{"id": "48833", "revid": "42335939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48833", "title": "Battle of Fredericksburg", "text": "1862 battle of the American Civil War\nThe Battle of Fredericksburg was fought December 11\u201315, 1862, in and around Fredericksburg, Virginia, in the Eastern Theater of the American Civil War. The combat between the Union Army of the Potomac commanded by Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside and the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia under Gen. Robert E. Lee included futile frontal attacks by the Union army on December 13 against entrenched Confederate against a feature of the battlefield that came to be remembered as the 'sunken wall' on the heights overlooking the city. It is remembered as one of the most one-sided battles of the war, with Union casualties more than twice as heavy as those suffered by the Confederates. A visitor to the battlefield described the battle as a \"butchery\" to U.S. President Abraham Lincoln.\nBurnside planned to cross the Rappahannock River at Fredericksburg in mid-November and race to the Confederate capital of Richmond before Lee's army could stop him. Burnside needed to receive the necessary pontoon bridges in time, and Lee moved his army to block the crossings. When the Union army was finally able to build its bridges and cross under fire, direct combat within the city resulted on December 11\u201312. Union troops prepared to assault Confederate defensive positions south of the city and on a strongly fortified ridge just west of the city known as Marye's Heights.\nOn December 13, the Left Grand Division of Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin was able to pierce the first defensive line of Confederate Lt. Gen. Stonewall Jackson to the south but was finally repulsed. Burnside ordered the Right and Center Grand Divisions of major generals Edwin V. Sumner and Joseph Hooker to launch multiple frontal assaults against Lt. Gen. James Longstreet's position on Marye's Heights \u2013 all were repulsed with heavy losses. On December 15, Burnside withdrew his army, ending another failed Union campaign in the Eastern Theater.\nBackground.\nMilitary situation.\nIn November 1862, U.S. President Abraham Lincoln needed to demonstrate the success of the Union war effort before the Northern public lost confidence in his administration. Confederate armies had been on the move earlier in the fall, invading Kentucky and Maryland. Although each had been turned back, those armies remained intact and capable of further action. Lincoln urged Major General Ulysses S. Grant to advance against the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi. He replaced Maj. Gen. Don Carlos Buell with Maj. Gen. William S. Rosecrans, hoping for a more aggressive posture against the Confederates in Tennessee, and on November 5, seeing that his replacement of Buell had not stimulated Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan into action, Lincoln issued orders to replace McClellan in command of the Army of the Potomac. McClellan had stopped General Robert E. Lee's forces at the Battle of Antietam in Maryland but had not been able to destroy Lee's army, nor did he pursue Lee back into Virginia aggressively enough for Lincoln.\nMcClellan's replacement was Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside, the commander of the IX Corps. Burnside had established a reputation as an independent commander, with successful operations earlier that year in coastal North Carolina and, unlike McClellan, had no apparent political ambitions. However, he felt unqualified for army-level command and objected when offered the position. He accepted only when it was made clear to him that McClellan would be replaced in any event and that a choice for command was Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker, whom Burnside disliked and distrusted. Burnside assumed command on November 7.\nBurnside's plan.\nIn response to prodding from Lincoln and general-in-chief Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck, Burnside planned a late fall offensive; he communicated his plan to Halleck on November 9. The plan relied on quick movement and deception. He would concentrate his army in a visible fashion near Warrenton, feigning a movement on Culpeper Court House, Orange Court House or Gordonsville. He would then rapidly shift his army southeast and cross the Rappahannock River to Fredericksburg, hoping that Lee would not move, unclear as to Burnside's intentions. At the same time, the Union Army made a rapid movement against Richmond, south along the Richmond, Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad (RF&amp;P) from Fredericksburg. Burnside selected this plan because he was concerned that if he were to move directly south from Warrenton, he would be exposed to a flanking attack from Lt. Gen. Thomas J. \"Stonewall\" Jackson, whose corps was at that time in the Shenandoah Valley south of Winchester. He also believed that the Orange and Alexandria Railroad (O&amp;A) would need to be an adequate supply line. (Burnside was also influenced by plans McClellan began developing just before being relieved. Aware that Lee had blocked the O&amp;A, McClellan considered a route through Fredericksburg and ordered a small group of cavalrymen commanded by Captain Ulric Dahlgren to investigate the condition of the RF&amp;P.) While Burnside began assembling a supply base at Falmouth, near Fredericksburg, the Lincoln administration undertook a lengthy debate about the wisdom of his plan, which differed from the president's preference of a movement south on the O&amp;A and a direct confrontation with Lee's army instead of the movement focused on the city of Richmond. Lincoln reluctantly approved the plan on November 14 but cautioned his general to move with great speed, certainly doubting that Lee would react as Burnside anticipated.\nMovement to battle.\nThe Union Army began marching on November 15, and the first elements arrived in Falmouth on November 17. Burnside's plan quickly went awry\u2014he had ordered pontoon bridges to be sent to the front and assembled for his quick crossing of the Rappahannock, but because of administrative bungling, the bridges did not arrive on time. Burnside first requisitioned the pontoon bridging (along with many other provisions) on November 7 when he detailed his plan to Halleck. The plan was sent to the attention of Brig. Gen. George Washington Cullum, the chief of staff in Washington (received on November 9). Plans called for both riverine and overland movement of the pontoon trains to Falmouth. On November 14, the 50th New York Engineers reported the pontoons were ready to move, except for a lack of the 270 horses needed to move them. Unknown to Burnside, most of the bridging was still on the upper Potomac. Communications between Burnside's staff engineer Cyrus B. Comstock and the Engineer Brigade commander Daniel P. Woodbury indicate that Burnside had assumed the bridging was en route to Washington based on orders given on November 6.\nAs Maj. Gen. Edwin V. Sumner arrived, he strongly urged an immediate crossing of the river to scatter the token Confederate force of 500 men in the town and occupying the commanding heights to the west. Burnside became anxious, concerned that the increasing autumn rains would make the fording points unusable and that Sumner might be cut off and destroyed, ordering Sumner to wait in Falmouth.\nLee at first anticipated that Burnside would beat him across the Rappahannock and that to protect Richmond, he would assume the next defensible position to the south, the North Anna River. But when he saw how slowly Burnside was moving (and Confederate President Jefferson Davis expressed reservations about planning for a battle so close to Richmond), he directed all of his army toward Fredericksburg. By November 23, the corps commanded by Lt. Gen. James Longstreet had arrived and Lee placed them on the ridge known as Marye's Heights to the west of town, with Anderson's division on the far left, McLaws's directly behind the town, and Pickett's and Hood's to the right. He sent for Jackson on November 26, but his Second Corps commander had anticipated the need and began forced-marching his troops from Winchester on November 22, covering as many as 20 miles a day. Jackson arrived at Lee's headquarters on November 29 and his divisions were deployed to prevent Burnside crossing downstream from Fredericksburg: D.H. Hill's division moved to Port Royal, 18 miles down river; Early's 12 miles down river at Skinker's Neck; A.P. Hill's at Thomas Yerby's house, \"Belvoir\", about 6 miles southeast of town; and Taliaferro's along the RF&amp;P Railroad, 4 miles south at Guinea Station.\nThe boats and equipment for a single pontoon bridge arrived at Falmouth on November 25, much too late to enable the Army of the Potomac to cross the river without opposition. Burnside still had an opportunity, however, because by then he was facing only half of Lee's army, not yet dug in, and if he acted quickly, he might have been able to attack Longstreet and defeat him before Jackson arrived. Once again he squandered his opportunity. The full complement of bridges arrived at the end of the month, but by this time Jackson was present and Longstreet was preparing strong defenses.\nBurnside originally planned to cross his army east of Fredericksburg at Skinker's Neck, but an advance movement by Federal gunboats to there was fired upon and drew Early's and D.H. Hill's divisions into that area, a movement spotted by Union balloon observers. Now assuming that Lee had anticipated his plan, Burnside guessed that the Confederates had weakened their left and center to concentrate against him on their right. So he decided to cross directly at Fredericksburg. On December 9, he wrote to Halleck, \"I think now the enemy will be more surprised by a crossing immediately in our front than any other part of the river. ... I'm convinced that a large force of the enemy is now concentrated at Port Royal, its left resting on Fredericksburg, which we hope to turn.\" In addition to his numerical advantage in troop strength, Burnside also had the advantage of knowing his army could not be attacked effectively. On the other side of the Rappahannock, 220 artillery pieces had been located on the ridge known as Stafford Heights to prevent Lee's army from mounting any major counterattacks.\nOpposing forces.\nUnion.\nBurnside organized his Army of the Potomac into three so-called \"grand divisions\", organizations that included infantry corps, cavalry, and artillery, comprising 120,000 men, of whom 114,000 would be engaged in the coming battle:\nConfederate.\nRobert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia had nearly 79,000 men, with 72,500 engaged. His organization of the army in corps was approved by an act of the Confederate Congress on November 6, 1862, and consisted of:\nThe two armies at Fredericksburg represented the largest number of armed men that ever confronted each other for combat during the Civil War.\nBattle.\nCrossing the Rappahannock, December 11\u201312.\nUnion engineers began to assemble six pontoon bridges before dawn on December 11, two just north of the town center, a third on the southern end of town, and three farther south, near the confluence of the Rappahannock and Deep Run. The engineers constructing the bridge directly across from the city came under punishing fire from Confederate sharpshooters, primarily from the Mississippi brigade of Brig. Gen. William Barksdale, in command of the town defenses. Union artillery attempted to dislodge the sharpshooters, but their positions in the cellars of houses rendered the fire from 150 guns mostly ineffective. Eventually Burnside's artillery commander, Brig. Gen. Henry J. Hunt, convinced him to send infantry landing parties over in the pontoon boats to secure a small bridgehead and rout the sharpshooters. Col. Norman J. Hall volunteered his brigade for this assignment. Burnside suddenly turned reluctant, lamenting to Hall in front of his men that \"the effort meant death to most of those who should undertake the voyage.\" When his men responded to Hall's request with three cheers, Burnside relented. At 3:00\u00a0p.m., the Union artillery began a preparatory bombardment and 135 infantrymen from the 7th Michigan and the 19th Massachusetts crowded into the small boats, and the 20th Massachusetts followed soon after. They crossed successfully and spread out in a skirmish line to clear the sharpshooters. Although some of the Confederates surrendered, fighting proceeded street by street through the town as the engineers completed the bridges. Sumner's Right Grand Division began crossing at 4:30\u00a0p.m., but the bulk of his men did not cross until December 12. Hooker's Center Grand Division crossed on December 13, using both the northern and southern bridges.\nThe clearing of the city buildings by Sumner's infantry and by artillery fire from across the river began the first major urban combat of both the war and American history. Union gunners sent more than 5,000 shells against the town and the ridges to the west. By nightfall, four brigades of Union troops occupied the town, which they looted with a fury that had not been seen in the war up to that point. This behavior enraged Lee, who compared their depredations with those of the ancient Vandals. The destruction also angered the Confederate troops, many of whom were native Virginians. Many on the Union side were also shocked by the destruction inflicted on Fredericksburg. Civilian casualties were unusually low given the widespread violence; George Rable estimates no more than four civilian deaths.\nRiver crossings south of the city by Franklin's Left Grand Division were much less eventful. Both bridges were completed by 11:00\u00a0a.m. on December 11 while five batteries of Union artillery suppressed most sniper fire against the engineers. Franklin was ordered at 4:00\u00a0p.m. to cross his entire command, but only a single brigade was sent out before dark. Crossings resumed at dawn and were completed by 1:00\u00a0p.m. on December 12. Early on December 13, Jackson recalled his divisions under Jubal Early and D.H. Hill from down river positions to join his main defensive lines south of the city.\nBurnside's verbal instructions on December 12 outlined a main attack by Franklin, supported by Hooker, on the southern flank, while Sumner made a secondary attack on the northern flank. His actual orders on December 13 were vague and confusing to his subordinates. At 5:00\u00a0p.m. on December 12, he made a cursory inspection of the southern flank, where Franklin and his subordinates pressed him to give definite orders for a morning attack by the grand division, so they would have adequate time to position their forces overnight. However, Burnside demurred and the order did not reach Franklin until 7:15 or 7:45\u00a0a.m. When it arrived, it was not as Franklin expected. Rather than ordering an attack by the entire grand division of almost 60,000 men, Franklin was to keep his men in position, but was to send \"a division at least\" to seize the high ground (Prospect Hill) around Hamilton's Crossing, Sumner was to send one division through the city and up Telegraph Road, and both flanks were to be prepared to commit their entire commands. Burnside was apparently expecting these weak attacks to intimidate Lee, causing him to withdraw. Franklin, who had originally advocated a vigorous assault, chose to interpret Burnside's order very conservatively. Brig. Gen. James A. Hardie, who delivered the order, did not ensure that Burnside's intentions were understood by Franklin, and map inaccuracies about the road network made those intentions unclear. Furthermore, Burnside's choice of the verb \"to seize\" was less forceful in 19th century military terminology than an order \"to carry\" the heights.\nSouth of the city, December 13.\nDecember 13 began cold and overcast. A dense fog blanketed the ground and made it impossible for the armies to see each other. Franklin ordered his I Corps commander, Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds, to select a division for the attack. Reynolds chose his smallest division, about 4,500 men commanded by Maj. Gen. George G. Meade, and assigned Brig. Gen. John Gibbon's division to support Meade's attack. His reserve division, under Maj. Gen. Abner Doubleday, was to face south and protect the left flank between the Richmond Road and the river. Meade's division began moving out at 8:30\u00a0a.m., with Gibbon following behind. At around 10:30\u00a0a.m., the fog started lifting. They moved parallel to the river initially, turning right to face the Richmond Road, where they began to be struck by enfilading fire from the Virginia Horse Artillery under Major John Pelham. Pelham started with two cannons\u2014a 12-pounder Napoleon smoothbore and a rifled Blakely\u2014but continued with only one after the latter was disabled by counter-battery fire. J.E.B. Stuart sent word to Pelham that he should feel free to withdraw from his dangerous position at any time, to which Pelham responded, \"Tell the General I can hold my ground.\" The Iron Brigade (formerly Gibbon's command, but now led by Brig. Gen. Solomon Meredith) was sent out to deal with the Confederate horse artillery. This action was mainly conducted by the 24th Michigan Infantry, a newly enlisted regiment that had joined the brigade in October. After about an hour, Pelham's ammunition began to run low and he withdrew. General Lee observed the action and commented about Pelham, age 24, \"It is glorious to see such courage in one so young.\" The most prominent victim of Pelham's fire was Brig. Gen. George D. Bayard, a cavalry general mortally wounded by a shell while standing in reserve near Franklin's headquarters. Jackson's main artillery batteries had remained silent in the fog during this exchange, but the Union troops soon began to receive direct fire from Prospect Hill, principally five batteries directed by Lt. Col. Reuben Lindsay Walker, and Meade's attack was stalled about 600 yards from his initial objective for almost two hours by these combined artillery attacks.\nThe Union artillery fire was lifted as Meade's men moved forward around 1:00\u00a0p.m. Jackson's force of about 35,000 remained concealed on the wooded ridge to Meade's front. His formidable defensive line had an unforeseen flaw. In A.P. Hill's division's line, a triangular patch of the woods that extended beyond the railroad was swampy and covered with thick underbrush and the Confederates had left a 600-yard gap there between the brigades of Brig. Gens. James H. Lane and James J. Archer. Brig. Gen. Maxcy Gregg's brigade stood about a quarter mile behind the gap. Meade's 1st Brigade (Col. William Sinclair) entered the gap, climbed the railroad embankment, and turned right into the underbrush, striking Lane's brigade in the flank. Following immediately behind, his 3rd Brigade (Brig. Gen. Feger Jackson) turned left and hit Archer's flank. The 2nd Brigade (Col. Albert L. Magilton) came up in support and intermixed with the leading brigades. As the gap widened with pressure on the flanks, thousands of Meade's men reached the top of the ridge and ran into Gregg's brigade. Many of these Confederates had stacked arms while taking cover from Union artillery and were not expecting to be attacked at that moment, so were killed or captured unarmed. Gregg at first mistook the Union soldiers for fleeing Confederate troops and ordered his men not to fire on them. While he rode prominently in front of his lines, the partially deaf Gregg could not hear the approaching Federals or their bullets flying around him. In the confusion, a bullet struck his spine and fatally wounded him; he died two days later. Col. Daniel Hamilton of the 1st South Carolina assumed command, but Gregg's brigade was totally routed and was no longer an organized unit for the rest of the day. Archer meanwhile was being pressed hard on his left flank and sent word for Gregg to reinforce him, unaware that he had been shot and his brigade had disintegrated. The 19th Georgia's flag was captured by the adjutant of the 7th Pennsylvania Reserves; it was the only Confederate regimental flag captured and retained by the Army of the Potomac in the battle. The Georgians broke and ran. The 14th Tennessee resisted the onslaught for a time before also breaking; a sizable number of its men were taken prisoner. Archer frantically sent messages to the rear, calling on John Brockenbrough and Edmund Atkinson's brigades for help. With ammunition on both sides running low, hand-to-hand fighting ensued with soldiers stabbing at each other with bayonets and using muskets as clubs. Most of the regimental officers on both sides went down as well; on the Confederate side, the 1st Tennessee went through three commanders in a matter of minutes. Meade's 15 regiments also lost most of their officers, although Meade himself survived the battle unscathed despite having been exposed to heavy artillery fire.\nConfederate reserves\u2014the divisions of Brig. Gens. Jubal A. Early and William B. Taliaferro\u2014moved into the fray from behind Gregg's original position. Inspired by their attack, regiments from Lane's and Archer's brigades rallied and formed a new defensive line in the gap. Now Meade's men were receiving fire from three sides and could not withstand the pressure. Feger Jackson attempted to flank a Confederate battery, but after his horse was shot and he began to lead on foot, he was shot in the head by a volley and his brigade fell back, leaderless (Col. Joseph W. Fisher soon replaced Jackson in command).\nTo Meade's right, Gibbon's division prepared to move forward at 1:00\u00a0p.m. Brig. Gen. Nelson Taylor proposed to Gibbon that they supplement Meade's assault with a bayonet charge against Lane's position. However, Gibbon stated that this would violate his orders, so Taylor's brigade did not move forward until 1:30\u00a0p.m. The attack did not have the benefit of a gap to exploit, nor did the Union soldiers have any wooded cover for their advance, so progress was slow under heavy fire from Lane's brigade and Confederate artillery. Immediately following Taylor was the brigade of Col. Peter Lyle, and the advance of the two brigades ground to a halt before they reached the railroad. Committing his reserve at 1:45\u00a0p.m., Gibbon sent forward his brigade under Col. Adrian R. Root, which moved through the survivors of the first two brigades, but they were soon brought to a halt as well. Eventually some of the Federals reached the crest of the ridge and had some success during hand-to-hand fighting\u2014men on both sides had depleted their ammunition and resorted to bayonets and rifle butts, and even empty rifles with bayonets thrown like javelins\u2014but they were forced to withdraw back across the railroad embankment along with Meade's men to their left. Gibbon's attack, despite heavy casualties, had failed to support Meade's temporary breakthrough and Gibbon himself was wounded when a shell fragment struck his right hand. Brig. Gen Nelson Taylor took over command of the division.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMy God, General Reynolds, did they think my division could whip Lee's whole army?\n\u00a0\u2014Maj. Gen. George G. Meade to Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds, afternoon of December 13\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt is well that war is so terrible, or we should grow too fond of it.\n\u00a0\u2014Gen. Robert E. Lee, watching the carnage of the Confederate counterattack from the center of his line, a position now known as Lee's Hill\nAfter the battle Meade complained that some of Gibbon's officers had not charged quickly enough. But his primary frustration was with Brig. Gen. David B. Birney, whose division of the III Corps had been designated to support the attack as well. Birney claimed that his men had been subjected to damaging artillery fire as they formed up, that he had not understood the importance of Meade's attack, and that Reynolds had not ordered his division forward. When Meade galloped to the rear to confront Birney with a string of fierce profanities that, in the words of one staff lieutenant, \"almost makes the stones creep,\" he was finally able to order the brigadier forward under his own responsibility, but harbored resentment for weeks. By this time, however, it was too late to accomplish any further offensive action.\nEarly's division began a counterattack, led initially by Col. Edmund N. Atkinson's Georgia brigade, which inspired the men from the brigades of Col. Robert Hoke, Brig. Gen. Archer, and Col. John M. Brockenbrough to charge forward out of the railroad ditches, driving Meade's men from the woods in a disorderly retreat, followed closely by Gibbon's. Early's orders to his brigades were to pursue as far as the railroad, but in the chaos many kept up the pressure over the open fields as far as the old Richmond Road. Union artillery crews proceeded to unleash a blast of close-range canister shot, firing as fast as they could load their guns. The Confederates were also struck by the leading brigade of Birney's belated advance, commanded by Brig. Gen. J. H. Hobart Ward. Birney followed up with the brigades of Brig. Gens. Hiram G. Berry and John C. Robinson, which broke the Rebel advance that had threatened to drive the Union into the river. Col. Atkinson was struck in the shoulder by canister shot and abandoned by his own brigade; Union soldiers later found and took him prisoner. Any further Confederate advance was deterred by the arrival of the III Corps division of Brig. Gen. Daniel E. Sickles on the right. General Burnside, who by this time was focused on his attacks on Marye's Heights, was dismayed that his left flank attack had not achieved the success he assumed earlier in the day. He ordered Franklin to \"advance his right and front,\" but despite repeated entreaties, Franklin refused, claiming that all of his forces had been engaged. This was not true, however, as the VI Corps and Brig. Gen. Doubleday's division of the I Corps had been mostly idle, suffering only a few casualties from artillery fire while they waited in reserve. In mid-afternoon elements of the VI Corps advanced to Deep Run to probe Lee's center but were attacked by Brig. Gen Evander M. Law's brigade of Hood's division and repulsed. Most of the fighting was done by the 57th North Carolina, a green regiment in its first battle, which lost 250 men and six officers.\nThe Confederates withdrew back to the safety of the hills south of town. Stonewall Jackson considered mounting a resumed counterattack, but the Federal artillery and impending darkness changed his mind. A fortuitous Union breakthrough had been wasted because Franklin did not reinforce Meade's success with some of the 20,000 men standing in reserve. Neither Franklin nor Reynolds took any personal involvement in the battle, and were unavailable to their subordinates at the critical point. Franklin's losses were about 5,000 casualties in comparison to Stonewall Jackson's 3,400, demonstrating the ferocity of the fighting. Skirmishing and artillery duels continued until dark, but no additional major attacks took place, while the center of the battle moved north to Marye's Heights. Brig. Gen George D. Bayard, who commanded a cavalry brigade in the VI Corps, was struck in the leg by a shell fragment and died two days later.\nAs the fighting south of Fredericksburg died down, the air was filled with the screams of hundreds of wounded men and horses. Dry sage grass around them caught fire and burned many men alive.\nMarye's Heights, December 13.\nOn the northern end of the battlefield, Brig. Gen. William H. French's division of the II Corps prepared to move forward, subjected to Confederate artillery fire that was descending on the fog-covered city of Fredericksburg. General Burnside's orders to Maj. Gen. Edwin V. Sumner, commander of the Right Grand Division, was to send \"a division or more\" to seize the high ground to the west of the city, assuming that his assault on the southern end of the Confederate line would be the decisive action of the battle. The avenue of approach was difficult\u2014mostly open fields, but interrupted by scattered houses, fences, and gardens that would restrict the movement of battle lines. A canal stood about 200 yards west of the town, crossed by three narrow bridges, which would require the Union troops to funnel themselves into columns before proceeding. About 600 yards to the west of Fredericksburg was the low ridge known as Marye's Heights, rising 40\u201350 feet above the plain. (Although popularly known as Marye's Heights, the ridge was composed of several hills separated by ravines, from north to south: Taylor's Hill, Stansbury Hill, Marye's Hill, and Willis Hill.) Near the crest of the portion of the ridge comprising Marye's Hill and Willis Hill, a narrow lane in a slight cut\u2014the Telegraph Road, known after the battle as the Sunken Road\u2014was protected by a 4-foot stone wall, enhanced in places with log breastworks and abatis, making it a perfect infantry defensive position. Confederate Maj. Gen. Lafayette McLaws initially had about 2,000 men on the front line of Marye's Heights and there were an additional 7,000 men in reserve on the crest and behind the ridge. Massed artillery provided almost uninterrupted coverage of the plain below. General Longstreet had been assured by his artillery commander, Lt. Col. Edward Porter Alexander, \"General, we cover that ground now so well that we will comb it as with a fine-tooth comb. A chicken could not live on that field when we open on it.\"\nThe fog lifted from the town around 10 a.m. and Sumner gave his order to advance an hour later. French's brigade under Brig. Gen. Nathan Kimball began to move around noon. They advanced slowly through heavy artillery fire, crossed the canal in columns over the narrow bridges, and formed in line, with fixed bayonets, behind the protection of a shallow bluff. In perfect line of battle, they advanced up the muddy slope until they were cut down at about 125 yards from the stone wall by repeated rifle volleys. Some soldiers were able to get as close as 40 yards, but having suffered severe casualties from both the artillery and infantry fire, the survivors clung to the ground. Kimball was severely wounded during the assault, and his brigade suffered 25% casualties. French's brigades under Col. John W. Andrews and Col. Oliver H. Palmer followed, with casualty rates of almost 50%.\nSumner's original order called for the division of Brig. Gen. Winfield S. Hancock to support French, and Hancock sent forward his brigade under Col. Samuel K. Zook behind Palmer's. They met a similar fate. Next was his Irish Brigade under Brig. Gen. Thomas F. Meagher who, equipped with outdated Springfield muskets, could not deliver an effective volley until within a hundred yards of the enemy. Of the 1,200 Irishmen who made the charge, 545 were killed or wounded. Hancock's final brigade was led by Brig. Gen. John C. Caldwell. Leading his two regiments on the left, Col. Nelson A. Miles suggested to Caldwell that the practice of marching in formation, firing, and stopping to reload, made the Union soldiers easy targets, and that a concerted bayonet charge might be effective in carrying the works. Caldwell denied permission. Miles was struck by a bullet in the throat as he led his men to within 40 yards of the wall, where they were pinned down as their predecessors had been. Caldwell himself was soon struck by two bullets and put out of action.\nThe commander of the II Corps, Maj. Gen. Darius N. Couch, was dismayed at the carnage wrought upon his two divisions in the hour of fighting and, like Col. Miles, realized that the tactics were not working. He first considered a massive bayonet charge to overwhelm the defenders, but as he surveyed the front, he quickly realized that French's and Hancock's divisions were in no shape to move forward again. He next planned for his final division, commanded by Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard, to swing to the right and attempt to envelop the Confederate left, but upon receiving urgent requests for help from French and Hancock, he sent Howard's men over and around the fallen troops instead. The brigade of Col. Joshua Owen went in first, reinforced by Col. Norman J. Hall's brigade, and then two regiments of Brig. Gen. Alfred Sully's brigade. The other corps in Sumner's Right Grand Division was the IX Corps, and he sent in one of its divisions under Brig. Gen. Samuel Sturgis. After two hours of desperate fighting, four Union divisions had failed in the mission Burnside had originally assigned to one. Casualties were heavy: II Corps losses for the afternoon were 4,114, Sturgis's division 1,011.\nWhile the Union Army paused, Longstreet reinforced his line so that there were four ranks of infantrymen behind the stone wall. Brig. Gen. Thomas R. R. Cobb of Georgia, who had commanded the key sector of the line, was mortally wounded by an exploding artillery shell and was replaced by Brig. Gen. Joseph B. Kershaw. General Lee expressed concerns to Longstreet about the massing troops breaking his line, but Longstreet assured his commander, \"General, if you put every man on the other side of the Potomac on that field to approach me over the same line, and give me plenty of ammunition, I will kill them all before they reach my line.\"\nBy mid-afternoon, Burnside had failed on both flanks to make progress against the Confederates. Rather than reconsidering his approach in the face of heavy casualties, he stubbornly decided to continue on the same path. He sent orders to Franklin to renew the assault on the left (which, as described earlier, the Left Grand Division commander ignored) and ordered his Center Grand Division, commanded by Maj. Gen. Hooker, to cross the Rappahannock into Fredericksburg and continue the attack on Marye's Heights. Hooker performed a personal reconnaissance (something that neither Burnside nor Sumner had done, both remaining east of the river during the failed assaults) and returned to Burnside's headquarters to advise against the attack.\nBrig. Gen. Daniel Butterfield, commanding Hooker's V Corps, while waiting for Hooker to return from his conference with Burnside, sent his division under Brig. Gen. Charles Griffin to relieve Sturgis's men. By this time, Maj. Gen. George Pickett's Confederate division and one of Maj. Gen. John Bell Hood's brigades had marched north to reinforce Marye's Heights. Griffin smashed his three brigades against the Confederate position one by one. Also concerned about Sturgis, Couch sent the six guns of Capt. John G. Hazard's Battery B, 1st Rhode Island Light Artillery, to within 150 yards of the Confederate line. They were hit hard by Confederate sharpshooter and artillery fire and provided no effective relief to Sturgis.\nA soldier in Hancock's division reported movement in the Confederate line that led some to believe that the enemy might be retreating. Despite the unlikeliness of this supposition, the V Corps division of Brig. Gen. Andrew A. Humphreys, two brigades of green nine month regiments, was ordered to attack and capitalize on the situation. Humphreys led his first brigade on horseback, with his men moving over and around fallen troops with fixed bayonets and unloaded rifles; some of the fallen men clutched at the passing pant legs, urging their comrades not to go forward, causing the brigade to become disorganized in their advance. The charge reached to within 50 yards before being cut down by concentrated rifle fire. Brig. Gen. George Sykes was ordered to move forward with his V Corps regular army division to support Humphreys's retreat, but his men were caught in a crossfire and pinned down. In the confusion, the horse of Brig. Gen. Abram S. Piatt stumbled and the general's back was seriously injured.\nBy 4:00\u00a0p.m., Hooker had returned from his meeting with Burnside, having failed to convince the commanding general to abandon the attacks. While Humphreys was still attacking, Hooker reluctantly ordered the IX Corps division of Brig. Gen. George W. Getty to attack as well, but this time to the leftmost portion of Marye's Heights, Willis Hill. Col. Rush Hawkins's brigade, followed by Col. Edward Harland's brigade, moved along an unfinished railroad line just north of Hazel Run, approaching close to the Confederate line without detection in the gathering twilight, but they were eventually detected, fired on, and repulsed.\nSeven Union divisions had been sent in, generally one brigade at a time, for a total of fourteen individual charges, all of which failed, costing from 6,000 to 8,000 casualties. A Union burial party found a total of 918 dead, many of them stripped naked by Confederates who had come down during the night to help themselves to their shoes and uniforms. Confederate losses at Marye's Heights totaled around 1,200. The falling of darkness and the pleas of Burnside's subordinates were enough to put an end to the attacks. Longstreet later wrote, \"The charges had been desperate and bloody, but utterly hopeless.\" Hancock's division had taken the heaviest losses with 2,032 casualties, the most suffered by any Union division during the battle. Thousands of Union soldiers spent the cold December night on the fields leading to the heights, unable to move or assist the wounded because of Confederate fire. That night, Burnside attempted to blame his subordinates for the disastrous attacks, but they argued that it was entirely his fault and no one else's.\nLull and withdrawal, December 14\u201315.\nDuring a dinner meeting the evening of December 13, Burnside dramatically announced that he would personally lead his old IX Corps in one final attack on Marye's Heights, but his generals talked him out of it the following morning. The armies remained in position throughout the day on December 14. That afternoon, Burnside asked Lee for a truce to attend to his wounded, which the latter granted. The next day the Federal forces retreated across the river, and the campaign came to an end. Burnside's generals had opposed retreating and recommended holding onto the town in preparation for making a future thrust elsewhere, but he refused their suggestions.\nTestament to the extent of the carnage and suffering during the battle was the story of Richard Rowland Kirkland, a Confederate Army sergeant with Company G, 2nd South Carolina Volunteer Infantry. Stationed at the stone wall by the sunken road below Marye's Heights, Kirkland had a close up view to the suffering and like so many others was appalled at the cries for help of the Union wounded throughout the cold winter night of December 13, 1862. After obtaining permission from his commander, Brig. Gen. Joseph B. Kershaw, Kirkland gathered canteens and in broad daylight, without the benefit of a cease fire or a flag of truce (refused by Kershaw), provided water to numerous Union wounded lying on the field of battle. Union soldiers held their fire as it was obvious what Kirkland's intent was. Kirkland was nicknamed the \"Angel of Marye's Heights\" for these actions, and is memorialized with a statue by Felix de Weldon on the Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park where he carried out his actions. Details of this story (first recorded in 1880) conflict with multiple after-action reports and may have been embellished and personalized for effect.\nOn the night of December 14, the Aurora Borealis made an appearance unusual for that latitude. One witness described that \"the wonderful spectacle of the Aurora Borealis was seen in the Gulf States. The whole sky was a ruddy glow as if from an enormous conflagration, but marked by the darting rays peculiar to the Northern light.\" The event was noted in the diaries and letters of many soldiers at Fredericksburg, such as John W. Thompson, Jr., who wrote \"Louisiana sent those famous cosmopolitan Zouaves called the Louisiana Tigers, and there were Florida troops who, undismayed in fire, stampeded the night after Fredericksburg, when the Aurora Borealis snapped and crackled over that field of the frozen dead hard by the Rappahannock...\"\nAftermath.\nCasualties.\nThe Union army suffered 12,653 casualties (1,284 killed, 9,600 wounded, 1,769 captured/missing). Two Union generals were mortally wounded: Brig. Gens. George D. Bayard and Conrad F. Jackson. The Confederate army lost 5,377 (608 killed, 4,116 wounded, 653 captured/missing), most of them in the early fighting on Jackson's front. Confederate Brig. Gens. Maxcy Gregg, T. R. R. Cobb, and William Dorsey Pender were all wounded; Cobb and Gregg mortally. The casualties sustained by each army showed clearly how disastrous the Union army's tactics were. Although the fighting on the southern flank produced roughly equal casualties (about 4,000 Confederate, 5,000 Union), the northern flank was completely lopsided, with about eight Union casualties for each Confederate. Burnside's men had suffered considerably more in the attack originally meant as a diversion than in his main effort. Over half the Confederate army had not even participated in the battle at all.\nConfederate reaction to the news of the victory.\nThe South erupted in jubilation over its great victory. The Richmond \"Examiner\" described it as a \"stunning defeat to the invader, a splendid victory to the defender of the sacred soil.\" General Lee, normally reserved, was described by the Charleston \"Mercury\" as \"jubilant, almost off-balance, and seemingly desirous of embracing everyone who calls on him.\" The newspaper also exclaimed, \"General Lee knows his business and the army has yet known no such word as fail.\"\nHowever, Lee was not as pleased as the rest of the South. He later wrote, \"At Fredericksburg we gained a battle, inflicting very severe loss on the enemy in men and material; our people were greatly elated\u2014I was much depressed. We had really accomplished nothing; we had not gained a foot of ground, and I knew the enemy could easily replace the men he had lost, and the loss of material was, if anything, rather beneficial to him, as it gave an opportunity to contractors to make money.\"\nEffect on the Union.\nReactions were opposite in the North, and both the Army and President Lincoln came under strong attacks from politicians and the press. The Cincinnati \"Commercial\" noted, \"It can hardly be in human nature for men to show more valor or generals to manifest less judgment, than were perceptible on our side that day.\" Senator Zachariah Chandler, a Radical Republican, wrote, \"The President is a weak man, too weak for the occasion, and those fool or traitor generals are wasting time and yet more precious blood in indecisive battles and delays.\" Pennsylvania Governor Andrew Curtin visited the White House after a trip to the battlefield. He told the president, \"It was not a battle, it was a butchery.\" Curtin reported that the president was \"heart-broken at the recital, and soon reached a state of nervous excitement bordering on insanity.\" Lincoln himself wrote, \"If there is a worse place than hell, I am in it.\" The situation in the West was equally dismal with Ulysses Grant's Army of the Tennessee bogged down in Mississippi in front of the seemingly unassailable city of Vicksburg while William Rosecrans's Army of the Cumberland had fought Braxton Bragg's Army of Tennessee to a bloody stalemate at the Battle of Stones River, which went into the books as a victory as Bragg retreated afterward and left the Union army in possession of the battlefield, but at a cost of over 13,000 casualties and mangling both armies so badly that neither was able to move again until the following summer. Burnside was relieved of command a month later, after an attempt to purge some of his subordinates from the Army and the humiliating failure of his \"Mud March\" in January.\nBattlefield preservation.\nThe Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park was established in 1927 under the War Department and transferred to the National Park Service in 1933. It consists of more than 8,300 acres that cover parts of four Civil War battlefields\u00a0\u2013 Fredericksburg, Spotsylvania Court House, The Wilderness and Chancellorsville.\nIn March 2003, the Civil War Trust (a division of the American Battlefield Trust) announced the beginning of a $12\u00a0million national campaign to preserve the historic Slaughter Pen Farm, a key part of the Fredericksburg battlefield. The farm, known locally as the Pierson Tract, was the scene of bloody struggle on December 13, 1862. Over this ground Federal troops under Maj. Gen. George Meade and Brig. Gen. John Gibbon launched their assault against Lt. Gen. Thomas \"Stonewall\" Jackson's Confederates holding the southern portion of the Army of Northern Virginia's line at Fredericksburg. Despite suffering enormous casualties the Federal troops under Meade were able to temporarily penetrate the Confederate line and for a time represented the North's best chance of winning the Battle of Fredericksburg. The fighting on this southern portion of the battlefield, later named the Slaughter Pen, produced 5,000 casualties and five Medal of Honor recipients.\nThe Slaughter Pen Farm was considered to be the largest remaining unprotected part of the Fredericksburg battlefield. It is also the only place on the battlefield where a visitor can still follow the Union assault of December 13 from beginning to end. Nearly all the other land associated with Union attacks at Fredericksburg\u2014either on the southern end of the battlefield or in front of Marye's Heights\u2014has been degraded by development. The $12\u00a0million acquisition of the Slaughter Pen Farm at the Fredericksburg battlefield has been called the most ambitious nonprofit battlefield acquisition in American history.\nIn October 2006, the Department of the Interior awarded a $2\u00a0million grant based on the significance of the Slaughter Pen Farm. The money was provided through a U.S. Congressional appropriation from the Land and Water Conservation Fund. The fund supports non-federal efforts to acquire and preserve meaningful American Civil War battlefield lands. The program is administered by the American Battlefield Protection Program, an arm of the National Park Service. In addition, the Central Virginia Battlefields Trust (CVBT) committed $1\u00a0million toward the Slaughter Pen Farm fundraising campaign.\nIn addition to the preservation of the Slaughter Pen Farm, the American Battlefield Trust and its partners have acquired and preserved an additional of the battlefield in more than five other acquisitions.\nIn November 2012, archaeological investigations at the construction site of a new courthouse recovered Union artifacts. These included ammunition, smoking pipes, and food tins.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\nSecondary sources\nMemoirs and primary sources\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "48835", "revid": "7624634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48835", "title": "Battle of the Wilderness", "text": "Major battle of the American Civil War\nThe Battle of the Wilderness was fought on May 5\u20137, 1864, during the American Civil War. It was the first battle of Lieutenant General Ulysses S. Grant's 1864 Virginia Overland Campaign against General Robert E. Lee and the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia. The fighting occurred in a wooded area near Locust Grove, Virginia, about west of Fredericksburg. Both armies suffered heavy casualties, nearly 29,000 in total, a harbinger of a war of attrition by Grant against Lee's army and, eventually, against the Confederate capital, Richmond, Virginia. The battle was tactically inconclusive, as Grant disengaged and then continued his offensive.\nGrant attempted to move quickly through the dense underbrush of the Wilderness of Spotsylvania, but Lee launched two of his corps on parallel roads to intercept him. On the morning of May 5, the Union V Corps under Major General Gouverneur K. Warren attacked the Confederate Second Corps, commanded by Lieutenant General Richard S. Ewell, on the Orange Turnpike. That afternoon the Third Corps, commanded by Lieutenant General A. P. Hill, encountered Brigadier General George W. Getty's division (VI Corps) and Major General Winfield S. Hancock's Union II Corps on the Orange Plank Road. Fighting, which ended for the evening because of darkness, was fierce but inconclusive as both sides attempted to maneuver in the dense woods.\nAt dawn on May 6, Hancock attacked along the Plank Road, driving Hill's corps back in confusion, but the First Corps of Lieutenant General James Longstreet arrived in time to prevent the collapse of the Confederate right flank. Longstreet followed up with a surprise flanking attack from an unfinished railroad bed that drove Hancock's men back, but the momentum was lost when Longstreet was wounded by his own men. An evening attack by Brigadier General John B. Gordon against the Union right flank caused consternation at the Union headquarters, but the lines stabilized and fighting ceased. On May 7, Grant disengaged and moved to the southeast, intending to leave the Wilderness to interpose his army between Lee and Richmond, leading to the Battle of Todd's Tavern and Battle of Spotsylvania Court House.\nBackground.\nIn the three years since fighting in the American Civil War had begun in 1861, the United States Army (a.k.a. the Union Army) made little progress against the Confederate Army in the Eastern Theater. The Union Army's most impressive successes came in the Western Theater, especially at the Battle of Vicksburg where nearly 30,000 Confederates surrendered. President Abraham Lincoln wanted a military leader who would fight. In March 1864, Major General Ulysses S. Grant was summoned from the Western Theater, promoted to lieutenant general, and given command of all the Union armies. Grant was the Union commander at Vicksburg, and also had major victories at Fort Henry, Fort Donelson, Shiloh, and Chattanooga. He chose to make his headquarters with the Army of the Potomac, although Major General George Meade retained formal command of that army. Major General William Tecumseh Sherman succeeded Grant in command of most of the western armies.\nGrant believed that the eastern and western Union armies were too uncoordinated in their actions, and that the previous practice of conquering and guarding new territories required too many resources. Grant's new strategy was to attack with all forces at the same time, making it difficult for the Confederates to transfer forces from one battlefront to another. His objective was to destroy the Confederate armies rather than conquering territory. The two largest Confederate armies became the two major targets, and they were General Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia and General Joseph E. Johnston's Army of Tennessee. This new strategy pleased President Lincoln.\nGrant considered Lee's army \"the strongest, best appointed and most confident Army in the South.\" Lee was a professional soldier who fought in the Mexican\u2013American War. At the beginning of the American Civil War, he rejected an offer to be commander of the United States Army. He was considered a master tactician in individual battles, and had the advantage of fighting mostly on familiar (Virginia) territory. Although the Confederate Army had fewer resources and men than the Union Army, Lee made good use of railroads to move his forces from one front to another. By the time Grant appeared in the Eastern Theater, the Confederate soldiers knew that his six predecessors all failed against Lee, and believed that Grant's successes in the Western Theater were against inferior opponents.\nGrant's plan.\nGrant's plan for Meade's Army of the Potomac was to move south to confront Lee's army between the Union and Confederate capital cities, Washington and Richmond. At the same time, General Benjamin Butler's Army of the James would approach Richmond, Petersburg, and Lee from the southeast near the James River. Major General Franz Sigel's Army of the Shenandoah would move through the Shenandoah Valley and destroy the rail line, agricultural infrastructure, and granaries used to feed the Confederate armies. Brigadier generals George Crook and William W. Averell would attack the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad, and salt and lead mines, in western Virginia before moving east to join Sigel. Sherman would attack Georgia with the similar goal of destroying rail lines, resources, and infrastructure used to equip and feed the Confederate armies.\nGrant's campaign objective of the destruction of Lee's army coincided with the preferences of both Lincoln and his military chief of staff, Henry Halleck. Grant instructed Meade, \"Lee's army will be your objective point. Wherever Lee goes, there you will go also.\" Although he hoped for a quick, decisive battle, Grant was prepared to fight a war of attrition. Both the Union and Confederate casualties could be high, but the Union had greater resources to replace lost soldiers and equipment. By May 2, Grant had four corps positioned to begin Meade's portion of Grant's plan against Lee's army. Three of the corps, plus cavalry, composed Meade's Army of the Potomac. A fourth corps, reporting directly to Grant, added additional firepower. The Rapidan River divided the two foes. A few days later, Grant and Meade would cross the river and begin what became known as the Overland Campaign, and the Battle of the Wilderness was its first battle.\nOpposing forces.\nUnion.\nThe Union force in the Battle of the Wilderness was the Army of the Potomac and a separate IX Corps. The Army of the Potomac was commanded by Major General George G. Meade, and Major General Ambrose E. Burnside was commander of the IX Corps. Both Meade and Burnside reported to Grant, who rode with Meade and his army. The II Corps was the largest of the army, with 28,333 officers and enlisted men present for duty and equipped as of April 30, 1864. At the beginning of the campaign in May, Grant's Union forces totaled 118,700 men and 316 artillery pieces including Meade's Army of the Potomac and Burnside's IX Corps.\nConfederate.\nThe Confederate force in the Battle of the Wilderness was the Army of Northern Virginia, commanded by General Robert E. Lee. Listed below are Lee's three infantry corps and one cavalry corps, which totaled to 66,140 men including staff and men in the artillery. Each corps had three divisions plus artillery except the First Corps, which had only two divisions. The Third Corps was the largest, with 22,675 men plus another 1,910 for artillery.\nDisposition of forces and movement to battle.\nThe Wilderness.\nThe Wilderness is located south of the Rapidan River in Virginia's Spotsylvania County and Orange County. Its southern border is Spotsylvania Court House, and western border is usually considered the Rapidan River tributary Mine Run. Its eastern border is less definite, causing estimates of the size of the Wilderness to vary. While the maximum area for the Wilderness is to , historians discussing the battles fought there typically use . At the time of the battle, the region was a \"patchwork of open areas and vegetation of varying density.\" Much of the vegetation was a dense second-growth forest consisting of small trees, bushes, shrubs, and pines.\nSince clearings were scarce, and the region had only a few narrow winding roads, mounted cavalry fighting was nearly impossible. The dense woods, often filled with smoke, made it difficult to see enemy soldiers. This put attackers at a disadvantage, as soldiers often fired at sounds instead of visual cues. Infantry units had difficulty keeping alignment, and often became lost or were involved in friendly-fire incidents. The Confederates had a better knowledge of the terrain, and it diminished the Union advantage of greater manpower. The terrain also diminished the effectiveness of artillery. Grant was aware of how the Wilderness made his advantages in size and artillery less effective, and preferred to move his army further south to fight Lee in open ground.\nLee prepares.\nOn May 2, Lee met with his generals on Clark Mountain, obtaining a panoramic view of the Union camps. He realized that Grant was getting ready to attack, but did not know the precise route of advance. He predicted (correctly) that Grant would cross to the east of the Confederate fortifications on the Rapidan, using the Germanna and Ely fords, but he could not be certain.\nTo retain flexibility of response, Lee had dispersed his army over a wide area. Longstreet's First Corps was around Gordonsville, from where they had the flexibility to respond by railroad to potential threats to the Shenandoah Valley or to Richmond. Hill's Third Corps was outside Orange Court House. Ewell's Second Corps was near Morton's Ford and Mine Run, northeast of Hill. Stuart's cavalry was scattered further south from Gordonsville to Fredericksburg.\nGrant crosses the river.\nOn May 4, 1864, the Army of the Potomac crossed the Rapidan River at three places and converged on the Wilderness of Spotsylvania in east central Virginia. Brigadier General James H. Wilson led his 3rd Cavalry Division across the river at Germanna Ford between 4:00am and 6:00am, and drove off a small group of Confederate cavalry pickets. After engineers placed pontoon bridges, the V Corps (Warren) and later the VI Corps (Sedgwick) crossed safely. Wilson continued south on the Germanna Plank Road toward Wilderness Tavern and the Orange Turnpike. He halted at Wilderness Tavern at noon to wait for the V Corps, and sent scouts to the south and west.\nA few miles east, Brigadier General David M. Gregg led his 2nd Cavalry Division across the river at Ely's Ford. They tried to capture the nearby Confederate outpost, but the southerners fled into the darkness. By 9:00am a pontoon bridge was placed across the water, and the II Corps (Hancock) began crossing. Gregg's cavalry moved south to Chancellorsville, where Hancock's men planned to camp. Once Hancock's men began arriving, Gregg moved further south to Alrich near the intersection of the Orange Plank Road and Catharpin Road, where they would protect Hancock and the army's wagons.\nThe IX Corps (Burnside) remained north of the river near Germanna Ford, with orders to protect the supply train. Although Grant insisted that the army travel light with minimal artillery and supplies, its supply train was 60 to 70 miles (97 to 110\u00a0km) long. Meade had an estimated 4,300 wagons, 835 ambulances, and a herd of cattle. The supply train crossed the Rapidan at Ely's and Culpeper Mine fords. At Culpeper Mine Ford, it was guarded by Brigadier General Alfred T. A. Torbert's 1st Cavalry Division. Grant and Meade gambled that they could move the army quickly enough to avoid being ensnared in the Wilderness, but Meade halted the II and V corps to allow the wagon train to catch up.\nLee responds.\nAt the Wilderness a year earlier, Lee defeated the Army of the Potomac in the Battle of Chancellorsville despite having an army less than half the size of the Union army. Much of the fighting at that time occurred slightly east of the Union Army's current route. Having already secured a victory one year ago in similar circumstances, Lee hoped to fight Grant in the Wilderness. However, Lee needed Longstreet's First Corps to be in position to fight before the battle started.\nAs Grant's plan became clearer to Lee on May 4, Lee arranged his forces to use the advantages of the Wilderness. He needed his Second and Third corps to delay Grant's army until Longstreet's First Corps could get in place. Ewell's Second Corps was sent east on the Orange Turnpike, reaching Robertson's Tavern at Locust Grove. His lead column camped about from the unsuspecting Union soldiers. Hill was sent east on the Orange Plank Road and stopped at the hamlet of New Verdiersville. Hill had two of his three divisions. The division commanded by Major General Richard H. Anderson was left at Orange Court House to guard the river. These two corps were to avoid battle, if possible, until Longstreet's First Corps arrived. That evening, Lee decided that Ewell and Hill should strike first, preserving the initiative. Longstreet would arrive a day later, or Ewell and Hill could retreat west to Mine Run if necessary. Orders were sent around 8:00pm to move early in the morning.\nUnion cavalry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Wilderness was \"peculiarly unsuitable for the operations of cavalry, covered ... in every direction with dense thickets that were impenetrable to horsemen and intersected by few and narrow paths which permitted of movement only in long-extended and thin columns...\"\nBrigadier General James H. Wilson, 3rd Cavalry Division\nAt Wilderness Tavern, Wilson sent a small force west on the Orange Turnpike. After the head of the V Corps reached Wilderness Tavern around 11:00am, Wilson continued south. He arrived at Parker's Store near the Orange Plank Road at 2:00pm. Scouts were sent south to Catharpin Road and west to Mine Run where they found only small enemy squads. During that time, his squad on the Orange Turnpike skirmished with Confederate soldiers near Robertson's Tavern (Locust Grove). Assuming they were fighting with a small group of Confederate pickets, they withdrew and by evening rejoined the division at Parker's Store.\nMeade's original plan was to have Torbert's 1st Cavalry Division join Wilson, but he received an erroneous report that the Confederate cavalry was operating in his army's rear, in the direction of Fredericksburg. He ordered his 1st and 2nd cavalry divisions to move east to deal with that perceived threat, leaving only Wilson's division to screen for three corps. Wilson had little experience with cavalry, and the 3rd Division was the smallest of the three cavalry divisions. Meade believed that Lee would fight from behind (west of) Mine Run, and aligned his army north to south from Germanna Ford to Shady Grove Church while it spent the night in the Wilderness. This change of plans by the Union leadership did not serve the army well. Not only were the Union forces spending the night in the Wilderness, \"lax cavalry patrols\" were causing leadership to be unaware of the proximity of Lee's Second Corps (Ewell).\nBattle May 5.\nThe Battle of the Wilderness had two distinct fronts, the Orange Turnpike and the Orange Plank Road, where most of the fighting was conducted by infantry. Any efforts to bridge the gap between those two fronts did not last long. Most of the cavalry fighting occurred south of the infantry, especially along Catharpin Road and Brock Road.\nHammond's cavalry.\nAt 5:00 am on May 5, Wilson's Division proceeded southward from Parker's Store. The 5th New York Cavalry, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel John Hammond, was detached and instructed to patrol west of the Parker's Store area until relieved by Warren's V Corps. A probe west on the Orange Plank Road discovered Confederate soldiers. Despite being reinforced, the Union probe was driven back toward Parker's Store. It was soon discovered that they were fighting infantry from most of Hill's Third Corps.\nHammond's total force consisted of only about 500 men. Hammond understood that the dense woods and the large infantry force made fighting on horseback inadvisable. The command fought dismounted and spread out as a skirmish line while utilizing their Spencer repeating rifles. The regiment slowly retreated east, moving toward and beyond Parker's Store on the Orange Plank Road. Once the Confederates advanced east of Parker's Store, the remainder of Wilson's cavalry division was cut off from Meade and Warren's VCorps.\nOrange Turnpike.\nAt 6:00am on May 5, Warren's V Corps began moving south over farm lanes toward Parker's Store. The Confederate infantry was observed in the west near the Orange Turnpike, and Meade was notified. Grant instructed \"If any opportunity presents itself of pitching into a part of Lee's army, do so without giving time for disposition.\" Meade halted his army and directed Warren to attack, assuming that the Confederates were a division and not an entire infantry corps. Hancock was held at Todd's tavern. Although Meade told Grant that the threat was probably a delaying tactic without the intent to give battle, he stopped his entire army\u2014the exact thing Lee wanted him to do. The Confederate force was Ewell's Second Corps, and his men erected earthworks on the western end of the clearing known as Saunders Field. Ewell's instructions from Lee were to not advance too fast, since his corps was out of the reach of Hill's Third Corps\u2014and Longstreet's First Corps was not yet at the battlefield.\nWarren approached the eastern end of Saunders Field with the division of Brigadier General Charles Griffin along the road on the right and the division of Brigadier General James S. Wadsworth on the left. Brigadier General Samuel W. Crawford's division was too far away on the left near Chewning Farm, and the division of Brigadier General John C. Robinson was in reserve closer to Wilderness Tavern. It took time to align Warren's divisions, and there was some concern about Griffin's northern (right) flank. A major problem was that \"once a division left the roads or fields it disappeared utterly, and its commander could not tell whether it was in line with the others...\" Brigadier General Horatio Wright's 1st Division from Sedgwick's VI Corps began to move south on the Germanna Plank Road to Spotswood Road to protect Warren's right. Warren requested a delay from attacking to wait for Wright. By 12:00pm, Meade was frustrated by the delay and ordered Warren to attack before Sedgwick's VI Corps could arrive. Warren's troops arrived at Saunders Field around 1:00pm. The Confederate division of Major General Edward Johnson was positioned on the Orange Turnpike west of Sanders Field, and it also guarded the Spotswood Road route of Sedgwick. Behind Johnson and further south was the division of Major General Robert E. Rodes, while the division of Major General Jubal Early waited further west in reserve.\nFight at Saunders Field.\nBy the time the Union line arrived near the enemy, it had numerous gaps, and some regiments faced north instead of west. The concerns about Warren's right flank were justified. As Griffin's division advanced, Ayres's brigade held the right but had difficulty maintaining its lines in a \"blizzard of lead\". They received enfilading fire on their right from the brigade of Confederate brigadier general, Leroy A. Stafford, causing all but two regiments (140th and 146th New York) to retreat east across Saunders Field. On the left of Ayres, the brigade of Brigadier General Joseph J. Bartlett made better progress and overran the position of Confederate brigadier general, John M. Jones, who was killed. However, since Ayres's men were unable to advance, Bartlett's right flank was now exposed to attack and his brigade was forced to flee back across the clearing. Bartlett's horse was shot out from under him, and he barely escaped capture.\nTo the left of Bartlett was Wadsworth's Iron Brigade, which was composed of regiments from the Midwest and commanded by Brigadier General Lysander Cutler. The Iron Brigade advanced through woods south of Saunders Field and contributed to the collapse of Jones' brigade while capturing battle flags and taking prisoners. However, the Iron Brigade outdistanced Bartlett's men\u2014exposing the Midwesterner's right flank. The Confederate brigade of Brigadier General George P. Doles attacked the exposed flank, and the Iron Brigade's 6th Wisconsin Infantry Regiment suffered nearly 50 casualties in only a few minutes. Soon, the Confederate brigade of Brigadier General John B. Gordon joined in the attack, tearing through the Union line and forcing the Iron Brigade to break and retreat.\nFurther to the Union left, near the Higgerson farm, the Union brigade of Colonel Roy Stone was ambushed in waist-high swamp water, and the survivors fled northeast to the fields of the Lacy House (a.k.a. Ellwood Manor). One soldier blamed the fiasco on the gap between Stone's brigade and the Iron Brigade. On Wadsworth's farthest left, the brigade of Brigadier General James C. Rice suffered severe losses when the North Carolina brigade commanded by Brigadier General Junius Daniel got around Rice's unprotected left. The problem was compounded when Stone's brigade fell back from Rice's right. Rice's survivors were chased by Daniel's men almost back to the Lacy House, where the V Corps artillery was used to slow the pursuing Confederates. A quick fight over the guns resulted in casualties for both sides. Rice's losses were severe, including two of his five regimental commanders wounded.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSuddenly, to the horror of the living, fire was seen creeping over the ground, fed by dead leaves which were thick. All who could move tried to get beyond the Pike, which the fire could not cross. Some were overtaken by the flames...\nUnnamed wounded soldier, 7th Indiana Infantry\nFurther south, Crawford's First Brigade, commanded by Colonel William McCandless, did not reach the fighting in time to help Wadsworth's left. The brigade became surrounded by Confederates, and its 7th Pennsylvania Reserve Regiment was captured. Crawford was in danger of having the remaining portion of his division cut off, so it withdrew toward the Lacy House while the Confederates occupied the Chewning farm. Back at Saunders Field, Warren had ordered an artillery section into Saunders Field to support his attack, but it was captured by Confederate soldiers, who were pinned down and prevented by rifle fire from moving the guns. Amid hand-to-hand combat at the guns, the field caught fire and men from both sides were shocked as their wounded comrades burned to death. The first phase of fighting on the Orange Turnpike was over by 2:30pm.\nThe lead elements of Sedgwick's VI Corps reached Saunders Field around 3:00pm. Wright commanded the renewal of fighting until Sedgwick arrived around 3:30pm. The fighting was now in the woods north of the turnpike, and both sides traded attacks and counterattacks. Ewell held his position for the remainder of the afternoon. During the fray, Confederate brigadier general, Leroy A. Stafford, was shot through the shoulder blade, the bullet severing his spine. Despite being paralyzed from the waist down and in agonizing pain, he managed to still urge his troops forward. He died four days later.\nGetty and Hancock at Orange Plank Road.\nVisibility was limited near Orange Plank Road, and officers had difficulty controlling men and maintaining formations. Attackers would move blindly and noisily forward, becoming targets for concealed defenders. Unable to duplicate the surprise that was achieved by Ewell on the turnpike, A.P. Hill's approach was detected from the Chewning farm location of Crawford's 3rd Division of the V Corps. Crawford notified Meade, and his message arrived at Meade's headquarters around 10:15am.\nCrawford sent the 13th Pennsylvania Reserve Regiment (a.k.a. the Bucktails) as skirmishers toward Hill, but Hammond's line was falling apart before the Bucktails arrived near the Orange Plank Road. Crawford did not support his Pennsylvanians, and instead worked to solidify his position at the Chewning Farm and get ready to assist in the Orange Turnpike fighting. By the time this was accomplished, Hammond was beyond helping. Meade's army was in danger if Hill could push Hammond beyond Brock Road and take control of the intersection (Orange Plank and Brock roads). That would cause Warren's VCorps to have large enemy forces on two sides, and Hancock's IICorps could get isolated from the rest of Meade's army.\nAlthough Hancock was not far from the intersection of Orange Plank Road and Brock Road, he would have to move on a twisting road that was a narrow wagon route. The VI Corps's lead division of Brigadier General George W. Getty was waiting at Wilderness Tavern, so at 10:30am Meade sent it to defend the important intersection until Hancock could get there. Hammond's 500-man cavalry force, employing repeating carbines and fighting dismounted, succeeded in slowing Hill's approach. However, Hammond's small force was vastly outnumbered and continued to gradually retreat east.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLee established his headquarters at the Widow Tapp farm. Lee, Jeb Stuart, and Hill were meeting there when they were surprised by a party of Union soldiers entering the clearing. The three generals ran for safety and the Union men, who were equally surprised by the encounter, returned to the woods, unaware of how close they had come to changing the course of history.\nBy noon, Hill had the division of Major General Henry Heth past the Widow Tapp farm, and the division of Major General Cadmus M. Wilcox followed near Parker's Store. Hammond was nearly out of ammunition and was eventually pushed back to the vital intersection around noon, but was relieved by Getty's advance brigade just before Hill's forces arrived. Hammond's force moved further east behind Getty, and was done fighting. Because of Hammond's repeating rifles, the Confederate prisoners stated that they believed they had been fighting an entire brigade. Getty's men skirmished briefly with Heth's advance, and held the intersection.\nGetty held the intersection for hours waiting for Hancock's II Corps to arrive. By 3:30pm, initial elements of Hancock's corps were arriving, and Meade ordered Getty to assault the Confederate line. Getty attacked at 4:15pm while elements of Hancock's II Corps began arriving shortly thereafter. Getty was reinforced by Hancock's men, while Confederate commander Heth was reinforced by Wilcox's division. The fighting was fierce, with casualties for the brigade commanded by Brigadier General Alexander Hays particularly high\u2014including Hays who was killed while addressing the 63rd Pennsylvania Infantry Regiment. Hays was an old friend of Grant, having attended West Point with him and served with him in the Mexican War, and Grant was saddened to hear the news, remarking that he was not surprised to learn he had died in battle as \"It was just like him.\" Attacks and counterattacks continued into the night as casualties grew while neither side gained an advantage. Getty's division was relieved by the II Corps after dark, and Getty's horse was killed in the day's fighting.\nWilson at Catharpin Road.\nLeaving Hammond's regiment at Parker's Store at 5:00am on May 5, Wilson moved his two brigades south. His Second Brigade led the way, and it was commanded by Colonel George H. Chapman. His First Brigade was commanded by Colonel Timothy M. Bryan. Chapman reached Catharpin Road and moved west beyond Craig's Meeting House, where he found 1,000 men from a Confederate cavalry brigade commanded by Brigadier General Thomas L. Rosser. After initially driving Rosser back, both of Wilson's brigades fled east after finding Hill's infantry on their north side and Rosser's cavalry on the Catharpin Road on their south side. The 18th Pennsylvania Cavalry Regiment was the rear guard, and it became surrounded on three sides. The regiment left the road and blended into the woods and a swamp.\nWhile Wilson battled Rosser, Sheridan's other two cavalry divisions were further east. Around noon, Meade notified Sheridan that Wilson had been cut off, and Gregg's 2nd Cavalry Division was sent to explore the Catharpin Road. Gregg found Wilson and confronted Rosser, who was driven back across the Po River bridge. In late afternoon, Gregg also fought Major General Fitzhugh Lee's cavalry division on the Brock Road near Alsop. At nightfall, Rosser sat on the high ground west of the Po River bridge, Lee's men camped near Alsop, and Wilson's exhausted division camped north and east of Todd's Tavern. Wilson was surprised that evening when the 18th Pennsylvania Cavalry, thought to be captured, rejoined the division. During the night, Gregg remained at Todd's Tavern, Wilson put Chapman's Brigade on the Brock Road, and the brigade of George Armstrong Custer from Torbert's division began moving to relieve Wilson. While the remaining portion of Torbert's Division was south of Chancellorsville at Alrich, Torbert checked into a hospital and Brigadier General Wesley Merritt assumed command of the division.\nBattle May 6.\nGrant's plan for May 6 was to resume the attacks at 5:00am. Sedgwick and Warren would renew their attack on Ewell at the Orange Turnpike, and Hancock and Getty would attack Hill again on the Orange Plank Road. At the same time, an additional force of men currently stationed around the Lacy House would move south and attack Hill's exposed northern flank. Wadsworth requested leadership of this force, and it consisted of his division plus a fresh brigade from Robinson's division commanded by Brigadier General Henry Baxter. Adding to Wadsworth, two divisions from Burnside's IX Corps were to move through the area between the turnpike and the Plank Road and move south to flank Hill.\nHill's weary men spent the evening of May 5 and the early morning hours of May 6 resting where they had fought\u2014with little line integrity and some regiments separated from their brigades. The men from Heth's division were generally on the north side of the Orange Plank Road, while the men from Wilcox's division were mostly on the south side. Although he was aware that Hill's front line along the Orange Plank Road needed to be reformed, Lee chose to allow Hill's men to rest where they were\u2014assuming that Longstreet's First Corps and Hill's remaining division, commanded by Major General Anderson, would arrive in time to relieve Heth and Wilcox. Longstreet's men had marched in 24 hours, but were still from the battlefield. Once Longstreet's men arrived, Lee planned to shift Hill to the left to cover some of the open ground between his divided forces. Longstreet calculated that he had sufficient time to allow his men, tired from marching all day, to rest and the First Corps did not resume marching until 1:00am. Moving cross-country in the dark, they made slow progress and lost their way at times, and by sunrise had not reached their designated position.\nAttacks begin.\nDuring the night, Ewell placed his artillery on his extreme left and on both sides of the Orange Turnpike. He also had an abatis in front of his trenchline. He attacked Sedgwick on the north side of the turnpike at 4:45am. His line moved forward and then back on multiple occasions, and some ground was fought over as many as five times.\nTo the south on the Orange Plank Road, Hancock's II Corps with Getty's division attacked Hill at 5:00am, overwhelming the ill-prepared Third Corps in concert with Wadsworth. Following Hill's orders, Lieutenant Colonel William T. Poague's 12 guns at the Widow Tapp farm fired tirelessly at the road\u2014despite the Confederate soldiers retreating in front of the guns. This slowed the Union advance, but could not stop it. Brig. Gen Alexander S. Webb's brigade of Gibbon's division was sent to support Getty but ended up being isolated from the latter and blundered into some of Hill's troops. The brigade was forced to retreat with 300 casualties and Webb wrote afterward that he never did figure out exactly where or what he was supposed to be doing.\nWhile Hill's corps retreated, reinforcements arrived. Longstreet rode ahead of his men and arrived at the battlefield around 6:00am. His men marched east and then turned north, arriving on the Orange Plank Road near Parker's Store where they found men from Hill's corps retreating. Brigadier General John Gregg's Texas Brigade was the vanguard of Longstreet's column. General Lee did not recognize the brigade's commander Brig. Gen John M. Gregg, a former officer from the Army of Tennessee who got command of the outfit the previous fall when it was serving out west and he asked what unit this was. Gregg replied that it was the Texas Brigade, whereupon Lee waved his hat over his head and shouted, \"Texans always move them!\" Caught up in the excitement, Lee began to move forward behind the advancing brigade. As the Texans realized this, they halted and grabbed the reins of Lee's horse, Traveller, telling the general that they were concerned for his safety and would only go forward if he moved to a less exposed location. Longstreet was able to convince Lee that he had matters well in hand and the commanding general relented.\nLongstreet counterattacks.\nStarting from near Poague's guns, Longstreet counterattacked with the divisions of Major General Charles W. Field on the left and Brigadier General Joseph B. Kershaw on the right. A series of attacks by both sides caused the front line to move back and forth between the Widow Tapp farm and Brock Road. The Texans, leading the charge north of the road, fought gallantly at a heavy price\u2014only 250 of the 800 men emerged unscathed. Field's division drove back Wadsworth's force on the north side of the Widow Tapp farm, while Kershaw's division fought along the road. Although Wadsworth and his brigadier Rice tried to restore order near the front, most of his troops fled to the Lacy House and were done fighting for the remainder of the battle.\nAt 10:00am, Lee's chief engineer, Major General Martin L. Smith, reported to Longstreet that he had explored an unfinished railroad bed south of the Plank Road and that it offered easy access to the Union left flank. The flank was unguarded due to a mix-up in orders. Hancock had ordered John Gibbon to take his division into action and hit Longstreet's flank but the order was not acted upon. Gibbon to his dying day insisted he never got the order and it has never been satisfactorily determined if the courier carrying it got lost or if Gibbon saw the order and misunderstood it. Longstreet assigned his aide, Lieutenant Colonel Moxley Sorrel, to the task of leading three fresh brigades for a surprise attack. An additional brigade, which was reduced in strength from the morning's fighting, volunteered to join them. Sorrel and the senior brigade commander, Brigadier General William Mahone, struck at 11:00am while Longstreet resumed his main attack. The Union line was broken and driven back, Wadsworth was mortally wounded, and Hancock reorganized his line in trenches near the Brock Road. Hancock wrote later that the flanking attack rolled up his line \"like a wet blanket\".\nMeanwhile, Burnside had gotten the IX Corps into action\u2014three divisions and six infantry brigades in an attempt to break the Confederate center, but after a fierce firefight with elements of Hill's corps, they were fought to a stalemate along the Plank Road with no less than ten regimental commanders being killed, wounded, or captured. By noon, a Confederate victory seemed likely. Longstreet rode forward on the Orange Plank Road with several of his officers while another fire caused Mahone's 12th Virginia Infantry Regiment to become separated from its brigade. An aide suggested that Longstreet was too close to the front, but his advice was disregarded. As the Virginians moved through the woods back to the road, their brigade mistook them for Union soldiers, and the two Confederate forces began shooting at each other. Longstreet's mounted party was caught in the crossfire, and Longstreet was severely wounded in his neck. Brigadier General Micah Jenkins, aide-de-camp Captain Alfred E. Doby and orderly Marcus Baum were killed. Longstreet was able to turn over his command directly to division commander Field and told him to \"Press the enemy.\" Burnside finally arrived on the Confederate northern flank with three brigades, and attacked around 2:00pm. His fighting for the day, beginning against Colonel William F. Perry's Alabama Brigade, was a standoff. Lee organized another attack on Hancock around 4:15pm that Hancock repelled in about an hour. This attack chiefly fell upon Brig. Gen Gershom Mott's division, the former command of Joe Hooker, which was once an elite unit but is now considered one of the weakest in the army and fell back in disorder. Hancock sent in Colonel Samuel Sprigg Carroll's brigade of Gibbon's division, and they repulsed the attack. Another fire threatened the wounded in the woods and Hancock's breastworks, as fighting on the Orange Plank Road front gradually ended near evening. The following day, Lee appointed Richard Anderson to temporary command of the First Corps.\nGordon attacks at the Orange Turnpike.\nAt the Orange Turnpike, inconclusive fighting proceeded for most of the day. During the morning, Gordon scouted the Union line and recommended to his division commander, Jubal Early, that he conduct a flanking attack in Sedgwick's right. This was held by the two-brigade division of Maj. Gen James B. Ricketts, formerly the command of General Robert Milroy, which had been routed by the Confederates eleven months earlier at the Second Battle of Winchester. They carried the taint of that defeat and were widely nicknamed \"Milroy's weary boys\". Early initially dismissed the venture as too risky, and Ewell did not have enough men to attack until 1:00pm when the brigade of Brigadier General Robert D. Johnston arrived. Gordon's attack was authorized around 5:30pm. The attack went well and caused some of the men in the Union brigade commanded by Brigadier General Alexander Shaler to simply run away. Shaler and another brigade commander, Brigadier General Truman Seymour, were captured. Sedgwick was almost captured, and his horse was injured, while the color-bearer standing next to him was shot. The Union line fell back about a mile (1.6\u00a0km) while the two generals and several hundred men were captured. Eventually the darkness and the dense foliage took their toll as the Union flank received reinforcements and recovered. Sedgwick's line was extended overnight to the Germanna Plank Road.\nReports of the collapse of this part of the Union line caused great consternation at Grant's headquarters, leading to an interchange that is widely quoted in Grant biographies. An officer accosted Grant, proclaiming, \"General Grant, this is a crisis that cannot be looked upon too seriously. I know Lee's methods well by past experience; he will throw his whole army between us and the Rapidan, and cut us off completely from our communications.\" Grant seemed to be waiting for such an opportunity and snapped, \"Oh, I am heartily tired of hearing about what Lee is going to do. Some of you always seem to think he is suddenly going to turn a double somersault, and land in our rear and on both of our flanks at the same time. Go back to your command, and try to think what we are going to do ourselves, instead of what Lee is going to do.\"\nCavalry.\nCuster's First Brigade reached Brock Road at about daylight on May 6. Custer extended his right toward Hancock and his left toward Gregg's 2nd Division at Todd's Tavern. Torbert's Second Brigade, commanded by Colonel Thomas Devin, began the trip from Chancellorsville to join Custer's right, bringing a battery. Hancock's infantry was hard pressed by two divisions from Longstreet's corps, but he worried about the location of Longstreet's other two divisions. Although Hancock wanted Custer to move down Brock Road to look for Longstreet's other divisions, Custer was attacked after 8:00am by Rosser's brigade. The arrival of Devin with his six-gun battery plus two more guns from Gregg turned the fight in Custer's favor, and Rosser backed off.\nHancock still did not know what was behind the Confederate cavalry, and he kept a substantial portion of his corps outside of the fighting with Longstreet to protect his left. While Custer was fighting, Gregg was fighting Wickham's brigade on the Brock Road near Todd's Tavern. This effectively blocked the Union Army from Spotsylvania Court House. Concern after Hancock's left had been turned by Longstreet's surprise attack from the unfinished railroad caused the Union leadership to order the cavalry to withdraw. At 2:30pm, Gregg was ordered to withdraw to Piney Branch Church, and Custer and Devin were sent further east back to Catharine Furnace.\nFighting ends.\nOn the morning of May7, Grant was faced with the prospect of attacking strong Confederate earthworks. His cavalry was south of the infantry fighting in the Battle of Todd's Tavern. Instead of more infantry attacks, Grant chose to maneuver. By moving south on the Brock Road, he hoped to reach the crossroads at Spotsylvania Court House, which would interpose his army between Lee and Richmond, forcing Lee to fight on ground more advantageous to the Union army. He ordered preparations for a night march on May7 that would reach Spotsylvania, to the southeast, by the morning of May8. Once Lee found out Grant was moving south instead of turning back, he correctly predicted Grant would move to Spotsylvania Court House. Lee got his army there first, and erected formidable earthworks. Grant's infantry fought the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House before maneuvering yet again as the campaign continued south toward Richmond.\nCasualties.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nForest fires raged; ammunition trains exploded; the dead were roasted in the conflagration; the wounded, roused by its hot breath, dragged themselves along, with their torn and mangled limbs, in the mad energy of despair, to escape the ravages of the flames; and every bush seemed hung with shreds of blood-stained clothing...\n Lt. Col. Horace Porter, Grant's staff\nWith over 28,000 casualties, the Battle of the Wilderness ranks in the top five American Civil War battles in terms of casualties for both sides combined. The official report for the Union listed 2,246 officers and men killed, 12,037 wounded, and 3,383 captured or missing\u2014a total of 17,666 casualties for the Union side of the battle. Historian Gordon C. Rhea notes that this number is probably larger, since a lieutenant witnessed Warren lowering the number of casualties reported. Other Union casualty estimates are typically between 17,500 and 18,000. Based on correspondence from Grant, at least six brigadier generals were among the Union casualties. Wadsworth and Alexander Hays were killed, Seymour and Shaler were taken prisoner, and Getty and Bartlett were wounded.\nYoung's study reveals Confederate casualties of 1,477 killed, 7,866 wounded, and 1,690 missing, for a total of 11,033 casualties. Among the wounded are 233 wounded and captured\u2014they are counted herein in the wounded total and not double-counted in the missing category. This study is close to some of the estimates made by other sources. Like the Union, Lee lost some generals. His report at the end of May 5 concluded with the \"gallant Brig. Gen. J. M. Jones was killed, and Brig. Gen. L. A. Stafford, I fear, mortally wounded while leading his command with conspicuous valor.\" His evening report for May 6 mentions the wounding of Longstreet and Brigadier General John Pegram, and the death of Jenkins.\nAftermath.\nPerformance and impact.\nCriticisms of the Union performance revolve around the \"woefully inadequate\" cavalry positioning. The decision to have Sheridan's most inexperienced general, Wilson, lead the smallest cavalry division to scout the Union army's right flank was not a good one. Wilson's 3rd Cavalry Division was not of sufficient size to screen the Union front by itself, and Wilson got his division cut off from the remainder of the Union Army. Earlier, Wilson's inexperience caused him to fail to leave pickets on the Orange Turnpike\u2014resulting in a surprise for the Union infantry and contributing to the Union Army being forced to fight in the Wilderness. Additionally, the decision to have the cavalry abandon Todd's Tavern on May 6 led to a delay in getting the Union army to Spotsylvania Court House. A few of the cavalry's regimental commanders fought well, such as Hammond, Brinton, and the 1st New Jersey Cavalry Regiment's lieutenant colonel, John W. Kester. The performance of the Union infantry was also below expectations, and all four corps commanders accomplished little.\nDiscussions of the Confederate performance revolve around Lee, Longstreet, and Gordon. Lee put Ewell's and Hill's corps in good position to face Meade, but kept Longstreet's First Corps too far away. Hill and Ewell defended well on May 5 against enemy forces that were larger. Lee's decision to let Hill's Third Corps men to rest on the evening of May 5 instead of reforming their lines was called by historian Peter S. Carmichael \"ahorrendous decision, maybe the worst of his career\". Longstreet's men fought well under his direction, but they enjoyed only brief success after Longstreet retired from the field wounded. Longstreet, surely aware that Jackson was mortally wounded by friendly-fire in the same Wilderness a year earlier, disregarded advice and rode into friendly fire where he was wounded and others were killed. Ewell and his Second Corps defended well, and the criticism of Ewell and Early by Gordon for delaying his flanking maneuver is not justified. Early had received (incorrect) intelligence that the Union IX Corps was moving between the river and the Confederate left flank, which contributed to his caution against using his outnumbered troops to attack the entrenched Union infantry.\nThe Battle of the Wilderness had no obvious winner, and neither side was driven from the battlefield. The National Park Service calls the battle \"indecisive\". One historian says that Lee won a victory because he fought Grant to a standoff, but he also adds that the battle was a failure for the Confederacy because it was unable to maintain the initiative and Lee's offensive capacity was eliminated. A major point discussed by historians is that after the battle, Grant did not retreat north across the nearest river\u2014like other leaders earlier in the war. Instead, the Union army continued south, presenting a threat to Lee's army and the Confederate capital city of Richmond. This was the first time in a Virginia campaign that the Army of the Potomac continued on the offensive after an initial battle, and morale was boosted to the point that the Union soldiers sang as they marched south. Sherman called this movement \"the grandest act of [Grant's] life\", and added that he now felt \"that the rebellion will be crushed\". The battle confirmed a warning made by Longstreet to Lee about Grant, that he would fight \"every day and every hour till the end of the war\". By April 1865, Lee's army needed supplies and his men were starving. His army was trapped between Sheridan's and Meade's forces. On April 9, 1865, Lee surrendered his army to Grant after the Battle of Appomattox Courthouse.\nPreservation.\nPortions of the Wilderness battlefield are preserved as part of Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park, established in 1927 to memorialize the battlefields of Fredericksburg, Chancellorsville, Spotsylvania Court House, and the Wilderness. In addition to the land that has been protected by the National Park Service, two major volunteer organizations have been active in preservation activities. The Friends of the Wilderness Battlefield have been active in helping to preserve and enhance Ellwood Manor (the Lacy House), which was the headquarters for Major General Warren during the battle and is the site of a family cemetery where Confederate Lieutenant General Stonewall Jackson's arm was buried. The American Battlefield Trust has saved more than through mid-2023.\nReferences.\nInformational notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48836", "revid": "51036188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48836", "title": "Kava", "text": "Species of plant\n \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nKava or kava kava (Piper methysticum: Latin 'pepper' and Latinized Greek 'intoxicating') is a plant in the pepper family, native to the Pacific Islands. The name \"kava\" is from Tongan and Marquesan, meaning 'bitter'. Kava can refer to either the plant or a psychoactive beverage made from its root. The beverage is a traditional ceremonial and recreational drink from Polynesia, Micronesia, and Melanesia. Nakamals and kava bars exist in many countries. Traditional kava is made by grinding fresh or dried kava root, mixing it with water or coconut milk, and straining it into a communal bowl. Outside the South Pacific, kava is typically prepared by soaking dried root powder in water and straining it. It is consumed socially for its sedative, hypnotic, muscle relaxant, anxiolytic, and euphoric effects, comparable to those produced by alcohol. Kava also produces a numbing sensation in the mouth.\nKava consists of sterile cultivars clonally propagated from its wild ancestor, \"Piper wichmanii\". It originated in northern Vanuatu, where it was domesticated by farmers around 3,000 years ago through selective cultivation. Historically, the beverage was made from fresh kava; preparation from dry kava emerged in response to the efforts of Christian missionaries in the 18th and 19th centuries to prohibit the drinking of kava.\nAccording to \"in vitro\" research, the pharmacological effects of kava stem primarily from six major kavalactones that modulate GABAA, dopamine, norepinephrine, and CB1 receptors, and inhibit MAO-B and ion channel mechanisms. Reviews of research have indicated an effect of kava on anxiety, but its specific efficacy for generalized anxiety disorder remains inconclusive. There appears to be no significant cognitive impairment from consumption. Kava does not exhibit the addictive properties associated with many other substances of abuse.\nModerate consumption of kava in its traditional form, as a water-based suspension of kava roots, is considered by the World Health Organization to present an \"acceptably low level of health risk\". However, consumption of kava extracts produced with organic solvents or excessive amounts of low-quality kava products may be linked to an increased risk of adverse health outcomes, including liver injury.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory and common names.\nKava is conspecific with \"Piper wichmannii,\" indicating kava was domesticated from \"Piper wichmannii\" (syn. \"Piper subbullatum\").\nKava was spread by the Austronesian Lapita culture after contact eastward into the rest of Polynesia. It is endemic to Oceania and is not found in other Austronesian groups. Kava reached Hawaii, but it is absent in New Zealand, where it cannot grow. Consumption of kava is also believed to be the reason why betel nut chewing, ubiquitous elsewhere, was lost for Austronesians in Oceania.\nAccording to Lynch (2002), the reconstructed Proto-Polynesian term for the plant, \"*kava\", was derived from the Proto-Oceanic term \"*kawaR\" in the sense of a \"bitter root\" or \"potent root [used as fish poison]\". It may have been related to reconstructed \"*wakaR\" (in Proto-Oceanic and Proto-Malayo-Polynesian) via metathesis. It originally referred to \"Zingiber zerumbet\", used to make a similar mildly psychoactive bitter drink in Austronesian rituals. Cognates for \"*kava\" include Pohnpeian \"sa-kau\"; Tongan, Niue, Rapa Nui, Tuamotuan, and Rarotongan \"kava\"; Samoan, Tahitian, and Marquesan \"\u02bbava\"; and Hawaiian \"\u02bbawa\". In some languages, most notably M\u0101ori \"kawa\", the cognates have come to mean \"bitter\", \"sour\", or \"acrid\" to the taste.\nIn the Cook Islands, the reduplicated forms of \"kawakawa\" or \"kavakava\" are also applied to the unrelated members of the genus \"Pittosporum\". In other languages, such as Futunan, compound terms like \"kavakava atua\" refer to other species belonging to the genus \"Piper\". The reduplication of the base form is indicative of falsehood or likeness, in the sense of \"false kava\". In New Zealand, it was applied to the kawakawa (\"Piper excelsum\"), which is endemic to New Zealand and nearby Norfolk Island and Lord Howe Island. It was exploited by the M\u0101ori based on previous knowledge of the kava, as the latter could not survive in the colder climates of New Zealand. The M\u0101ori name for the plant, \"kawakawa\", is derived from the same etymon as kava, but reduplicated. It is a sacred tree among the M\u0101ori people. It is seen as a symbol of death, corresponding to the rangiora (\"Brachyglottis repanda\"), which is the symbol of life. However, \"kawakawa\" has no psychoactive properties. Its connection to kava is linked to its similarity in appearance and bitter taste.\nOther names for kava include \"\u02bbawa\" (Hawaii), \"\u02bbava\" (Samoa), \"yaqona\" or \"yagona\" (Fiji), \"sakau\" (Pohnpei), \"seka\" (Kosrae), and \"malok\" or \"malogu\" (parts of Vanuatu).\nCharacteristics.\nKava was historically grown only in the Pacific islands of Hawaii, Federated States of Micronesia, Vanuatu, Fiji, the Samoas, and Tonga. It appears to have originated in Vanuatu; an inventory of \"P. methysticum\" distribution showed it was cultivated on numerous islands of Micronesia, Melanesia, Polynesia, and Hawaii, whereas specimens of \"P. wichmannii\" were all from Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu.\nTraditionally, plants are harvested around four years of age, as older plants have higher concentrations of kavalactones. After reaching about in height, plants grow a wider stalk and additional stalks, but not much taller. The roots can reach a depth of .\nCultivars.\nKava consists of sterile cultivars cloned from its wild ancestor, \"Piper wichmanii\". Today it comprises hundreds of different cultivars grown across the Pacific. Each cultivar has not only different requirements for successful cultivation, but also displays unique characteristics both in terms of its appearance and its psychoactive properties.\nNoble and non-noble kava.\nScholars make a distinction between the so-called noble and non-noble kava. The latter category comprises the so-called tudei (or \"two-day\") kavas, medicinal kavas, and wild kava (\"Piper wichmanii\", the ancestor of domesticated \"Piper methysticum\"). Traditionally, only noble kavas have been used for regular consumption, due to their more favourable composition of kavalactones and other compounds that produce more pleasant effects and have lower potential for causing negative side effects, such as nausea, or \"kava hangover\".\nThe perceived benefits of noble cultivars explain why only these cultivars were spread around the Pacific by Polynesian and Melanesian migrants, with presence of non-noble cultivars limited to the islands of Vanuatu, from which they originated. More recently, it has been suggested that the widespread use of tudei cultivars in the manufacturing of several kava products might have been the key factor contributing to the rare reports of adverse reactions to kava observed among the consumers of kava-based products in Europe.\nTudei varieties have traditionally not been grown in Hawaii and Fiji, but in recent years there have been reports of farmers attempting to grow \"isa\" or \"palisi\" non-noble cultivars in Hawaii, and of imports of dried tudei kava into Fiji for further re-exporting. The tudei cultivars may be easier and cheaper to grow: while it takes up to 5 years for noble kava to mature, non-noble varieties can often be harvested just one year after being planted.\nThe concerns about the adverse effects of non-noble varieties, produced by their undesirable composition of kavalactones and high concentrations of potentially harmful compounds (flavokavains, which are not present in any significant concentration in the noble varieties), have led to legislation prohibiting exports from countries such as Vanuatu. Likewise, efforts have been made to educate non-traditional customers about the difference between noble and non-noble varieties and that non-noble varieties do not offer the same results as noble cultivars. In recent years, government regulatory bodies and non-profit NGOs have been set up with the declared aim of monitoring kava quality; producing regular reports; certifying vendors selling proper, noble kava; and warning customers against products that may contain tudei varieties.\nGrowing regions.\nIn Vanuatu, exportation of kava is strictly regulated. Only cultivars classified as noble are allowed to be exported. Only the most desirable cultivars for everyday drinking are classified as noble to maintain quality control. In addition, their laws mandate that exported kava must be at least five years old and farmed organically. Their most common noble cultivars are \"Borogu\" or \"Borongoru\" from Pentecost Island, \"Melomelo\" from Aoba Island (called \"Sese\" in the north Pentecost Island), and \"Palarasul\" kava from Espiritu Santo. In Vanuatu, Tudei (\"two-day\") kava is reserved for special ceremonial occasions and exporting it is not allowed. \"Palisi\" is a common Tudei variety.\nIn Hawaii, there are many other cultivars of kava (). Some of the most common cultivars are \"Mahakea\", \"Mo\u02bbi\", \"Hiwa\", and \"Nene\". The \"Ali\u02bbi\" (kings) of precolonial Hawaii coveted the \"Mo\u02bbi\" variety, which had a strong cerebral effect due to a predominant amount of the kavalactone kavain. This sacred variety was so important to them that no one but royalty could ever experience it, \"lest they suffer an untimely death\". The reverence for Hiwa in old Hawai\u02bbi is evident in this portion of a chant recorded by Nathaniel Bright Emerson and quoted by E. S. Craighill and Elizabeth Green Handy: \"This refers to the cup of sacramental \u02bbawa brewed from the strong, black \u02bbawa root (\u02bbawa hiwa), which was drunk sacramentally by the kumu hula\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nThe day of revealing shall see what it sees: \nA seeing of facts, a sifting of rumors, \nAn insight won by the black sacred 'awa, \nA vision like that of a god!&lt;/poem&gt;\nWinter describes a hula prayer for inspiration that contains the line, \"He \u02bbike p\u016b \u02bbawa hiwa.\" Pukui and Elbert translated this as \"a knowledge from kava offerings\". Winter explains that \u02bbawa, especially of the Hiwa variety, was offered to hula deities in return for knowledge and inspiration.\nMore recently, specialized kava varieties have been introduced to South Florida which have been acclimated and adapted to grow well in South Florida's unique soil and climate and have significant resistance to pest and disease pressures. As of 2024, cultivation of these varieties is limited to a small number of commercial farms and backyard growers.\nRelationship with kawakawa.\nThe Kawakawa (\"Piper excelsum\") plant, known also as \"M\u0101ori kava\", may be confused with kava. While the two plants look similar and have similar names, they are different, but related, species. Kawakawa is a small tree endemic to New Zealand, having importance to traditional medicine and M\u0101ori culture. As noted by the Kava Society of New Zealand, \"in all likelihood, the kava plant was known to the first settlers of Aotearoa [New Zealand]. It is also possible that (just like the Polynesian migrants that settled in Hawaii) the Maori explorers brought some kava with them. Unfortunately, most of New Zealand is simply too cold for growing kava and hence the Maori settlers lost their connection to the sacred plant.\" Further, \"in New Zealand, where the climate is too cold for kava, the Maori gave the name kawa-kawa to another \"Piperaceae M. excelsum\", in memory of the kava plants they undoubtedly brought with them and unsuccessfully attempted to cultivate. The Maori word kawa also means \"ceremonial protocol\", recalling the stylized consumption of the drug typical of Polynesian societies\". Kawakawa is commonly used in Maori traditional medicine for the treatment of skin infections, wounds, and cuts, and (when prepared as a tea) for stomach upsets and other minor illnesses.\nComposition.\nFresh kava root contains on average 80% water. Dried root contains approximately 43% starch, 20% dietary fiber, 15% kavalactones, 12% water, 3.2% sugars, 3.6% protein, and 3.2% minerals.\nIn general, kavalactone content is greatest in the roots and decreases higher up the plant into the stems and leaves. Relative concentrations of 15%, 10%, and 5% have been observed in the root, stump, and basal stems, respectively. The relative content of kavalactones depends not only on plant segment but also on the kava plant variety, plant maturity, geographic location, and time of harvest. The kavalactones present are kavain, desmethoxyyangonin, and yangonin, which are higher in the roots than in the stems and leaves, with dihydrokavain, methysticin, and dihydromethysticin also present.\nThe mature roots of the kava plant are harvested after a minimum of four years (at least five years, ideally) for peak kavalactone content. Most kava plants produce around of root when they are harvested. Kava root is classified into two categories: crown root (or chips) and lateral root. Crown roots are the large-diameter pieces that look like -diameter wooden poker chips. Most kava plants consist of approximately 80% crown root upon harvesting. Lateral roots are smaller-diameter roots that look more like a typical root. A mature kava plant is about 20% lateral roots. Kava lateral roots have the highest content of kavalactones in the kava plant. \"Waka\" grade kava is made of lateral roots only.\nPharmacology.\nConstituents.\nA total of 18 different kavalactones (or kavapyrones) have been identified to date, at least 15 of which are active. However, six of them, including kavain, dihydrokavain, methysticin, dihydromethysticin, yangonin, and desmethoxyyangonin, have been determined to be responsible for about 96% of the plant's pharmacological activity. Some minor constituents, including three chalcones\u2014flavokavain A, flavokavain B, and flavokavain C\u2014have also been identified, as well as a toxic alkaloid (not present in the consumable parts of the plant), pipermethystine. Alkaloids are present in the roots and leaves.\nPharmacodynamics.\nThe following pharmacological actions have been reported for kava and/or its major active constituents:\nMethanolic leaf extracts of Hawaiian kava cultivars showed stronger binding inhibition to several CNS receptors\u2014including GABAA, dopamine D2, opioid (\u03bc, \u03b4), and histamine (H1, H2)\u2014than root extracts, suggesting that compounds beyond the main kavalactones may contribute to the pharmacological effects of kava leaves.\nDetection.\nRecent usage of kava has been documented in forensic investigations by quantitation of kavain in blood specimens. The principal urinary metabolite, conjugated 4'-OH-kavain, is generally detectable for up to 48 hours.\nPharmacokinetics.\nKavalactones are quickly absorbed in the gut and vary in bioavailability. They primarily act on brain areas like the limbic system, amygdala, and reticular formation, but their exact molecular mechanisms are not yet fully understood.\nData on the pharmacokinetics of kavalactones remain limited. In animal studies, particularly in rats, kavain\u2014the primary kavalactone found in traditional kava preparations\u2014was shown to be well absorbed, with an estimated bioavailability of approximately 50%. In humans, kavain undergoes extensive hepatic metabolism, primarily via cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme-mediated pathways, followed by further phase II biotransformation processes such as sulfonation, glucuronidation, and glutathione (GSH) conjugation.\nIn rats administered a 100\u00a0mg/kg bodyweight dose of kavain, over 90% was eliminated within 72 hours through urine and feces, either as unchanged compound or as metabolites. No evidence of bioaccumulation has been observed in rats, mice, or humans.\nPreparations.\nTraditional preparation.\nThe traditional kava beverage is prepared through aqueous extraction of the fresh or dried roots of the \"Piper methysticum\" plant. When using fresh roots, the outer layer is typically peeled before the root is either chewed or mechanically ground into a fine, fibrous pulp, which is then mixed with water. For dried roots, the material is finely ground, placed in a porous cloth, and infused in water. The resulting brew is usually consumed immediately after preparation, often from a communal bowl.\nTraditional and recreational preparation of kava beverage involves macerating, grinding, or pounding fresh or dried rhizome/root (1.0\u20131.5 g) and mixing it with water or coconut milk (100\u2013150 mL) to form an emulsion, which is then agitated and strained through cloth or bark filters into a communal bowl. The resulting drink is grey and slightly pungent, with fresh rhizome/root producing a stronger and more complex beverage than dried forms due to the retention of volatile compounds. In Vanuatu, fresh root is commonly used, while in non-Pacific countries, kava is typically prepared from dried root powder soaked in water (about one tablespoon per cup) for 30 minutes before straining. On Pohnpei in Micronesia, preparation also includes mixing the kava root with the fibrous bark of \"Hibiscus tiliaceus\" before pressing.\nChewing produces the strongest effect because it produces the finest particles. The strength also depends on the species and techniques of cultivation.\nIn Vanuatu, a strong kava drink is normally followed by a hot meal or tea. The meal traditionally follows some time after the drink so that the psychoactives are absorbed into the bloodstream more quickly. Traditionally, no flavoring is added.\nIn Papua New Guinea, the locals in Madang province refer to their kava as \"waild koniak\" (\"wild cognac\" in English).\nFijians commonly share a drink called \"grog\", made by pounding sun-dried kava root into a fine powder, straining and mixing it with cold water. Traditionally, grog is drunk from the shorn half-shell of a coconut, called a \"bilo\". Grog is commonly used in Fiji, especially among young men, and often brings people together for storytelling and socializing. Drinking grog for a few hours brings a numbing and relaxing effect to the drinker; grog also numbs the tongue, and grog drinking typically is followed by a \"chaser\" or sweet or spicy snack to follow a \"bilo\".\nSupplements and pharmaceutical preparations.\nWater extraction is the traditional method for preparation of the plant. Pharmaceutical and herbal supplement companies extract kavalactones from the kava plant using solvents such as supercritical carbon dioxide, acetone, and ethanol to produce pills standardized with between 30% and 90% kavalactones.\nConcerns.\nNumerous scholars and regulatory bodies have raised concerns over the safety profile of such products.\nOne group of scholars say that organic solvents introduce compounds that may affect the liver into the standardized product; these compounds are not extracted by water and are consequently largely absent from kava prepared with water. For instance, when compared with water extraction, organic solvents extract vastly larger amounts of flavokavains, compounds associated with adverse reactions to kava that are present in very low concentrations in noble kava, but significant in non-noble.\nAlso, \"chemical solvents used do not extract the same compounds as the natural water extracts in traditional use. The extraction process may exclude important modifying constituents soluble only in water\". In particular, it has been noted that, unlike traditional water-based preparations, products obtained with the use of organic solvents do not contain glutathione, an important liver-protecting compound. Another group of researchers noted: \"The extraction process (aqueous vs. acetone in the two types of preparations) is responsible for the difference in toxicity as extraction of glutathione in addition to the kava lactones is important to provide protection against hepatotoxicity\".\nIt has also been argued that kavalactone extracts have often been made from low-quality plant material, including the toxic aerial parts of the plant that contain the hepatotoxic alkaloid pipermethystine, non-noble kava varieties, or plants affected by mold \u2013 which, in light of the chemical solvents' ability to extract far greater amounts of the potentially toxic compounds than water, makes them particularly problematic.\nIn the context of these concerns, the World Health Organization advises against the consumption of ethanolic and acetonic kavalactone extracts, and says that \"products should be developed from water-based suspensions of kava\". The government of Australia prohibits the sales of such kavalactone extracts, and only permits the sale of kava products in their natural form or produced with cold water.\nKava culture.\nKava is used for medicinal, religious, political, cultural, and social purposes throughout the Pacific. These cultures have a great respect for the plant and place a high importance on it. In Fiji, for example, a formal \"yaqona\" (kava) ceremony will often accompany important social, political, or religious functions, usually involving a ritual presentation of the bundled roots as a \"sevusevu\" (gift) and drinking of the \"yaqona\" itself. Due to the importance of kava in religious rituals and the seemingly (from the Western point of view) unhygienic preparation method, its consumption was discouraged or even banned by Christian missionaries. The nakamal, traditionally the central meeting place in Vanuatu, serves as a cultural and social hub where kava is consumed to facilitate communal gathering, dialogue, and the exchange of knowledge across different groups and generations.\nKava bars.\nBars serving kava beverage exist outside of the South Pacific.\nKava bars exist in several American cities as social, alcohol-free spaces, with the number increasing to around 180 establishments between 2012 and 2017.\nEffects of consumption.\nThe nature of effects will largely depend on the cultivar of the kava plant and the form of its consumption. Traditionally, only noble kava cultivars have been consumed, as they are accepted as safe and produce desired effects. The specific effects of various noble kavas depend on various factors, such as the cultivar used (and the related specific composition of kavalactones), age of the plant, and method of consumption. However, it can be stated that in general, noble kava produces a state of calmness, relaxation, and well-being without diminishing cognitive performance. Kava may produce an initial talkative period, followed by muscle relaxation and eventual sleepiness. The beverage has initial numbing and astringent effect in the mouth caused by the local anesthetic action of kavalactones and chewing it has local anesthetic effects similar to that of cocaine and longer lasting than benzocaine.\nAs noted in one of the earliest Western publications on kava (1886): \"A well prepared Kava potion drunk in small quantities produces only pleasant changes in behavior. It is therefore a slightly stimulating drink which helps relieve great fatigue. It relaxes the body after strenuous efforts, clarifies the mind and sharpens the mental faculties\".\nDespite its psychoactive effects, kava is not considered to be physically addictive and its use does not lead to dependency.\nLong-term effects.\nRegular use of large amounts of kava may cause mood swings, apathy, dry, scaly skin, malnutrition, weight loss, increased susceptibility to infections, and shortness of breath. Long-term use has also been associated with liver damage; however, the available evidence remains inconclusive. The risk is higher with alcoholic or acetonic extracts, or concentrated forms like pills. Water-based kava extracts in moderate doses are considered safer, but should not be consumed with alcohol, particularly in those with a history of liver issues.\nToxicity, safety, and potential side effects.\nGeneral observations.\nThere is limited safety information available on the effects of kava consumption, but in general, moderate consumption appears unlikely to be harmful, while there is evidence of harm from heavy use.\nThreshold intake levels for adverse effects.\nAdverse health and social effects associated with kava consumption\u2014such as skin rashes, increased body mass index (BMI), elevated gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) enzyme levels, and higher lymphocyte counts\u2014may begin to appear at intake levels of approximately 240 to 440 grams of kava powder per week, corresponding to 3,500 to 6,440\u00a0mg of kavalactones per day. One shell of kava contains an average of 250\u00a0mg kavalactones. Published and anecdotal evidence further indicates that recreational consumption of kava beverages can often exceed these levels, surpassing the kavalactone doses used in clinical settings for the treatment of anxiety, where aqueous extracts containing 140\u2013250\u00a0mg per day over six weeks have demonstrated no significant toxicity.\nEffects on the liver.\nLong-term use of kava has been associated with potential hepatotoxicity; however, the evidence remains inconclusive. Some kava extracts have demonstrated to be hepatotoxic. Concerns about this led to kava being omitted from the US Pharmacopeia.\nKava has been linked to rare but serious liver disease cases, prompting warnings from health authorities in the United States, Australia, and Canada. \nThe potential causes include contamination with toxic alkaloids from kava leaves and stems, differences in traditional versus commercial preparations, drug interactions affecting liver enzymes, and genetic variations in metabolism among populations. While kava appears safe in traditional South Pacific use, caution is advised, especially during pregnancy, in people having preexisting liver conditions, or when combined with alcohol consumption, prescription drugs or dietary supplements. The risk is higher with alcoholic or acetonic extracts, or concentrated forms like pills. Water-based kava extracts in moderate doses are considered safer, but should not be consumed with alcohol, particularly in those with a history of liver issues.\nOther adverse reactions.\nAdverse reactions may result from the poor quality of kava raw material used in the manufacturing of various kava products. In addition to the potential for hepatotoxicity, adverse reactions from chronic use may include visual impairment, rashes or dermatitis, seizures, weight loss, and malnutrition, but there is only limited high-quality research on these possible effects.\nPotential interactions.\nSeveral adverse interactions with drugs have been documented, both prescription and nonprescription \u2014 including, but not limited to, anticonvulsants, alcohol, anxiolytics (central nervous system depressants such as benzodiazepines), antipsychotics, levodopa, diuretics, and drugs metabolized by CYP450 in the liver.\nA few notable potential drug interactions are, but are not limited to:\nKava dermopathy.\nLong-term and heavy kava consumption is associated with a reversible skin condition known as \"kava dermopathy\", or \"kanikani\" (in the Fijian language), characterised by dry and scaly skin covering the palms of the hands, soles of the feet, and back. The first symptom to appear is usually dry, peeling skin; some Pacific Islanders deliberately consume large quantities of kava for several weeks in order to get the peeling effect, resulting in a layer of new skin. These effects appeared at consumption levels between to a week of kava powder. Despite numerous studies, the mechanism that causes kava dermopathy is poorly understood \"but may relate to interference with cholesterol metabolism\". The condition is easily treatable with abstinence or lowering of kava intake as the skin appears to be returning to its normal state within a couple of weeks of reduced or no kava use. Kava dermopathy should not be confused with rare instances of allergic reactions to kava that are usually characterised by itchy rash or puffy face.\nResearch.\nA 2003 systematic review found that kava extract reduced anxiety symptoms compared to placebo, with a small effect size and mostly mild, transient side effects. Kava may help with anxiety after several weeks of use, but current evidence does not support its effectiveness for generalized anxiety disorder or other conditions. Meta-analyses suggest kava can reduce anxiety symptoms \u2013 sometimes comparably to medications like oxazepam and buspirone \u2013 with strongest evidence seen in multiweek studies using aqueous extracts for generalized anxiety disorder, although results were mixed and standardized trials are limited.\nA study of heavy and long-term kava users in northern Australia found no evidence of cognitive or brain dysfunction despite some physical health effects, including liver enzyme elevation and skin changes.\nKava extracts have no proven effects on cancer, cognitive function, or microbial infections.\nTraditional medicine.\nOver centuries, kava has been used in the traditional medicine of the South Pacific Islands.\nRegulation.\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, the supply of kava is regulated through the National Code of Kava Management. Travellers to Australia are allowed to bring up to 4\u00a0kg of kava in their baggage, provided they are at least 18 years old and the kava is in root or dried form. Commercial import of larger quantities is allowed, under licence for medical or scientific purposes. These restrictions were introduced in 2007 after concern about abuse of kava in indigenous communities. Initially, the import limit was 2\u00a0kg per person; it was raised to 4\u00a0kg in December 2019, and a pilot program allowing for commercial importation was implemented on 1 December 2021.\nThe Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration has recommended no more than 250\u00a0mg of kavalactones be taken in a 24\u2011hour period.\nKava possession is limited to 2\u00a0kg per adult in the Northern Territory. While it was previously banned in Western Australia in the 2000s, the Western Australian Health Department announced the lifting of the ban in February 2017, bringing Western Australia \"into line with other States\" where it has always remained legal, albeit closely regulated.\nEurope.\nFollowing discussions on the safety of certain pharmaceutical products derived from kava and sold in Germany, the EU imposed a temporary ban on imports of kava-based pharmaceutical products in 2002. The sale of kava plant became regulated in Switzerland, France, and in prepared form in the Netherlands. Some Pacific island states which had been benefiting from the export of kava to the pharmaceutical companies have attempted to overturn the EU ban on kava-based pharmaceutical products by invoking international trade agreements at the WTO: Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu argued that the ban was imposed with insufficient evidence. The pressure prompted Germany to reconsider the evidence base for banning kava-based pharmaceutical products. On 10 June 2014, the German Administrative Court overturned the 2002 ban, making selling kava as a medicine legal (personal possession of kava has never been illegal), albeit strictly regulated. In Germany, kava-based pharmaceutical preparations are currently prescription drugs. Furthermore, patient and professional information brochures have been redesigned to warn about potential side effects. These strict measures have been opposed by some of the leading kava scientists. In early 2016, a court case was filed against the Bundesinstitut f\u00fcr Arzneimittel und Medizinprodukte (BfArM/German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices), arguing that the new regulatory regime is too strict and not justified.\nIn the United Kingdom, it is a criminal offence to sell, supply, or import any medicinal product containing kava for human consumption. It is legal to possess kava for personal use or to import it for purposes other than human consumption (e.g., for animals).\nUntil August 2018, Poland was the only EU country with an \"outright ban on kava\" and where the mere possession of kava was prohibited and may have resulted in a prison sentence. Under the new legislation, kava is no longer listed among prohibited substances and it is therefore legal to possess, import, and consume the plant, but it remains illegal to sell it within Poland for the purpose of human consumption.\nIn the Netherlands, for unknown reasons, the ban was never lifted, and it is still prohibited to prepare, manufacture, or trade kava or goods containing kava.\nDue to safety concerns, including reports of hepatotoxicity and limitations in clinical evidence, the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) concluded in 2017 that the benefit-risk balance for the oral use of kava in the treatment of anxiety disorders is unfavorable, and therefore a European Union herbal monograph could not be established.\nNew Zealand.\nWhen used traditionally, kava is regulated as a food under the Food Standards Code. Kava may also be used as an herbal remedy, where it is currently regulated by the Dietary Supplements Regulations. Only traditionally consumed forms and parts of the kava plant (i.e., pure roots of the kava plant, water extractions prepared from these roots) can legally be sold as food or dietary supplements in New Zealand. The aerial parts of the plant (growing up and out of the ground), unlike the roots, contain relatively small amounts of kavalactones; instead, they contain a mildly toxic alkaloid, pipermethysticine. While not normally consumed, the sale of aerial plant sections and non-water based extract (such as CO2, acetonic, or ethanol extractions) is prohibited for the purpose of human consumption (but can be sold as an ingredient in cosmetics or other products not intended for human consumption).\nCanada.\nIn 2002, Health Canada issued an order prohibiting the sale of any product containing kava. While the restrictions on kava were lifted in 2012, Health Canada lists five kava ingredients, as of 2017, although manufactured products containing kava or its extracts must be approved by the federal government before marketing.\nSingapore.\nDue to the risk of liver toxicity, the Health Sciences Authority of Singapore banned the sale of kava and its extracts in July 2002. The commercial sale, supply and import of \"Piper methysticum (kava-kava), the active constituents of; kava pyrones (kavalactones); their quarternary compounds; their salts\" remains banned in Singapore under the \"Poisons Act\".\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, kava is sold mainly as a dietary supplement and is not approved by the FDA as a drug. Manufacturers are responsible for ensuring product safety and proper labeling, while consumers are advised to consult healthcare professionals before using kava supplements.\nIn 2002, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration warned that kava-containing dietary supplements, promoted for relaxation and other uses, may cause rare but severe liver injury\u2014including hepatitis, cirrhosis, and liver failure\u2014and advised consumers, especially those with liver issues or on liver-impacting drugs, to consult a doctor before use and to report any related adverse effects.\nThe FDA concluded in 2020 that kava is not generally recognized as safe (GRAS) for use in conventional foods due to evidence of toxicity, potential liver damage, possible carcinogenicity, drug interactions, and a lack of sufficient safety data.\nVanuatu.\nThe Pacific island-state of Vanuatu has passed legislation to regulate the quality of its kava exports. Vanuatu prohibits the export or consumption of non-noble kava varieties or the parts of the plant that are unsuitable for consumption (such as leaves and stems).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48837", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48837", "title": "Sidereal time", "text": "Timekeeping system on Earth relative to the celestial sphere\nSidereal time (\"sidereal\" pronounced ) is a system of timekeeping used especially by astronomers. Using sidereal time and the celestial coordinate system, it is easy to locate the positions of celestial objects in the night sky. Sidereal time is a \"time scale that is based on Earth's rate of rotation measured relative to the fixed stars\". A sidereal day (also known as the sidereal rotation period) represents the time for one rotation about the planet axis relative to the stars.\nViewed from the same location, a star seen at one position in the sky will be seen at the same position on another night at the same time of day (or night), if the day is defined as a sidereal day. This is similar to how the time kept by a sundial (Solar time) can be used to find the location of the Sun. Just as the Sun and Moon appear to rise in the east and set in the west due to the rotation of Earth, so do the stars. Both solar time and sidereal time make use of the regularity of Earth's rotation about its polar axis: solar time is reckoned according to the position of the Sun in the sky while sidereal time is based approximately on the position of the fixed stars on the theoretical celestial sphere.\nMore exactly, sidereal time is the angle, measured along the celestial equator, from the observer's meridian to the great circle that passes through the March equinox (the northern hemisphere's vernal equinox) and both celestial poles, and is usually expressed in hours, minutes, and seconds. In the context of sidereal time, \"March equinox\" or \"equinox\" or \"first point of Aries\" is currently the direction from the center of the Earth along the line formed by the intersection of the Earth's equator and the ecliptic, toward the constellation Pisces; during ancient times it was toward the constellation Aries. Common time on a typical clock (using mean Solar time) measures a slightly longer cycle, affected not only by Earth's axial rotation but also by Earth's orbit around the Sun.\nThe March equinox itself precesses slowly westward relative to the fixed stars, completing one revolution in about 25,800 years, so the misnamed \"sidereal\" day (\"sidereal\" is derived from the Latin \"sidus\" meaning \"star\") is 0.0084\u00a0seconds shorter than the stellar day, Earth's actual period of rotation relative to the fixed stars. The slightly longer stellar period is measured as the Earth rotation angle (ERA), formerly the stellar angle. An increase of 360\u00b0 in the ERA is a full rotation of the Earth.\nA sidereal day on Earth is approximately 86164.0905 seconds (23 h 56 min 4.0905\u00a0s or 23.9344696 h). (Seconds are defined as per International System of Units and are not to be confused with ephemeris seconds.) Each day, the sidereal time at any given place and time will be about four minutes shorter than local civil time (which is based on solar time), so that for a complete year the number of sidereal \"days\" is one more than the number of solar days.\nComparison to solar time.\nSolar time is measured by the apparent diurnal motion of the Sun. Local noon in apparent solar time is the moment when the Sun is exactly due south or north (depending on the observer's latitude and the season). A mean solar day (what we normally measure as a \"day\") is the average time between local solar noons (\"average\" since this varies slightly over a year).\nEarth makes one rotation around its axis each sidereal day; during that time it moves a short distance (about 1\u00b0) along its orbit around the Sun. So after a sidereal day has passed, Earth still needs to rotate slightly more before the Sun reaches local noon according to solar time. A mean solar day is, therefore, nearly 4 minutes longer than a sidereal day.\nThe stars are so far away that Earth's movement along its orbit makes nearly no difference to their apparent direction (except for the nearest stars if measured with extreme accuracy; see parallax), and so they return to their highest point at the same time each sidereal day.\nAnother way to understand this difference is to notice that, relative to the stars, as viewed from Earth, the position of the Sun at the same time each day appears to move around Earth once per year. A year has about 365.24 solar days but 366.24 sidereal days. Therefore, there is one fewer solar day per year than there are sidereal days, similar to an observation of the coin rotation paradox. This makes a sidereal day approximately times the length of the 24-hour solar day.\nEffects of precession.\nEarth's rotation is not a simple rotation around an axis that remains always parallel to itself. Earth's rotational axis itself rotates about a second axis, orthogonal to the plane of Earth's orbit, taking about 25,800\u00a0years to perform a complete rotation. This phenomenon is termed the precession of the equinoxes. Because of this precession, the stars appear to move around Earth in a manner more complicated than a simple constant rotation.\nFor this reason, to simplify the description of Earth's orientation in astronomy and geodesy, it was conventional to chart the positions of the stars in the sky according to right ascension and declination, which are based on a frame of reference that follows Earth's precession, and to keep track of Earth's rotation, through sidereal time, relative to this frame as well. (The conventional reference frame, for purposes of star catalogues, was replaced in 1998 with the International Celestial Reference Frame, which is fixed with respect to extra-galactic radio sources. Because of the great distances, these sources have no appreciable proper motion.) In this frame of reference, Earth's rotation is close to constant, but the stars appear to rotate slowly with a period of about 25,800 years. It is also in this frame of reference that the tropical year (or solar year), the year related to Earth's seasons, represents one orbit of Earth around the Sun. The precise definition of a sidereal day is the time taken for one rotation of Earth in this precessing frame of reference.\nModern definitions.\nDuring the past, time was measured by observing stars with instruments such as photographic zenith tubes and Danjon astrolabes, and the passage of stars across defined lines would be timed with the observatory clock. Then, using the right ascension of the stars from a star catalog, the time when the star should have passed through the meridian of the observatory was computed, and a correction to the time kept by the observatory clock was computed. Sidereal time was defined such that the March equinox would transit the meridian of the observatory at 0 hours local sidereal time.\nBeginning during the 1970s, the radio astronomy methods very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) and pulsar timing overtook optical instruments for the most precise astrometry. This resulted in the determination of UT1 (mean solar time at 0\u00b0 longitude) using VLBI, a new measure of the Earth Rotation Angle, and new definitions of sidereal time. These changes became effective 1 January 2003.\nEarth rotation angle.\nThe Earth rotation angle (ERA) measures the rotation of the Earth from an origin on the celestial equator, the \"Celestial Intermediate Origin\", also termed the \"Celestial Ephemeris Origin\", that has no instantaneous motion along the equator; it was originally referred to as the \"non-rotating origin\". This point is very close to the equinox of J2000.\nERA, measured in radians, is related to UT1 by a simple linear relation:formula_1where \"tU\" is the Julian UT1 date (JD) minus 2451545.0.\nThe linear coefficient represents the Earth's rotation speed around its own axis.\nERA replaces \"Greenwich Apparent Sidereal Time\" (GAST). The origin on the celestial equator for GAST, termed the true equinox, does move, due to the movement of the equator and the ecliptic. The lack of motion of the origin of ERA is considered a significant advantage.\nThe ERA may be converted to other units; for example, the \"Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017\" tabulated it in degrees, minutes, and seconds.\nAs an example, the \"Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017\" gave the ERA at 0 h 1 January 2017 UT1 as 100\u00b0 37\u2032 12.4365\u2033. Since Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) is within a second or two of UT1, this can be used as an anchor to give the ERA approximately for a given civil time and date.\nMean and apparent varieties.\nAlthough ERA is intended to replace sidereal time, there is a need to maintain definitions for sidereal time during the transition, and when working with older data and documents.\nSimilarly to mean solar time, every location on Earth has its own local sidereal time (LST), depending on the longitude of the point. Since it is not feasible to publish tables for every longitude, astronomical tables use Greenwich sidereal time (GST), which is sidereal time on the IERS Reference Meridian, less precisely termed the Greenwich, or Prime meridian. There are two varieties, mean sidereal time if the mean equator and equinox of date are used, and apparent sidereal time if the apparent equator and equinox of date are used. The former ignores the effect of astronomical nutation while the latter includes it. When the choice of location is combined with the choice of including astronomical nutation or not, the acronyms GMST, LMST, GAST, and LAST result.\nThe following relationships are true:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;local mean sidereal time = GMST + east longitude\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;local apparent sidereal time = GAST + east longitude\nThe new definitions of Greenwich mean and apparent sidereal time (since 2003, see above) are:\nformula_2formula_3such that \"\u03b8\" is the Earth Rotation Angle, \"E\"PREC is the accumulated precession, and \"E\"0 is equation of the origins, which represents accumulated precession and nutation. The calculation of precession and nutation was described in Chapter 6 of Urban &amp; Seidelmann.\nAs an example, the \"Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017\" gave the ERA at 0 h 1 January 2017 UT1 as 100\u00b0 37\u2032 12.4365\u2033 (6 h 42 m 28.8291 s). The GAST was 6 h 43 m 20.7109 s. For GMST the hour and minute were the same but the second was 21.1060.\nRelationship between solar time and sidereal time intervals.\nIf a certain interval \"I\" is measured in both mean solar time (UT1) and sidereal time, the numerical value will be greater in sidereal time than in UT1, because sidereal days are shorter than UT1 days. The ratio is:formula_4such that \"t\" represents the number of Julian centuries elapsed since noon 1 January 2000 Terrestrial Time.\nSidereal days compared to solar days on other planets.\nSix of the eight solar planets have prograde rotation\u2014that is, they rotate more than once per year in the same direction as they orbit the Sun, so the Sun rises in the east. Venus and Uranus, however, have retrograde rotation. For prograde rotation, the formula relating the lengths of the sidereal and solar days is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;number of sidereal days per orbital period = 1 + number of solar days per orbital period\nor, equivalently:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;length of solar day = .\nWhen calculating the formula for a retrograde rotation, the operator of the denominator will be a plus sign (put another way, in the original formula the length of the sidereal day must be treated as negative). This is due to the solar day being shorter than the sidereal day for retrograde rotation, as the rotation of the planet would be against the direction of orbital motion.\nIf a planet rotates prograde, and the sidereal day exactly equals the orbital period, then the formula above gives an infinitely long solar day (division by zero). This is the case for a planet in synchronous rotation; in the case of zero eccentricity, one hemisphere experiences eternal day, the other eternal night, with a \"twilight belt\" separating them.\nAll the solar planets more distant from the Sun than Earth are similar to Earth in that, since they experience many rotations per revolution around the Sun, there is only a small difference between the length of the sidereal day and that of the solar day \u2013 the ratio of the former to the latter never being less than Earth's ratio of 0.997. But the situation is quite different for Mercury and Venus. Mercury's sidereal day is about two-thirds of its orbital period, so by the prograde formula its solar day lasts for two revolutions around the Sun \u2013 three times as long as its sidereal day. Venus rotates retrograde with a sidereal day lasting about 243.0 Earth days, or about 1.08 times its orbital period of 224.7 Earth days; hence by the retrograde formula its solar day is about 116.8 Earth days, and it has about 1.9 solar days per orbital period.\nBy convention, rotation periods of planets are given in sidereal terms unless otherwise specified.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48838", "revid": "122969", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48838", "title": "Hour angle", "text": "Coordinates used in the equatorial coordinate system\nIn astronomy and celestial navigation, the hour angle is the dihedral angle between the \"meridian plane\" (containing Earth's axis and the zenith) and the \"hour circle\" (containing Earth's axis and a given point of interest). \nIt may be given in degrees, time, or rotations depending on the application.\nThe angle may be expressed as negative east of the meridian plane and positive west of the meridian plane, or as positive westward from 0\u00b0 to 360\u00b0. The angle may be measured in degrees or in time, with 24h = 360\u00b0 exactly.\nIn celestial navigation, the convention is to measure in degrees westward from the prime meridian (Greenwich hour angle, GHA), from the local meridian (local hour angle, LHA) or from the first point of Aries (sidereal hour angle, SHA).\nThe hour angle is paired with the declination to fully specify the location of a point on the celestial sphere in the equatorial coordinate system.\nRelation with right ascension.\nThe local hour angle (LHA) of an object in the observer's sky is\nformula_1\nor\nformula_2\nwhere LHAobject is the local hour angle of the object, LST is the local sidereal time, formula_3 is the object's right ascension, GST is Greenwich sidereal time and formula_4 is the observer's longitude (positive east from the prime meridian). These angles can be measured in time (24 hours to a circle) or in degrees (360 degrees to a circle)\u2014one or the other, not both.\nNegative hour angles (\u2212180\u00b0 &lt; LHAobject &lt; 0\u00b0) indicate the object is approaching the meridian, positive hour angles (0\u00b0 &lt; LHAobject &lt; 180\u00b0) indicate the object is moving away from the meridian; an hour angle of zero means the object is on the meridian.\nRight ascension is frequently given in sexagesimal hours-minutes-seconds format (HH:MM:SS) in astronomy, though may be given in decimal hours, sexagesimal degrees (DDD:MM:SS), or, decimal degrees.\nBecause the earth rotates 365.2564 times in a sidereal year whereas fixed stars appear to go around one time more, the hour angle of a fixed star increases by 366.2564/365.2564 (about 1.0027) per hour, or in other words it takes 59 minutes and 50.17 seconds for the hour angle to increase by one hour.\nSolar hour angle.\nObserving the Sun from Earth, the \"solar hour angle\" is an expression of time, expressed in angular measurement, usually degrees, from solar noon. At solar noon the hour angle is zero degrees, with the time before solar noon expressed as negative degrees, and the local time after solar noon expressed as positive degrees. For example, at 10:30 AM local apparent time the hour angle is \u221222.5\u00b0 (15\u00b0 per hour times 1.5 hours before noon).\nThe solar hour angle increases on average by one hour per hour, but because of the equation of time this varies with time of year. In mid-September a solar day is about 22 seconds less than 24 hours, meaning that the solar hour angle increases by 1.00025 hours per hour, whereas in late December a solar day is about 28 seconds more than 24 hours, so the solar hour angle increases by 0.99968 hours per hour.\nThe cosine of the hour angle (cos(\"h\")) is used to calculate the solar zenith angle. At solar noon, \"h\" = 0.000 so cos(\"h\") = 1, and before and after solar noon the cos(\u00b1\u00a0\"h\") term = the same value for morning (negative hour angle) or afternoon (positive hour angle), so that the Sun is at the same altitude in the sky at 11:00AM and 1:00PM solar time.\nSidereal hour angle.\nThe sidereal hour angle (SHA) of a body on the celestial sphere is its angular distance west of the March equinox generally measured in degrees. The SHA of a star varies by less than a minute of arc per year, due to precession, while the SHA of a planet varies significantly from night to night. SHA is often used in celestial navigation and navigational astronomy, and values are published in nautical almanacs.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48839", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48839", "title": "Meridian", "text": "Meridian or a meridian line (from Latin \"meridies\" via Old French \"meridiane\", meaning \u201cmidday\u201d) may refer to\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48842", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48842", "title": "Smallmouth bass", "text": "Species of freshwater fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe smallmouth bass (Micropterus dolomieu) is a species of freshwater fish in the sunfish family (Centrarchidae) of the order Centrarchiformes. It is the type species of its genus \"Micropterus\" (black basses), and is a popular game fish sought by anglers throughout the temperate zones of North America, and has been spread by stocking \u2014as well as illegal introductions\u2014to many cool-water tributaries and lakes in Canada and more so introduced in the United States. The maximum recorded size is approximately and . \nThe smallmouth bass is native to the upper and middle Mississippi River basin, the Saint Lawrence River\u2013Great Lakes system, the Champlain Valley, and the Hudson Bay basin. Its common names include smallmouth, bronzeback, brown bass, brownie, smallie, bronze bass, and bareback bass.\nDescription.\nSmallmouth have a slender but muscular fusiform body shape making them powerful swimmers. The coloration of the smallmouth bass' ctenoid scales range from golden-olive to dark brown dorsally which fades to a yellowish white with dark brown vertical bars or blotches along the body and dark brown horizontal bars on the head. The combination of the muscular fusiform body shape and camouflage like coloring make these fish highly effective ambush predators. The coloration can vary greatly depending on the fishes age, habitat, water quality, diet, and the spawning cycle.\nGenerally, the protruding jaw of the smallmouth does not extend back beyond the eyes which are red or brown. They have two dorsal fins which are separated by a shallow interdorsal notch. The front dorsal has 9\u201311 spiney rays and the back dorsal has 13\u201315 soft rays.\nMales are generally smaller than females. The males tend to range around two pounds, while females can range from three to six pounds. Their average sizes and coloration can differ, depending on if they are found in lacustrine or riverine habitats. Smallmouth found in riverine habitats are generally long and slender which allows greater agility in moving water, while those found in lacustrine habitats and shorter and deeper bodied.\nRiverine smallmouth that live in dark water tend to be rather torpedo-shaped and very dark brown to be more efficient for feeding. Lacustrine smallmouth bass, however, that live in sandy areas, tend to be a light yellow-brown and are more oval-shaped.\nThere are two recognized subspecies, the Northern smallmouth bass (\"M. dolomieui dolomieui\") and the Neosho smallmouth bass (\"M. dolomieui velox\"). The Northern smallmouth bass is much more widespread than the much smaller subgroup called the Neosho smallmouth bass. The Neosho are native to an ecologically isolated region of the lower Midwest known as the Central Interior Highlands, which weave through southwestern Missouri, northern Arkansas and northeastern Oklahoma.\nThey eat tadpoles, fish, aquatic insects, and crayfish.\nThe world record size is caught in the Dale Hollow reservoir, on the Kentucky\u2014Tennessee border.\nHabitat.\nThe smallmouth bass is found in clearer water than the largemouth, especially streams, rivers, and the rocky areas and stumps and also sandy bottoms of lakes and reservoirs. It can also survive in a stronger current than other black bass. The smallmouth prefers cooler water temperatures than its cousin the largemouth bass, and as a result will often seek out deeper, faster moving water during the hot summer months. Because it is intolerant of pollution, the smallmouth bass is a good natural indicator of a healthy environment, though they are still much more resilient than most trout species. Carnivorous, its diet comprises crayfish, amphibians, insects, and smaller fish, while the larvae feed on various zooplankton and insect larvae. Adults also cannibalize young of other parents.\nThe female can lay up to 21,100 eggs, which are guarded by the male in his nest.\nMigration.\nWhen the weather gets colder, and the water temperature drops below , smallmouth will often migrate in search of deeper pools in which they enter a semi-hibernation state, moving sluggishly and feeding very little until the warm season returns. The migration patterns of smallmouth have been tracked and it is not unusual for a smallmouth to travel 12 miles in a single day in a stream, creek or river. The overall migration can exceed 60 miles.\nSmallmouth generally begin spawning patterns in spring or early summer when water temperatures are between , which is heavily dependent on latitudinal location. Smallmouth require clean stone, rock, or gravel substrate for a successful spawn.\nAngling.\nIn the United States, smallmouth bass were first introduced outside of their native range with the construction of the Erie Canal in 1825, extending the fish's range into central New York state. During the mid-to-late 19th century, smallmouth were transplanted via the nation's rail system to lakes and rivers throughout the northern and western United States, as far as California. Shippers found that smallmouth bass were a hardy species that could be transported in buckets or barrels by rail, sometimes using the spigots from the railroad water tanks to aerate the fingerlings. They were introduced east of the Appalachians just before the Civil War, and afterwards transplanted to the states of New England.\nWith increased industrialization and land use changes, many of the nation's eastern trout rivers were polluted or experienced elevated water temperatures, reducing the range of native brook trout. Smallmouth bass were often introduced to northern rivers with increased water temperatures and slowly became a popular gamefish with many anglers. Equally adaptable to large, cool-water impoundments and reservoirs, the smallmouth also spread far beyond its original native range. Later, smallmouth populations also began to decline after years of damage caused by overdevelopment and pollution, as well as a loss of river habitat caused by damming many formerly wild rivers to form lakes or reservoirs. In recent years, a renewed emphasis on preserving water quality and riparian habitat in the nation's rivers and lakes, together with stricter management practices, eventually benefited smallmouth populations and has caused a resurgence in their popularity with anglers.\nToday, smallmouth bass are very popular game fish, frequently sought by anglers using conventional spinning and bait casting gear, as well as fly fishing tackle. The smallmouth bass is potentially the toughest fighting freshwater fish in North America, and is commonly the targeted species in many fresh water fishing tournaments. In addition to wild populations, the smallmouth bass is stocked in cool rivers and lakes throughout Canada and the United States. In shallow streams, it is a wary fish, though usually not to the extent of most trout. The smallmouth is highly regarded for its topwater fighting ability when hooked \u2013 old fishing journals referred to the smallmouth bass as \"ounce for ounce and pound for pound the gamest fish that swims\". Smallmouth bass are not usually taken for the table, but rather are caught and released by most anglers. However, smaller specimens in cooler water often have higher quality filets of white, firm flesh when cooked.\nThe current all-tackle world record for a smallmouth bass is 11\u00a0lb 15 oz, caught by David Hayes in the Dale Hollow Reservoir, on the Kentucky/Tennessee border, in 1955.\nTackle.\nIn conventional fishing, smallmouth may be successfully caught on a wide range of natural and artificial baits or lures, including crankbaits, hair jigs, plastic jerkbaits, artificial worms, spinnerbaits, and all types of soft plastic lures, including curly tail grubs or tubes with lead head jigs. Spinning reels or baitcasting reels may be used, with line strengths of 6 to 15 pounds typically utilized. According to many, smallmouth typically put up a better, more exciting fight than any other black bass. Rods are usually of ultralight to medium-heavy action. They may also be caught with a fly rod using a dry or wet artificial fly, nymphs, streamers, or imitations of larger aquatic creatures, such as hellgrammites, crawfish, or leeches. Floating topwater popper fly patterns and buzz baits are also popular for smallmouth fishing.\nFor river fishing, spinning tackle or fly tackle has been the most popular angling tools for smallmouth in North America for many years. When fishing in colder water, it is believed to be more effective to fish with smaller lures like hair jigs or small spinners. During the rest of the year, smallmouth are usually taken using soft plastic tubes or spinnerbaits. The best spots in rivers to fish for smallmouth are behind rocks or in eddies, where water swirls around. Smallmouth can also be taken in cool lakes like Lake Erie or any of the northern lakes.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48843", "revid": "50455532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48843", "title": "Largemouth bass", "text": "Species of black bass\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe largemouth bass (Micropterus nigricans) is a carnivorous, freshwater, ray-finned fish in the Centrarchidae (sunfish) family, native to the eastern and central United States, southeastern Canada and northern Mexico. It is known by a variety of regional names, such as the widemouth bass, bigmouth bass, black bass, largie, potter's fish, Florida bass or Florida largemouth, green bass, bucketmouth bass, green trout, growler, Gilsdorf bass, Oswego bass, southern largemouth and northern largemouth.\nThe largemouth bass, as it is known today, was first described by French naturalist Georges Cuvier in 1828. A recent study concluded that the correct scientific name for the Florida bass is \"Micropterus salmoides\", while the largemouth bass is \"Micropterus nigricans\". It is the largest species of the black bass, with a maximum recorded length of and an unofficial weight of .\nThe largemouth bass is the state fish of Georgia and Mississippi, and the state freshwater fish of Florida and Alabama. It is a highly prized sport fish among anglers for their vigorous resistance when caught, and have been introduced to many regions due to their popularity in bass fishing and tolerance to urban streams. However, they have become an invasive species in some areas, causing the decline, displacement or extinction of native species through predation and competition.\nTaxonomy.\nThe largemouth bass was first formally described as \"Labrus salmoides\" in 1802 by the French naturalist Bernard Germain de Lac\u00e9p\u00e8de with the type locality given as the Carolinas. Lac\u00e9p\u00e8de based his description on an illustration of a specimen collected by Louis Bosc near Charleston, South Carolina. Recent phylogenomic studies, however, place the type locality given by Lac\u00e9p\u00e8de as within the range of the Florida bass (\"M. salmoides\") and outside that of the largemouth bass. This study concludes that Lac\u00e9p\u00e8de's name is the correct binomial for the Florida bass and that the oldest available binomial for the largemouth bass is Cuvier's \"Huro nigricans\", which has a type locality of Lake Huron which is within the range of the largemouth bass.\nDescription.\nThe largemouth bass is an olive green to greenish-gray fish, marked by a series of dark, sometimes black, blotches forming a jagged horizontal stripe along each flank. The upper jaw (maxilla) of a largemouth bass extends beyond the rear margin of the orbit.\nThe largemouth bass is the largest of the black basses, reaching a maximum recorded overall length of and a maximum unofficial weight of . Sexual dimorphism is found, with the female larger than the male.\nLargemouth bass prefer habitats with abundant littoral vegetation and generally maintain relatively small home ranges in lakes. They have an average lifespan of 10 to 16 years in the wild.\nFeeding.\nJuvenile largemouth bass consumes mostly small bait fish, scuds, water fleas, copepods, small shrimp, and insects. Adults consume smaller fish (bluegill, banded killifish, minnows, juvenile bass), shad, worms, snails, crawfish, frogs, snakes, and salamanders. In larger lakes and reservoirs, adult bass occupy slightly deeper water than younger fish, and shift to a diet consisting almost entirely of smaller fish like shad, yellow perch, ciscoes, suckers, shiners, other cyprinids, freshwater silversides, and sunfish (such as bluegill and green sunfish). It also consumes younger members of larger fish species, such as catfish, trout, walleye, white bass, striped bass, and even smaller black bass. Among the crayfish species preyed upon include \"Faxonius difficilis\", \"F. harrisonii\", \"F. hartfieldi\", and \"Procambarus clarkii.\" Prey items can be as large as 50% of the bass's body length or larger.\nStudies of prey utilization by largemouths show that in weedy waters, bass grow more slowly due to difficulty in acquiring prey. Less weed cover allows bass to more easily find and catch prey, but this consists of more open-water baitfish. With little or no cover, bass can devastate the prey population and starve or be stunted. Fisheries managers must consider these factors when designing regulations for specific bodies of water. Under overhead cover, such as overhanging banks, brush, or submerged structure, such as weedbeds, points, humps, ridges, and drop-offs, the largemouth bass uses its senses of hearing, sight, vibration, and smell to attack and seize its prey. Adult largemouth are generally apex predators within their habitat, but they are preyed upon by many animals while young, including great blue herons, larger bass, northern pike, walleye, muskellunge, yellow perch, channel catfish, northern water snakes, crappie, common carp, and American eels. Multiple species of kingfishers, bitterns, and other herons feed on this bass, as well. Both the young and adult largemouths are targeted by the bald eagle.\nNotably in the Great Lakes Region, \"Micropterus nigricans\" along with many other species of native fish have been known to prey upon the invasive round goby (\"Neogobius melanostomus\"). Remains of said fish have been found inside the stomachs of largemouth bass consistently. This feeding habit may impact the ecosystem positively, but more research must be conducted to verify this. It is illegal to use or possess live \"Neogobius melanostomus\" as bait in the Great Lakes Region.\nSpawning.\nLargemouth bass usually reach sexual maturity and begin spawning when they are about a year old. Spawning takes place in the spring season when the water temperature first remains continuously above for a sufficient period of time. In the northern region of the United States and Canada, this usually occurs anywhere from late April until early July. In the southern states, where the largest and healthiest specimens typically inhabit, this process can begin in March and is usually over by June. Males form nests by moving debris from the bottom of the body of water using their tails. These nests are usually about twice the length of the males, although this can vary. Bass prefer sand, muck, or gravel bottoms, but will also use rocky and weedy bottoms where there is cover for their nest, such as roots or twigs. After finishing the nest, the males swim near the nest looking for a female to mate with. After one is found, the two bass swim around the nest together, turning their bodies so that the eggs and sperm that are being released will come in contact on the way down to the nest. Bass will usually spawn twice per spring, with some spawning three or four times, although this is not as common. The male will then guard the nest until the eggs hatch, which can take about two to four days in the southern US and Northern Mexico, and slightly longer in the northern part of its native range. Finally, depending on the water temperature, the male will stay with the nest until the infant bass are ready to swim out on their own, which can be about two more weeks after they hatch. After this, the male, female, and newborns will switch to more of a summer mode, in which they then focus more on feeding.\nAngling.\nLargemouth bass are keenly sought after by anglers and are noted for the excitement of their 'fight', meaning how vigorously the fish resists being hauled into the boat or onto shore after being hooked. The fish will often become airborne in their effort to throw the hook, but many say that their cousin species, the smallmouth bass, is even more aggressive. Anglers most often fish for largemouth bass with lures such as spinnerbaits, plastic worms (and other plastic baits), jigs, crankbaits, and live bait, such as worms and minnows. A recent trend is the use of large swimbaits to target trophy bass that often forage on juvenile rainbow trout in California. Fly fishing for largemouth bass, while uncommon, may be done using both topwater and worm imitations tied with natural or synthetic materials. Other live baits, such as frogs or crawfish, can also be productive. Large golden shiners are a popular live bait used to catch trophy bass, especially when they are sluggish in the heat of summer or in the cold of winter. Largemouth bass usually hang around big patches of weeds and other shallow water cover. These fish are very capable of surviving in a wide variety of climates and waters. They are perhaps one of the world's most tolerant freshwater fish.\nThe world record largemouth according to the IGFA is shared by Manabu Kurita and George W. Perry. Kurita's bass was caught from Lake Biwa in Japan on July 2, 2009, and weighed . Perry's bass was caught on June 2, 1932, from Montgomery Lake in Georgia and weighed . This record is shared because the IGFA states a new record must beat the old record by at least 2 ounces.\nInvasive species.\nThe largemouth bass has been introduced into many other regions and countries due to its popularity as a sport fish and tolerance to urban environments. It causes the decline, displacement or extinctions of species in its new habitat through predation and competition, for example in Namibia. They are also an invasive species in the Canadian province of New Brunswick, and are on the watch list across much of the far northern US and Canada. In colder waters, these fish are often a danger to native fish fry such as salmon and trout. They have also been blamed for the extinction of the Atitl\u00e1n grebe, a large waterbird which once inhabited Lake Atitl\u00e1n in Guatemala. In 2011, researchers found that in streams and rivers in the Iberian Peninsula, juvenile largemouth bass were able to demonstrate trophic plasticity, meaning that they were able to adjust their feeding habits to obtain the necessary amount of energy needed to survive. This allows them to be successful as an invasive species in relatively stable aquatic food webs. Similarly, a study done in Japan showed that the introduction of both largemouth bass and bluegill into farm ponds have caused increases in the numbers of benthic organisms, resulting from the predation on fishes, crustaceans, and nymphal odonates by the bass. The largemouth bass has been causing sharp decreases in native fish populations in Japan since 1996, especially in bitterling fish in Lake Izunuma-Uchinuma.\nConservation.\nTo better understand the effects of angling on largemouth bass populations, researchers have studied physiological variation in the largemouth bass. One study found that in areas where angling was high, there was a significant effect on bass physiology. In stress tests, bass from protected areas had increased cortisol responsiveness compared to those in the highly active fisheries. The largemouth bass in Freshwater Protected Areas also had a higher aerobic scope, potentially providing them with more energy for growth, reproduction, and responding to environmental change. Another study found that maternal exposure to the stress hormone cortisol resulted in a lower responsiveness to angling stressors in their progeny. These studies in tandem provide evidence that repeated exposure to stress hormones and high angling pressure can bring out suboptimal phenotypes in largemouth bass populations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48844", "revid": "8087765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48844", "title": "Redeye bass", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe redeye bass, redeye, or Coosa bass (Micropterus coosae) is a species of freshwater fish in the sunfish family (Centrarchidae).The small bass is endemic to the Mobile and Alabama River systems, more specifically the Coosa River, which is a major tributary to the Alabama River in Georgia and Tennessee.\nSystematics.\nTaxonomy and classification.\nRedeye historically have been under-described compared to other centrarchids (sunfish). The osteology (skeleton) of \"M. coosae\" fits the general centrarchid (sunfish) pattern. These similarities in anatomy provide a gateway into understanding evolutionary relationships for future taxonomic and phylogenetic research. Etymologically, the redeye bass was named by American Ichthyologists Carl Hubbs and Reeve Bailey in 1940 upon discovery of the holotype (first official specimen). The species name \u201ccoosae\u201d derives from the Coosa River system in Georgia, its native region. Prior to Hubbs's and Bailey's later research, M. coosae was taxonomically considered to be a small form of smallmouth bass. This misconception may be due to redeye bass's tendency to hybridize with smallmouth and spotted bass, as seen in California.\nSimilar and co-occurring species.\nTwo native species of fish have the most prominent similarity to redeye bass in terms of diet and habitat \u2013 the Rainbow Trout (\"Oncorhynchus mykiss\"), and Sacramento Pikeminnow (\"Ptychocheilus grandis\"). These fishes can co-occur with redeye bass in small numbers below refuge areas. Additionally, redeye bass are often confused with the recently (1999) described shoal bass (\"M. cataractae\") from Alabama, Georgia, and Florida, which is sympatric (occupying the same geographic area) with redeye bass. Before the formal description of shoal bass by James Williams and George H. Burgess in 1999, shoal bass were often considered a type of redeye bass and were sometimes called the \"Flint River form of Redeye Bass\". In 2013, the redeye bass showed additional species-level variation: \"Micropterus cahabae\", restricted to the Cahaba River system; \"Micropterus tallapoosae\", restricted to the Tallapoosa River system; \"Micropterus warriorensis\", from the Black Warrior River system; and \"Micropterus chattahoochae\", from the Chattahoochee River system. Naturally, \"Micropterus coosae\" resides in the Coosa River system. The redeye bass\u2019s most recent common ancestor (MRCA) can be dated to approximately 7.39 million years ago (Mya), with a potential range between 4.63 and ten Mya. The most recent speciation events from the largemouth and spotted bass likely happened between 0.68 and 0.76 Mya.\nDescription.\nBody color and pattern.\nRedeye bass are distinguished from other species of black basses due to a couple of subtle, but diagnostic features; the presence of a distinct silver-white crescent on the posterior (back) one-half of the eyeball, iridescent white, turquoise, or red on upper and lower margins of the caudal fin, a shallow emargination (notch) between the dorsal fins, and the absence of a dark mid-lateral (side) stripe along the body. The upper and lower margins of the caudal fin are edged in white, a useful feature for separating redeye bass from both smallmouth bass (\"Micropterus dolomieu\") and shoal bass (\"M. cataractae\"). Unique from all other black basses, redeye typically have three dark bars on the cheek. Most individuals (about 76%) have 0\u20136 vertical black blotches near the front of the body, followed by softer spots toward the back. The back and sides of the fish are generally olive to brown with darker brown mottling.\nFin shape and features.\nThe anterior (front) dorsal fin has dark green spines tipped in white with translucent green membranes, while the posterior (back) dorsal fin is red with the front five or six rays tipped in white; the base is green, the upper half red, and the last few membranes are transparent. The caudal fin is green at the base and red at the tips, with translucent membranes and a thin white border on the top and bottom edges. The anal fin is dark green at the base, red toward the tip, and edged in white, with membranes shifting from greenish white at the base to red in the middle and clear near the edge. The pelvic fins are white with black streaks, and the membranes are translucent white, while the pectoral fins have red rays with transparent membranes.\nSex and age differences.\nNotably, the red pigmentation in the fins occurs in both males and females throughout the year and is not linked to breeding or sexual dimorphism. Adults have several horizontal rows of dark spots on their lower sides, with breeding males have having a light bluish green color on the lower head and throat. On juveniles, the sides of the body usually have 10 to 12 dark blotches that do not join to form a lateral stripe (subterminal black band) across the caudal lobes (tail fin), with red coloration on the fins and a rusty red base of a caudal fin.\nAnatomical features.\nThe upper jaw (maxilla) extends to the back of the eye, which is usually red. The redeye is an elongate, slender fish with a large mouth that extends to or slightly behind the rear margin of the eye. The dorsal fin contains nine to 11 (usually 10) spines and 11 to 13 (usually 12) rays, and the area between the two is only slightly notched. The anal fin contains three spines and nine to 11 (usually 10) rays. The complete lateral line has from 63 to 74 scales. Scales above the lateral line number 12 or 13. A small tooth patch is present on the tongue. The fish has relatively small ctenoid scales, containing a range of 66 to 73 lateral line scales, 6\u20139 scales above the lateral line, 10\u201313 below it, and 28\u201332 around the caudal peduncle (base of tailfin). A small tooth patch is present on the tongue, measured to be approximately 2\u00a0mm in size on average. Internally, the bass has a fairly narrow head and do not often exceed approximately 0.45\u00a0kg.\nGrowing to a maximum reported overall length of , the redeye bass is one of the smaller black basses. The probable world record for redeye bass is from Lake Jocassee in South Carolina. Many redeye bass world record listings, especially those over are actually records for the shoal bass.\nThe rock bass (\"Ambloplites rupestris\"), a distinct species of Centrarchid, is sometimes called the redeye or redeye bass in Canada.\nSpecies distribution.\nThe redeye bass is a predatory fish that is endemic to the Coosa River system in the southeastern United States, including Georgia and Alabama. It can also be found in states such as Tennessee, Florida, South Carolina, and North Carolina. Its occurrence in Georgia includes the Alabama River system, and Chattahoochee, Oconee, and Savannah Rivers. Sheed's Creek and Cohutta Creek are the only two streams in Tennessee in which this fish occurs naturally. While native to the area, the redeye bass is not known to occur within the Apalachicola River basin, where it is often mistaken as a shoal bass. Redeye bass are limited to upland streams with canopy cover, cool water temperatures, vegetative cover, undercut banks, and rock ledges or large boulders. The species typically avoids impoundments and navigational pools, due to competition with the larger Alabama bass and largemouth bass.\nAs an introduced species.\nIn 1962 and 1964, redeye bass were introduced in California to provide angling (hook on a line to catch fish) in streams dominated by native fishes not favored by anglers, examples being introductions into the Stanislaus River (Tuolumne County), Feather River (Butte County), Alder Creek (Sacramento County), and Santa Margarita River (San Diego County). Now dominating in some California river ecosystems, the bass has eliminated native fishes. Introduced redeye bass additionally pose a threat to California's endemic frogs and the California tiger salamander (Ambystoma californiense). In 1969 redeye bass raised in the California Department of Fish and Wildlife\u2019s (CDFG) Central Valley Hatchery were planted in Oroville Reservoir (Butte County), where they became established and hybridized with smallmouth and spotted bass. The redeye bass is established in the Sisquoc River within the Santa Maria River basin. Introduced \"Micropterus coosae\" have displaced native hardhead (\"Mylopharodon conocephalus\") in the Cosumnes River.\nCoosa bass were also introduced into the Verde River and it's tributaries, of North Central Arizona. The introduction of these fishes were mistakenly imported to the region from Alabama thought to be smallmouth bass, and have since become well established since their introduction during the mid 1950's; in around 2021 these fishes were genetically identified as Micropterus coosae. Elsewhere, the redeye bass was introduced to Tennessee in the 1950s and has hybridized extensively with native smallmouth bass (\"M. dolomieu\").\nLife history.\nAge, growth, and sexual maturity of redeye bass are not well understood, however, maximum age is assumed to be about 9\u201310 years, while sexual maturity was estimated at three or four years The growth rate of the redeye bass compared with other gamefish is particularly slow. The growth is greatest its first year and gradually decreases as the fish become older. On average, a 10-year-old redeye bass grows about 1 inch in length each year. In their native streams, redeye bass and closely related species inhabit clear, cool water with large, rocky pools, where they are opportunistic predators on fish and invertebrates, especially adult aquatic and terrestrial insects. Larger redeye bass tend to dominate low velocity, deep pools, while smaller bass tend to be absent from these pools and are primarily found in shallow, fast-moving riffles. Intermediate-sized redeye bass tend to be found in runs or shallow pools. Diet for large redeye bass typically includes crayfish, dobsonfly nymphs, mayfly nymphs and adults, and damselfly nymphs. They are opportunistic predators that feed on the surface, in the water column, and on the bottom. Small juveniles feed mainly on aquatic insects, but have successfully preyed on mosquitofish in shallow water. The bass tends to move up small tributary streams or to the heads of pools in larger streams to spawn in late spring when temperatures rise to 17\u201321\u00a0\u00b0C. Males construct nests in beds of gravel. Spawning and parental behavior is presumably similar to that of smallmouth bass.\nConservation status.\nHistorically, redeye bass were not heavily pursued as a sport fish, although recreational angling has recently increased for redeye bass from streams. Now, members of the redeye bass complex are popular sport fish that occur above the Fall Line in the Appalachian foothill streams of several southeastern U.S. states. While the slow growth of M. coosae coupled with their vulnerability to angling could have serious implications for their population size, redeye bass remain to have been solely responsible for the near elimination of native fishes in the middle reaches of the Cosumnes River. Redeye bass has proved capable of becoming established in streams with various degrees of alteration throughout California, consequently becoming a major threat to native fishes. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) rating of redeye bass is conservative because of their takeover of large stretches of the Cosumnes River. In many reaches of the Cosumnes, 99% of the fish are redeye bass. Native minnows and suckers are largely gone from these reaches and are present mainly in areas where redeye bass are absent. The disastrous success of their invasion of the Cosumnes was largely unappreciated because the redeye bass had been misidentified for years as smallmouth bass. It is likely that they are more widespread than presently recognized in the Stanislaus River and elsewhere in San Joaquin Valley streams. M. coosae\u2019s small adult size, aggressive behavior, and generalized habitat and feeding requirements presumably allow them to dominate foothill streams. They have not provided much of a fishery because most California anglers do not know they exist and they are rather small and slow-growing for a game fish.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48845", "revid": "50991670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48845", "title": "Reims", "text": "Subprefecture and commune in Grand Est, France\nReims ( ; ; also spelled Rheims in English) is the most populous city in the French department of Marne, and the 12th most populous city in France. The city lies northeast of Paris on the Vesle river, a tributary of the Aisne.\nFounded by the Gauls, Reims became a major city in the Roman Empire. Reims later played a prominent ceremonial role in French monarchical history as the traditional site of the coronation of the kings of France. The royal anointing was performed at the Cathedral of Reims, which housed the Holy Ampulla of chrism allegedly brought by a white dove at the baptism of Frankish king Clovis I in 496. For this reason, Reims is often referred to in French as (\"the Coronation City\").\nReims is recognized for the diversity of its heritage, ranging from Romanesque to Art-d\u00e9co. Reims Cathedral, the adjacent Palace of Tau, and the Abbey of Saint-Remi were listed together as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1991 because of their outstanding Romanesque and Gothic architecture and their historical importance to the French monarchy. Reims also lies on the northern edge of the Champagne wine region and is linked to its production and export.\nHistory.\nBefore the Roman conquest of northern Gaul, Reims had served as the Remi tribe's capital, founded c.\u200980\u00a0BC. In the course of Julius Caesar's conquest of Gaul (58\u201351\u00a0BC), the Remi allied themselves with the Romans, and by their fidelity throughout the various Gallic insurrections secured the special favour of the imperial power. At its height in Roman times the city had a population in the range of 30,000\u201350,000 or perhaps up to 100,000. Reims was first called in Latin, which is hypothesized to derive from a Gaulish name meaning 'Door of Cortoro-'. The city later took its name from the Remi tribe ( or ). The modern French name is derived from the accusative case of the latter, .\nChristianity had become established in the city by 260, at which period Saint Sixtus of Reims founded the Diocese of Reims (which would be elevated to an archdiocese around 750). The consul Jovinus, an influential supporter of the new faith, repelled the Alamanni who invaded Champagne in 336, but the Vandals captured the city in 406 and slew Bishop Nicasius; in 451 Attila the Hun put Reims to fire and sword.\nIn 496\u2014ten years after Clovis, King of the Salian Franks, won his victory at Soissons (486)\u2014Remigius, the bishop of Reims, baptized him using the oil of the sacred phial\u2013purportedly brought from heaven by a dove for the baptism of Clovis and subsequently preserved in the Abbey of Saint-Remi. For centuries the events at the crowning of Clovis I became a symbol used by the monarchy to claim the divine right to rule.\nMeetings of Pope Stephen II (752\u2013757) with Pepin the Short, and of Pope Leo III (795\u2013816) with Charlemagne (died 814), took place at Reims; here Pope Stephen IV crowned Louis the Debonnaire in 816. King Louis IV gave the city and countship of Reims to the archbishop Artaldus in 940. King Louis VII (reigned 1137\u20131180) gave the title of duke and peer to William of Champagne, archbishop from 1176 to 1202, and the archbishops of Reims took precedence over the other ecclesiastical peers of the realm.\nBy the 10th century, Reims had become a centre of intellectual culture. Archbishop Adalberon (in office 969 to 988), seconded by the monk Gerbert (afterwards (from 999 to 1003) Pope Silvester II), founded schools which taught the classical \"liberal arts\". (Adalberon also played a leading role in the dynastic revolution which elevated the Capetian dynasty in the place of the Carolingians.)\nThe archbishops held the important prerogative of the consecration of the kings of France \u2013 a privilege which they exercised (except in a few cases) from the time of Philippe II Augustus (anointed 1179, reigned 1180\u20131223) to that of Charles X (anointed 1825). The Palace of Tau, built between 1498 and 1509 and partly rebuilt in 1675, would later serve as the Archbishop's palace and as the residence of the kings of France on the occasion of their coronations, with royal banquets taking place in the .\nLouis VII granted the city a communal charter in 1139. The Treaty of Troyes (1420) ceded it to the English, who had made a futile attempt to take it by siege in 1360; French patriots expelled them on the approach of Joan of Arc, who in 1429 had Charles VII consecrated in the cathedral. Louis XI cruelly suppressed a revolt at Reims, caused in 1461 by the salt tax.\nDuring the French Wars of Religion the city sided with the Catholic League (1585), but submitted to King Henri IV after the battle of Ivry (1590). At about the same time, the English College had been \"at Reims for some years\".\"\nThe city was stricken with plague in 1635, and again in 1668, followed by an epidemic of typhus in 1693\u20131694. The construction of the dates back to the same century.\nThe Place Royale was built in the 18th century. Some of the 1792 September Massacres took place in Reims.\nIn the invasions of the War of the Sixth Coalition in 1814, anti-Napoleonic allied armies captured and re-captured Reims. \"In 1852, the Eastern Railways completed the Paris\u2013Strasbourg main line with branch lines to Reims and Metz.\" In 1870\u20131871, during the Franco-Prussian War, the victorious Germans made it the seat of a governor-general and impoverished it with heavy requisitions. In 1874 the construction of a chain of detached forts started in the vicinity, the French Army having selected Reims as one of the chief defences of the northern approaches to Paris. In the meantime, British inventor and manufacturer Isaac Holden had opened plants at Reims and Croix, which \"by the 1870s [...] were producing almost 12 million kilograms of combed wool a year [...] and accounted for 27 percent of all the wool consumed by French industry.\"\nOn 30 October 1908, Henri Farman made the first cross-country flight from Ch\u00e2lons to Reims. In August 1909 Reims hosted the first international aviation meet, the . Major aviation personages such as Glenn Curtiss, Louis Bl\u00e9riot and Louis Paulhan participated.\nHostilities in World War I greatly damaged the city. German bombardment and a subsequent fire in 1914 did severe damage to the cathedral. The ruined cathedral became one of the central images of anti-German propaganda produced in France during the war, which presented it, along with the ruins of the Ypres Cloth Hall and the University Library in Louvain, as evidence that German aggression targeted cultural landmarks of European civilization. Since the end of World War I, an international effort to restore the cathedral from the ruins has continued.\nDuring World War II, the city suffered additional damage. On the morning of 7 May 1945, at 2:41, General Eisenhower and the Allies received the unconditional surrender of the German in Reims. General Alfred Jodl, German Chief-of-Staff, signed the surrender at the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) as the representative for German President Karl D\u00f6nitz.\nThe British statesman Leslie Hore-Belisha died of a cerebral haemorrhage while making a speech at the in February 1957.\nAdministration.\nReims functions as a subprefecture of the department of Marne, in the administrative region of Grand Est. Although Reims is by far the largest commune in its department, Ch\u00e2lons-en-Champagne is the prefecture. Reims co-operates with 142 other communes in the .\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEconomy.\nRue de Vesle is the main commercial street (continued under other names), traversing the city from southwest to northeast through the Place Royale. The economy of Reims is driven by the wine and Champagne industries and innovation in the bio-economic field.\nArchitecture.\nReims Cathedral is an example of French Gothic architecture.\nThe Basilica of Saint-Remi, founded in the 11th century \"over the chapel of St. Christophe where St. Remi was buried\", is \"the largest Romanesque church in northern France, though with later additions.\"\nThe Church of Saint-Jacques dates from the 13th to the 16th centuries. A few blocks from the cathedral, it stands as of 2009[ [update]] in a neighbourhood of shopping and restaurants. The churches of Saint-Maurice (partly rebuilt in 1867), Saint-Andr\u00e9, and Saint-Thomas (erected from 1847 to 1853, under the patronage of Cardinal Gousset, now buried within its walls) also draw tourists.\nThe Protestant Church of Reims, built in 1921\u20131923 over designs by Charles Letrosne, is an example of flamboyant neo-Gothic architecture.\nThe H\u00f4tel de Ville, erected in the 17th century and enlarged in the 19th, features a pediment with an equestrian statue of Louis XIII (reigned 1610 to 1643).\nNarcisse Brunette was the architect of the city for nearly 50 years in the 19th century. He designed the Reims Man\u00e8ge and Circus, which \"combines stone and brick in a fairly sober classical composition.\"\nExamples of Art Deco in Reims include the Carnegie library.\nThe Foujita Chapel, built in 1965\u20131966 over designs and with frescos by Japanese\u2013French artist Tsuguharu Foujita, has been listed as a \"monument historique\" since 1992.\nCulture.\nReims was a candidate in the bid to become the European Capital of Culture in 2028, however was eliminated in the preselection round.\nMuseums.\nThe Palace of Tau contains such exhibits as statues formerly displayed by the cathedral, treasures of the cathedral from past centuries, and royal attire from coronations of French kings.\nThe Mus\u00e9e Saint-Remi, formerly the Abbey of Saint-Remi, contains tapestries from the 16th century donated by the archbishop Robert de Lenoncourt (uncle of the cardinal of the same name), marble capitals from the fourth century AD, furniture, jewellery, pottery, weapons and glasswork from the sixth to eighth centuries, medieval sculpture, the fa\u00e7ade of the 13th-century musicians' House, remnants from an earlier abbey building, and also exhibits of Gallo-Roman arts and crafts and a room of pottery, jewellery and weapons from Gallic civilization, as well as an exhibit of items from the Palaeolithic to the Neolithic periods. Another section of the museum features a permanent military exhibition.\nThe Automobile Museum Reims-Champagne, established in 1985 by Philippe Charbonneaux, houses a collection of automobiles dating from 1903 to the present day. The museum has five collections: automobiles, motorcycles and two-wheelers, pedal cars, miniature toys, and enamel plaques.\nThe Museum of Fine Arts is housed in the former Abbey of Saint-Denis. Part of the former Coll\u00e8ge des J\u00e9suites has also become a contemporary art gallery: the FRAC Champagne-Ardenne. \nThe Museum of the Surrender is the building in which on 7 May 1945, General Eisenhower and the Allies received the unconditional surrender of the German Wehrmacht.\nTheaters.\nVenues include the Reims Opera House, built in 1873 and renovated in 1931\u20131932, and the Reims Man\u00e8ge and Circus, dating from 1865 and 1867.\nThe Com\u00e9die de Reims was inaugurated in 1966.\nLibraries.\nLibraries in Reims include a Carnegie library which was built in the 1920s.\nFestivals and events.\nAt the beginning of the year, the FARaway - Festival des Arts \u00e0 Reims is a two-week event of music, dance, theatre, exhibitions, and installations at various cultural venues around the city.\nEvery year in June, the \"F\u00eates Johanniques\" commemorate the entrance of Joan of Arc into Reims in 1429 and the coronation of Charles VII of France in the cathedral.\nIn August and September there are regular evening light shows called Regalia projected onto the Reims Cathedral. It has a duration of 15 minutes and is free of charge. Regalia is an open-air multimedia show telling the story of the French coronations in a dramatic and whimsical fashion. Pets are welcome.\nA Christmas market was held on the parvis of Reims Cathedral (Place du Cardinal-Lu\u00e7on). It has since been moved in front of the Reims train station. In takes place in the month before Christmas, in 2023 this will be November 24th until December 24th. The Christmas market in Reims is the 3rd largest Christmas market in France. There are 150 different stalls each with various regional crafts, gifts, foods and specialities. This includes a famous poutine stand. The market last year was open on Mondays from 2pm to 8pm, Tuesday to Thursday from 10:30am to 10pm, Friday from 10:30am to 10pm, Saturday from 10am to 10pm, and Sundays from 10pm to 8pm. Access to the Christmas market is free and it is accessible to people with reduced mobility. Dogs are welcome if they are on a leash. Close by, there is a large traditional Christmas tree. \nWine and food.\nRestaurants and bars are concentrated around Place Drouet d'Erlon in the city centre.\nReims, along with \u00c9pernay and Ay, functions as one of the centres of champagne production. Many of the largest champagne-producing houses, known as \"les grandes marques\", have their headquarters in Reims, and most open for tasting and tours. Champagne ages in the many caves and tunnels under Reims, which form a sort of maze below the city. Carved from chalk, some of these passages date back to Roman times.\nThe \"biscuit rose de Reims\" is a biscuit frequently associated with Champagne wine. Reims was long renown for its \"pain d'\u00e9pices\" and \"nonnette\".\nSports.\nBetween 1925 and 1969, Reims hosted the \"Grand Prix de la Marne\" automobile race at the circuit of Reims-Gueux. The French Grand Prix took place here 14 times between 1938 and 1966.\nAs of 2021[ [update]], the football club \"Stade Reims\", based in the city, competed in the Ligue 1, the highest tier of French football. \"Stade Reims\" became the outstanding team of France in the 1950s and early 1960s and reached the final of the European Cup of Champions twice in that era.\nIn October 2018, the city hosted the second Teqball World Cup.\nThe city has hosted the Reims Marathon since 1984.\nTransport.\nReims is served by two main railway stations: Gare de Reims in the city centre, the hub for regional transport, and the new Gare de Champagne-Ardenne TGV southwest of the city with high-speed rail connections to Paris, Metz, Nancy and Strasbourg. There are two other railway stations for local services in the southern suburbs: Franchet d'Esperey and Reims-Maison-Blanche. The motorways A4 (Paris-Strasbourg), A26 (Calais-Langres) and A34 intersect near Reims.Public transport within the city consists of buses and a tramway, the latter opened in 2011. There is also a bikeshare program, Z\u00e9bullo.\nThe Canal de l'Aisne \u00e0 la Marne is a waterway. There is also an airport, Reims \u2013 Prunay Aerodrome, but it had, as of 2020, no commercial airline flights. Paris's Charles de Gaulle Airport is located 136 km south west of Reims.\nParks and gardens.\nAmong the parks and gardens of Reims are the Parc de Champagne, where a Monument to the Heroes of the Black Army is located.\nNext to the main train station, there is the Hautes Promenades, which is a park equipped with leisure facilities such as swings, hammocks, a carousel, in-ground trampolines, and a water park.\nSmaller gardens and parks are also peppered throughout Reims, such as Jardin Le Vergeur, Parc L\u00e9o-Lagrange, and the Parc Saint-Remi which next to the Basilica of Saint-Remi.\nHigher education.\nThe Institut d'\u00c9tudes politiques de Paris, the leading French university in social and political sciences, also known as SciencesPo Paris, opened a new campus in the former Jesuit College of Reims in 2010. It hosts both the Europe-Africa and Europe-America Program with more than 1,500 students in the respective programs. Aside from its Jesuit architecture, the campus also features the oldest grape vines in France, which are harvested every year by the City of Reims and are not at the disposal of students or visitors. In 2012 the first Reims Model United Nations was launched, which gathered 200 international students from all the Sciences Po campuses. Daniel Rondeau, the ambassador of France to UNESCO and a French writer, is the patron of the event. \nThe URCA (Universit\u00e9 de Reims Champagne-Ardenne) was founded in 1548. This multidisciplinary university develops innovative, fundamental, and applied research. It provides more than 18,000 students in Reims (22,000 in Champagne-Ardenne) with a wide initial undergraduate studies program which corresponds to society's needs in all domains of the knowledge. The university also accompanies independent or company-backed students in continuing professional development training. \nNEOMA Business School (former Reims Management School) is also one of the main schools in Reims. The Advanced Business School of Reims was created in 1928. It took the name Reims Management School in 2000.\nNotable residents.\nThose born in Reims include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClimate.\nReims has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cfb\"), influenced by its inland position. This renders that although the maritime influence moderates averages, it nevertheless is prone to hot and cold extremes in certain instances. Reims has a relatively gloomy climate due to the said maritime influence and the dominance of low-pressure systems for much of the year. In spite of this, the amount of precipitation is fairly limited.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nReims is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48846", "revid": "7098284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48846", "title": "Maya", "text": "Maya may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48847", "revid": "41718658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48847", "title": "Deflation", "text": "Decrease in the general price level\nIn economics, deflation is an increase in the real value of the monetary unit of account, as reflected in a decrease in the general price level of goods and services exchanged, measurable by broad price indices. \nDeflation occurs when the inflation rate falls below 0% and becomes negative. While inflation reduces the value of currency over time, deflation increases it. This allows more goods and services to be bought than before with the same amount of currency, but means that more goods or services must be sold for money in order to finance payments that remain fixed in nominal terms, as many debt obligations may. Deflation is distinct from \"disinflation\", a slowdown in the inflation rate; i.e., when inflation declines to a lower rate but is still positive.\nEconomists generally believe that a sudden deflationary shock is a problem in a modern economy because it increases the real value of debt, especially if the deflation is unexpected. Deflation may also aggravate recessions and lead to a deflationary spiral &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nSome economists argue that prolonged deflationary periods are related to the underlying technological progress in an economy, because as productivity increases (TFP), the cost of goods decreases.\nDeflation usually happens when supply is high (when excess production occurs), when demand is low (when consumption decreases), or when the money supply decreases (sometimes in response to a contraction created from careless investment or a credit crunch) or because of a net capital outflow from the economy. It can also occur when there is too much competition and too little market concentration.\nCauses and corresponding types.\nIn the IS\u2013LM model (investment and saving equilibrium\u00a0\u2013 liquidity preference and money supply equilibrium model), deflation is caused by a shift in the supply and demand curve for goods and services. This in turn can be caused by an increase in supply, a fall in demand, or both.\nWhen prices are falling, consumers have an incentive to delay purchases and consumption until prices fall further, which in turn reduces overall economic activity. When purchases are delayed, productive capacity is idled and investment falls, leading to further reductions in aggregate demand. This is the deflationary spiral. The way to reverse this quickly would be to introduce an economic stimulus. The government could increase productive spending on things like infrastructure or the central bank could start expanding the money supply.\nDeflation is also related to risk aversion, where investors and buyers will start hoarding money because its value is now increasing over time. This can produce a liquidity trap or it may lead to shortages that entice investments yielding more jobs and commodity production. A central bank cannot, normally, charge negative interest for money, and even charging zero interest often produces less stimulative effect than slightly higher rates of interest. In a closed economy, this is because charging zero interest also means having zero return on government securities, or even negative return on short maturities. In an open economy, it creates a carry trade and devalues the currency. A devalued currency produces higher prices for imports without necessarily stimulating exports to a like degree.\nDeflation is the natural condition of economies when the supply of money is fixed, or does not grow as quickly as population and the economy. When this happens, the available amount of hard currency per person falls, in effect making money more scarce, and consequently, the purchasing power of each unit of currency increases. Deflation also occurs when improvements in production efficiency lower the overall price of goods. Competition in the marketplace often prompts those producers to apply at least some portion of these cost savings into reducing the asking price for their goods. When this happens, consumers pay less for those goods, and consequently, deflation has occurred, since purchasing power has increased.\nRising productivity and reduced transportation cost created structural deflation during the accelerated productivity era from 1870 to 1900, but there was mild inflation for about a decade before the establishment of the Federal Reserve in 1913. There was inflation during World War I, but deflation returned again after the war and during the 1930s depression. Most nations abandoned the gold standard in the 1930s so that there is less reason to expect deflation, aside from the collapse of speculative asset classes, under a fiat monetary system with low productivity growth.\nIn mainstream economics, deflation may be caused by a combination of the supply and demand for goods and the supply and demand for money, specifically the supply of money going down and the supply of goods going up. Historic episodes of deflation have often been associated with the supply of goods going up (due to increased productivity) without an increase in the supply of money, or (as with the Great Depression and possibly Japan in the early 1990s) the demand for goods going down combined with a decrease in the money supply. Studies of the Great Depression by Ben Bernanke have indicated that, in response to decreased demand, the Federal Reserve of the time decreased the money supply, hence contributing to deflation.\nCauses include, on the demand side:\nAnd on the supply side:\nGrowth deflation.\nGrowth deflation is an enduring decrease in the real cost of goods and services as the result of technological progress, accompanied by competitive price cuts, resulting in an increase in aggregate demand.\nA structural deflation existed from the 1870s until the cycle upswing that started in 1895. The deflation was caused by the decrease in the production and distribution costs of goods. It resulted in competitive price cuts when markets were oversupplied. The mild inflation after 1895 was attributed to the increase in gold supply that had been occurring for decades. There was a sharp rise in prices during World War I, but deflation returned at the war's end. By contrast, under a fiat monetary system, there was high productivity growth from the end of World War II until the 1960s, but no deflation.\nHistorically not all episodes of deflation correspond with periods of poor economic growth.\nProductivity and deflation are discussed in a 1940 study by the Brookings Institution that gives productivity by major US industries from 1919 to 1939, along with real and nominal wages. Persistent deflation was clearly understood as being the result of the enormous gains in productivity of the period. By the late 1920s, most goods were over supplied, which contributed to high unemployment during the Great Depression.\nBank credit deflation.\nBank credit deflation is a decrease in the bank credit supply due to bank failures or increased perceived risk of defaults by private entities or a contraction of the money supply by the central bank.\nDebt deflation.\nDebt deflation is a phenomenon associated with the end of long-term credit cycles. It was proposed as a theory by Irving Fisher (1933) to explain the deflation of the Great Depression.\nMoney supply-side deflation.\nFrom a monetarist perspective, deflation is caused primarily by a reduction in the velocity of money or the amount of money supply per person.\nA historical analysis of money velocity and monetary base shows an inverse correlation: for a given percentage decrease in the monetary base the result is a nearly equal percentage increase in money velocity. This is to be expected because monetary base (, velocity of base money (, price level (P) and real output (Y) are related by definition: . However, the monetary base is a much narrower definition of money than M2 money supply. Additionally, the velocity of the monetary base is interest-rate sensitive, the highest velocity being at the highest interest rates.\nIn the early history of the United States, there was no national currency and an insufficient supply of coinage. Banknotes were the majority of the money in circulation. During financial crises, many banks failed and their notes became worthless. Also, banknotes were discounted relative to gold and silver, the discount depended on the financial strength of the bank.\nIn recent years changes in the money supply have historically taken a long time to show up in the price level, with a rule of thumb lag of at least 18 months. More recently Alan Greenspan cited the time lag as taking between 12 and 13 quarters. Bonds, equities and commodities have been suggested as reservoirs for buffering changes in the money supply.\nCredit deflation.\nIn modern credit-based economies, deflation may be caused by the central bank \"initiating\" higher interest rates (i.e., to \"control\" inflation), thereby possibly popping an asset bubble. In a credit-based economy, a slow-down or fall in lending leads to less money in circulation, with a further sharp fall in money supply as confidence reduces and velocity weakens, with a consequent sharp fall-off in demand for employment or goods. The fall in demand causes a fall in prices as a supply glut develops. This becomes a deflationary spiral when prices fall below the costs of financing production, or repaying debt levels incurred at the prior price level. Businesses, unable to make enough profit no matter how low they set prices, are then liquidated. Banks get assets that have fallen dramatically in value since their mortgage loan was made, and if they sell those assets, they further glut supply, which only exacerbates the situation. To slow or halt the deflationary spiral, banks will often withhold collecting on non-performing loans (as in Japan, and most recently America and Spain). This is often no more than a stop-gap measure, because they must then restrict credit, since they do not have money to lend, which further reduces demand, and so on.\nHistorical examples of credit deflation.\nIn the early economic history of the United States, cycles of inflation and deflation correlated with capital flows between regions, with money being loaned from the financial center in the Northeast to the commodity producing regions of the (mid)-West and South. In a procyclical manner, prices of commodities rose when capital was flowing in, that is, when banks were willing to lend, and fell in the depression years of 1818 and 1839 when banks called in loans. Also, there was no national paper currency at the time and there was a scarcity of coins. Most money circulated as banknotes, which typically sold at a discount according to distance from the issuing bank and the bank's perceived financial strength.\nWhen banks failed, their notes were redeemed for bank reserves, which often did not result in payment at par value, and sometimes the notes became worthless. Notes of weak surviving banks traded at steep discounts. During the Great Depression, people who owed money to a bank whose deposits had been frozen would sometimes buy bank books (deposits of other people at the bank) at a discount and use them to pay off their debt at par value.\nDeflation occurred periodically in the U.S. during the 19th century (the most important exception was during the Civil War). This deflation was at times caused by technological progress that created significant economic growth, but at other times it was triggered by financial crises \u2013 notably the Panic of 1837 which caused deflation through 1844, and the Panic of 1873 which triggered the Long Depression that lasted until 1879. These deflationary periods preceded the establishment of the U.S. Federal Reserve System and its active management of monetary matters. Episodes of deflation have been rare and brief since the Federal Reserve was created (a notable exception being the Great Depression) while U.S. economic progress has been unprecedented.\nA financial crisis in England in 1818 caused banks to call in loans and curtail new lending, draining specie out of the U.S. The Bank of the United States also reduced its lending. Prices for cotton and tobacco fell. The price of agricultural commodities also was pressured by a return of normal harvests following 1816, the \"year without a summer\", that caused large scale famine and high agricultural prices.\nThere were several causes of the deflation of the severe depression of 1839\u20131843, which included an oversupply of agricultural commodities (importantly cotton) as new cropland came into production following large federal land sales a few years earlier, banks requiring payment in gold or silver, the failure of several banks, default by several states on their bonds and British banks cutting back on specie flow to the U.S.\nThis cycle has been traced out on a broad scale during the Great Depression. Partly because of overcapacity and market saturation and partly as a result of the Smoot\u2013Hawley Tariff Act, international trade contracted sharply, severely reducing demand for goods, thereby idling a great deal of capacity, and setting off a string of bank failures. A similar situation in Japan, beginning with the stock and real estate market collapse in the early 1990s, was arrested by the Japanese government preventing the collapse of most banks and taking over direct control of several in the worst condition.\nScarcity of official money.\nThe United States had no national paper money until 1862 (greenbacks used to fund the Civil War), but these notes were discounted to gold until 1877. There was also a shortage of U.S. minted coins. Foreign coins, such as Mexican silver, were commonly used. At times banknotes were as much as 80% of currency in circulation before the Civil War. In the financial crises of 1818\u201319 and 1837\u20131841, many banks failed, leaving their money to be redeemed below par value from reserves. Sometimes the notes became worthless, and the notes of weak surviving banks were heavily discounted. The Jackson administration opened branch mints, which over time increased the supply of coins. Following the 1848 finding of gold in the Sierra Nevada, enough gold came to market to devalue gold relative to silver. To equalize the value of the two metals in coinage, the US mint slightly reduced the silver content of new coinage in 1853.\nWhen structural deflation appeared in the years following 1870, a common explanation given by various government inquiry committees was a scarcity of gold and silver, although they usually mentioned the changes in industry and trade we now call productivity. However, David A. Wells (1890) notes that the U.S. money supply during the period 1879-1889 actually rose 60%, the increase being in gold and silver, which rose against the percentage of national bank and legal tender notes. Furthermore, Wells argued that the deflation only lowered the cost of goods that benefited from recent improved methods of manufacturing and transportation. Goods produced by craftsmen did not decrease in price, nor did many services, and the cost of labor actually increased. Also, deflation did not occur in countries that did not have modern manufacturing, transportation and communications.\nBy the end of the 19th century, deflation ended and turned to mild inflation. William Stanley Jevons predicted rising gold supply would cause inflation decades before it actually did. Irving Fisher blamed the worldwide inflation of the pre-WWI years on rising gold supply.\nIn economies with an unstable currency, barter and other alternate currency arrangements such as dollarization are common, and therefore when the 'official' money becomes scarce (or unusually unreliable), commerce can still continue (e.g., most recently in Zimbabwe). Since in such economies the central government is often unable, even if it were willing, to adequately control the internal economy, there is no pressing need for individuals to acquire official currency except to pay for imported goods.\nCurrency pegs and monetary unions.\nIf a country pegs its currency to one of another country that features a higher productivity growth or a more favourable unit cost development, it must \u2013 to maintain its competitiveness \u2013 either become equally more productive or lower its factor prices (e.g., wages). Cutting factor prices fosters deflation. Monetary unions have a similar effect to currency pegs.\nEffects.\nOn spending and borrowing.\nSome believe that, in the absence of large amounts of debt, deflation would be a welcome effect because the lowering of prices increases purchasing power. However, while an increase in the purchasing power of one's money benefits some, it amplifies the sting of debt for others: after a period of deflation, the payments to service a debt represent a larger amount of purchasing power than they did when the debt was first incurred. Consequently, deflation can be thought of as an effective increase in a loan's interest rate. If, as during the Great Depression in the United States, deflation averages 10% per year, even an interest-free loan is unattractive as it must be repaid with money worth 10% more each year.\nUnder normal conditions, most central banks, such as the Federal Reserve, implement policy by setting a target for a short-term interest rate\u00a0\u2013 the overnight federal funds rate in the U.S.\u00a0\u2013 and enforcing that target by buying and selling securities in open capital markets. When the short-term interest rate hits zero, the central bank can no longer ease policy by lowering its usual interest-rate target. With interest rates near zero, debt relief becomes an increasingly important tool in managing deflation.\nIn recent times, as loan terms have grown in length and loan financing (or leveraging) is common among many types of investments, the costs of deflation to borrowers has grown larger.\nOn savings and investments.\nDeflation can discourage private investment, because there is reduced expectations on future profits when future prices are lower. Consequently, with reduced private investments, spiraling deflation can cause a collapse in aggregate demand. Without the \"hidden risk of inflation\", it may become more prudent for institutions to hold on to money, and not to spend or invest it (burying money). They are therefore rewarded by saving and holding money. This \"hoarding\" behavior is seen as undesirable by most economists. Friedrich Hayek, a libertarian Austrian-school economist, wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is agreed that hoarding money, whether in cash or in idle balances, is deflationary in its effects. No one thinks that deflation is in itself desirable.\u2014\u200a\nCompared with inflation.\nDeflation causes a transfer of wealth from borrowers and holders of illiquid assets to the benefit of savers and of holders of liquid assets and currency, and because confused price signals cause malinvestment in the form of underinvestment. In this sense, its effects are the opposite of inflation, the effect of which is to transfer wealth from currency holders and lenders (savers) and to borrowers, including governments, and cause overinvestment. Whereas inflation encourages short term consumption and can similarly overstimulate investment in projects that may not be worthwhile in real terms (for example, the dot-com and housing bubbles), deflation reduces investment even when there is a real-world demand not being met. In modern economies, deflation is usually associated with economic depression, as occurred in the Great Depression and the Long Depression. Deflation was present during most economic depressions in US history.\nDeflationary spiral.\nA \"deflationary spiral\" is a situation where decreases in the price level lead to lower production, which in turn leads to lower wages and demand, which leads to further decreases in the price level. Since reductions in general price level are called deflation, a deflationary spiral occurs when reductions in price lead to a vicious circle, where a problem exacerbates its own cause. In science, this effect is also known as a positive feedback loop. Another economic example of this situation in economics is the bank run.\nThe Great Depression was regarded by some as a deflationary spiral. A deflationary spiral is the modern macroeconomic version of the general glut controversy of the 19th century. Another related idea is Irving Fisher's theory that excess debt can cause a continuing deflation.\nCounteracting deflation.\nDuring severe deflation, targeting an interest rate (the usual method of determining how much currency to create) may be ineffective, because even lowering the short-term interest rate to zero may result in a real interest rate which is too high to attract credit-worthy borrowers. In the 21st-century, negative interest rates have been tried, but it cannot be too negative, since people might withdraw cash from bank accounts if they have a negative interest rate. Thus the central bank must directly set a target for the quantity of money (called \"quantitative easing\") and may use extraordinary methods to increase the supply of money, e.g. purchasing financial assets of a type not usually used by the central bank as reserves (such as mortgage-backed securities). Before he was Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke claimed in 2002, \"sufficient injections of money will ultimately always reverse a deflation\", although Japan's deflationary spiral was not broken by the amount of quantitative easing provided by the Bank of Japan.\nUntil the 1930s, it was commonly believed by economists that deflation would cure itself. As prices decreased, demand would naturally increase, and the economic system would correct itself without outside intervention.\nThis view was challenged in the 1930s during the Great Depression. Keynesian economists argued that the economic system was not self-correcting with respect to deflation and that governments and central banks had to take active measures to boost demand through tax cuts or increases in government spending. Reserve requirements from the central bank were high compared to recent times. So were it not for redemption of currency for gold (in accordance with the gold standard), the central bank could have effectively increased money supply by simply reducing the reserve requirements and through open market operations (e.g., buying treasury bonds for cash) to offset the reduction of money supply in the private sectors due to the collapse of credit (credit is a form of money).\nWith the rise of monetarist ideas, the focus in fighting deflation was put on expanding demand by lowering interest rates (i.e., reducing the \"cost\" of money). This view has received criticism in light of the failure of accommodative policies in both Japan and the US to spur demand after stock market shocks in the early 1990s and in 2000\u20132002, respectively. Austrian economists worry about the inflationary impact of monetary policies on asset prices. Sustained low real rates can cause higher asset prices and excessive debt accumulation. Therefore, lowering rates may prove to be only a temporary palliative, aggravating an eventual debt deflation crisis.\nSpecial borrowing arrangements.\nWhen the central bank has lowered nominal interest rates to zero, it can no longer further stimulate demand by lowering interest rates. This is the famous liquidity trap. When deflation takes hold, it requires \"special arrangements\" to lend money at a zero nominal rate of interest (which could still be a very high \"real\" rate of interest, due to the \"negative\" inflation rate) in order to artificially increase the money supply.\nCapital.\nAlthough the values of capital assets are often casually said to deflate when they decline, this usage is not consistent with the usual definition of deflation; a more accurate description for a decrease in the value of a capital asset is economic depreciation. Another term, the accounting conventions of depreciation are standards to determine a decrease in values of capital assets when market values are not readily available or practical.\nHistorical examples.\nEU countries.\nThe inflation rate of Greece was negative during three years from 2013 to 2015. The same applies to Bulgaria, Cyprus, Spain, and Slovakia from 2014 to 2016. Greece, Cyprus, Spain, and Slovakia are members of the European monetary union. The Bulgarian currency, the lev, is pegged to the Euro with a fixed exchange rate. In the entire European Union and the Eurozone, a disinflationary development was to be observed in the years 2011 to 2015.\nTable: Harmonised index of consumer prices. Annual average rate of change (%) (HICP inflation rate). Negative values are highlighted in colour.\nHong Kong.\nFollowing the 1997 Asian financial crisis, Hong Kong experienced a long period of deflation which did not end until the fourth quarter of 2004. Many East Asian currencies devalued following the crisis. The Hong Kong dollar, however, was pegged to the U.S. dollar, leading to an adjustment instead by a deflation of consumer prices. The situation was worsened by the increasingly cheap exports from mainland China, and \"weak consumer confidence\" in Hong Kong. This deflation was accompanied by an economic slump that was more severe and prolonged than those of the surrounding countries that devalued their currencies in the wake of the Asian financial crisis.\nIreland.\nIn February 2009, Ireland's Central Statistics Office announced that during January 2009, the country experienced deflation, with prices falling by 0.1% from the same time in 2008. This was the first time deflation has hit the Irish economy since 1960. Overall consumer prices decreased by 1.7% in the month.\nBrian Lenihan, Ireland's Minister for Finance, mentioned deflation in an interview with RT\u00c9 Radio. According to RT\u00c9's account, \"Minister for Finance Brian Lenihan has said that deflation must be taken into account when Budget cuts in child benefit, public sector pay and professional fees are being considered. Mr Lenihan said month-on-month there has been a 6.6% decline in the cost of living this year.\"\nThis interview is notable in that the deflation referred to is not discernibly regarded negatively by the Minister in the interview. The Minister mentions the deflation as an item of data helpful to the arguments for a cut in certain benefits. The alleged economic harm caused by deflation is not alluded to or mentioned by this member of government. This is a notable example of deflation in the modern era being discussed by a senior financial Minister without any mention of how it might be avoided, or whether it should be.\nJapan.\nDeflation started in the early 1990s. The Bank of Japan and the government tried to eliminate it by reducing interest rates and \"quantitative easing,\" but did not create a sustained increase in broad money and deflation persisted. In July 2006, the zero-rate policy was ended.\nSystemic reasons for deflation in Japan can be said to include:\nIn November 2009, Japan returned to deflation, according to \"The Wall Street Journal\". Bloomberg L.P. reports that consumer prices fell in October 2009 by a near-record 2.2%. It was not until 2014 that new economic policies laid out by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe finally allowed for significant levels of inflation to return. However, the COVID-19 recession once again led to deflation in 2020, with consumer good prices quickly falling, prompting heavy government stimulus worth over 20% of GDP. As a result, it is likely that deflation will remain as a long-term economic issue for Japan.\nUnited Kingdom.\nDuring World War I the British pound sterling was removed from the gold standard. The motivation for this policy change was to finance World War I; one of the results was inflation, and a rise in the gold price, along with the corresponding drop in international exchange rates for the pound. When the pound was returned to the gold standard after the war it was done on the basis of the pre-war gold price, which, since it was higher than equivalent price in gold, required prices to fall to realign with the higher target value of the pound.\nThe UK experienced deflation of approximately 10% in 1921, 14% in 1922, and 3 to 5% in the early 1930s.\nUnited States.\nMajor deflations in the United States.\nThere have been four significant periods of deflation in the United States.\nThe first and most severe was during the depression in 1818\u20131821 when prices of agricultural commodities declined by almost 50%. A credit contraction caused by a financial crisis in England drained specie out of the U.S. The Bank of the United States also contracted its lending. The price of agricultural commodities fell by almost 50% from the high in 1815 to the low in 1821, and did not recover until the late 1830s, although to a significantly lower price level. Most damaging was the price of cotton, the U.S.'s main export. Food crop prices, which had been high because of the famine of 1816 that was caused by the year without a summer, fell after the return of normal harvests in 1818. Improved transportation, mainly from turnpikes, and to a minor extent the introduction of steamboats, significantly lowered transportation costs.\nThe second was the depression of the late 1830s to 1843, following the Panic of 1837, when the currency in the United States contracted by about 34% with prices falling by 33%. The magnitude of this contraction is only matched by the Great Depression. (See: .) This \"deflation\" satisfies both definitions, that of a decrease in prices and a decrease in the available quantity of money. Despite the deflation and depression, GDP rose 16% from 1839 to 1843.\nThe third was after the Civil War, sometimes called The Great Deflation. It was possibly spurred by return to a gold standard, retiring paper money printed during the Civil War:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Great Sag of 1873\u201396 could be near the top of the list. Its scope was global. It featured cost-cutting and productivity-enhancing technologies. It flummoxed the experts with its persistence, and it resisted attempts by politicians to understand it, let alone reverse it. It delivered a generation's worth of rising bond prices, as well as the usual losses to unwary creditors via defaults and early calls. Between 1875 and 1896, according to Milton Friedman, prices fell in the United States by 1.7% a year, and in Britain by 0.8% a year. \u2014\u200a\nThe fourth was in 1930\u20131933 when the rate of deflation was approximately 10 percent/year, part of the United States' slide into the Great Depression, where banks failed and unemployment peaked at 25%.\nThe deflation of the Great Depression occurred partly because there was an enormous contraction of credit (money), bankruptcies creating an environment where cash was in frantic demand, and when the Federal Reserve was supposed to accommodate that demand, it instead contracted the money supply by 30% in enforcement of its new real bills doctrine, so banks failed one by one (because they were unable to meet the sudden demand for cash\u00a0\u2013 see Bank run). From the standpoint of the Fisher equation (see above), there was a simultaneous drop both in money supply (credit) and the velocity of money which was so profound that price deflation took hold despite the increases in money supply spurred by the Federal Reserve.\nMinor deflations in the United States.\nThroughout the history of the United States, inflation has approached zero and dipped below for short periods of time. This was quite common in the 19th century, and in the 20th century until the permanent abandonment of the gold standard for the Bretton Woods system in 1948. In the past 60 years, the United States has experienced deflation only two times; in 2009 with the Great Recession and in 2015, when the CPI barely broke below 0% at \u22120.1%.\nSome economists believe the United States may have experienced deflation as part of the 2008 financial crisis; compare the theory of debt deflation. Consumer prices dropped 1 percent in October 2008. This was the largest one-month fall in prices in the U.S. since at least 1947. That record was again broken in November 2008 with a 1.7% decline. In response, the Federal Reserve decided to continue cutting interest rates, down to a near-zero range as of December 16, 2008.\nIn late 2008 and early 2009, some economists feared the U.S. would enter a deflationary spiral. Economist Nouriel Roubini predicted that the United States would enter a deflationary recession, and coined the term \"stag-deflation\" to describe it. It was the opposite of stagflation, which was the main fear during the spring and summer of 2008. The United States then began experiencing measurable deflation, steadily decreasing from the first measured deflation of \u22120.38% in March, to July's deflation rate of \u22122.10%. On the wage front, in October 2009, the state of Colorado announced that its state minimum wage, which was indexed to inflation, was set to be cut, which would be the first time a state had cut its minimum wage since 1938.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48851", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48851", "title": "Quillback", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe quillback (Carpiodes cyprinus), also known as the quillback sucker, is a type of freshwater fish of the sucker family widely distributed throughout North America. It is deeper-bodied than most suckers, leading to a fuller-bodied appearance. However, the quillback is not a carp. Quillback are catostomids, and like all catostomids, they do not have barbels around the mouth. The quillback is long-lived, with age up to 30 years, 44 years, 49 years, and 52 years documented across different studies throughout North America.\nPhysical description.\nThe quillback is a medium-sized, deep-bodied fish found throughout North America. It has a small head, humped back and deeply forked caudal fin. The compressed body of the quillback makes it look flattened when viewed from the side. The quillback has a subterminal mouth with no barbels, and no nipple-like protrusions on the bottom lip. It has large, reflective, silver cycloid scales that are responsible for giving the quillback its characteristic silver color. They have a white belly with yellow or orange lower fins. The tail and dorsal fin are usually gray or silver. The quillback gets its name from the long quill that is formed via the first several fin rays of the dorsal fin. Quillback are typically 15\u201320 inches on average, weighing between 1 and 4 pounds. However, they can grow up to 26 inches and weigh 10 pounds. The quillback has a nearly straight, hyper-sensitive lateral line, composed of at least 37 lateral line scales. This helps the fish locate predators and prey.\nDistribution, habitat and diet.\nThe quillback is found throughout much of North America, from Saskatchewan to Florida, and from South Dakota to Alabama. The quillback occupies temperate, freshwater habitats. This includes many streams, lakes, channels and rivers. They prefer water that is clear, slow moving, highly productive and moderately deep. The quillback can commonly be found in the Hudson Bay, the Mississippi River basin, the Great Lakes, and drainages from the Delaware, Apalachicola, and Pearl rivers. They often comprise a large portion of the biomass of warmwater rivers, but they are very difficult to catch with traditional American angling methods. The quillback is closely related to the highfin carpsucker and the river carpsucker. All three species are rarely caught by anglers due to their feeding habits, but they have been caught occasionally on worms, minnows, and artificial lures.\nQuillbacks usually feed in schools. They are omnivores and bottom feeders that prefer lakes, rivers and streams in which the water is clear at the bottom. The school of quillbacks moves slowly over a sand or gravel bottom when they eat. Their typical diet consists of aquatic insect larvae and other small organisms although they have also been known to eat molluscs and aquatic vegetation.\nLife history.\nThe quillback is a slow-paced and long-lived freshwater fish species that belongs to a subfamily (Ictiobinae) for which extremely long-lived fishes are becoming known. A study of a Minnesota population found that they may reach sexual maturity by age 8\u20139 years, live several decades at adult size, recruit more sporadically than previously realized, and attain longevity in excess of 40 years. The study also documented accrual of age-spot pigmentation after 30 years, similar to their larger-bodied cousins, the bigmouth buffalo. A study from Colorado revealed sexual maturity by an age of 3 years, highly variable recruitment, population declines, and longevity approaching 50 years.\nReproduction.\nThe quillback reproduces once yearly, typically in late spring or early summer. The timing of reproduction depends on the water temperature. Ideal temperatures for reproduction are between 7\u201318 degrees Celsius. Spawning occurs upstream of the typical quillback habitat, and they migrate in schools to the spawning site. The female quillback produces between 15,000 and 60,000 eggs, and scatters them in shallow water over a sandy or mud bottom. Fertilization then happens externally, and the eggs are left in quiet water. Since the quillback is oviparous, the eggs are hatched outside of the fish's body. The quillback possesses a polygynandrous mating system, meaning that two or more males have an exclusive sexual relationship with two or more females. The numbers of each sex can vary, and do not need to be equal.\nRelationship with humans.\nThe quillback is currently at risk for extinction in various states throughout the continental United States including Vermont, New York and Michigan. A recent threat to the species is modern bowfishing, which is unregulated across the USA and prone to excessive waste. Other places prove vulnerability to the species including Alberta, Saskatchewan, Quebec, South Dakota, Kansas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Louisiana and North Carolina. Quillbacks benefit the ecosystem they reside in because they are bottom feeders. Bottom feeders help keep their natural environment clean by feeding on the material at the bottom of the habitat. The quillback has an economic benefit to Mexico. The IGFA world record for the species stands at 8lb 1oz taken from Lake Manitoba in Canada in 2016.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48852", "revid": "19553220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48852", "title": "Market economy", "text": "Type of economic system\nA market economy is an economic system in which the decisions regarding investment, production, and distribution to the consumers are guided by the price signals created by the forces of supply and demand. The major characteristic of a market economy is the existence of factor markets that play a dominant role in the allocation of capital and the factors of production.\nMarket economies range from minimally regulated to highly regulated systems. On the least regulated side, free market and \"laissez-faire\" systems are where state activity is restricted to providing public goods and services and safeguarding private ownership, while interventionist economies are where the government plays an active role in correcting market failures and promoting social welfare. State-directed or dirigist economies are those where the state plays a directive role in guiding the overall development of the market through industrial policies or indicative planning\u2014which guides yet does not substitute the market for economic planning\u2014a form sometimes referred to as a mixed economy.\nMarket economies are contrasted with planned economies where investment and production decisions are embodied in an integrated economy-wide economic plan. In a centrally planned economy, economic planning is the principal allocation mechanism between firms rather than markets, with the economy's means of production being owned and operated by a single organizational body.\nCharacteristics.\nProperty rights.\nFor market economies to function efficiently, governments must establish clearly defined and enforceable property rights for assets and capital goods. However, property rights do not specifically mean private property rights and market economies do not logically presuppose the existence of private ownership of the means of production. Market economies can and often do include various types of cooperatives or autonomous state-owned enterprises that acquire capital goods and raw materials in capital markets. These enterprises utilize a market-determined free price system to allocate capital goods and labor. In addition, there are many variations of market socialism where the majority of capital assets are socially owned with markets allocating resources between socially owned firms. These models range from systems based on employee-owned enterprises based on self-management to a combination of public ownership of the means of production with factor markets.\nSupply and demand.\nSupply and demand supposedly work in tandem. The economic theory is that supply slopes upwards as people buy more and demand drops as prices rise and people buy less.\nMarket economies rely upon a price system to signal market actors to adjust production and investment. Price formation relies on the interaction of supply and demand to reach or approximate an equilibrium where the unit price for a particular good or service is at a point where the quantity demanded equals the quantity supplied.\nThe price data point where the supply and demand lines intersect is called the market-clearing price. \nGovernments can intervene by establishing price ceilings or price floors in specific markets (such as minimum wage laws in the labor market), or use fiscal policy to discourage certain consumer behavior or to address market externalities generated by certain transactions (Pigovian taxes). Different perspectives exist on the role of government in both regulating and guiding market economies and in addressing social inequalities produced by markets. Fundamentally, a market economy requires that a price system affected by supply and demand exists as the primary mechanism for allocating resources irrespective of the level of regulation.\nCapitalism.\nCapitalism is an economic system where the means of production are largely or entirely privately owned and operated for a profit, structured on the process of capital accumulation. In general, in capitalist systems investment, distribution, income and prices are determined by markets, whether regulated or unregulated.\nThere are different variations of capitalism with different relationships to markets. In \"laissez-faire\" and free-market variations of capitalism, markets are utilized most extensively with minimal or no state intervention and minimal or no regulation over prices and the supply of goods and services. In interventionist, welfare capitalism and mixed economies, markets continue to play a dominant role, but they are regulated to some extent by the government in order to correct market failures or to promote social welfare. In state capitalist systems, markets are relied upon the least, with the state relying heavily on either indicative planning and/or state-owned enterprises to accumulate capital.\nCapitalism has been dominant in the Western world since the end of mercantilism. However, it is argued that the term \"mixed economies\" more precisely describes most contemporary economies due to their containing both private-owned and state-owned enterprises. In capitalism, prices determine the demand-supply scale. Higher demand for certain goods and services leads to higher prices and lower demand for certain goods lead to lower prices, in relation to supply.\nFree-market capitalism.\nA capitalist free-market economy is an economic system where prices for goods and services are set freely by the forces of supply and demand and are expected by its supporters to reach their point of equilibrium without intervention by government policy. It typically entails support for highly competitive markets, private ownership of productive enterprises. \"Laissez-faire\" is a more extensive form of free-market economy where the role of the state is limited to protecting property rights and enforcing contracts.\n\"Laissez-faire\".\n\"Laissez-faire\" is synonymous with what was referred to as strict free-market economy during the early and mid-19th century as a classical liberal ideal to achieve. It is generally understood that the necessary components for the functioning of an idealized free market include the complete absence of government regulation, subsidies, artificial price pressures and government-granted monopolies (usually classified as coercive monopoly by free market advocates) and no taxes or tariffs other than what is necessary for the government to provide protection from coercion and theft, maintaining peace and property rights and providing for basic public goods. Right-libertarian advocates of anarcho-capitalism see the state as morally illegitimate and economically unnecessary and destructive. Although \"laissez-faire\" has been commonly associated with capitalism, there is a similar left-wing \"laissez-faire\" system called free-market anarchism, also known as free-market anti-capitalism and free-market socialism to distinguish it from \"laissez-faire\" capitalism. Thus, critics of \"laissez-faire\" as commonly understood argues that a truly \"laissez-faire\" system would be anti-capitalist and socialist.\nWelfare capitalism.\nWelfare capitalism is a capitalist economy that includes public policies favoring extensive provisions for social welfare services. The economic mechanism involves a free market and the predominance of privately owned enterprises in the economy, but public provision of universal welfare services aimed at enhancing individual autonomy and maximizing equality. Examples of contemporary welfare capitalism include the Nordic model of capitalism predominant in Northern Europe.\nRegional models.\nAnglo-Saxon model.\nAnglo-Saxon capitalism is the form of capitalism predominant in Anglophone countries and typified by the economy of the United States. It is contrasted with European models of capitalism such as the continental social market model and the Nordic model. Anglo-Saxon capitalism refers to a macroeconomic policy regime and capital market structure common to the Anglophone economies. Among these characteristics are low rates of taxation, more open international markets, lower labor market protections and a less generous welfare state eschewing collective bargaining schemes found in the continental and northern European models of capitalism.\nEast Asian model.\nThe East Asian model of capitalism involves a strong role for state investment and in some instances involves state-owned enterprises. The state takes an active role in promoting economic development through subsidies, the facilitation of \"national champions\" and an export-based model of growth. The actual practice of this model varies by country. This designation has been applied to the economies of China, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Vietnam, and sometimes to those of Hong Kong and Taiwan.\nA related concept in political science is the developmental state.\nSocial market economy.\nThe social market economy was implemented by Alfred M\u00fcller-Armack and Ludwig Erhard after World War II in West Germany. The social market economic model, sometimes called Rhine capitalism, is based upon the idea of realizing the benefits of a free-market economy, especially economic performance and high supply of goods while avoiding disadvantages such as market failure, destructive competition, concentration of economic power and the socially harmful effects of market processes. The aim of the social market economy is to realize greatest prosperity combined with best possible social security. One difference from the free market economy is that the state is not passive, but instead takes active regulatory measures. The social policy objectives include employment, housing and education policies, as well as a socio-politically motivated balancing of the distribution of income growth. Characteristics of social market economies are a strong competition policy and a contractionary monetary policy. The philosophical background is neoliberalism or ordoliberalism.\nSocialism.\nMarket socialism is a form of market economy where the means of production are socially owned. In a market socialist economy, firms operate according to the rules of supply and demand and operate to maximize profit; the principal difference between market socialism and capitalism being that the profits accrue either directly to the workers of the company or society as a whole as opposed to private owners.\nThe distinguishing feature between non-market socialism and market socialism is the existence of a market for factors of production and the criteria of profitability for enterprises. Profits derived from publicly owned enterprises can variously be used to reinvest in further production, to directly finance government and social services, or be distributed to the public at large through a social dividend or basic income system.\nAdvocates of market socialism such as Jaroslav Van\u011bk argue that genuinely free markets are not possible under conditions of private ownership of productive property. Instead, he contends that the class differences and inequalities in income and power that result from private ownership enable the interests of the dominant class to skew the market to their favor, either in the form of monopoly and market power, or by utilizing their wealth and resources to legislate government policies that benefit their specific business interests. Additionally, Van\u011bk states that workers in a socialist economy based on cooperative and self-managed enterprises have stronger incentives to maximize productivity because they would receive a share of the profits (based on the overall performance of their enterprise) in addition to receiving their fixed wage or salary. The stronger incentives to maximize productivity that he conceives as possible in a socialist economy based on cooperative and self-managed enterprises might be accomplished in a free-market economy if cooperatives were the norm as envisioned by various thinkers including Louis O. Kelso and James S. Albus.\nModels of market socialism.\nMarket socialism traces its roots to classical economics and the works of Adam Smith, the Ricardian socialists and mutualist philosophers.\nIn the 1930s, the economists Oskar Lange and Abba Lerner developed a model of socialism that posited that a public body (dubbed the Central Planning Board) could set prices through a trial-and-error approach until they equaled the marginal cost of production in order to achieve perfect competition and pareto optimality. In this model of socialism, firms would be state-owned and managed by their employees and the profits would be disbursed among the population in a social dividend. This model came to be referred to as market socialism because it involved the use of money, a price system and simulated capital markets, all of which were absent from traditional non-market socialism.\nA more contemporary model of market socialism is that put forth by the American economist John Roemer, referred to as economic democracy. In this model, social ownership is achieved through public ownership of equity in a market economy. A Bureau of Public Ownership would own controlling shares in publicly listed firms, so that the profits generated would be used for public finance and the provision of a basic income.\nSome anarchists and libertarian socialists promote a form of market socialism in which enterprises are owned and managed cooperatively by their workforce so that the profits directly remunerate the employee-owners. These cooperative enterprises would compete with each other in the same way private companies compete with each other in a capitalist market. The first major elaboration of this type of market socialism was made by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and was called mutualism.\nSelf-managed market socialism was promoted in Yugoslavia by economists Branko Horvat and Jaroslav Van\u011bk. In the self-managed model of socialism, firms would be directly owned by their employees and the management board would be elected by employees. These cooperative firms would compete with each other in a market for both capital goods and for selling consumer goods.\nSocialist market economy.\nFollowing the 1978 reforms, China developed what it calls a socialist market economy in which most of the economy is under state ownership, with the state enterprises organized as joint-stock companies with various government agencies owning controlling shares through a shareholder system. Prices are set by a largely free-price system and the state-owned enterprises are not subjected to micromanagement by a government planning agency. A similar system called socialist-oriented market economy has emerged in Vietnam following the reforms in 1986. This system is frequently characterized as state capitalism instead of market socialism because there is no meaningful degree of employee self-management in firms, because the state enterprises retain their profits instead of distributing them to the workforce or government and because many function as \"de facto\" private enterprises. The profits neither finance a social dividend to benefit the population at large, nor do they accrue to their employees. In China, this economic model is presented as a preliminary stage of socialism to explain the dominance of capitalistic management practices and forms of enterprise organization in both the state and non-state sectors.\nIn religion.\nA wide range of philosophers and theologians have linked market economies to concepts from monotheistic religions. Michael Novak described capitalism as being closely related to Catholicism, but Max Weber drew a connection between capitalism and Protestantism. The economist Jeffrey Sachs has stated that his work was inspired by the healing characteristics of Judaism. Chief Rabbi Lord Sacks of the United Synagogue draws a correlation between modern capitalism and the Jewish image of the Golden Calf.\nChristianity.\nIn the Christian faith, the liberation theology movement advocated involving the church in labor market capitalism. Many priests and nuns integrated themselves into labor organizations while others moved into the slums to live among the poor. The Holy Trinity was interpreted as a call for social equality and the elimination of poverty. However, the Pope John Paul II was highly active in his criticism of liberation theology. He was particularly concerned about the increased fusion between Christianity and Marxism. He closed Catholic institutions that taught liberation theology and dismissed some of its activists from the church.\nBuddhism.\nThe Buddhist approach to the market economy was dealt with in E. F. Schumacher's 1966 essay \"Buddhist Economics\". Schumacher asserted that a market economy guided by Buddhist principles would more successfully meet the needs of its people. He emphasized the importance of pursuing occupations that adhered to Buddhist teachings. The essay would later become required reading for a course that Clair Brown offered at University of California, Berkeley.\nCriticism.\nThe economist Joseph Stiglitz argues that markets suffer from informational inefficiency and the presumed efficiency of markets stems from the faulty assumptions of neoclassical welfare economics, particularly the assumption of perfect and costless information and related incentive problems. Neoclassical economics assumes static equilibrium and efficient markets require that there be no non-convexities, even though nonconvexities are pervasive in modern economies. Stiglitz's critique applies to both existing models of capitalism and to hypothetical models of market socialism. However, Stiglitz does not advocate replacing markets, but instead states that there is a significant role for government intervention to boost the efficiency of markets and to address the pervasive market failures that exist in contemporary economies. A fair market economy is in fact a martingale or a Brownian motion model and for a participant competitor in such a model there is no more than 50% of success chances at any given moment. Due to the fractal nature of any fair market and being market participants subject to the law of competition which impose reinvesting an increasing part of profits, the mean statistical chance of bankruptcy within the half life of any participant is also 50% and 100% whether an infinite sample of time is considered.\nRobin Hahnel and Michael Albert claim that \"markets inherently produce class division\". Albert states that even if everyone started out with a balanced job complex (doing a mix of roles of varying creativity, responsibility and empowerment) in a market economy, class divisions would arise, arguing:\nWithout taking the argument that far, it is evident that in a market system with uneven distribution of empowering work, such as Economic Democracy, some workers will be more able than others to capture the benefits of economic gain. For example, if one worker designs cars and another builds them, the designer will use his cognitive skills more frequently than the builder. In the long term, the designer will become more adept at conceptual work than the builder, giving the former greater bargaining power in a firm over the distribution of income. A conceptual worker who is not satisfied with his income can threaten to work for a company that will pay him more. The effect is a class division between conceptual and manual laborers, and ultimately managers and workers, and a de facto labor market for conceptual workers.\nDavid McNally argues in the Marxist tradition that the logic of the market inherently produces inequitable outcomes and leads to unequal exchanges, arguing that Adam Smith's moral intent and moral philosophy espousing equal exchange was undermined by the practice of the free markets he championed. The development of the market economy involved coercion, exploitation and violence that Smith's moral philosophy could not countenance. McNally also criticizes market socialists for believing in the possibility of fair markets based on equal exchanges to be achieved by purging parasitical elements from the market economy such as private ownership of the means of production. McNally argues that market socialism is an oxymoron when socialism is defined as an end to wage-based labor.\nThe role of supply and demand in a market economy.\nSupply and demand play an instrumental role in driving market economies by setting both prices and quantities traded in markets. Supply is defined as any increase in price leading to an increase in supply from producers; demand on the other hand means any drop leads to an increase in desired quantities from consumers; these two laws meet at equilibrium when provided quantity equals quantity demanded - known as equilibrium price/quantity equilibrium point. Prices play an extremely vital role in market economies by providing important information about commodity and service availability. When there is strong demand but limited supply, prices increase, signaling to producers that there may be opportunities to increase profits by producing more of that product. Conversely, when there is low demand with increased supply then prices reduce, showing manufacturers they must either reduce output or find methods of cutting costs in order to stay competitive and remain profitable.\nExternal factors, including shifting technological standards, new government laws, and natural catastrophes can have a substantial impact on supply and demand. Technological innovations may increase supply, while laws issued by governments could decrease it or even demand. Natural disasters have the ability to severely disrupt supply chains, creating shortages of key items that increase costs while simultaneously decreasing demand. Supply and demand play an indispensable role in any market economy by ensuring prices reflect market forces accurately, adapting accordingly as conditions shift between supply and demand situations, while producers adjust production according to price signals from consumers, fulfilling customers' requests while giving individuals freedom in making purchasing choices based on personal preferences or financial constraints. Thus supply and demand play an instrumental part in shaping and stabilizing economies governed by market forces.\nSustainable market economy.\nA sustainable market economy seeks to balance economic expansion and environmental preservation. It acknowledges that sustainable environmental protection and resource management are essential for long-term economic growth. To achieve this balance, implementing sustainable practices across sectors, such as lowering carbon emissions, developing renewable energy sources, and putting circular economy ideas into practice. Tax incentives, carbon trading programs, and environmental requirements are just a few ways government rules and policies encourage enterprises to adopt sustainable practices.\nAt the same time, consumer demand for eco-friendly goods and services and understanding of these issues may influence market dynamics to favour more sustainable options. A sustainable market economy may encourage innovation, provide green employment, and guarantee the welfare of future generations by incorporating environmental factors into economic decision-making. Prioritizing sustainability while preserving economic development needs cooperation between governments, corporations, and people.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48853", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48853", "title": "Walleye", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe walleye (Sander vitreus, synonym \"Stizostedion vitreum\"), also called the walleyed pike, yellow pike, yellow pikeperch or yellow pickerel, is a freshwater perciform fish native to most of Canada and to the Northern United States. It is a North American close relative of the European zander, also known as the pikeperch. The walleye is sometimes called the yellow walleye to distinguish it from the blue walleye, which is a color morph that was once found in the southern Ontario and Quebec regions, but is now presumed extinct. However, recent genetic analysis of a preserved (frozen) 'blue walleye' sample suggests that the blue and yellow walleye were simply phenotypes within the same species and do not merit separate taxonomic classification.\nIn parts of its range in English-speaking Canada, the walleye is known as a pickerel, though the fish is not related to the true pickerels, which are members of the family \"Esocidae\". It is also sometimes called a dory in British English (and its common name in French is the similar \"dor\u00e9\"\u2014meaning \"golden\" or \"gilded\"), although this name is also used for various other species.\nWalleyes show a fair amount of variation across watersheds. In general, fish within a watershed are quite similar and are genetically distinct from those of nearby watersheds. The species has been artificially propagated for over a century and has been planted on top of existing populations or introduced into waters naturally devoid of the species, sometimes reducing the overall genetic distinctiveness of populations.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"walleye\" comes from its pearlescent eyes caused by the reflective tapetum lucidum which, in addition to allowing the fish to see well in low-light conditions, gives its eyes an opaque appearance. Their vision affects their behavior. They avoid bright light and feed in low light on fish that cannot see as well as they do. Many anglers look for walleyes at night since this is when major feeding efforts occur. The fish's eyes also allow them to see well in turbid waters (stained or rough, breaking waters), which gives them an advantage over their prey. Thus, walleye anglers commonly look for locations where a good \"walleye chop\" (i.e., rough water) occurs. Their vision also allows the fish to populate the deeper regions in a lake, and they can often be found in deeper water, particularly during the warmest part of the summer and at night.\nDescription.\nWalleyes are largely olive and gold in color (hence the French common name: \"dor\u00e9\"\u2014golden). The dorsal side of a walleye is olive, grading into a golden hue on the flanks. The olive/gold pattern is broken up by five darker saddles that extend to the upper sides. The color shades to white on the belly. The mouth of a walleye is large and is armed with many sharp teeth. The first dorsal and anal fins are spinous, as is the operculum. Walleyes are distinguished from their close relative the sauger by the white coloration on the lower lobe of the caudal fin, which is absent on the sauger. In addition, the two dorsals and the caudal fin of the sauger are marked with distinctive rows of black dots which are absent from or indistinct on the same fins of walleyes.\nLength and weight.\nWalleyes grow to about in length, and weigh up to about . The maximum recorded size for the fish is in length and in weight. The rate depends partly on where in their range they occur, with southern populations often growing faster and larger. In general, females grow larger than males. Walleyes may live for decades; the maximum recorded age is 29 years. In heavily fished populations, however, few walleye older than five or six years of age are encountered. In North America, where they are highly prized, their typical size when caught is on the order of , substantially below their potential size.\nAs walleye grow longer, they increase in weight. The relationship between total length (\"L\") and total weight (\"W\") for nearly all species of fish can be expressed by an equation of the form\nformula_1\nInvariably, \"b\" is close to 3.0 for all species, and \"c\" is a constant that varies among species. For walleye, \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a03.180 and \"c\"\u00a0=\u00a00.000228 (with units in inches and pounds) or \"b\"\u00a0=\u00a03.180 and \"c\"\u00a0=\u00a00.000005337 (with units in cm and kg).\nThis relationship suggests a walleye will weigh about , while a walleye will likely weigh about .\nPopulation dynamics.\nThe Garrison Dam National Fish Hatchery at Garrison Dam, North Dakota, is the largest walleye hatchery in the world. Although they are in high demand for fishing and consumption in North Dakota, elsewhere they are considered a nuisance. For that reason GDNFH is also researching hormonal population control to provide control options to other areas.\nReproduction.\nIn most of the species' range, male walleyes mature sexually between three and four years of age. Females normally mature about a year later. Adults migrate to tributary streams in late winter or early spring to lay eggs over gravel and rock, although open-water reef or shoal-spawning strains are seen, as well. Some populations are known to spawn on sand or vegetation. Spawning occurs at water temperatures of . A large female can lay up to 500,000 eggs, and no care is given by the parents to the eggs or fry. The eggs are slightly adhesive and fall into spaces between rocks. The incubation period for the embryos is temperature-dependent, but generally lasts from 12 to 30 days. After hatching, the free-swimming embryos spend about a week absorbing a relatively small amount of yolk. Once the yolk has been fully absorbed, the young walleyes begin to feed on invertebrates, such as fly larv\u00e6 and zooplankton. After 40 to 60 days, juvenile walleyes become piscivorous. Thenceforth, both juvenile and adult walleyes eat fish almost exclusively, frequently yellow perch or ciscoes, moving onto bars and shoals at night to feed. Walleye also feed heavily on crayfish, minnows, and leeches.\nTaxonomy.\nThe walleye is part of the North American clade within the genus \"Sander\", alongside the sauger (\"S. canadensis\"). Hubbs described a taxon called the blue walleye (\"S. glaucus\") from the Great Lakes but subsequent taxonomic work showed no consistent differences between this form and the \"yellow\" walleye and the blue walleye is now considered to be a synonym and color variant of the walleye. The walleye was first formally described by the American naturalist Samuel Latham Mitchill (1764\u20131831) with the type locality given as Cayuga Lake near Ithaca, New York.\nAs food.\nThe walleye is considered to be a quite palatable freshwater fish, and consequently, is fished recreationally and commercially for food. Because of its nocturnal feeding habits, it is most easily caught at night using live minnows or lures that mimic small fish. Most commercial fisheries for walleye are situated in the Canadian waters of the Great Lakes, and fried walleye is considered a staple of Canadian cuisine. In Minnesota, the walleye is often fished for in the late afternoon on windy days (known as a \"walleye chop\") or at night. Often served as a sandwich in Minnesota's pubs where the fish is very popular, deep-fried walleye on a stick is a Minnesota State Fair food. Fried walleye is a popular food in both Canada and Minnesota.\nFishing.\nBecause walleyes are popular with anglers, fishing for walleyes is regulated by most natural resource agencies. Management may include the use of quotas and length limits to ensure that populations are not overexploited. For example, in Michigan, walleyes shorter than may not be legally kept.\nSince walleyes have excellent visual acuity under low illumination levels, they tend to feed more extensively at dawn and dusk, on cloudy or overcast days, and under choppy conditions when light penetration into the water column is disrupted. Although anglers interpret this as light avoidance, it is merely an expression of the walleyes' competitive advantage over their prey under those conditions. Similarly, in darkly stained or turbid waters, walleyes tend to feed throughout the day. In the spring and fall, walleyes are located near the shallower areas due to the spawning grounds, and they are most often located in shallower areas during higher winds due to the murkier, higher oxygenated water at around deep. On calm spring days, walleyes are more often located at the deep side of the shoreline drop-off and around shore slopes at depths approaching or more.\nAs a result of their widespread presence in Canada and the northern United States, walleyes are frequently caught while ice fishing, a popular winter pastime throughout those regions.\n\"Walleye chop\" is a term used by walleye anglers for rough water typically with winds of , and is one of the indicators for good walleye fishing due to the walleyes' increased feeding activity during such conditions. In addition to fishing this chop, night fishing with live bait can be very effective.\nThe current all-tackle world record for a walleye is held by Mabry Harper, who caught an walleye in Old Hickory Lake in Tennessee on 2 August 1960. LeRoy Chiovitte holds the Minnesota state-record for the walleye he caught on 13 May 1979 on the Seagull River near Saganaga Lake. The fish weighed , was long and had a girth of .\nCultural aspects.\nWalleye is a culturally significant food in the Upper Midwest. Walleye is popular in Minnesota; the Minnesota Legislature declared walleye the official state fish in 1965. Three towns\u2014Garrison, Minnesota; Baudette, Minnesota; and Garrison, North Dakota\u2014each claim to be the \"Walleye Capital of the World\" and a large statue of the fish is erected in each town. Walleye pike was declared the official \"state warm water fish\" of Vermont in 2012. (Vermont's official \"state cold water fish\" is the brook trout, \"Salvelinus fontinalis\".)\nSouth Dakota designated the walleye as its official state fish in 1982. Although the fish is native to South Dakota, living in Missouri River reservoirs and eastern glacial lakes of the state, it only became a popular food in South Dakota in the 1970s and 1980s, when the fishing tournament circuit promoted the fish and operated walleye fishing contests in the state.\nThe walleye is the official provincial fish of Manitoba. Winnipeg, Manitoba, considers the walleye (referred to locally as \"pickerel\") its most important local fish. Icelandic fishermen in Lake Winnipeg traditionally supplied the Winnipeg market. The walleye is also the provincial fish of Saskatchewan, which declared the species its official fish in 2015 after it won a fish emblem contest. Walleye is the most popular fish for sport fishing in Saskatchewan, and can be caught in many rivers, reservoirs, and lakes. The International Underwater Spearfishing Association record for largest spearfishing-caught walleye is held by a walleye caught in 2014 on the South Saskatchewan River north of Lake Diefenbaker.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48854", "revid": "38056903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48854", "title": "Linguistic typology", "text": "Branch of linguistics\nLinguistic typology (or language typology) is a field of linguistics that studies and classifies languages according to their structural features to allow their comparison. Its aim is to describe and explain the structural diversity and the common properties of the world's languages. Its subdisciplines include, but are not limited to phonological typology, which deals with sound features; syntactic typology, which deals with word order and form; lexical typology, which deals with language vocabulary; and theoretical typology, which aims to explain the universal tendencies.\nLinguistic typology is contrasted with genealogical linguistics on the grounds that typology groups languages or their grammatical features based on formal similarities rather than historic descendence. The issue of genealogical relation is however relevant to typology because modern data sets aim to be representative and unbiased. Samples are collected evenly from different language families, emphasizing the importance of lesser-known languages in gaining insight into human language.\nHistory.\nSpeculations of the existence of a (logical) general or universal grammar underlying all languages were published in the Middle Ages, especially by the Modistae school. At the time, Latin was the model language of linguistics, although transcribing Irish and Icelandic into the Latin alphabet was found problematic. The cross-linguistic dimension of linguistics was established in the Renaissance period. For example, \"Grammaticae quadrilinguis partitiones\" (1544) by Johannes Drosaeus compared French and the three 'holy languages', Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. The approach was expanded by the Port-Royal Grammar (1660) of Antoine Arnauld and Claude Lancelot, who added Spanish, Italian, German and Arabic. Nicolas Beauz\u00e9e's 1767 book includes examples of English, Swedish, Lappish, Irish, Welsh, Basque, Quechua, and Chinese.\nThe conquest and conversion of the world by Europeans gave rise to 'missionary linguistics' producing first-hand word lists and grammatical descriptions of exotic languages. Such work is accounted for in the 'Catalogue of the Languages of the Populations We Know', 1800, by the Spanish Jesuit Lorenzo Herv\u00e1s. Johann Christoph Adelung collected the first large language sample with the Lord's prayer in almost five hundred languages (posthumous 1817).\nMore developed nineteenth-century comparative works include Franz Bopp's 'Conjugation System' (1816) and Wilhelm von Humboldt's 'On the Difference in Human Linguistic Structure and Its Influence on the Intellectual Development of Mankind' (posthumous 1836). In 1818, August Wilhelm Schlegel made a classification of the world's languages into three types: (i) languages lacking grammatical structure, e.g. Chinese; (ii) agglutinative languages, e.g. Turkish; and (iii) inflectional languages, which can be synthetic like Latin and Ancient Greek, or analytic like French. This idea was later developed by others including August Schleicher, Heymann Steinthal, Franz Misteli, Franz Nicolaus Finck, and Max M\u00fcller.\nThe word 'typology' was proposed by Georg von der Gabelentz in his \"Sprachwissenschaft\" (1891). Louis Hjelmslev proposed typology as a large-scale empirical-analytical endeavour of comparing grammatical features to uncover the essence of language. Such a project began from the 1961 conference on language universals at Dobbs Ferry. Speakers included Roman Jakobson, Charles F. Hockett, and Joseph Greenberg who proposed forty-five different types of linguistic universals based on his data sets from thirty languages. Greenberg's findings were mostly known from the nineteenth-century grammarians, but his systematic presentation of them would serve as a model for modern typology. Winfred P. Lehmann introduced Greenbergian typological theory to Indo-European studies in the 1970s.\nDuring the twentieth century, typology based on missionary linguistics became centered around SIL International, which today hosts its catalogue of living languages, Ethnologue, as an online database. The Greenbergian or universalist approach is accounted for by the World Atlas of Language Structures, among others. Typology is also done within the frameworks of functional grammar including Functional Discourse Grammar, Role and Reference Grammar, and Systemic Functional Linguistics. During the early years of the twenty-first century, however, the existence of linguistic universals became questioned by linguists proposing evolutionary typology.\nMethod.\nQuantitative typology deals with the distribution and co-occurrence of structural patterns in the languages of the world. Major types of non-chance distribution include:\nLinguistic universals are patterns that can be seen cross-linguistically. Universals can either be absolute, meaning that every documented language exhibits this characteristic, or statistical, meaning that this characteristic is seen in most languages or is probable in most languages. Universals, both absolute and statistical can be unrestricted, meaning that they apply to most or all languages without any additional conditions. Conversely, both absolute and statistical universals can be restricted or implicational, meaning that a characteristic will be true on the condition of something else (if Y characteristic is true, then X characteristic is true). An example of an implicational hierarchy is that dual pronouns are only found in languages with plural pronouns while singular pronouns (or unspecified in terms of number) are found in all languages. The implicational hierarchy is thus singular &lt; plural &lt; dual (etc.).\nQualitative typology develops cross-linguistically viable notions or types that provide a framework for the description and comparison of languages.\nSubfields.\nThe main subfields of linguistic typology include the empirical fields of syntactic, phonological and lexical typology. Additionally, theoretical typology aims to explain the empirical findings, especially statistical tendencies or implicational hierarchies.\nSyntactic typology.\nSyntactic typology studies a vast array of grammatical phenomena from the languages of the world. Two well-known issues include dominant order and left-right symmetry.\nDominant order.\nOne set of types reflects the basic order of subject, verb, and direct object in sentences:\nThese labels usually appear abbreviated as \"SVO\" and so forth, and may be called \"typologies\" of the languages to which they apply. The most commonly attested word orders are SOV and SVO while the least common orders are those that are object initial with OVS being the least common with only four attested instances.\nIn the 1980s, linguists began to question the relevance of geographical distribution of different values for various features of linguistic structure. They may have wanted to discover whether a particular grammatical structure found in one language is likewise found in another language in the same geographic location. Some languages split verbs into an auxiliary and an infinitive or participle and put the subject and/or object between them. For instance, German ( - *\"I have a fox in-the woods seen\"), Dutch ( - *\"Hans suspected that Jan Marie saw to learn to swim\") and Welsh ( - *\"Is the checking spelling after its to complete\"). In this case, linguists base the typology on the non-analytic tenses (i.e. those sentences in which the verb is not split) or on the position of the auxiliary. German is thus SVO in main clauses and Welsh is VSO (and preposition phrases would go after the infinitive).\nMany typologists classify both German and Dutch as V2 languages, as the verb invariantly occurs as the second element of a full clause.\nSome languages allow varying degrees of freedom in their constituent order, posing a problem for their classification within the subject\u2013verb\u2013object schema. Languages with bound case markings for nouns, for example, tend to have more flexible word orders than languages where case is defined by position within a sentence or presence of a preposition. For example, in some languages with bound case markings for nouns, such as Language X, varying degrees of freedom in constituent order are observed. These languages exhibit more flexible word orders, allowing for variations like Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) structure, as in 'The cat ate the mouse,' and Object-Subject-Verb (OSV) structure, as in 'The mouse the cat ate.' To define a basic constituent order type in this case, one generally looks at frequency of different types in declarative affirmative main clauses in pragmatically neutral contexts, preferably with only old referents. Thus, for instance, Russian is widely considered an SVO language, as this is the most frequent constituent order under such conditions\u2014all sorts of variations are possible, though, and occur in texts. In many inflected languages, such as Russian, Latin, and Greek, departures from the default word-orders are permissible but usually imply a shift in focus, an emphasis on the final element, or some special context. In the poetry of these languages, the word order may also shift freely to meet metrical demands. Additionally, freedom of word order may vary within the same language\u2014for example, formal, literary, or archaizing varieties may have different, stricter, or more lenient constituent-order structures than an informal spoken variety of the same language.\nOn the other hand, when there is no clear preference under the described conditions, the language is considered to have \"flexible constituent order\" (a type unto itself).\nAn additional problem is that in languages without living speech communities, such as Latin, Ancient Greek, and Old Church Slavonic, linguists have only written evidence, perhaps written in a poetic, formalizing, or archaic style that mischaracterizes the actual daily use of the language. The daily spoken language of Sophocles or Cicero might have exhibited a different or much more regular syntax than their written legacy indicates.\nTheoretical issues.\nThe below table indicates the distribution of the dominant word order pattern of over 5,000 individual languages and 366 language families. SOV is the most common type in both although much more clearly in the data of language families including isolates. 'NODOM' represents languages without a single dominant order.\nThough the reason of dominance is sometimes considered an unsolved or unsolvable typological problem, several explanations for the distribution pattern have been proposed. Evolutionary explanations include those by Thomas Givon (1979), who suggests that all languages stem from an SOV language but are evolving into different kinds; and by Derek Bickerton (1981), who argues that the original language was SVO, which supports simpler grammar employing word order instead of case markers to differentiate between clausal roles.\nUniversalist explanations include a model by Russell Tomlin (1986) based on three functional principles: (i) animate before inanimate; (ii) theme before comment; and (iii) verb-object bonding. The three-way model roughly predicts the real hierarchy (see table above) assuming no statistical difference between SOV and SVO, and, also, no statistical difference between VOS and OVS. By contrast, the processing efficiency theory of John A. Hawkins (1994) suggests that constituents are ordered from shortest to longest in VO languages, and from longest to shortest in OV languages, giving rise to the attested distribution. This approach relies on the notion that OV languages have heavy subjects, and VO languages have heavy objects, which is disputed. \nLeft-right symmetry.\nA second major way of syntactic categorization is by excluding the subject from consideration. It is a well-documented typological feature that languages with a dominant OV order (object before verb), Japanese for example, tend to have postpositions. In contrast, VO languages (verb before object) like English tend to have prepositions as their main adpositional type. Several OV/VO correlations have been uncovered.\nTheoretical issues.\nSeveral processing explanations were proposed in the 1980s and 1990s for the above correlations. They suggest that the brain finds it easier to parse syntactic patterns that are either right or left branching, but not mixed. The most widely held such explanation is John A. Hawkins' parsing efficiency theory, which argues that language is a non-innate adaptation to innate cognitive mechanisms. Typological tendencies are considered as being based on language users' preference for grammars that are organized efficiently, and on their avoidance of word orderings that cause processing difficulty. Hawkins's processing theory predicts the above table but also makes predictions for non-correlation pairs including the order of adjective, demonstrative and numeral in respect with the noun. This theory was based on corpus research and lacks support in psycholinguistic studies.\nSome languages exhibit regular \"inefficient\" patterning. These include the VO languages Chinese, with the adpositional phrase before the verb, and Finnish, which has postpositions. But there are few other profoundly exceptional languages. It is suggested more recently that the left-right orientation is limited to role-marking connectives (adpositions and subordinators), stemming directly from the semantic mapping of the sentence. Since the true correlation pairs in the above table either involve such a connective or, arguably, follow from the canonical order, orientation predicts them without making problematic claims.\nMorphosyntactic alignment.\nAnother common classification distinguishes nominative\u2013accusative alignment patterns and ergative\u2013absolutive ones. In a language with cases, the classification depends on whether the subject (S) of an intransitive verb has the same case as the agent (A) or the patient (P) of a transitive verb. If a language has no cases, but the word order is AVP or PVA, then a classification may reflect whether the subject of an intransitive verb appears on the same side as the agent or the patient of the transitive verb. Bickel (2011) has argued that alignment should be seen as a construction-specific property rather than a language-specific property.\nMany languages show mixed accusative and ergative behaviour (for example: ergative morphology marking the verb arguments, on top of an accusative syntax). Other languages (called \"active languages\") have two types of intransitive verbs\u2014some of them (\"active verbs\") join the subject in the same case as the agent of a transitive verb, and the rest (\"stative verbs\") join the subject in the same case as the patient. Yet other languages behave ergatively only in some contexts (this \"split ergativity\" is often based on the grammatical person of the arguments or on the tense/aspect of the verb). For example, only some verbs in Georgian behave this way, and, as a rule, only while using the perfective (aorist).\nPhonological typology.\nLinguistic typology also seeks to identify patterns in the structure and distribution of sound systems among the world's languages.\nThis is accomplished by surveying and analyzing the relative frequencies of different phonological properties.\nExemplary relative frequencies are given below for certain speech sounds formed by obstructing airflow (obstruents).\nThese relative frequencies show that contrastive voicing commonly occurs with plosives, as in English \"neat\" and \"need\", but occurs much more rarely among fricatives, such as the English \"niece\" and \"knees\". According to a worldwide sample of 637 languages,\n62% have the voicing contrast in stops but only 35% have this in fricatives.\nIn the vast majority of those cases, the absence of voicing contrast occurs because there is a lack of voiced fricatives and because all languages have some form of plosive (occlusive), but there are languages with no fricatives.\nBelow is a chart showing the breakdown of voicing properties among languages in the aforementioned sample.\nLanguages worldwide also vary in the number of sounds they use. These languages can go from very small phonemic inventories (Rotokas with six consonants and five vowels) to very large inventories (!X\u00f3\u00f5 with 128 consonants and 28 vowels). An interesting phonological observation found with this data is that the larger a consonant inventory a language has, the more likely it is to contain a sound from a defined set of complex consonants (clicks, glottalized consonants, doubly articulated labial-velar stops, lateral fricatives and affricates, uvular and pharyngeal consonants, and dental or alveolar non-sibilant fricatives). Of this list, only about 38% of languages in a survey of over 600 with small inventories (less than 19 consonants) contain a member of this set, while 32% of average languages (19-25) contain at least one member and 38% of large consonant inventories (greater than 25 consonants) contain a member of this set. It is then seen that complex consonants are in proportion to the size of the inventory.\nVowels contain a more modest number of phonemes, with the average being 5\u20136, which 51% of the languages in the survey have. About a third of the languages have larger than average vowel inventories. Most interesting though is the lack of relationship between consonant inventory size and vowel inventory size. Below is a chart showing this lack of predictability between consonant and vowel inventory sizes in relation to each other.\nSources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48856", "revid": "1812441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48856", "title": "Sucker", "text": "Sucker may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48857", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48857", "title": "VOS", "text": ""}
{"id": "48858", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48858", "title": "Verb\u2013object\u2013agent", "text": ""}
{"id": "48859", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48859", "title": "Percidae", "text": "Family of fishes\nThe Percidae are a family of ray-finned fish, part of the order Perciformes, which are found in fresh and brackish waters of the Northern Hemisphere. The majority are Nearctic, but there are also Palearctic species. The family contains nearly 250 species in 12 genera. The perches and their relatives are in this family; well-known species include the walleye, sauger, ruffe, and three species of perch. However, small fish known as darters are also a part of this family. \nDespite the widespread and speciose nature of this family, the vast majority of its species diversity is within the darters, which are restricted to eastern North America, and the majority of which have small ranges. Excluding the darters, this family contains only 20 species. In Europe, percids were likely a more ecologically dominant group in the past than now, with the immigration of cyprinids to Europe during the Miocene causing a decline in their importance.\nCharacteristics.\nThe family is characterised by having the dorsal fin split into two which are normally separated or have a narrow connection, although this is wider in the genus \"Zingel\", the front section contains the spines and the rear section contains the soft rays. The anal fin contains 1 or 2 spines, if there is a second spine it is typically weak. The pelvic fins are placed on the thorax and have a single spine and 5 soft rays. They also have skeletal synapomorphies. The maximum size attained is in the zander (\"Sander lucioperca\") but most of the species in the family are much smaller. Their scales are ctenoid and their bodies are normally somewhat elongate.\nSystematics.\nThe following classification is based on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\" (2025):\nUnder a former treatment by the 5th Edition of \"Fishes of the World\", \"Gymnocephalus\" was placed in its own subfamily, Acerinae, as was \"Percarina\" in Percarininae.\nAlthough the family likely underwent an evolutionary radiation during the Paleogene, the earliest definitive fossil remains of percids are of modern \"Sander\" from the Middle Miocene of Canada. \u2020\"Vixperca\" from the Middle Eocene of Spain has been suggested to be the earliest known percid, but its remains are fragmentary and show closer similarities to lates perches than to true perches.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48860", "revid": "45079649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48860", "title": "Cirrus", "text": "Cirrus may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48863", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48863", "title": "Centrarchidae", "text": "Family of ray-finned fishes\nCentrarchidae, better known as sunfishes or centrarchids, is a family of freshwater ray-finned fish belonging to the order Centrarchiformes, native only to North America. There are eight universally included genera within the centrarchid family: \"Lepomis\" (true sunfishes), \"Micropterus\" (black basses), \"Pomoxis\" (crappies), \"Enneacanthus\" (banded sunfishes), \"Centrarchus\" (type genus, consisting solely of the flier \"C. macropterus\"), \"Archoplites\" (Sacramento perch), \"Ambloplites\" (rock basses), and \"Acantharchus\" (mud sunfish). Their closest relatives are the pygmy sunfishes of the family Elassomatidae, which are sometimes placed in the same family, although presently treated as distinct.\nThe centrarchid family comprises 38 identified species, 34 of which are extant. It includes many popular game fishes familiar to North American anglers, such as the rock bass, largemouth bass, bluegill, pumpkinseed, green sunfish and crappies. Most sunfish are highly valued panfish for sport fishing, and have been introduced in many areas outside their native ranges, sometimes becoming invasive species. While edible, they are not commercially marketed as food fish.\nEvolution.\nAs their name suggests, sunfishes are most closely related to the pygmy sunfishes (Elassomatidae), which also occur in North America. Together, these two families are sister to the Chinese perches (Sinipercidae) of East Asia. These three families are among the few temperate Northern Hemisphere members of the order Centrarchiformes (primarily found in the Southern Hemisphere and the tropics), and share the suborder Centrarchoidei with a group of temperate Southern Hemisphere fishes that include the jutjaw, oldwife, and the Australian temperate perches.\nThe earliest fossils of Centrarchidae are from latest Eocene to early Oligocene deposits from Montana and South Dakota, belonging to several as yet undescribed species. Two extinct genera are also known: \u2020\"Plioplarchus\" from the Early Oligocene to the Middle Miocene of the Dakotas &amp; Oregon, and \u2020\"Boreocentrarchus\" from the Late Oligocene or Early Miocene of southern Alaska (making it one of the northernmost known members of the family). Both \"Plioplarchus\" and \"Boreocentrarchus\" are classified in the subfamily Centrarchinae, because these species possess more than three anal fin spines.\nTaxonomy.\nThe family is classified as follows:\nPhylogeny.\nRecent genetic evidence suggests the following taxonomy of the centrarchid genera and species:\nThe 5th edition of \"Fishes of the World\" recognises three subfamilies; the Lepominae, which contains the genera \"Acantharchus\", \"Lepomis\", and \"Micropterus\"; the Elassomatinae, which consists solely of the highly distinct genus \"Elassoma\" (treated by Fishbase as a separate family, the Elassomatidae); and the Centrarchinae, which contains all of the remaining genera. The more recent \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\" again treats Elassomatidae as a distinct family, with Centrarchidae composed of Lepominae and Centrarchinae.\nDescription.\nFamily members are distinguished by having a laterally compressed body shape, 6 to 9 anal spines, and 2 dorsal fins (spinous first dorsal and rayed second dorsal) which are fused. The number of dorsal spines varies from 6 to 13. All species in \"Micropterus\" and \"Lepomis\" have 3 anal spines, which distinguishes them from the other genera in the family. The pseudobranch is small and concealed. Body size varies widely within the family with the black-banded sunfish at just in length, while the largemouth bass is reported to reach almost in extreme cases.\nMany of the species within Centrarchidae can be separated into two main groups based on the two most common genera (\"Micropterus\" and \"Lepomis\"). Species in the genera \"Lepomis\" are defined by a deep or more round body shape, smaller mouths, and obtaining food through suction feeding. Species in the genera \"Micropterus\" are defined by a more streamlined body shape, larger mouths, and consuming prey primarily by ram feeding methods.\nHabitat.\nCentrarchids prefer clear, warm, and slower-moving water, and are commonly found in habitats such as lakes, ponds, medium to low flow streams and rivers, and swamps. They also prefer to live in and around aquatic vegetation so they can get adequate coverage from predators. While few species in the family diverge from the aforementioned habitat list, the Sacramento perch can survive in habitats with unusually high alkalinity, salinity, and temperatures. Centrarchids can be found in various locations within the water column and their exact preference is species specific. For instance, bluegill (\"Lepomis macrochirus\") mainly inhabit the deeper littoral zones, while green sunfish (\"Lepomis cyanellus\") prefer habitats near the shoreline and shallower areas. Suction feeders within the family (i.e. \"Lepomis\") generally feed off the bottom of their habitat, while ram feeders (i.e. \"Micropterus\") generally feed in more open areas known as the limnetic zone. Centrarchids diet consists of macro-invertebrates (e.g. insects, snails and crayfish) and other fish found in their habitat.\nThermal tolerance.\nIn freshwater systems, water temperature is determined by many abiotic factors, with air temperature being one of the most significant contributors. As in other ectotherms, many physiological processes and behaviors in Centrarchidae, such as feeding and reproduction, are heavily impacted by the temperature in their environment. All species in the family Centrarchidae are considered warmwater adapted species. In general, warmwater adapted species are characterized as being larger at higher temperatures and lower latitudes. The optimal temperature range of most species in the family is 28\u00a0\u00b0C(82\u00a0\u00b0F) to 32\u00a0\u00b0C(90\u00a0\u00b0F), although they can survive and reproduce in temperatures that are outside of this optimum range. Increases in temperature outside the optimal range for centrarchids can have negative effects, such as speeding up reproductive maturity or increasing mortality after the first reproductive event. The lethal temperature range varies widely in the family, but some species have been seen to survive water temperatures as low as 1\u00a0\u00b0C(33\u00a0\u00b0F) or as high as 41\u00a0\u00b0C(106\u00a0\u00b0F).\nReproduction.\nCentrarchids generally spawn in the spring, and juveniles emerge in the late spring to early summer. The transition from winter to spring conditions (i.e. melting of ice-cover, increase in day length, and increased food availability) is the main cue for centrarchids to begin preparing for reproduction. All species within Centrarchidae, except for those in the genus \"Micropterus,\" develop breeding coloration in both males and females (although less defined in females) during the breeding season. The process of courtship and reproduction is nearly identical for all species in the family, which is a major reason for the high levels of hybridization within Centrarchidae. With that said, there are some mechanisms in place to prevent hybridization, such as intricate morphology of the operculum in \"Lepomis,\" which assists in recognition of conspecific mates.\nTo initiate reproduction, males dig a deep circular depression in the substrate with their caudal fins to create a nest, which they will aggressively defend from intruding males. Males and females then undergo a courtship dancing ritual before the female deposits her eggs into the male's nest. Multiple females may deposit eggs in a single nest. Larger males usually attract more mates and also take better care of their offspring. Male parental care includes nest building, nest guarding, guarding of eggs and fry, and nest fanning (aerating eggs).\nMales unsuccessful at courtship may exhibit a cheater strategy where they sneak fertilizations of female's eggs by various behavioral methods. This is commonly seen with smaller males in the genus \"Lepomis\".\nRange.\nThe native range of Centrarchidae is confined within North America, covering most of the United States and stopping in southern Canada. The northern edge of the native range is heavily bound by temperature due to reduced foraging ability and growth in cold weather and subsequent starvation in winter months. As a result, centrarchid distributions and range in any place they are found will be restricted by cold temperatures.\nRange shifts.\nThe ability to adapt to cold temperatures at the edge of the sunfish range varies widely within the family. Largemouth bass (\"Micropterus salmoides\") have no cold acclimation ability as seen through the strict maintenance of the northern boundary of the species range. Other species like smallmouth bass (\"Micropterus dolomieu\") and green sunfish (\"Lepomis cyanellus\") have exhibited signs of minor cold-water adaptation and have even experienced slight range expansions into colder habitats.\nIf air temperatures continue to rise in the next 50 to 100 years as predicted, warmwater species like centrarchids will likely experience range expansions northward and see an overall increase in occupiable habitat. This range expansion can have grave consequences for other freshwater fishes however, as many centrarchids are dominant top predators which can severely alter the community structure of non-native ecosystems and drive the extinction of other native predators.\nInvasive range.\nWhile centrarchids are native to only North America, they can be found worldwide due to introductions on multiple continents, including Europe, South America, Africa, and Asia. At least 18 species of Centrarchidae are North American exports. Its multi-continental spread is mostly due to the high popularity of the family (especially from the genera \"Micropterus\") as freshwater game fish that are frequently stocked for recreational fishing all around Europe.\nAcross the globe, invasive and introduced centrarchids pose a great threat to native species in the areas they invade. There are multiple confirmed instances of largemouth bass \"(Micropterus salmoides)\" severely altering and reducing native fish populations in Italy, South Africa, Japan, and Madagascar and even causing the local extinction of any species of the family Cyprinodontidae within the waterbodies they have invaded in Mexico.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48864", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48864", "title": "Ostia (modern district)", "text": ""}
{"id": "48865", "revid": "27645623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48865", "title": "Gadidae", "text": "Family of ray-finned fishes\nThe Gadidae are a family of marine fish, included in the order Gadiformes, known as the cods, codfishes, or true cods. It contains several commercially important fishes, including the cod, haddock, whiting, and pollock.\nMost gadid species are found in temperate waters of the Northern Hemisphere, but several range into subtropical, subarctic, and Arctic oceans, and a single (southern blue whiting) is found in the Southern Hemisphere. They are generally medium-sized fish, and are distinguished by the presence of three dorsal fins on the back and two anal fins on the underside. Most species have barbels on their chins, which they use while browsing on the sea floor. Gadids are carnivorous, feeding on smaller fish and crustaceans.\nGadids are highly prolific, producing several million eggs at each spawning. This contributes to their high population numbers, which, in turn, makes commercial fishing relatively easy.\nTaxonomy.\nIn the past, the contents of this family varied depending on the taxonomic authority. For example, fishes in the current Lotidae (with burbot, cusk) and Phycidae (hakes) were included in the Gadidae, as its subfamilies Lotinae and Phycinae. However, they are presently considered distinct families from one another, based on phylogenetic analyses.\nThe following genera are placed in the Gadidae:\nThe following fossil genera are also known:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48866", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48866", "title": "Gadiformes", "text": "Order of fishes\nGadiformes , also called the Anacanthini, are an order of ray-finned fish that include the cod, hakes, pollock, haddock, burbot, rocklings and moras, many of which are food fish of major commercial value. They are mostly marine fish found throughout the world and the vast majority are found in temperate or colder regions (tropical species are typically deep-water) while a few species may enter brackish estuaries. Pacific tomcods, one of the two species that makes up the genus \"Microgadus\", are able to enter freshwater, but there is no evidence that they breed there. Some populations of landlocked Atlantic tomcod on the other hand, complete their entire life cycle in freshwater. Yet only one species, the burbot (\"Lota lota\"), is a true freshwater fish.\nCommon characteristics include the positioning of the pelvic fins (if present), below or in front of the pectoral fins. Gadiformes are physoclists, which means their swim bladders do not have a pneumatic duct. The fins are spineless. Gadiform fish range in size from the codlets, which may be as small as in adult length, to the Atlantic cod, \"Gadus morhua\", which reaches up to .\nThe earliest gadiforms are \"Palaeogadus weltoni\" from the Maastrichtian of the United States and the undescribed, informally named \"Protocodus\" from the Early Paleocene of Greenland.\nTaxonomy.\nThe following classification is based on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\":\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48867", "revid": "35508256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48867", "title": "Sciaenidae", "text": "Family of fishes\nSciaenidae is a family of ray-finned fishes belonging to the order Acanthuriformes. They are commonly called drums or croakers in reference to the repetitive throbbing or drumming sounds they make. The family consists of about 293 to 298 species in about 66 or 67 genera.\nTaxonomy.\nSciaenidae was first proposed as a family in 1829 by the French zoologist Georges Cuvier. The 5th edition of \"Fishes of the World\" classifies the family in the suborder Sciaenoidei, alongside the rover family Emmelichthyidae, in the order Acanthuriformes. Other authorities classify the Sciaenidae and the Emmelichthyidae as \"incertae sedis\" within the series Eupercaria. The \"Catalog of Fishes\" retains this family within the Acanthuriformes but does not recognise the suborder Sciaenoidei.\nThe 5th edition of \"Fishes of the World\", \"Fishbase\" and \"Catalog of Fishes\" do not recognise subfamilies within the Sciaenidae but many workers on these fishes do recognise subfamilies and tribes within the family. For example, in 1989 Kunio Sasaki erected a number of subfamilies and tribes.\nGenera.\nThe following genera are classified within the family Sciaenidae:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFossil genera.\nThe following fossil genera are known:\nThe fossil genus \"Ioscion\" may be either a drumfish or belong to its own family more closely related to carangids.\nThe former Paratethys Sea appears to have been a hotspot of endemism for many of these extinct sciaenid taxa, as many articulated remains and otoliths are known from this region.\"\"\nEtymology.\nSciaenidae takes its name from its type genus \"Sciaena\" which is derived from the Greek \"skiaina\", which was used to refer to marine perch-like fishes.\nCharacteristics.\nA sciaenid has a long dorsal fin reaching nearly to the tail, and a notch between the rays and spines of the dorsal, although the two parts are actually separate. Drums are somberly coloured, usually in shades of brown, with a lateral line on each side that extends to the tip of the caudal fin. The anal fin usually has two spines, while the dorsal fins are deeply notched or separate. Most species have a rounded or pointed caudal fin. The mouth is set low and is usually inferior. Their croaking mechanism involves the beating of abdominal muscles against the swim bladder.\nSciaenids are found worldwide, in both fresh and salt water, and are typically benthic carnivores, feeding on invertebrates and smaller fish. They are small to medium-sized, bottom-dwelling fishes living primarily in estuaries, bays, and muddy river banks. Most of these fish types avoid clear waters, such as coral reefs and oceanic islands, with a few notable exceptions (e.g. reef croaker, high-hat, and spotted drum). They live in warm-temperate and tropical waters and are best represented in major rivers in Southeast Asia, northeast South America, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Gulf of California.\nIn the United States most fishers consider freshwater drum to be rough fish not suitable for eating, similar to carp, gar, and buffalo fish, although there are a number of people that enjoy fishing for these species and eating them, despite their limitations.\nFisheries.\nThey are excellent food and sport fish, and are commonly caught by surf and pier fishers. Some are important commercial fishery species, notably small yellow croaker with reported landings of 218,000\u2013407,000 tonnes in 2000\u20132009; according to FAO fishery statistics, it was the 25th most important fishery species worldwide. However, a large proportion of the catch is not reported at species level; in the FAO fishery statistics, the category \"Croakers, drums, not elsewhere included\", is the largest one within sciaenids, with annual landings of 431,000\u2013780,000 tonnes in 2000\u20132009, most of which were reported from the western Indian Ocean (FAO fishing area 51) and northwest Pacific (FAO fishing area 61).\nThe future of croakers, like many other fish species in the United States and around the world is uncertain because overfishing continues to be a major threat. The population has decreased significantly which will affect their ability reproduce. In United States Croakers are managed by the federal and state governments to ensure that they're harvested sustainably.\nCroaking mechanism.\nA notable trait of sciaenids is the ability to produce a \"croaking\" sound. However, the pitch and use of croaking varies species to species. The croaking ability is a distinguishing characteristic of sciaenids. The croaking mechanism is used by males as a mating call in some species.\nTo produce the croaking sound, special muscles vibrate against the swim bladder. These muscles are called sonic muscle fibres, and run horizontally along the fish's body on both sides around the swim bladder, connected to a central tendon that surrounds the swim bladder ventrally. These sonic muscle fibres are repeatedly contracted against the swim bladder to produce the croaking sound that gives drum and croaker their common name, effectively using the swim bladder as a resonating chamber. The sciaenids' large swim bladder is more expansive and branched than other species, which aids in the croaking. In some species the sonic muscle fibres are only present in males. These muscles strengthen during the mating season and are allowed to atrophy the rest of the time, deactivating the croaking mechanism. In other species, most notably the Atlantic croaker, the croaking mechanism is present in both sexes and remains active year-round. These species are thought to use croaking for communication, such as announcing hazards and location when in turbid water.\nCroaking in communication.\nIn some species, croaking is used for communication aside from attracting mates. For those species that have year-round croaking ability, the croaks may serve as a low-aggression warning during group feeding, as well as to communicate location in cloudy water. In those species that lack the ability to croak year-round, croaking is usually restricted to males for attracting mates. A disadvantage to the croaking ability is that it allows bottlenose dolphin to easily locate large groups of croaker and drum as they broadcast their position, indicating large amounts of food for the dolphins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48868", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48868", "title": "Sparidae", "text": "Family of fishes\nSparidae, the seabreams and porgies, is a family of ray-finned fishes belonging to the order Acanthuriformes, although they were previously classified in the order Perciformes. The over 150 species are found in shallow and deep marine waters in temperate through tropical regions around the world. Most species are demersal carnivores.\nTaxonomy.\nSparidae was first proposed as a family in 1818 by the French polymath and naturalist Constantine Samuel Rafinesque. Traditionally the taxa within the Spariformes were classified within the Perciformes, with some authorities using the term \"Sparoid lineage\" for the families Centracanthidae, Nemipteridae, Lethrinidae and Sparidae. Since then the use of molecular phylogenetics in more modern classifications has meant that the Spariformes is recognised as a valid order within the Percomorpha containing six families, with Callanthidae, Sillaginidae and Lobotidae included. Other workers have found that the Centracanthidae is synonymous with Sparidae and that the Spariformes contains only the remaining three families of the \"Sparoid lineage\".\nIn the past workers recognised six subfamilies within the Sparidae. These were Boopsinae, Denticinae, Diplodinae, Pagellinae, Pagrinae, and Sparinae. However, these taxa did not resolve as monophyletic in all the analyses undertaken. These analyses support Sparidae as a monophyletic family if \"Spicara\", a genus formerly in the family Centracanthidae, was included. This meant that \"Spicara\" and \"Centracanthus\" were both now classified within Sparidae, so that Centracanthidae is a junior synonym of Sparidae.\nEtymology.\nSparidae takes its name from its type genus, \"Sparus\", that name coming from the Greek for its only species the gilt-head bream (\"Sparus aurata\").\nGenera.\nThe family Sparidae contains about 155 species in 38 genera:\nFossil genera include:\nCharacteristics.\nSparidae breams have oblong, moderately deep and compressed bodies. The head is large, with a characteristic steep dorsal slant. There are no scales on the snout but there are scales on the cheeks. The preoperculum may or may not have scales and has no spines or serrations on its margin. The operculum is scaled and also has no spines. The mouth is slightly oblique and can be protruded a little. The upper jaw never extends back past a vertical line through the centre of the eye. There are teeth in the jaws which vary from conical or flattened but there are no teeth on the roof of the mouth. There is one dorsal fin which is supported by between 10 and 13 spines and 9 and 17 soft rays, with the ultimate ray being split into 2, and no incision separated the spines from the soft rays. The rearmost spines in the dorsal fin may be elongated or filamentous. The anal fin is supported by 3 robust spines and between 7 and 15 soft rays. The caudal fin varies from moderately deeply emarginate to forked. The pectoral fins are typically long and pointed and the pelvic fins are under or immediately to the rear of the bases of the pectoral fins, supported a single spine and 5 soft rays, with a scale in the axilla, referred to as the axillary pelvic process. The scales are typically smooth, cycloid, or slightly rough to the touch, weakly ctenoid, The lateral line is single and continuous and reached the base of the caudal fin. They are very variable in colour and may be pinkish or reddish to yellowish or greyish, frequently with tints of silver or gold and dark or coloured spots, stripes or bars. The two largest species of Sparid are the white steenbras (\"Lithognathus lithognathus\") and the red steenbras (\"Petrus rupestris\"), both of which have a maximum published total length of , while the smallest species is the cherry seabream (\"Polysteganus cerasinus\").\nDistribution and habitat.\nSparidae breams are found in tropical and temperate coastal waters around the world. They are demersal fishes on the continental shelf and slope. A few species are found in brackish water, and a few of these will enter fresh water.\nBiology.\nSparidae breams are predatory with most feeding on benthic invertebrates. Smaller species in the family usually gather in schools, as do the juveniles of the larger species. The larger adult fishes are normally solitary or, at least, are less sociable and prefer deeper waters. The juveniles and subadults are often markedly different in shape and colour patterns, and may be much more colourful. Many sparids are hermaphroditic and some have both male and female sex organs at the same time. Others change sex as they grow, either from male to female or from female to male.\nFisheries.\nSparids are highly regarded as food fish and are important target species for commercial fisheries wherever they occur. Between 1990 and 1995, the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics reported that the annual weight of landings was between of sparids in the Western Central Pacific.\nCulinary use.\nThe most celebrated of the breams for culinary use are the gilt-head bream and the common dentex.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48869", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48869", "title": "Clupeiformes", "text": "Order of fishes\nClupeiformes is the order of ray-finned fish that includes the herring family, Clupeidae, and the anchovy family, Engraulidae and sardines. The group includes many of the most important forage and food fish.\nClupeiformes are physostomes, which means that their gas bladder has a pneumatic duct connecting it to the gut. They typically lack a lateral line, but still have the eyes, fins and scales that are common to most fish, though not all fish have these attributes. They are generally silvery fish with streamlined, spindle-shaped bodies, and they often school. Most species eat plankton which they filter from the water with their gill rakers. \nThe former order of Isospondyli was subsumed mostly by Clupeiformes, but some isospondylous fishes (isospondyls) were assigned to Osteoglossiformes, Salmoniformes, Cetomimiformes, etc.\nTheir sister group were the extinct Ellimmichthyiformes, which were dominant throughout much of the Cretaceous and into the Paleogene, and often coexisted with clupeiforms at many known localities. Both groups closely resembled each other morphologically, although the ellimmichthyiformes evolved some highly divergent body plans later in the Cretaceous.\nSeveral fossil clupeiforms are known from the Early Cretaceous of South America that appear to be more closely allied with Clupeioidei over the Denticipitidae. This suggests a very deep divergence within the crown group Clupeiformes that must have occurred during the Early Cretaceous or before.\nFamilies.\nThe order includes about 405 species in ten families:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48870", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48870", "title": "Clupeidae", "text": "Family of fishes\nClupeidae is a family of clupeiform ray-finned fishes, comprising, for instance, the herrings and sprats. Many members of the family have a body protected with shiny cycloid (very smooth and uniform) scales, a single dorsal fin, and a fusiform body for quick, evasive swimming and pursuit of prey composed of small planktonic animals. Due to their small size and position in the lower trophic level of many marine food webs, the levels of methylmercury they bioaccumulate are very low, reducing the risk of mercury poisoning when consumed.\nThe earliest known fossil members of this group are the stem-clupeids \"Italoclupea\" and \"Lecceclupea\" from the late Campanian/early Maastrichtian of Italy.\"\"\nDescription and biology.\nClupeids are mostly marine forage fish, although a few species are found in fresh water. No species has scales on the head, and some are entirely scaleless. The lateral line is short or absent, and the teeth are unusually small where they are present at all. Clupeids typically feed on plankton, and range from in length.\nClupeids spawn huge numbers of eggs (up to 200,000 in some species) near the surface of the water. After hatching, the larvae live among the plankton until they develop a swim bladder and transform into adults. These eggs and fry are not protected or tended to by parents. The adults typically live in large shoals, seeking protection from piscivorous predators such as birds, sharks and other predatory fish, toothed whales, marine mammals, and jellyfish. They also form bait balls.\nCommercially important species of the Clupeidae include the Atlantic and Baltic herrings (\"Clupea harengus\"), and the Pacific herring (\"C. pallasii\").\nFeeding physiology.\nThe Clupeidae family primarily feed on small planktonic organisms. The teeth of members of this family are either reduced or absent, reduced teeth are miniature teeth that would be barely visible and line the interior of the fish's mouth. The structure of these teeth indicate that these organisms do not need to cut or tear their prey items as they would need fully formed teeth to complete this process. They do, however, possess long gill rakers that are designed for sifting plankton and other small particles out of the water as it passes through their gills. Gill rakers are protrusions along the gill arch, opposing the gill filaments, that help aquatic organisms to trap food particles.\nThe diet of many clupeids primarily consists of phytoplankton and plant matter during their larval stages. As the fish mature this diet begins to shift towards larger and more substantive organisms, including more zooplankton and copepods. This change in diet is possible due to their increase in body and gill raker size, which allows them to capture and process larger organisms to support themselves. Small organisms like these do not need to be ground or torn apart for consumption so pronounced teeth would not serve a purpose in the feeding habits of Clupeidae, instead the use of filter feeding allows for much more efficient nutrient collection.\nThe fusiform body shape of Clupeidae is also advantageous to their trophic ecology. The tapering body form is a highly hydrodynamic form that allows for quick increases in speed and a high maximum speed. Moving at high speeds allows the members of this family to regulate their feeding habits and avoid predators. Clupeidae can moderate the speed at which they swim to increase their uptake of nutrients. As with all filter feeders, Clupeidae cannot take in food if nutrient rich water does not pass over their gills. To moderate this, members of this family have been found to increase their swimming speed when they sense that there is a high concentration of food items in order to take advantage of this feeding period. Keeping a high swimming speed during periods of low food availability would not be efficient to maintain over long periods of time as the organisms would not net as much energy as they may need to in order to sustain themselves and increase their fitness. Increasing their swimming speed during feeding periods would allow them to take in more plankton while not suffering consequences from maintaining that speed.\nTaxonomy.\nThe following genera are classified within the family:\nThe family arguably also contains the \"Sundasalangidae\", a paedomorphic taxon first thought to be a distinct salmoniform family, but then discovered to be deeply nested in the Clupeidae.\nUntil recently, the concept of Clupeidae was broader, but it has been subdivided into several distinct families (e.g. Alosidae)\nFossil genera.\nThe following fossil genera have been variously suggested to be \"sensu stricto\" members of Clupeidae. Many were formerly placed in the subfamily Clupeinae:\nDisputed fossil genera.\nKnown fossil genera classified under the \"sensu lato\" concept of Clupeidae include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48871", "revid": "9855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48871", "title": "Freshwater sunfish", "text": ""}
{"id": "48872", "revid": "7646666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48872", "title": "Scombridae", "text": "Family of fishes\nThe mackerel, tuna, and bonito family, Scombridae, includes many of the most important and familiar food fishes. The family consists of 51 species in 15 genera and two subfamilies. All species are in the subfamily Scombrinae, except the butterfly kingfish, which is the sole member of subfamily Gasterochismatinae.\nScombrids have two dorsal fins and a series of finlets behind the rear dorsal fin and anal fin. The caudal fin is strongly divided and rigid, with a slender, ridged base. The first (spiny) dorsal fin and the pelvic fins are normally retracted into body grooves. Species lengths vary from the of the island mackerel to the recorded for the immense Atlantic bluefin tuna.\nScombrids are generally predators of the open ocean, and are found worldwide in tropical and temperate waters. They are capable of considerable speed, due to a highly streamlined body and retractable fins. Some members of the family, in particular the tunas, are notable for being partially endothermic (warm-blooded), a feature that also helps them to maintain high speed and activity. Other adaptations include a large amount of red muscle, allowing them to maintain activity over long periods. Scombrids like the yellowfin tuna can reach speeds of .\nClassification.\nJordan, Evermann, and Clark (1930) divide these fishes into the four families: Cybiidae, Katsuwonidae, Scombridae, and Thunnidae, but taxonomists later classified them all into a single family, the Scombridae.\nThe World Wildlife Fund and the Zoological Society of London jointly issued their \"Living Blue Planet Report\" on 16 September 2015 which states that a dramatic fall of 74% occurred in worldwide stocks of scombridae fish between 1970 and 2010, and the global overall \"population sizes of mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish fell by half on average in just 40 years\".\nExtant genera.\nThe 51 extant species are in 15 genera and two subfamilies \u2013 with the subfamily Scombrinae further grouped into four tribes, as:\nFossil genera.\nThe following fossil genera are known:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48873", "revid": "38411991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48873", "title": "Serranidae", "text": "Family of fishes\nSerranidae is a family of marine fish belonging to the order Perciformes. The family used to contain about 450 species in 65 genera, including some of the sea basses and groupers, but taxonomic revisions split out Epinephelinae (groupers), Grammistini (soapfish), and Anthiadinae (anthias); as a consequence, this family is now much less speciose. Representatives of this group live in tropical and subtropical seas worldwide.\nCharacteristics.\nSerranids are generally robust in form, with large mouths and small spines on the gill coverings. They typically have several rows of sharp teeth, usually with a pair of particularly large, canine-like fangs projecting from the lower jaw. Many serranid species are brightly colored.\nThey generally have ten spines in their dorsal fins and seven soft rays in their anal fins. They are also characterised by the fin spines being unserrated. The genera within the Serranidae are separated by the meristics of the soft rays in the dorsal fin.\nAll serranids are carnivorous, feeding on other fish and crustaceans. They are typically ambush predators, hiding in cover on the reef and darting out to grab passing prey. Their bright colours are most likely a form of disruptive camouflage, similar to the stripes of a tiger.\nMany species are protogynous hermaphrodites, meaning they start out as females and change sex to male later in life. They produce large quantities of eggs and their larvae are planktonic, generally at the mercy of ocean currents until they are ready to settle into adult populations.\nClassification.\nIn past taxonomic treatments, this family had long encompassed three subfamilies: Anthiadinae, Epinephelinae, and Serraninae. A 2007 study of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA by W. L. Smith and M. T. Craig recovered a different arrangement, where Serranines and Anthiadines nested with part of Scorpaeniformes such as \"Ablabys\" and \"Hoplichthys\", while Epinephelines were more basal; outside the larger group (clade) containing Serranines and Anthiadines. \nMore recent studies have retained these three clades within the Percoidei instead of with scorpaenoids. Although later studies continued using the three subfamily system, more recent studies have split them into their own families based on phylogenetic evidence. The elevation of Epinephelidae, Grammistidae, and Anthiadidae into their own distinct families was eventually accepted by multiple taxonomic authorities, such as the World Register of Marine Species (WoRMS), \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\" (ECoF), and the International Union for Conservation of Nature. This family is the most basal of the three former subfamilies within the Serranidae, with the genus \"Centropristis\" being the most basal serranid as presently defined.\nGenera.\nThe following genera are considered part of Serranidae in \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe fossil genus \"Paleoserranus\" was formerly placed in the former, more expansive version of this family. More recent studies have, however, suggested it to be a basal perciform.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48874", "revid": "50904605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48874", "title": "Hugo Ch\u00e1vez", "text": "President of Venezuela from 1999 to 2013\nHugo Rafael Ch\u00e1vez Fr\u00edas ( , ; 28 July 1954\u00a0\u2013 5 March 2013) was a Venezuelan politician, revolutionary, and military officer who was the president of Venezuela from 1999 until his death in 2013. Ch\u00e1vez was also leader of the Fifth Republic Movement political party from its foundation in 1997 until 2007, when it merged with several other parties to form the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (PSUV), which he led until 2012.\nBorn into a middle-class family in Sabaneta, Barinas, Ch\u00e1vez became a career military officer. After becoming dissatisfied with the Venezuelan political system based on the Puntofijo Pact, he founded the clandestine Revolutionary Bolivarian Movement-200 (MBR-200) in the early 1980s. Ch\u00e1vez led the MBR-200 in its unsuccessful coup d'\u00e9tat against the Democratic Action government of President Carlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez in 1992, for which he was imprisoned. Pardoned from prison two years later, he founded the Fifth Republic Movement political party, and then receiving 56.2% of the vote, was elected president of Venezuela in 1998. He was reelected in the 2000 Venezuelan general election with 59.8% of the vote and again in the 2006 Venezuelan presidential election, with 62.8% of the vote. After winning his fourth term as president in the 2012 Venezuelan presidential election with 55.1% of the vote, he was to be sworn in on 10 January 2013. However, the inauguration was cancelled due to his cancer treatment, and on 5 March at age 58, he died in Caracas.\nFollowing the adoption of the 1999 Venezuelan Constitution, Ch\u00e1vez focused on enacting social reforms as part of the Bolivarian Revolution. Using record-high oil revenues of the 2000s, his government nationalized key industries, created participatory democratic Communal Councils and implemented social programs known as the Bolivarian missions to expand access to food, housing, healthcare and education. While these initiatives led to temporary improvements in poverty reduction and social welfare during periods of high oil revenue, their reliance on state control and centralized planning exposed significant structural weaknesses as oil prices declined. The high oil profits coinciding with the start of Chavez's presidency resulted in temporary improvements in areas such as poverty, literacy, income equality and quality of life between primarily 2003 and 2007, though extensive changes in structural inequalities did not occur. On 2 June 2010, Ch\u00e1vez declared an \"economic war\" on Venezuela's upper classes due to shortages, arguably beginning the crisis in Venezuela. By the end of Ch\u00e1vez's presidency in the early 2010s, economic actions performed by his government during the preceding decade, such as deficit spending and price controls, proved to be unsustainable, with Venezuela's economy faltering. At the same time, poverty, inflation and shortages increased.\nUnder Ch\u00e1vez, Venezuela experienced democratic backsliding, as he suppressed the press, manipulated electoral laws, and arrested and exiled government critics. His use of enabling acts and his government's use of propaganda were controversial. Ch\u00e1vez's presidency saw significant increases in the country's murder rate and continued corruption within the police force and the government.\nAcross the political spectrum, Ch\u00e1vez is regarded as one of the most influential and controversial politicians in the modern history of Venezuela and Latin America. His 14-year presidency marked the start of the socialist \"pink tide\" sweeping Latin America\u2014he supported Latin American and Caribbean cooperation and was instrumental in setting up the pan-regional Union of South American Nations, the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States, the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas, the Bank of the South and the regional television network TeleSUR. Internationally, Ch\u00e1vez aligned himself with the Marxist\u2013Leninist governments of Fidel and then Ra\u00fal Castro in Cuba, as well as the socialist governments of Evo Morales in Bolivia, Rafael Correa in Ecuador and Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua. Ch\u00e1vez's ideas, programs, and style form the basis of \"Chavismo\", a political ideology closely associated with Bolivarianism and socialism of the 21st century. Ch\u00e1vez described his policies as anti-imperialist, being a prominent adversary of the United States's foreign policy as well as a vocal opponent of neoliberalism and \"laissez-faire\" capitalism. He described himself as a Marxist.\nEarly life.\nCh\u00e1vez was born on 28 July 1954 in his paternal grandmother Rosa In\u00e9s Ch\u00e1vez's home, a modest three-room house located in the rural village Sabaneta, Barinas State. The Ch\u00e1vez family were of Amerindian, Afro-Venezuelan, Spanish and Italian descent. His parents, Hugo de los Reyes Ch\u00e1vez \u2013 described as a proud COPEI member\u2013 and Elena Fr\u00edas de Ch\u00e1vez, were schoolteachers who lived in the small village of Los Rastrojos.\nHugo was born the second of seven children. Ch\u00e1vez's childhood of supposed poverty has been disputed as he possibly changed the story of his background for political reasons. Attending the Juli\u00e1n Pino Elementary School, Ch\u00e1vez was particularly interested in the 19th-century federalist general Ezequiel Zamora, in whose army his own great-great-grandfather had served. With no high school in their area, Hugo's parents sent Hugo and his older brother Ad\u00e1n to live with their grandmother Rosa, who lived in a lower middle class subsidized home provided by the government, where they attended Daniel O'Leary High School in the mid-1960s. His father, despite having the salary of a teacher, helped pay for college for Ch\u00e1vez and his siblings.\nMilitary career.\nMilitary academy.\nAged 17, Ch\u00e1vez studied at the Venezuelan Academy of Military Sciences in Caracas, following a curriculum known as the Andr\u00e9s Bello Plan, instituted by a group of progressive, nationalistic military officers. This new curriculum encouraged students to learn not only military routines and tactics but also a wide variety of other topics, and to do so civilian professors were brought in from other universities to give lectures to the military cadets.\nLiving in Caracas, he began to get involved in activities outside of the military school, playing baseball and softball with the \"Criollitos de Venezuela\" team, progressing with them to the Venezuelan National Baseball Championships. He also wrote poetry, fiction, and drama, and painted. He also became interested in the Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara (1928\u20131967) after reading his memoir \"The Diary of Che Guevara\". In 1974, he was selected to be a representative in the commemorations for the 150th anniversary of the Battle of Ayacucho in Peru, the conflict in which Simon Bol\u00edvar's lieutenant, Antonio Jos\u00e9 de Sucre, defeated royalist forces during the Peruvian War of Independence. In Peru, Ch\u00e1vez heard the leftist president, General Juan Velasco Alvarado (1910\u20131977), speak, and was inspired by Velasco's ideas that the military should act in the interests of the working classes when the ruling classes were perceived as corrupt.\nBefriending the son of Maximum Leader Omar Torrijos, the leftist dictator of Panama, Ch\u00e1vez visited Panama, where he met with Torrijos, and was impressed with his land reform program that was designed to benefit the peasants. Influenced by Torrijos and Velasco he saw the potential for military generals to seize control of a government when the civilian authorities were perceived as serving the interests of only the wealthy elites. Ch\u00e1vez later said, \"With Torrijos, I became a Torrijist. With Velasco I became a Velasquist. And with Pinochet, I became an anti-Pinochetist\". In 1975, Ch\u00e1vez graduated from the military academy as one of the top graduates of the year.\nEarly military career.\nFollowing his graduation, Ch\u00e1vez was stationed as a communications officer at a counterinsurgency unit in Barinas.\nIn 1977, Ch\u00e1vez's unit was transferred to Anzo\u00e1tegui, where they were involved in battling the Red Flag Party, a Marxist\u2013Hoxhaist insurgency group. After intervening to prevent the beating of an alleged insurgent by other soldiers, Ch\u00e1vez began to have his doubts about the army.\nIn 1977, he founded a revolutionary movement within the armed forces, in the hope that he could one day introduce a leftist government to Venezuela: the Venezuelan People's Liberation Army (\"\", or ELPV), consisted of him and a handful of his fellow soldiers who had no immediate plans for direct action, though they knew they wanted a middle way between the right-wing policies of the government and the far-left position of the Red Flag. Nevertheless, hoping to gain an alliance with civilian leftist groups in Venezuela, Ch\u00e1vez set up clandestine meetings with various prominent Marxists, including Alfredo Maneiro (the founder of the Radical Cause) and Douglas Bravo.\nBolivarian Revolutionary Army-200.\nFive years after his creation of the ELPV, Ch\u00e1vez went on to form a new secretive cell within the military, the Bolivarian Revolutionary Army-200 (EBR-200), later redesignated the Revolutionary Bolivarian Movement-200 (MBR-200). He was inspired by Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar, Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez and Ezequiel Zamora, who became known as the \"three roots of the tree\" of the MBR-200.\nIn 1984, he met Herma Marksman, a recently divorced history teacher with whom he had an affair that lasted several years. During this time Francisco Arias C\u00e1rdenas, a soldier interested in liberation theology, also joined MBR-200. After some time, some senior military officers became suspicious of Ch\u00e1vez and reassigned him so that he would not be able to gain any more fresh new recruits from the academy. He was sent to take command of the remote barracks at Elorza in Apure State.\n1992 coup attempt.\nIn 1989, Carlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez was elected president, and though he had promised to oppose the International Monetary Fund's policies, once he got into office he enacted economic policies supported by the IMF, angering the public. In an attempt to stop widespread lootings and protests that followed his spending cuts, known as \"El Caracazo\", P\u00e9rez initiated Plan \u00c1vila, a military contingency plan by the Venezuelan Army to maintain public order, and an outbreak of violent repression unfolded. Though members of Ch\u00e1vez's MBR-200 movement allegedly participated in the crackdown, Ch\u00e1vez did not, since he was then hospitalized with chicken pox. He later condemned the event as \"genocide\".\nCh\u00e1vez began preparing for a military coup d'\u00e9tat known as Operation Zamora. The plan involved members of the military overwhelming military locations and communication installations and then establishing Rafael Caldera in power once P\u00e9rez was captured and assassinated. Ch\u00e1vez delayed the MBR-200 coup, initially planned for December, until the early twilight hours of 4 February 1992.\nOn that date five army units under Ch\u00e1vez's command moved into urban Caracas. Despite years of planning, the coup quickly encountered trouble since Ch\u00e1vez commanded the loyalty of less than 10% of Venezuela's military. After numerous betrayals, defections, errors, and other unforeseen circumstances, Ch\u00e1vez and a small group of rebels found themselves hiding in the Military Museum, unable to communicate with other members of their team. P\u00e9rez managed to escape Miraflores Palace. Officially, thirty-two civilians, police officers and soldiers were killed, and fifty soldiers and some eighty civilians injured during the ensuing violence.\nCh\u00e1vez gave himself up to the government and appeared on television, in uniform, to call on the remaining coup members to lay down their arms. Ch\u00e1vez remarked in his speech that they had failed only \"por ahora\" (for now). Venezuelans, particularly poor ones, began seeing him as someone who stood up against government corruption and kleptocracy. The coup \"flopped militarily\u2014and dozens died\u2014but made him a media star\", noted Rory Carroll of \"The Guardian\".\nCh\u00e1vez was arrested and imprisoned at the San Carlos military stockade, wracked with guilt and feeling responsible for the failure of the coup. Pro-Ch\u00e1vez demonstrations outside San Carlos led to his transfer to Yare Prison. Another unsuccessful coup against the government occurred in November, with the fighting during the coups resulting in the deaths of at least 143 people and perhaps as many as several hundred. P\u00e9rez was impeached a year later, charged with malfeasance and misappropriating funds.\nPolitical rise.\nWhile Ch\u00e1vez and the other senior members of the MBR-200 were in prison, his relationship with Herma Marksman broke up in July 1993. In 1994, Rafael Caldera (1916\u20132009) of the centrist National Convergence Party who allegedly had knowledge of the coup was elected president and soon afterward he freed Ch\u00e1vez and the other imprisoned MBR-200 members, though Caldera banned them from returning to the military. After his release, on 14 December 1994, Ch\u00e1vez visited Cuba during the Special Period, where he was received by Fidel Castro with head of state honors. During his visit, Ch\u00e1vez gave a speech at the Aula Magna of the University of Havana before Fidel and the Cuban high hierarchy where, among other things, he said \"We have a long term strategic project, in which the Cubans have and would have much to contribute\" and \"it is a project of a twenty to forty year horizon, a sovereign economic model\".\nTravelling around Latin America in search of foreign support for his Bolivarian movement, he visited Argentina, Uruguay, Chile, Colombia, and Cuba, where he met Castro and became friends with him. According to journalist Patricia Poleo, during his stay in Colombia, he spent six months receiving guerrilla training and establishing contacts with the FARC and National Liberation Army (Colombia) Marxist guerrilla groups, and even adopted a \"nom de guerre\" Comandante Centeno.\nBy now Ch\u00e1vez was a supporter of taking military action, believing that the oligarchy would never allow him and his supporters to win an election. Ch\u00e1vez and his supporters later founded a political party, the Fifth Republic Movement (MVR \u2013 \"Movimiento Quinta Rep\u00fablica\") in July 1997 to support Ch\u00e1vez's candidacy in the 1998 presidential election. Ch\u00e1vez went on a tour around the country. On his tours, he met Marisabel Rodr\u00edguez, who would give birth to their daughter shortly before becoming his second wife in 1997.\n1998 election.\nAt the start of the election run-up, front runner Irene S\u00e1ez was backed by one of Venezuela's two primary political parties, Copei. Ch\u00e1vez's revolutionary rhetoric gained him support from \"Patria Para Todos\" (Homeland for All), the \"Partido Comunista Venezolano\" (Venezuelan Communist Party) and the \"Movimiento al Socialismo\" (Movement for Socialism). Ch\u00e1vez received support from different sectors: the lower class felt that Ch\u00e1vez cared about their needs and would offer a solution to their problems; members of the middle class, frustrated with corruption and wishing for a strong-handed government, also supported; Ch\u00e1vez also received support from members of the old left, as well as the members of the militarist right wing, some of them nostalgic for the dictatorship of Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez. By May 1998, Ch\u00e1vez's support had risen to 30% in polls, and by August he was registering 39%. Voter turnout was 63%, and Ch\u00e1vez won the election with 56.2% of the vote.\nPresidency (1999\u20132013).\nFirst presidential term: 2 February 1999 \u2013 10 January 2001.\nCh\u00e1vez's presidential inauguration took place on 2 February 1999. He deviated from the usual words of the presidential oath when he took it, proclaiming: \"I swear before God and my people that upon this \"moribund\" constitution I will drive forth the necessary democratic transformations so that the new republic will have a Magna Carta befitting these new times\". Freedom in Venezuela suffered following \"the decision of President Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, ratified in a national referendum, to abolish congress and the judiciary, and by his creation of a parallel government of military cronies\". Soon after being established into office, Ch\u00e1vez spent much of his time attempting to abolish existing checks and balances in Venezuela. He appointed new figures to government posts, adding leftist allies to key positions and \"army colleagues were given a far bigger say in the day-to-day running of the country\". For instance, he put Revolutionary Bolivarian Movement-200 founder Jes\u00fas Urdaneta in charge of the National Directorate of Intelligence and Prevention Services and made Hern\u00e1n Gr\u00fcber \u00d3dreman, one of the 1992 coup leaders, governor of the Federal District of Caracas. His critics referred to these government officials as the \"Boliburgues\u00eda\" or \"Bolivarian bourgeoisie\", and highlighted that it \"included few people with experience in public administration\". The number of his immediate family members in Venezuelan politics also led to accusations of nepotism. Ch\u00e1vez appointed businessman Roberto Mandini president of the state-run oil company Petroleos de Venezuela.\nAlthough Ch\u00e1vez did not believe, as he put it in 1998, \"in this paradigm of the Western capitalist, bourgeois democratic world,\" he initially believed that capitalism was still a valid economic model for Venezuela, but only Rhenish capitalism, not neoliberalism. Low oil prices made Chavez's government reliant on international free markets during his first months in office, when he showed pragmatism and political moderation, and continued to encourage foreign investment in Venezuela. During a visit to the United States in 1999, he rang the closing bell at the New York Stock Exchange. His administration held formal talks with the International Monetary Fund until oil prices rose enough to let the government rule out the need for any financial assistance.\nBeginning 27 February 1999, the tenth anniversary of the \"Caracazo\", Ch\u00e1vez set into motion a social welfare program called Plan Bol\u00edvar 2000. He said he had allotted $20.8\u00a0million for the plan. The plan involved 70,000 soldiers, sailors and members of the air force repairing roads and hospitals, removing stagnant water that offered breeding areas for disease-carrying mosquitoes, offering free medical care and vaccinations, and selling food at low prices. Several scandals later affected the program as allegations of corruption were formulated against generals involved in the plan and that significant amounts of money had been diverted.\nConstitutional reform.\nCh\u00e1vez called a public referendum, which he hoped would support his plans to form a constituent assembly of representatives from across Venezuela and from indigenous tribal groups to rewrite the Venezuelan constitution. Ch\u00e1vez said he had to run again; \"Venezuela's socialist revolution was like an unfinished painting and he was the artist\", he said, while someone else \"could have another vision, start to alter the contours of the painting\".\nThere was a low turnout of 37.65% and an abstention of 62.35%, 88% of the voters supported his proposal.\nCh\u00e1vez called an election on 25 July to elect the members of the constituent assembly. Over 900 of the 1,171 candidates standing for election were Ch\u00e1vez opponents. To elect the members of the assembly, Ch\u00e1vez used a formula designed by mathematical experts and politicians, known at the time as the \"kino\" (lottery) or the \"keys of Ch\u00e1vez\". Ch\u00e1vez obtained 51% of the votes, but his supporters took 95% of the seats, 125 in total, including all of the seats assigned to indigenous groups, while the opposition won six seats.\nOn 12 August 1999, the new constituent assembly voted to give themselves the power to abolish government institutions and to dismiss officials who were perceived as corrupt or as operating only in their own interests. Opponents of the Ch\u00e1vez regime argued that it was dictatorial. Most jurists believed that the new constituent assembly had become the country's \"supreme authority\" and that all other institutions were subordinate to it. The assembly also declared a \"judicial emergency\" and granted itself the power to overhaul the judicial system. The Supreme Court ruled that the assembly did indeed have this authority, and was replaced in the 1999 Constitution with the Supreme Tribunal of Justice. The constituent assembly put together a new constitution, which was voted on at a referendum in December 1999. Seventy-two percent of those who voted approved of the new constitution. There was a low turnout and an abstention vote of over 50%. The new constitution provided protections for the environment and indigenous people, socioeconomic guarantees and state benefits, while giving greater powers to the president. The presidential term was extended to six years, and a president was allowed to serve for two consecutive terms. Previously, a sitting president could not run for reelection for 10 years after leaving office. It also replaced the bicameral Congress with a unicameral Legislative Assembly and gave the president the power to legislate on citizen rights, to promote military officers and to oversee economic and financial matters. The assembly also gave the military a mandated role in the government by empowering it to ensure public order and aid national development, which the previous constitution had expressly forbidden.\nIn the new constitution, the country, until then officially known as the Republic of Venezuela, was renamed the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Rep\u00fablica Bolivariana de Venezuela) at Ch\u00e1vez's request. Ch\u00e1vez's actions following the ratification the 1999 Venezuelan constitution government weakened many of Venezuela's checks and balances, allowing the government to control every branch of the Venezuelan government for over 15 years after it passed until the Venezuelan parliamentary election in 2015.\nIn May 2000 he launched his own Sunday morning radio show, \"Al\u00f3 Presidente\" (\"Hello, President\"), on the state radio network. This followed an earlier Thursday night television show, \"De Frente con el Presidente\" (\"Face to Face with the President\"). He founded two newspapers, \"El Correo del Presidente\" (\"The President's Post\"), founded in July, for which he acted as editor-in-chief, and \"Vea\" (\"See\"), another newspaper, as well as \"Question\" magazine and Vive TV. \"El Correo\" was later shut down among accusations of corruption and mismanagement. In his television and radio shows, he answered calls from citizens, discussed his latest policies, sang songs and told jokes.\nIn June 2000 he separated from his wife Marisabel, and their divorce was finalised in January 2004.\nSecond presidential term: 10 January 2001 \u2013 10 January 2007.\nUnder the new constitution, it was legally required that new elections be held in order to re-legitimize the government and president. This presidential election in July 2000 would be a part of a greater \"megaelection\", the first time in the country's history that the president, governors, national and regional congressmen, mayors and councilmen would be voted for on the same day. Going into the elections, Ch\u00e1vez had control of all three branches of government. For the position of president, Ch\u00e1vez's closest challenger proved to be his former friend and co-conspirator in the 1992 coup, Francisco Arias C\u00e1rdenas, who since becoming a governor of Zulia state had turned towards the political centre and begun to denounce Ch\u00e1vez as autocratic. Some of his supporters feared that he had alienated those in the middle class and the Roman Catholic Church hierarchy who had formerly supported him. Ch\u00e1vez was re-elected with 60% of the vote, a larger majority than his 1998 electoral victory.\nThat year, Ch\u00e1vez improved ideological ties with the Cuban government of Fidel Castro by signing an agreement under which Venezuela would supply Cuba with 53,000 barrels of oil per day at preferential rates, in return receiving 20,000 trained Cuban medics and educators. In the ensuing decade, this would be increased to 90,000 barrels a day (in exchange for 40,000 Cuban medics and teachers), dramatically aiding the Caribbean island's economy and standard of living after its \"Special Period\" of the 1990s. However, Venezuela's growing alliance with Cuba came at the same time as a deteriorating relationship with the United States. Ch\u00e1vez opposed of the 2001 American-led invasion of Afghanistan in response to the 11 September attacks against the U.S. by Islamist militants. In late 2001, Ch\u00e1vez showed pictures on his television show of children said to be killed in a bombing attack. He commented that \"They are not to blame for the terrorism of Osama bin Laden or anyone else\", called on the American government to end \"the massacre of the innocents\", and described the war as \"fighting terrorism with terrorism.\" The U.S. government responded negatively to the comments, which were picked up by the media worldwide and recalled its ambassador for consultations.\nMeanwhile, the 2000 elections had led to Ch\u00e1vez's supporters gaining 101 out of 165 seats in the Venezuelan National Assembly, and so in November 2001 they voted to allow him to pass 49 social and economic decrees. This move antagonized the opposition movement particularly strongly. At the start of the 21st century, Venezuela was the world's fifth largest exporter of crude oil, with oil accounting for 85% of the country's exports, therefore dominating the country's economy. Before the election of Ch\u00e1vez, the state-run oil company, Petr\u00f3leos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA) ran autonomously, making oil decisions based on internal guidance to increase profits. Once he came to power, Ch\u00e1vez started directing PDVSA and effectively turned it into a direct government arm whose profits would be injected into social spending. The result of this was the creation of \"Bolivarian missions\", oil funded social programs targeting poverty, literacy, hunger, and more. In 2001, the government introduced a new Hydrocarbons Law through which it sought to gain greater state control over the oil industry. The law increased the transnational companies taxation in oil extraction activities to 30% and set the minimum state participation in \"mixed companies\" at 51%, whereby the state-run oil company, Petr\u00f3leos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), could have joint control with private companies over industry. By 2006, all of the 32 operating agreements signed with private companies during the 1990s had been converted from being primarily or privately run to being at least 51% controlled by PDVSA. Ch\u00e1vez had also removed many of the managers and executives of PDVSA and replaced them with political allies, stripping the state-owned company expertise.\nOpposition and the Coordinadora Democr\u00e1tica.\nMuch of Ch\u00e1vez's opposition originated from the response to the \"cubanization\" of Venezuela. Ch\u00e1vez's popularity dropped due to his relationship with Fidel Castro and Cuba, with Ch\u00e1vez attempting to make Venezuela in Cuba's image. Ch\u00e1vez, following Castro's example, consolidated the country's bicameral legislature into a single National Assembly that gave him more power and created community groups of loyal supporters allegedly trained as paramilitaries. Such actions created great fear among Venezuelans who felt like they were tricked and that Ch\u00e1vez had dictatorial goals.\nThe first organized protest against the Bolivarian government occurred in January 2001, when the Ch\u00e1vez administration tried to implement educational reforms through the proposed Resolution 259 and Decree 1.011, which would have seen the publication of textbooks with a heavy Bolivarian bias. Parents noticed that such textbooks were really Cuban books filled with revolutionary propaganda outfitted with different covers. The protest movement, which was primarily by middle-class parents whose children went to privately run schools, marched to central Caracas shouting out the slogan \"Con mis hijos no te metas\" (\"Don't mess with my children\"). Although the protesters were denounced by Ch\u00e1vez, who called them \"selfish and individualistic\", the protest was successful enough for the government to retract the proposed education reforms and instead enter into a consensus-based educational program with the opposition.\nLater into 2001, an organization known as the \"\" (Democratic Coordinator, CD) was founded, under which the Venezuelan opposition political parties, corporate powers, most of the country's media, the Venezuelan Federation of Chambers of Commerce, the Institutional Military Front and the Central Workers Union all united to oppose Ch\u00e1vez's regime. The prominent businessman Pedro Carmona (1941\u2013) was chosen as the CD's leader. The Coordinadora Democr\u00e1tica and other opponents of Ch\u00e1vez's Bolivarian government accused it of trying to turn Venezuela from a democracy into a dictatorship by centralising power among its supporters in the Constituent Assembly and granting Ch\u00e1vez increasingly autocratic powers. Many of them pointed to Ch\u00e1vez's personal friendship with Cuba's Fidel Castro and the one-party socialist government in Cuba as a sign of where the Bolivarian government was taking Venezuela.\nCoup, strikes and the recall referendum.\nCh\u00e1vez sought to make PDVSA his main source of funds for political projects and replaced oil experts with political allies to support him with this initiative. In early-2002, he placed a leftist professor as the president of PDVSA. In April 2002, Ch\u00e1vez appointed his allies to head the PDVSA and replaced the company's board of directors with loyalists who had \"little or no experience in the oil industry\", mocking the PDVSA executives on television as he fired them. Anger with Ch\u00e1vez's decisions led to civil unrest in Venezuela, which culminated in an attempted coup. On 11 April 2002, during a march headed to the presidential palace, nineteen people were killed, and over 110 were wounded.\nCh\u00e1vez believed that the best way to stay in power was to implement Plan \u00c1vila. Military officers, including General Ra\u00fal Baduel, a founder of Ch\u00e1vez's MBR-200, then decided that they had to pull support from Ch\u00e1vez to deter a massacre and shortly after at 8:00\u00a0pm, V\u00e1squez Velasco, together with other ranking army officers, declared that Ch\u00e1vez had lost his support. Ch\u00e1vez agreed to be detained and was transferred by army escort to La Orchila; business leader Pedro Carmona declared himself president of an interim government. Carmona abolished the 1999 constitution and appointed a governing committee. Protests in support of Ch\u00e1vez along with insufficient support for Carmona's government quickly led to Carmona's resignation, and Ch\u00e1vez was returned to power on 14 April.\nCh\u00e1vez's response was to moderate his approach, implementing a new economic team that appeared to be more centrist and reinstated the old board of directors and managers of the state oil company Petr\u00f3leos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), whose replacement had been one of the reasons for the coup. At the same time, the Bolivarian government began to increase the country's military capacity, purchasing 100,000 AK-47 assault rifles and several helicopters from Russia, as well as a number of Super Tucano light attack and training planes from Brazil. Troop numbers were also increased.\nCh\u00e1vez faced a two-month management strike at the PDVSA. The Ch\u00e1vez government's response was to fire about 19,000 striking employees for abandoning their posts and then employing retired workers, foreign contractors, and the military to do their jobs instead. The total firing of tens of thousands of employees by Ch\u00e1vez would forever damage Venezuela's oil industry due to the tremendous loss of expertise. By 2005, the members of Venezuela's energy ministries stated it would take more than 15 years for PDVSA to recover from Ch\u00e1vez's actions.\nThe 1999 constitution had introduced the concept of a recall referendum into Venezuelan politics, so the opposition called for such a referendum to take place. The resulting 2004 referendum to recall Ch\u00e1vez was unsuccessful. 70% of the eligible Venezuelan population turned out to vote, with 59% of voters deciding to keep the president in power. Commenting on his victory in the recall referendum, Ch\u00e1vez described the result as \u201can alternative to capitalism and false democracy.\u201d\n\"Socialism of the 21st century\".\nIn January 2005, Ch\u00e1vez began openly proclaiming the ideology of \"socialism of the 21st century\", something that was distinct from his earlier forms of Bolivarianism, which had been social democratic in nature, merging elements of capitalism and socialism. He used this new term to contrast the democratic socialism, which he wanted to promote in Latin America, from the Marxist\u2013Leninist socialism that had been spread by socialist states like the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China during the 20th century, arguing that the latter had not been truly democratic, suffering from a lack of participatory democracy and an excessively authoritarian governmental structure.\nIn May 2006, Ch\u00e1vez visited Europe in a private capacity, where he announced plans to supply cheap Venezuelan oil to poor working class communities in the continent. The Mayor of London Ken Livingstone welcomed him, describing him as \"the best news out of Latin America in many years.\"\nThird presidential term: 10 January 2007 \u2013 10 January 2013.\nIn the presidential election of December 2006, which saw a 77% voter turnout, Ch\u00e1vez was once more elected, this time with 63% of the vote, beating his closest challenger Manuel Rosales. The Organization of American States (OAS) and the Carter Center concluded that the election results were free and legitimate. After this victory, Ch\u00e1vez promised an \"expansion of the revolution\".\nUnited Socialist Party of Venezuela and domestic policy.\nOn 15 December 2006, Ch\u00e1vez publicly announced that those leftist political parties who had continually supported him in the Patriotic Pole would unite into one single, much larger party, the United Socialist Party of Venezuela (\"Partido Socialista Unido de Venezuela\", PSUV). In the speech which he gave announcing the PSUV's creation, Ch\u00e1vez declared that the old parties must \"forget their own structures, party colours and slogans, because they are not the most important thing for the fatherland\".\nCh\u00e1vez had initially proclaimed that those leftist parties which chose to not dissolve into the PSUV would have to leave the government. Party membership rose to 5.7\u00a0million people by 2007. The United Nations' International Labour Organization expressed concern over some voters' being pressured to join the party.\nOn 28 December 2006, President Ch\u00e1vez announced that the government would not renew RCTV's broadcast license which expired on 27 May 2007, thereby forcing the channel to cease operations on that day. On 17 May 2007, the government rejected a plea made by RCTV to stop the TV station's forced shutdown. Thousands of protesters marching both against and in support of the government's decision remained on the streets in Caracas. Other marches took place in Maracaibo and Valencia. On 21 May 2007, hundreds of journalists and students marched in Caracas carrying a banner reading \"S.O.S. Freedom of Expression\". A few days later, on 25 May 2007, university students from the Universidad Cat\u00f3lica Andr\u00e9s Bello, the Universidad Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar and the Universidad Central de Venezuela protested against the government's intentions. On 26 May, tens of thousands of protesters marched in support of RCTV to their headquarters. Since the week prior to the shutdown of RCTV, many individuals, international organizations and NGOs\u2014including the OAS's Secretary General Jos\u00e9 Miguel Insulza and its Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression, the Inter American Press Association, Human Rights Watch, and the Committee to Protect Journalists\u2014 expressed concerns for freedom of the press following the shutdown. However, Secretary Insulza also stated that it was up to the Venezuelan courts to solve this dispute and that he believed that this was an administrative decision.\nIn 2007, the Bolivarian government set up a constitutional commission to review the 1999 constitution and suggest potential amendments to be made to it. Led by the prominent pro-Ch\u00e1vez intellectual Luis Britto Garc\u00eda, it suggested measures that would have increased many of the president's powers, for instance increasing the presidential term limit to seven years, allowing the president to run for election indefinitely and centralizing powers in the executive. The government put the suggested changes to a public referendum in December 2007. Abstention rate was high however, with 44% of registered voters not turning out, and in the end the proposed changes were rejected by 51% of votes. This would prove to the first electoral loss that Ch\u00e1vez had faced in the thirteen electoral contests held since he took power, due to the top-down nature of the changes, as well as general public dissatisfaction with \"the absence of internal debate on its content, as well as dissatisfaction with the running of the social programmes, increasing street crime, and with corruption within the government\".\nIn mid 2010, tons of rotten food supplies imported during Ch\u00e1vez's government through subsidies of state-owned enterprise PDVAL were found. Due to the scandal, PDVAL started being administrated by the Vice President of Venezuela and afterwards by the Alimentation Ministry. Three former managers were detained, but were released afterwards and two of them had their positions restored. In July 2010, official estimates stated that 130,000 tons of food supplies were affected, while the political opposition informed of 170,000 tons. As of 2012, any advances in the investigations by the National Assembly were unknown. The most accepted explanation of the loss of food supplies is the organization of PDVAL, because the food network allegedly imported supplies faster than what it could distribute them. The opposition considers the affair as a corrupt case and spokespeople have assured that the public officials deliberately imported more food that could be distributed to embezzle funds through the import of subsidized supplies.\nDuring an address on Ch\u00e1vez's birthday in 2011, he called on the middle classes and the private sector to get more involved in his Bolivarian Revolution, something he saw as \"vital\" to its success. \nIn August of 2011, Ch\u00e1vez announced that his government would nationalize Venezuela's gold industry, taking it over from Russian-controlled company Rusoro, while at the same time also moving the country's gold stocks, which were largely stored in western banks, to banks in allied countries such as Russia, China and Brazil.\nTo ensure that his Bolivarian Revolution became socially ingrained in Venezuela, Ch\u00e1vez discussed his wish to stand for re-election when his term ran out in 2013, and spoke of ruling beyond 2030. Under the 1999 constitution, he could not legally stand for re-election again, and so brought about a referendum on 15 February 2009 to abolish the two-term limit for all public offices, including the presidency. Approximately 70% of the Venezuelan electorate voted, and they approved this alteration to the constitution with over 54% in favor, allowing any elected official the chance to try to run indefinitely.\nFourth presidential term: 10 January 2013 \u2013 5 March 2013.\nOn 7 October 2012, Ch\u00e1vez won election as president for a fourth time, his third six-year term. He defeated Henrique Capriles with 54% of the votes versus 45% for Capriles, which was a lower victory margin than in his previous presidential wins, in the 2012 Venezuelan presidential election. Turnout in the election was 80%, with a hotly contested election between the two candidates. There was significant support for Ch\u00e1vez among the Venezuelan lower class. Ch\u00e1vez's opposition blamed him for unfairly using state funds to spread largesse before the election to bolster Chavez's support among his primary electoral base, the lower class.\nThe inauguration of Ch\u00e1vez's new term was scheduled for 10 January 2013, but as he was undergoing medical treatment at the time in Cuba, he was not able to return to Venezuela for that date. The National Assembly president Diosdado Cabello proposed to postpone the inauguration and the Supreme Court decided that, being just another term of the sitting president and not the inauguration of a new one, the formality could be bypassed. The Venezuelan Bishops Conference opposed the verdict, stating that the constitution must be respected, and the Venezuelan government had not been transparent regarding details about Ch\u00e1vez's health.\nActing executive officials produced orders of government signed by Ch\u00e1vez, which were suspected of forgery by some opposition politicians, who claimed that Ch\u00e1vez was too sick to be in control of his faculties. Guillermo Cochez, recently dismissed from the office of Panamanian ambassador to the Organization of American States, even claimed that Ch\u00e1vez had been brain-dead since 31 December 2012.\nDue to the death of Ch\u00e1vez, Vice President Nicol\u00e1s Maduro took over the presidential powers and duties for the remainder of Ch\u00e1vez's abbreviated term until presidential elections were held. Venezuela's constitution specifies that the speaker of the National Assembly, Diosdado Cabello, should assume the interim presidency if a president cannot be sworn in. Maduro remains in power as president as of 2025.\nPolitical ideology.\nCh\u00e1vez was described as a leftist, with one journal stating that he was \"billed as the hemisphere's second leftist leader after Cuba's Fidel Castro.\" In a 1996 interview, Ch\u00e1vez stated \"I am not Marxist, but I am not anti-Marxist. I am not communist, but I am not anti-communist.\" In 1999, Ch\u00e1vez told the \"New York Times\" that \"If you are attempting to determine whether Chavez is of the left, right, or center, if he is socialist, Communist, or capitalist, well, I am none of those, but I have a bit of all of those.\" In a 1998 interview, Ch\u00e1vez stated that \"I am not a socialist. I believe that today's world, Latin America and the world to come require a leap forward. We are going beyond socialism and even savage capitalism.\"\nOpposition to capitalism and neoliberalism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Democracy is impossible in a capitalist system. Capitalism is the realm of injustice and a tyranny of the richest against the poorest. Rousseau said, 'Between the powerful and the weak all freedom is oppressed. Only the rule of law sets you free.' That's why the only way to save the world is through socialism, a democratic socialism\u00a0... [Democracy is not just turning up to vote every four or five years], it's much more than that, it's a way of life, it's giving power to the people\u00a0... it is not the government of the rich over the people, which is what's happening in almost all the so-called democratic Western capitalist countries.\n\u2014Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, June 2010\nBoth before and during his presidency, Ch\u00e1vez spoke out against \"savage capitalism,\" neoliberal capitalism and simply capitalism in various speeches. During his first electoral campaign, as noted by one observer, Ch\u00e1vez made clear his rejection of what he called \"savage capitalism,\" using the words of Pope John Paul II. Ch\u00e1vez wanted greater state intervention in the economy, but \"built bridges to the private sector to promote the development of national industry.\" According to Eduardo Semtei, a political scientist considered close to the ideas of Chavez, \"From the beginning he had the idea that the classic capitalist model is a model contrary to the development of society.\"\nIn 1999, Ch\u00e1vez argued that a new constitution drafted by an assembly packed with his allies would distance Venezuela from \"savage capitalism.\" He reiterated this position on 28 September 2001, when Chavez spoke negatively of neoliberal capitalism and the economic measures of the Carlos Andr\u00e9s P\u00e9rez, El Gran Viraje, one of the causes of the Caracazo riots.\nIn various interviews conducted in 2002, Ch\u00e1vez shared his views on capitalism, saying that the Bolivarian Revolution was an alternative to neoliberalism, saying that capitalism was \"sown ... in the marrow\" of Venezuela and the rest of the world, stating that his revolution and its missions were more humane. Ultimately, Ch\u00e1vez said that the Bolivarian Revolution was \"an alternative economy to dehumanized capitalism.\"\nIn 2003, Ch\u00e1vez argued that the Soviet Union disappeared when it failed in its efforts to dismantle \"the devastating logic of capital,\" stating that it is the \"alternative model\" that he promoted was the one now confronting \"neoliberalism and savage capitalism.\" While at the World Social Forum on 26 January 2003, Ch\u00e1vez criticized the idea that capitalism and neoliberalism \"won\" following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, saying that some individuals raised \"the thesis of single thinking, there are no more alternatives, ... socialism is over, and communism is over and long live neoliberal capitalism and all this fairy tale.\"\nCh\u00e1vez noted in a 2005 interview that \"At one time I came to think about the Third Way. I was having trouble interpreting the world. I was confused ... I spoke and wrote a lot about 'human capitalism'. Today I am convinced that it is impossible ... I became convinced that socialism is the way.\"\nCh\u00e1vez arguably did not fully talk openly about the socialism of the 21st century until 3 December 2006, during a speech after his reelection in the 2006 presidential elections.\nMarxism and socialism.\nCh\u00e1vez's connection to Marxism was a complex one, though he had described himself as a Marxist on some occasions. In May 1996, he gave an interview with Agust\u00edn Blanco Mu\u00f1oz in which he remarked, \"I am not a Marxist, but I am not anti-Marxist. I am not communist, but I am not anti-communist.\" In a 2009 speech to the national assembly, he said: \"I am a Marxist to the same degree as the followers of the ideas of Jesus Christ and the liberator of America, Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar\". He was well versed in many Marxist texts, having read the works of many Marxist theoreticians, and often publicly quoted them. Various international Marxists supported his government, believing it to be a sign of proletariat revolution as predicted in Marxist theory. In 2010, Hugo Ch\u00e1vez proclaimed support for the ideas of Marxist Leon Trotsky, saying \"When I called him (former Minister of Labour, Jos\u00e9 Ram\u00f3n Rivero)\" Ch\u00e1vez explained, \"he said to me: 'President I want to tell you something before someone else tells you ... I am a Trotskyist', and I said, 'well, what is the problem? I am also a Trotskyist! I follow Trotsky's line, that of permanent revolution\", and then cited Marx and Lenin.\nCh\u00e1vez also noted his identification with socialism, noting that \"The Constitution speaks that the socioeconomic regime of Venezuela must have a strong cooperative and associative content and that gives it a charge that breaks with individualism and neoliberalism, which gives a strong socialist content to the project. In that direction we have to go all out. To cooperate is to socialize the economy, to give it a social content. I am sure that in Puerto Cruz, agricultural cooperatives will emerge.\" Later in his presidency Ch\u00e1vez promoted the socialism of the 21st century. His approach was more heavily influenced by the theories of Istv\u00e1n M\u00e9sz\u00e1ros, Michael Lebowitz and Marta Harnecker, who was Ch\u00e1vez's adviser between 2004 and 2011, rather than by those of Heinz Dieterich.\nBolivarianism.\nHugo Ch\u00e1vez defined his political position as Bolivarianism, an ideology he developed from that of Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar (1783\u20131830) and others. Bol\u00edvar was a 19th-century general who led the fight against the colonialist Spanish authorities and who is widely revered across Latin America today. Along with Bol\u00edvar, the other two primary influences upon Bolivarianism are Sim\u00f3n Rodr\u00edguez (1769\u20131854), a philosopher who was Bol\u00edvar's tutor and mentor, and Ezequiel Zamora, (1817\u20131860), the Venezuelan Federalist general. The fact that Ch\u00e1vez's ideology originated from Bol\u00edvar has also received some criticism because Ch\u00e1vez had occasionally described himself as being influenced by Karl Marx, a critic of Bol\u00edvar. Beddow and Thibodeaux noted the complications between Bol\u00edvar and Marx, stating that \"[d]escribing Bolivar as a socialist warrior in the class struggle, when he was actually member of the aristocratic 'criollos', is peculiar when considering Karl Marx's own writings on Bolivar, whom he dismissed as a false liberator who merely sought to preserve the power of the old Creole nobility which he belonged\".\nOther influences.\nCh\u00e1vez's early heroes were nationalist military dictators that included former Peruvian president Juan Velasco Alvarado and former Panamanian \"Maximum Leader\" Omar Torrijos. One dictator Ch\u00e1vez admired was Marcos P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez, a former president of Venezuela that he praised for the public works he performed. Ch\u00e1vez praised P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez to vilify preceding democratic governments, stating that \"General P\u00e9rez Jim\u00e9nez was the best president Venezuela had in a long time ... He was much better than R\u00f3mulo Betancourt, much better than all of those others. They hated him because he was a soldier.\"\nCh\u00e1vez was also well acquainted with the various traditions of Latin American socialism, espoused by such figures as Colombian politician Jorge Eli\u00e9cer Gait\u00e1n and former Chilean president Salvador Allende. Early in his presidency, Ch\u00e1vez was advised and influenced by the Argentine Peronist Norberto Ceresole. Communist revolutionaries Che Guevara and Fidel Castro also influenced Ch\u00e1vez and Castro's government assisted with the Bolivarian Missions.\nCh\u00e1vez also spoke admiringly of Mahatma Gandhi, stating in a 2005 speech that \"we must remember that thought of Gandhi that reflects a deep respect for himself, for his own country, for a healthy nationalism\" and expressed support for what he said was Gandhi's espousal of being anti-capitalist, anti-colonialist and anti-imperialist. During the same speech, Ch\u00e1vez also expressed influence from Jawaharlal Nehru, noting he was a main figure of the Non-Aligned Movement, with Ch\u00e1vez citing his leadership as an inspiration \"of the need, of brotherhood and solidarity among the peoples of the Third World. The need to unite to defend the interests of our people, of poor people against the abuse of rich people.\"\nOther indirect influences on Ch\u00e1vez's political philosophy are the Gospel teachings of Jesus Christ. Other inspirations of Ch\u00e1vez's political view are Giuseppe Garibaldi, Antonio Gramsci and Antonio Negri.\nPromotion of conspiracy theories.\nIn September 2006, Ch\u00e1vez said 9/11 conspiracy theories were \"not absurd\" and that \"a building never collapses like that, unless it's with an implosion\". Ch\u00e1vez also told Christopher Hitchens that he did not believe that the footage of the Apollo 11 Moon landings was genuine.\nPolicy overview.\nEconomic and social policy.\nFrom his election in 1998 until his death in March 2013, Ch\u00e1vez's administration proposed and enacted populist economic policies. The social programs were designed to be short-term, though after seeing political success as their result, Ch\u00e1vez made the efforts central to his administration and often overspent outside of Venezuela's budget.\nDue to increasing oil prices in the early 2000s which raised funds not seen in Venezuela since the 1980s, Ch\u00e1vez created the Bolivarian Missions, aimed at providing public services to improve economic, cultural, and social conditions, using these populist policies to maintain political power. According to Corrales and Penfold, \"aid was disbursed to \"some\" of the poor, and more gravely, in a way that ended up helping the president and his allies and cronies more than anyone else\". The Missions, which were directly overseen by Ch\u00e1vez and often linked to his political campaigns, entailed the construction of thousands of free medical clinics for the poor and the enactment of food and housing subsidies. The quality of life of Venezuelans had also improved temporarily according to a UN Index. Teresa A. Meade wrote that Ch\u00e1vez's popularity strongly depended \"on the lower classes who have benefited from these health initiatives and similar policies\". Following elections, social programs saw less attention from the government and their overall effectiveness decreased.\nThe Gini coefficient, a measure of income inequality, dropped from .495 in 1998 to .39 in 2011, putting Venezuela behind only Canada in the Western Hemisphere. 95% of Venezuelans aged 15 and older could also read and write, though some scholars have disputed the claim that literacy improvements during Chavez's presidency resulted from his administration's policies. The poverty rate fell from 48.6% in 1999 to 32.1% in 2013, according to the Venezuelan government's National Statistics Institute (INE). The drop of Venezuela's poverty rate compared to poverty in other South American countries was slightly behind that of Peru, Brazil and Panama with the poverty rate becoming higher than the Latin American average in 2013 according to the UN. In the two years following Ch\u00e1vez's death, the poverty rate returned to where it had been before his presidency, with a 2017 NACLA analysis stating that \"reductions in poverty and inequality during the Ch\u00e1vez years were real, but somewhat superficial ... structural poverty and inequality, such as the quality of housing, neighborhoods, education, and employment, remained largely unchanged\".\nCh\u00e1vez's populist policies eventually led to a severe socioeconomic crisis in Venezuela. The social works initiated by Ch\u00e1vez's government relied on oil products, the keystone of the Venezuelan economy, with Ch\u00e1vez's administration suffering from Dutch disease as a result. In 2012, the World Bank also explained that Venezuela's economy was \"extremely vulnerable\" to changes in oil prices since in 2012 \"96% of the country's exports and nearly half of its fiscal revenue\" relied on oil production, while by 2008, according to \"Foreign Policy\", exports of everything but oil \"collapsed\". The Ch\u00e1vez administration then spent governmental proceeds from the high oil prices on his populist policies to gain the approval of voters.\nEconomists say that the Venezuelan government's overspending on social programs and strict business policies caused to imbalances in the country's economy, contributing to rising inflation, poverty, low healthcare spending and shortages in Venezuela going into the final years of his presidency. Such occurrences, especially the risk of default and the unfriendliness toward private businesses, led to a lack of foreign investment and stronger foreign currencies, though the Venezuelan government argued that the private sector had remained relatively unchanged during Chavez's presidency despite several nationalizations. In January 2013 near the end of Ch\u00e1vez's presidency, The Heritage Foundation and \"The Wall Street Journal\" gave Venezuela's economic freedom a score of 36.1, down from 56.1 in 1999, ranking its freedom very low at 174th of 177 countries, with freedom on a downward trend. According to some analysts, the economic problems Venezuela has suffered under President Nicol\u00e1s Maduro would likely have emerged even if Ch\u00e1vez had remained president.\nFood and products.\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, health and nutrition indexes in Venezuela were generally low, and social inequality in access to nutrition was high. Ch\u00e1vez made it his stated goal to lower inequality in access to basic nutrition, and to achieve food sovereignty for Venezuela. The main strategy for making food available to all economic classes was the controversial policy of creating fixed price ceilings for basic staple foods, which was implemented in 2003. Between 1998 and 2006, malnutrition related deaths fell by 50%. Ch\u00e1vez also expropriated and redistributed 5 million acres of farmland from large landowners.\nPrice controls initiated by Ch\u00e1vez created product shortages since merchants could no longer afford to import necessary goods. Ch\u00e1vez blamed \"speculators and hoarders\" for these scarcities and strictly enforced his price control policy, denouncing anyone who sold food products for higher prices. In 2011, food prices in Caracas were nine times higher than when the price controls were put in place and resulted in shortages of cooking oil, chicken, powdered milk, cheese, sugar and meat. The price controls increased the demand for basic foods while making it difficult for Venezuela to import goods, causing increased reliance on domestic production. Economists believe this policy increased shortages. Shortages of food then occurred throughout the rest of Ch\u00e1vez's presidency with food shortage rates between 10% and 20% from 2010 to 2013. One possible reason for shortages is the relationship between inflation and subsidies, where a lack profitability due to price regulations affects operations. In turn, the lack of dollars made it difficult to purchase more food imports. Ch\u00e1vez's strategy in response to food shortages consisted of attempting to increase domestic production through nationalizing large parts of the food industry, though such nationalizations allegedly did the opposite and caused decreased production instead.\nAs part of his strategy of food security Ch\u00e1vez started a national chain of supermarkets, the Mercal network, which had 16,600 outlets and 85,000 employees that distributed food at highly discounted prices, and ran 6,000 soup kitchens throughout the country. Simultaneously Ch\u00e1vez expropriated many private supermarkets. The Mercal network was criticized by some commentators as being a part of Ch\u00e1vez's strategy to brand himself as a provider of cheap food, and the shops feature his picture prominently. The Mercal network was also subject to frequent shortages of basic staples such as meat, milk and sugar\u2014and when scarce products arrived, shoppers had to wait in lines.\nCommunes.\nAfter his election in 1998, more than 100,000 state-owned cooperatives\u2014which claimed to represent some 1.5\u00a0million people\u2014were formed with the assistance of government start-up credit and technical training.\nThe Venezuelan government often failed to construct the number of homes they had proposed. According to Venezuela's \"El Universal\", one of the Ch\u00e1vez administration's outstanding failures was the inability to meet its goals of constructing housing.\nCurrency controls.\nIn the first few years of Chavez's office, his newly created social programs required large payments to make the desired changes. On 5 February 2003, the government created CADIVI, a currency control board charged with handling foreign exchange procedures. Its creation was to control capital flight by placing limits on individuals and only offering them so much of a foreign currency. This limit to foreign currency led to a creation of a currency black market economy since Venezuelan merchants rely on foreign goods that require payments with reliable foreign currencies. As Venezuela printed more money for their social programs, the bol\u00edvar continued to devalue for Venezuelan citizens and merchants since the government held the majority of the more reliable currencies.\nThe implied value or \"black market value\" is what Venezuelans believe the hard bol\u00edvar is worth compared to the United States dollar. The high rates in the black market make it difficult for businesses to purchase necessary goods since the government often forces these businesses to make price cuts. This leads to businesses selling their goods and making a low profit. Since businesses make low profits, this leads to shortages since they are unable to import the goods that Venezuela is reliant on. Chavez used exchange rate subsidies to underwrite imports; this policy was not welfare-maximizing, but rather benefited special interests.\nCrime and punishment.\nDuring the 1980s and 1990s there was a steady increase in crime in Latin America. The countries of Colombia, El Salvador, Venezuela, and Brazil all had homicide rates above the regional average. During Ch\u00e1vez's terms as president, hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans were murdered due to violent crimes occurring in the country. Gareth A. Jones and Dennis Rodgers stated in their book \"Youth violence in Latin America: Gangs and Juvenile Justice in Perspective\" that, \"With the change of political regime in 1999 and the initiation of the Bolivarian Revolution, a period of transformation and political conflict began, marked by a further increase in the number and rate of violent deaths\" showing that in four years, the murder rate had increased to 44 per 100,000 people. Kidnappings also rose tremendously during Ch\u00e1vez's tenure, with the number of kidnappings over 20 times higher in 2011 than when Chavez was elected. Documentary filmmaker James Brabazon, stated \"kidnapping crimes had skyrocketed ... after late Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez freed thousands of violent prisoners as part of controversial criminal justice system reforms\" while kidnappings and murders also increased due to Colombian organized crime activity as well. He further explained that common criminals felt that the Venezuelan government did not care for the problems of the higher and middle classes, which in turn gave them a sense of impunity that created a large business of kidnapping-for-ransom.\nUnder Ch\u00e1vez's administration, crimes were so prevalent that by 2007 the government no longer produced crime data. Homicide rates in Venezuela more than tripled, with one NGO finding the rate to have nearly quadrupled. The majority of the deaths occur in crowded slums in Caracas. The NGO found that the number of homicides in the country increased from 6,000 in 1999 to 24,763 in 2013. In 2010 Caracas had the highest murder rate in the world, having more deaths than Baghdad during the Iraq War. According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, in 2012 there were 13,080 murders in Venezuela.\nIn leaked government INE data for kidnappings in the year 2009, the number of kidnappings were at an estimated 16,917, contrasting the CICPCs number of only 673, before the Venezuelan government blocked the data. According to the leaked INE report, only 1,332 investigations for kidnappings were opened or about 7% of the total kidnapping cases, with 90% of the kidnappings happening away from rural areas, 80% of all being express kidnappings and the most common victim being lower-middle or middle class Venezuelans and middle-aged men. Also in 2009, it was reported that Venezuelan authorities would assign judicial police to Caracas area morgues to speak with families. At that time, they would advise families not to report the murder of their family member to the media in exchange for expediting the process of releasing the victim's body.\nIn September 2010, responding to escalating crime rates in the country, Ch\u00e1vez stated that Venezuela was no more violent than it was when he first took office. An International Crisis Group report that same year stated that when Ch\u00e1vez took office, there were some factors beyond his control that led to the crime epidemic throughout Venezuela, but that Ch\u00e1vez ignored it as well as corruption in the country; especially among fellow state officials. The report also stated that international organised crime filters between Colombia and Venezuela with assistance from \"the highest spheres of government\" in Venezuela, leading to higher rates of kidnapping, drug trafficking, and homicides. Ch\u00e1vez supporters stated that the Bolivarian National Police had reduced crime and also said that the states with the highest murder rates were controlled by the opposition.\nPrisons.\nDuring Ch\u00e1vez's presidency, there were reports of prisoners having easy access to firearms, drugs, and alcohol. Carlos Nieto, head of Window to Freedom, alleged that heads of gangs acquire military weapons from the state, saying: \"They have the types of weapons that can only be obtained by the country's armed forces. ... No one else has these.\" Use of internet and mobile phones were also commonplace, allowing criminals to take part in street crime while in prison. One prisoner explained how, \"if the guards mess with us, we shoot them\" and that he had \"seen a man have his head cut off and people play football with it\".\nEdgardo Lander, a sociologist and professor at the Central University of Venezuela with a PhD in sociology from Harvard University, explained that Venezuelan prisons were \"practically a school for criminals\" since young inmates come out \"trained and hardened\" compared to before their incarceration. He also explained that prisons are controlled by gangs and that \"very little has been done\" to restrain their activities.\nElections under Ch\u00e1vez.\nThe electoral processes surrounding Venezuela's democracy under Ch\u00e1vez were often observed controversially. According to \"Bloomberg\", he changed Venezuela from a democracy to \"a largely authoritarian system\".\nHowever, there were limits to his authoritarianism, and he thought of the electoral system as a key way to make himself more effective as a leader.\nAs New York University historian Greg Grandin has pointed out, Ch\u00e1vez \"submitted himself and his agenda to 14 national votes, winning 13 of them by large margins, in polling deemed by Jimmy Carter to be \u2018best in the world.\u2019\"\nFrancisco Toro, editor of Caracas Chronicles, an opposition-friendly news and analysis site, said \"Ch\u00e1vez was always careful to maintain electoral legitimacy\". Toro says that Ch\u00e1vez had big advantages with friendly media and his tendency to use state money on his campaigns, but that he didn't \"steal or cancel elections blatantly.\" Ch\u00e1vez even allowed his opposition to run a recall referendum against him in 2004 just two years after surviving a coup attempt. He won the referendum by a huge margin.\nSince 1998, elections in Venezuela have been automated using touch-screen DRE voting machines, which provide a Voter Verified Paper Audit Trail and administered by the National Electoral Council.\nIn Venezuela, voters touch a computer screen to cast their vote and then receive a paper receipt, which they verify and deposit in a ballot box. Most of the paper ballots are compared with the electronic tally. This system makes vote-rigging nearly impossible: to steal the vote would require hacking the computers and then stuffing the ballot boxes to match the rigged vote.\nBeginning in 2012, Venezuela's elections used biometric authentication to activate the voting machine.\nCorruption.\nIn December 1998, Hugo Ch\u00e1vez declared three goals for the new government; \"convening a constituent assembly to write a new constitution, eliminating government corruption, and fighting against social exclusion and poverty\". However, according to the libertarian Cato Institute, during Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's time in power, corruption has become widespread throughout the government due to impunity towards members of the government, bribes and the lack of transparency. In 2004, Hugo Ch\u00e1vez and his allies took over the Supreme Court, filling it with supporters of Ch\u00e1vez and made new measures so the government could dismiss justices from the court. According to the Cato Institute, the National Electoral Council of Venezuela was under control of Ch\u00e1vez where he tried to \"push a constitutional reform that would have allowed him unlimited opportunities for reelection\". The Corruption Perceptions Index, produced annually by the Berlin-based NGO Transparency International (TNI), reported that in the later years of Ch\u00e1vez's tenure, corruption worsened; it was 158th out of 180 countries in 2008, and 165th out of 176 (tied with Burundi, Chad, and Haiti). Most Venezuelans believed the government's effort against corruption was ineffective; that corruption had increased; and that government institutions such as the judicial system, parliament, legislature, and police were the most corrupt.\nIn Gallup Poll's 2006 Corruption Index, Venezuela ranked 31st out of 101 countries according to how widespread the population perceive corruption as being in the government and in business. The index listed Venezuela as the second least corrupt nation in Latin America, behind Chile. Some criticism came from Ch\u00e1vez's supporters, as well. Ch\u00e1vez's own political party, Fifth Republic Movement (MVR), had been criticized as being riddled with the same cronyism, political patronage, and corruption that Ch\u00e1vez alleged were characteristic of the old \"Fourth Republic\" political parties. Venezuela's trade unionists and indigenous communities participated in peaceful demonstrations intended to impel the government to facilitate labor and land reforms. These communities, while largely expressing their sympathy and support for Ch\u00e1vez, criticized what they saw as Ch\u00e1vez's slow progress in protecting their interests against managers and mining concerns, respectively.\nAiding FARC.\nAccording to the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), \"Chavez's government funded FARC's office in Caracas and gave it access to Venezuela's intelligence services\" and said that during the 2002 coup attempt that \"FARC also responded to requests from [Venezuela's intelligence service] to provide training in urban terrorism involving targeted killings and the use of explosives\". The IISS continued saying that \"the archive offers tantalizing but ultimately unproven suggestions that FARC may have undertaken assassinations of Chavez's political opponents on behalf of the Venezuelan state\". Venezuelan diplomats denounced the IISS' findings saying that they had \"basic inaccuracies\".\nIn 2007, authorities in Colombia declared that through laptops they had seized on a raid against Ra\u00fal Reyes, they found in documents that Hugo Ch\u00e1vez offered payments of as much as $300\u00a0million to the FARC \"among other financial and political ties that date back years\" along with other documents showing \"high-level meetings have been held between rebels and Ecuadorean officials\" and some documents arguing that FARC had \"bought and sold uranium\".\nIn 2015, Ch\u00e1vez's former bodyguard Leamsy Salazar stated in the book \"Bumer\u00e1n Ch\u00e1vez\" that Ch\u00e1vez met with the high command of FARC in 2007 somewhere in rural Venezuela. Ch\u00e1vez created a system in which the FARC would provide the Venezuelan government with drugs that would be transported in live cattle and the FARC would receive money and weaponry from the Venezuelan government. According to Salazar, this was done to weaken Colombian President \u00c1lvaro Uribe, an enemy of Ch\u00e1vez.\nIn 2019, federal prosecutors from the Southern District of New York further provided documents outlining that in 2005 Ch\u00e1vez ordered top lieutenants to discuss plans to ship cocaine to the United States with the help of the FARC and \"flood\" the country with the drug, as part of his policy objectives to combat the United States.\nHuman rights.\nCriticisms.\nShortly after Hugo Ch\u00e1vez's election, ratings for freedom in Venezuela dropped according to political and human rights group Freedom House and Venezuela was rated \"partly free\". In 2004, Amnesty International criticized Chavez's administration of not handling the 2002 coup in a proper manner, saying that violent incidents \"have not been investigated effectively and have gone unpunished\" and that \"impunity enjoyed by the perpetrators encourages further human rights violations in a particularly volatile political climate\". Amnesty International also criticized the Venezuelan National Guard and the Direccion de Inteligencia Seguridad y Prevenci\u00f3n (DISIP) stating that they \"allegedly used excessive force to control the situation on a number of occasions\" during protests involving the 2004 Venezuela recall. It was also noted that many of the protesters detained seemed to not be \"brought before a judge within the legal time limit\".\nIn 2008, Human Rights Watch released a report reviewing Ch\u00e1vez's human rights record over his first decade in power. The report praises Ch\u00e1vez's 1999 amendments to the constitution which significantly expanded human rights guarantees, as well as mentioning improvements in women's rights and indigenous rights, but noted a \"wide range of government policies that have undercut the human rights protections established\" by the revised constitution. In particular, the report accused Ch\u00e1vez and his administration of engaging in discrimination on political grounds, eroding the independence of the judiciary, and of engaging in \"policies that have undercut journalists' freedom of expression, workers' freedom of association, and civil society's ability to promote human rights in Venezuela\". The Venezuelan government retaliated for the report by expelling members of Human Rights Watch from the country. Subsequently, over a hundred Latin American scholars signed a joint letter with the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a leftist NGO that would defend Ch\u00e1vez and his movement, with the individuals criticizing the Human Rights Watch report for its alleged factual inaccuracy, exaggeration, lack of context, illogical arguments, and heavy reliance on opposition newspapers as sources, among other things.\nThe International Labour Organization of the United Nations had also expressed concern over voters being pressured to join the party.\nIn 2009, Judge Mar\u00eda Lourdes Afiuni was arrested on charges of corruption after ordering the conditional release on bail of businessman Eligio Cede\u00f1o, who then fled the country. She was moved to house arrest in Caracas in February 2011, but she is still barred from practicing law, leaving the country, or using her bank account or social networks. Human rights groups accused Ch\u00e1vez of creating a climate of fear that threatened the independence of the judiciary. \"Reuters\" said Afiuni is \"considered by opponents and jurists as one of the most emblematic political prisoners\" in Venezuela, because Ch\u00e1vez called for her to be imprisoned.\nIn 2009, the Attorney General announced the creation of an investigative team to examine 6,000 reports of extrajudicial killings between 2000 and 2007.\nIn 2010, Amnesty International criticized the Ch\u00e1vez administration for targeting critics following several politically motivated arrests. Freedom House listed Venezuela as being \"partly free\" in its 2011 Freedom in the World annual report, noting a recent decline in civil liberties. A 2010 Organization of American States report found concerns with freedom of expression, human rights abuses, authoritarianism, press freedom, threats to democracy, as well as erosion of separation of powers, the economic infrastructure and ability of the president to appoint judges to federal courts. OAS observers were denied access to Venezuela; Ch\u00e1vez rejected the OAS report, pointing out that its authors did not go to Venezuela. Venezuelan ombudswoman Gabriela Ram\u00edrez said the report distorted and took statistics out of context, and said that \"human rights violations in Venezuela have decreased\".\nIn November 2014, Venezuela appeared before the United Nations Committee Against Torture over cases between 2002 and 2014. Human rights expert of the UN committee, Felice D. Gaer, noted that in \"only 12 public officials have been convicted of human rights violations in the last decade when in the same period have been more than 5,000 complaints\". The United Nations stated that there were 31,096 complaints of human rights violations received between 2011 and 2014. Of the 31,096 complaints, 3% of the cases resulted in only in an indictment by the Venezuelan Public Ministry.\nAllegations of antisemitism.\nChavez's opposition to Zionism and close relations with Iran led to accusations of antisemitism. Such claims were made by the Venezuelan Jewish community at a World Jewish Congress Plenary Assembly in Jerusalem, after Venezuela's oldest synagogue was vandalised by armed men. In 2006, the Simon Wiesenthal Center published a shortened version of a speech by Ch\u00e1vez, which significantly changed its meaning to make it appear that he had made anti-Semitic remarks. The \"New York Daily News\", the \"Los Angeles Times\", and the \"Wall Street Journal\" published the Wiesenthal Center's claim. The Confederation of Jewish Associations of Venezuela, the American Jewish Committee and the American Jewish Congress said that Chavez's comments were not aimed at Jews, but rather at \"the white oligarchy that has dominated the region since the colonial era\". In 2009, attacks on a synagogue in Caracas were alleged to be influenced by \"vocal denunciations of Israel\" by the Venezuelan state media and Hugo Ch\u00e1vez, even though Chavez promptly condemned the attacks, blaming an \"oligarchy\". A weeklong investigation by the Venezuelan CICPC concluded the synagogue attack to be an 'inside job', the motive apparently being robbery rather than antisemitism.\nMedia and the press.\nUnder Ch\u00e1vez, press freedom declined while censorship in Venezuela increased. He used state-run bodies to silence the media and to disseminate Bolivarian propaganda. Other actions included pressuring media organizations to sell to those related to his government or to face closure.\nHuman Rights Watch criticized Ch\u00e1vez for engaging in \"often discriminatory policies that have undercut journalists' freedom of expression\". Reporters Without Borders criticized the Ch\u00e1vez administration for \"steadily silencing its critics\".\nIn 2004, Ch\u00e1vez used the National Commission of Telecommunications and the Social Responsibility in Radio, Television and Electronic Media law to officially censor media organizations.\nCh\u00e1vez inaugurated TeleSUR in July 2005, a Pan-American news channel similar to Al Jazeera, which sought to challenge Latin American television news by Univision and the United States\u2013based CNN en Espa\u00f1ol. In 2006, Ch\u00e1vez inaugurated a state-funded movie studio called \"Villa del Cine\" (English: Cinema City).\nIn the group's 2009 Press Freedom Index, Reporters Without Borders noted that \"Venezuela is now among the region's worst press freedom offenders.\" Freedom House listed Venezuela's press as being \"Not Free\" in its 2011 Map of Press Freedom, noting that \"[t]he gradual erosion of press freedom in Venezuela continued in 2010.\"\nCh\u00e1vez also had a Twitter account with more than 3,200,000 followers as of August 2012. A team of 200 people sorted through suggestions and comments sent via Twitter. Ch\u00e1vez said Twitter was \"another mechanism for contact with the public, to evaluate many things and to help many people\", and that he saw Twitter as \"a weapon that also needs to be used by the revolution\".\nForeign policy.\nThough Ch\u00e1vez inspired other movements in Latin America to follow his model of \"chavismo\" in an attempt to reshape South America, it was later seen as being erratic and his influence internationally became exaggerated. Domestic mishandling of the country under Ch\u00e1vez prevented Venezuela from strengthening its position in the world.\nAccording to communications studies academic Stuart Davis, Ch\u00e1vez's foreign policy aimed to promote South\u2013South cooperation. He refocused Venezuelan foreign policy on Latin American economic and social integration by enacting bilateral trade and reciprocal aid agreements, including his so-called \"oil diplomacy\" making Venezuela more dependent on using oil, its main commodity, and increasing its longterm vulnerability. Ch\u00e1vez also focused on a variety of multinational institutions to promote his vision of Latin American integration, including Petrocaribe, Petrosur, and TeleSUR. Bilateral trade relationships with other Latin American countries also played a major role in his policy, with Ch\u00e1vez increasing arms purchases from Brazil, forming oil-for-expertise trade arrangements with Cuba, and creating unique barter arrangements that exchange Venezuelan petroleum for cash-strapped Argentina's meat and dairy products.\nCh\u00e1vez also aligned himself with authoritarian nations and radical movements that were seen as being anti-Western, with relations with Cuba and Iran becoming a particular importance. He also befriended pariah states such as Belarus and Iran.\nIn particular, relations between Venezuela and the United States deteriorated markedly as Ch\u00e1vez became highly critical of the foreign policy of the United States, opposing the U.S. led 2003 invasion of Iraq and condemning the NATO-led 2011 military intervention in Libya. Relations thawed somewhat under President Barack Obama in June 2009, only to steadily deteriorate once again shortly afterwards.\nPersonal life.\nCh\u00e1vez married twice. He first wed Nancy Coromoto Colmenares (d.\u20092022), a woman from a poor family in Ch\u00e1vez's hometown of Sabaneta. Ch\u00e1vez and Colmenares remained married for 18 years, during which time they had three children: Rosa Virginia, born on September 6, 1978 in Maracay, Mar\u00eda Gabriela, born on March 12, 1980 in Barinas and Hugo Rafael, born on October 14, 1982 in Barinas; the last of whom suffers from behavioural problems. The couple separated soon after Ch\u00e1vez's 1992 coup attempt. During his first marriage, Ch\u00e1vez had an affair with historian Herma Marksman; their relationship lasted nine years. Ch\u00e1vez's second wife was journalist Marisabel Rodr\u00edguez de Ch\u00e1vez, from whom he separated in 2002 and divorced in 2004. Through that marriage, Ch\u00e1vez had another daughter, Rosin\u00e9s, born on September 23, 1997 in Barquisimeto. When Ch\u00e1vez was released from prison, he initiated affairs with women that had been his followers. Allegations were also made that Ch\u00e1vez was a womanizer throughout both his marriages, having encounters with actresses, journalists, ministers, and ministers' daughters. The allegations remained unproven and are contradicted by statements provided by other figures close to him, though one retired aide shared that while Ch\u00e1vez was married to Marisabel and afterward, he participated in liaisons with women and gave them gifts, with some rumors among his aides stating that some of the women bore children from Ch\u00e1vez.\nOn May 1, 2005, his fifth daughter, G\u00e9nesis Mar\u00eda, was born in Chacao Municipality; the fruit of his relationship with Barinese, Bexhi Lisette Segura (1971); who was the Venezuelan Consul in Guayaquil and on May 3, 2008, his last daughter, Sara Manuela, was born in Baruta Municipality; the fruit of his relationship with the flight attendant, Nidia Coromoto Fajardo (1966); who was the Venezuelan consul in Lisbon and Montreal, respectively. \nHe also had five grandchildren: Gabriela Alejandra Rivero, born on April 18, 1998 (daughter of Mar\u00eda), Manuel Alejandro Prieto, born on September 1, 2003 and Jorge Alejandro Arreaza, born on September 18, 2007 (sons of Rosa) and Hugo Rafael, born on March 9, 2013 and Miranda, born on November 2, 2014 (children of \"Huguito\") and a great-grandson, Paulo Aponte; born in August 2025 (son of Gabriela).\nThose who were very close to Ch\u00e1vez felt that he had bipolar disorder. Salvador Navarrete, a physician who treated Ch\u00e1vez during his first years in the presidency, believed that Ch\u00e1vez was bipolar. In 2010, Alberto M\u00fcller Rojas, then vice president of Ch\u00e1vez's party, PSUV, stated that Ch\u00e1vez had \"a tendency toward cyclothymia\u2014mood swings that range from moments of extreme euphoria to moments of despondence\". A different explanation was that such behavior was a tactic used by Ch\u00e1vez to attack opponents and polarize.\nCh\u00e1vez was raised as a Catholic, and he intended at one time to become a priest. He saw his socialist policies as having roots in the teachings of Jesus Christ (liberation theology), and he publicly used the slogan of \"Christ is with the Revolution!\" Although he traditionally kept his own faith a private matter, Ch\u00e1vez over the course of his presidency became increasingly open to discussing his religious views, stating that he interpreted Jesus as a Communist. He was, in general, a liberal Catholic, some of whose declarations were disturbing to the religious community of his country. In 2008, he said that an afterlife does not exist. He also believed in Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, stating that \"it is a lie that God created man from the ground\". He cursed the state of Israel, and he had some disputes with both the Venezuelan Catholic clergy and Protestant groups like the New Tribes Mission, whose evangelical leader he \"condemned to hell\". In addition, he showed syncretistic practices such as the worship of the Venezuelan goddess Mar\u00eda Lionza. In his last years, after he discovered he had cancer, Ch\u00e1vez became more attached to the Catholic Church.\nIllness.\nOn 30 June 2011, Ch\u00e1vez revealed in a televised address from Havana, Cuba, that he was recovering from two operations in Cuba, including an operation to remove an abscessed tumor with cancerous cells in the pelvic region. During the speech, he was noticeably thinner and paler and had a serious and at times sad expression, and stated that he regretted his lack of medical checkups. Analysts theorized that he was suffering from colorectal cancer. He returned to Venezuela from Cuba on 4 July, but on 17 July 2011, he returned to Cuba for further cancer treatments. At that time, some powers were delegated to cabinet ministers but he resisted requests by the opposition to give up all powers during his absence.\nCh\u00e1vez gave a public appearance on 28 July 2011, his 57th birthday, in which he stated that his health troubles had led him to radically reorient his life towards a \"more diverse, more reflective and multi-faceted\" outlook. \nOn 9 July 2012, Ch\u00e1vez declared himself fully recovered from cancer just three months before the 2012 Venezuelan presidential election, which he won, securing a fourth term as president. In November 2012, Ch\u00e1vez announced plans to travel to Cuba for more medical treatment for cancer.\nOn 8 December 2012, Ch\u00e1vez announced he would undergo another operation after doctors in Cuba detected malignant cells; the operation took place on 11 December 2012. Ch\u00e1vez suffered complications from the surgery including a respiratory tract infection as well as unexpected bleeding. It was announced on 3 January 2013, that Ch\u00e1vez had a severe lung infection that had caused respiratory failures following a strict treatment regimen for respiratory insufficiency; he was then breathing through a tracheal tube but was giving orders to ministers by writing them down. However, he was reported to have overcome the infection by 26 January and was then undergoing further treatment. On 18 February 2013, Ch\u00e1vez returned to Venezuela after two months of cancer treatment in Cuba. On 1 March 2013, after opposition leader Henrique Capriles accused the government of lying about Ch\u00e1vez's condition, Vice President Nicol\u00e1s Maduro said that Ch\u00e1vez had been receiving chemotherapy in Venezuela following his surgery in Cuba and \"continues his battle for life\". A Mass, broadcast on live television, was held in the hospital in which Ch\u00e1vez was staying. On 4 March, it was announced that Ch\u00e1vez's breathing problems had worsened and he was suffering a new, severe respiratory tract infection.\nDeath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVenezuela's hybrid regime, after Ch\u00e1vez's death, became more selectively accommodating on the inside and more explicitly repressive on the outside. This allowed the regime to survive, but not to thrive. Regime survival was purchased at the cost of policy immobilism. And policy immobilism has left Venezuela with the deepest economic crisis in Venezuela's history.\n\u2014Corales and Penfold, \"Dragon in the Tropics: The Legacy of Hugo Ch\u00e1vez\"\nOn 5 March 2013, Vice President Nicol\u00e1s Maduro announced on state television that Ch\u00e1vez had died in a military hospital in Caracas at 16:25 VET (20:55 UTC). Maduro said Ch\u00e1vez died \"after battling a tough illness for nearly two years\". According to the head of Venezuela's presidential guard, Ch\u00e1vez died from a massive heart attack, and his cancer of the pelvic region was very advanced when he died. Jos\u00e9 Ornella said that near the end of his life Ch\u00e1vez \"couldn't speak but he said it with his lips ... \"'No quiero morir, por favor no me dejen morir\"' ('I don't want to die. Please don't let me die'), because he loved his country, he sacrificed himself for his country\". Ch\u00e1vez is survived by four children and four grandchildren.\nCh\u00e1vez was entombed in a marble sarcophagus at the Mountain Barracks in Caracas. His death triggered a constitutional requirement that a presidential election be called within 30 days. Maduro, Chavez's vice president, was elected president on 14 April 2013.\nRumors surrounding Ch\u00e1vez's death.\nAfter defecting from Venezuela, former bodyguard for Ch\u00e1vez, Leamsy Salazar, stated that he died in December 2012, months before his death was officially announced. In July 2018, former Attorney General Luisa Ortega D\u00edaz also said that Ch\u00e1vez had actually died in December 2012 and the announcement of his death was delayed for political reasons. In an interview cited by Venezuelan daily \"El Nacional\", the former Ch\u00e1vez supporter said that the Venezuelan president died on 28 December, but his closest allies decided to delay the announcement and never submitted the death certificate to the Office of the Attorney General. The supposed delay in announcing Ch\u00e1vez's death raised concerns that laws signed in his name during that period were forged for political purposes.\nHonors and awards.\nRecognition.\nThe United States\u2013based \"Time\" magazine included Ch\u00e1vez among their list of the world's 100 most influential people in 2005 and 2006, noting the spreading of his anti-globalization efforts and anti-US sentiment throughout Latin America. In a 2006 list compiled by the left-wing British magazine \"New Statesman\", he was voted 11th in the list of \"Heroes of our time\". In 2010 the magazine included Ch\u00e1vez in its annual \"The World's 50 Most Influential Figures\". His biographers Marcano and Tyszka believed that within only a few years of his presidency, he \"had already earned his place in history as the president most loved and most despised by the Venezuelan people, the president who inspired the greatest zeal and the deepest revulsion at the same time\".\nIn the Belarus's capital Minsk a park was named after Ch\u00e1vez on 18 October 2014. In addition in Al-Bireh and in Moscow, streets were also named after Ch\u00e1vez.\nHonorary degrees.\nCh\u00e1vez was awarded the following honorary degrees:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademic articles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNews articles, reports and essays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nInterviews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites and e-publications.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48876", "revid": "757572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48876", "title": "Siluriformes", "text": ""}
{"id": "48877", "revid": "18010125", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48877", "title": "Code talker", "text": "Military personnel using their native languages for secret wartime communication\nA code talker was a person employed by the military during wartime to use a little-known language as a means of secret communication. The term is most often used for United States service members during the World Wars who used their knowledge of Native American languages as a basis to transmit coded messages. \nThere were approximately 400 to 500 Native Americans in the United States Marine Corps whose primary job was to transmit secret tactical messages. Code talkers transmitted messages over military telephone or radio communications nets using formally or informally developed codes built upon their indigenous languages. \nThe code talkers improved the speed of encryption and decryption of communications in front line operations during World War II and are credited with some decisive victories. Their code was never broken.\nMethods.\nThere were two code types used during World War II. \nTraining.\nThe term \"code talker\" was originally coined by the United States Marine Corps and used to identify individuals who completed the special training required to qualify as code talkers. Their service records indicated \"642 \u2013 Code Talker\" as a duty assignment. Today, the term code talker is still strongly associated with the bilingual Navajo speakers trained in the Navajo Code during World War II by the US Marine Corps to serve in all six divisions of the Corps and the Marine Raiders of the Pacific theater. \nThe use of Native American communicators pre-dates World War II. Early pioneers of Native American-based communications used by the US military included the Cherokee, Choctaw, and Lakota peoples during World War I. Today the term code talker includes military personnel from all Native American communities who have contributed their language skills in service to the United States.\nNative languages.\nOther Native American communicators\u2014now referred to as code talkers\u2014were deployed by the United States Army during World War II, including Lakota, Meskwaki, Mohawk, Comanche, Tlingit, Hopi, Cree, and Crow soldiers; they served in the Pacific, North African, and European theaters.\nAssiniboine.\nNative speakers of the Assiniboine language served as code talkers during World War II to encrypt communications. One of these code talkers was Gilbert Horn Sr., who grew up in the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation of Montana and became a tribal judge and politician.\nBasque.\nIn November 1952, \"Euzko Deya\" magazine reported that sometime in May 1942, upon meeting a large number of US Marines of Basque ancestry in a San Francisco camp, Captain Frank D. Carranza had thought of using the Basque language for codes. His superiors were concerned about risk, as there were known settlements of Basque people in the Pacific region, including 35 Basque Jesuits in Hiroshima, led by Pedro Arrupe; a colony of Basque jai alai players in China and the Philippines; and Basque supporters of Falange in Asia. Consequently, the US Basque code talkers were not deployed in these theaters; instead, they were used initially in tests and in transmitting logistics information for Hawaii and Australia.\nAccording to \"Euzko Deya\", on August 1, 1942, Lieutenants Nemesio Aguirre, Fern\u00e1ndez Bakaicoa, and Juanana received a Basque-coded message from San Diego for Admiral Chester Nimitz. The message warned Nimitz of Operation Apple to remove the Japanese from the Solomon Islands. They also translated the start date, August 7, for the attack on Guadalcanal. As the war extended over the Pacific, there was a shortage of Basque speakers, and the US military came to prefer the parallel program based on the use of Navajo speakers.\nIn 2017, Pedro Oiarzabal and Guillermo Tabernilla published a paper refuting \"Euzko Deya\"'s article. According to Oiarzabal and Tabernilla, they could not find Carranza, Aguirre, Fern\u00e1ndez Bakaicoa, or Juanana in the National Archives and Records Administration or US Army archives. They did find a small number of US Marines with Basque surnames, but none of them worked in transmissions. They suggest that Carranza's story was an Office of Strategic Services operation to raise sympathy for US intelligence among Basque nationalists.\nCherokee.\nThe US military's first known use of code talkers was during World War I. Cherokee soldiers of the US 30th Infantry Division fluent in the Cherokee language were assigned to transmit messages while under fire during the Second Battle of the Somme. According to the Division Signal Officer, this took place in September 1918 when their unit was under British command.\nChoctaw.\nDuring World War I, company commander Captain Lawrence of the US Army overheard Solomon Louis and Mitchell Bobb having a conversation in Choctaw. Upon further investigation, he found eight Choctaw men served in the battalion. The Choctaw men in the Army's 36th Infantry Division were trained to use their language in code. They helped the American Expeditionary Forces in several battles of the Meuse-Argonne Offensive. On October 26, 1918, the code talkers were pressed into service and the \"tide of battle turned within 24 hours ... and within 72 hours the Allies were on full attack.\"\nComanche.\nGerman authorities knew about the use of code talkers during World War I. Germans sent a team of thirty anthropologists to the United States to learn Native American languages before the outbreak of World War II. However, the task proved too difficult because of the large array of Indigenous languages and dialects. Nonetheless, after learning of the Nazi effort, the US Army opted not to implement a large-scale code talker program in the European theater.\nInitially, 17 code talkers were enlisted, but three could not make the trip across the Atlantic until the unit was finally deployed. A total of 14 code talkers using the Comanche language took part in the Invasion of Normandy and served in the 4th Infantry Division in Europe. Comanche soldiers of the 4th Signal Company compiled a vocabulary of 250 code terms using words and phrases in their own language. Using a substitution method similar to that of the Navajo, the code talkers used descriptive words from the Comanche language for things that did not have translations. For example, the Comanche language code term for \"tank\" was \"turtle\", \"bomber\" was \"pregnant bird\", \"machine gun\" was \"sewing machine\", and \"Adolf Hitler\" was \"crazy white man\".\nTwo Comanche code talkers were assigned to each regiment, and the remainder were assigned to the 4th Infantry Division headquarters. The Comanche began transmitting messages shortly after landing on Utah Beach on June 6, 1944. Some were wounded but none killed.\nIn 1989, the French government awarded the Comanche code talkers the \"Chevalier\" of the National Order of Merit. On November 30, 1999, the United States Department of Defense presented Charles Chibitty with the Knowlton Award, in recognition of his outstanding intelligence work.\nCree.\nIn World War II, the Canadian Armed Forces employed First Nations soldiers who spoke the Cree language as code talkers. Owing to oaths of secrecy and official classification through 1963, the role of Cree code talkers was less well-known than their US counterparts and went unacknowledged by the Canadian government. A 2016 documentary, \"Cree Code Talkers\", tells the story of one such M\u00e9tis individual, Charles \"Checker\" Tomkins. Tomkins died in 2003 but was interviewed shortly before his death by the Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian. While he identified other Cree code talkers, \"Tomkins may have been the last of his comrades to know anything of this secret operation.\"\nHungarian.\nIn 2022 during the Russo-Ukrainian War, the Hungarian language is reported to be used by the Ukrainian army to relay operational military information and orders to circumvent being understood by the invading Russian army without the need to encrypt and decipher the messages.\nUkraine has a sizeable Hungarian population of over 150,000 people who live mainly in the K\u00e1rp\u00e1talja (in Hungarian) or Zakarpatska Oblast (in Ukrainian) division of Ukraine, adjacent to Hungary. As Ukrainian nationals, men of enlistment age are also subject to military service, hence the Ukrainian army has a Hungarian-speaking capability. It is one of the most spoken and official languages of this region in present-day Ukraine. The Hungarian language is not an Indo-European language like the Slavic Ukrainian or Russian, but a Uralic language. For this reason, it is distinct and incomprehensible for Russian speakers.\nMeskwaki.\nA group of 27 Meskwaki enlisted in the US Army together in January 1941; they comprised 16 percent of Iowa's Meskwaki population. During World War II, the US Army trained eight Meskwaki men to use their native Fox language as code talkers. They were assigned to North Africa. The eight were posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 2013; the government gave the awards to representatives of the Meskwaki community.\nMohawk.\nMohawk language code talkers were used during World War II by the United States Army in the Pacific theater. Levi Oakes, a Mohawk code talker born in Canada, was deployed to protect messages sent by Allied Forces using \"Kanien'k\u00e9ha\", a Mohawk sub-set language. Oakes died in May 2019; he was the last of the Mohawk code talkers.\nMuscogee (Seminole and Creek).\nThe Muscogee language was used as a type two code (informal) during World War II by enlisted Seminole and Creek people in the US Army. Tony Palmer, Leslie Richard, Edmund Harjo, and Thomas MacIntosh from the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma and Muscogee (Creek) Nation were recognized under the Code Talkers Recognition Act of 2008. The last survivor of these code talkers, Edmond Harjo of the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma, died on March 31, 2014, at the age of 96. His biography was recounted at the Congressional Gold Medal ceremony honoring Harjo and other code talkers at the US Capitol on November 20, 2013.\nNavajo.\nPhilip Johnston, a civil engineer for the city of Los Angeles, proposed the use of the Navajo language to the United States Marine Corps at the beginning of World War II. Johnston, a World War I veteran, was raised on the Navajo reservation as the son of missionaries to the Navajo. He was able to converse in \"Trader's Navajo,\" a pidgin language. He was among a few non-Navajo who had enough exposure to it to understand some of its nuances. Many Navajo enlisted shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor and eagerly contributed to the war effort.\nBecause Navajo has a complex grammar, it is not mutually intelligible with even its closest relatives within the Na-Dene family to provide meaningful information. It was still an unwritten language at the time, and Johnston believed Navajo could satisfy the military requirement for an undecipherable code. Its complex syntax, phonology, and numerous dialects made it unintelligible to anyone without extensive exposure and training. One estimate indicates that fewer than 30 non-Navajo could understand the language during World War II.\nIn early 1942, Johnston met with the commanding general of the Amphibious Corps, Major General Clayton B. Vogel, and his staff. Johnston staged simulated combat conditions, demonstrating that Navajo men could transmit and decode a three-line message in 20 seconds, compared to the 30 minutes it took the machines of the time. The idea of using Navajo speakers as code talkers was accepted; Vogel recommended that the Marines recruit 200 Navajo. However, that recommendation was cut to one platoon to use as a pilot project to develop and test the feasibility of a code. On May 4, 1942, twenty-nine Navajo men were sworn into service at Fort Wingate, an old US Army fort converted into a Bureau of Indian Affairs boarding school. They were organized as Platoon 382. The first 29 Navajo recruits attended boot camp in May 1942. This first group created the Navajo code at Camp Pendleton.\nThe First Twenty-Nine and the creation of the code.\nOne of the key features of the Navajo Code Talkers is that they employed a coded version of their language. Other Navajos not trained in the Navajo Code could not decipher the messages being sent.\nPlatoon 382 was the Marine Corps's first \"all-Indian, all-Navajo\" platoon. Its members would become known as \"The First Twenty-Nine\". Most were recruited from near the Fort Wingate, NM, area. The youngest was William Dean Yazzie (aka Dean Wilson), who was only 15 when he was recruited. The oldest was Carl N. Gorman\u2014who with his son, R. C. Gorman, would become an artist of great acclaim and design the Code Talkers's logo\u2014at age 35. \nThe Navajo code was formally developed and modeled on the Joint Army/Navy Phonetic Alphabet that uses agreed-upon English words to represent letters. Since it was determined that phonetically spelling out all military terms letter by letter into words while in combat would be too time-consuming, some terms, concepts, tactics, and instruments of modern warfare were given uniquely formal descriptive nomenclatures in Navajo. For example, the word for \"shark\" referred to a destroyer, while \"silver oak leaf\" indicated the rank of lieutenant colonel.\nDeployment and evolution of the code and post-war code talkers.\nA codebook was developed to teach new initiates the many relevant words and concepts. The text was for classroom purposes only and was never to be taken into the field. The code talkers memorized all these variations and practiced their rapid use under stressful conditions during training. Navajo speakers who had not been trained in the code work would have no idea what the code talkers' messages meant; they would hear only truncated and disjointed strings of individual, unrelated nouns and verbs.\nThe Navajo code talkers were commended for the skill, speed, and accuracy they demonstrated throughout the war. At the Battle of Iwo Jima, Major Howard Connor, 5th Marine Division signal officer, had six Navajo code talkers working around the clock during the first two days of the battle. These six sent and received over 800 messages, all without error. Connor later said, \"Were it not for the Navajos, the Marines would never have taken Iwo Jima.\"\nAfter incidents where Navajo code talkers were mistaken for ethnic Japanese and were captured by other American soldiers, several were assigned a personal bodyguard whose principal duty was to protect them from their side. According to Bill Toledo, one of the second groups after the original 29, they had a secret secondary duty: if their charge was at risk of being captured, they were to shoot him to protect the code. Fortunately, none were ever called upon to do so.\nTo ensure consistent use of code terminologies throughout the Pacific theater, representative code talkers of each of the US Marine divisions met in Hawaii to discuss shortcomings in the code, incorporate new terms into the system, and update their codebooks. These representatives, in turn, trained other code talkers who could not attend the meeting. As the war progressed, additional code words were added and incorporated program-wide. In other instances, informal shortcuts code words were devised for a particular campaign and not disseminated beyond the area of operation. Examples of code words include the Navajo word for \"buzzard\", , which was used for \"bomber\", while the code word used for \"submarine\", , meant \"iron fish\" in Navajo. The last of the original 29 Navajo code talkers who developed the code, Chester Nez, died on June 4, 2014.\nFour of the last nine Navajo code talkers used in the military died in 2019: Alfred K. Newman died on January 13, 2019, at the age of 94. On May 10, 2019, Fleming Begaye Sr. died at the age of 97. New Mexico State Senator John Pinto, elected in 1977, died in office on May 24, 2019. William Tully Brown died in June 2019 aged 96. Joe Vandever Sr. died at 96 on January 31, 2020. Samuel Sandoval died on 29 July 2022, at the age of 98. John Kinsel Sr. died on 18 October 2024, at the age of 107. Only two members are still living as of 2025, Thomas H. Begay and former Navajo chairman Peter MacDonald.\nSome code talkers such as Chester Nez and William Dean Yazzie (aka Dean Wilson) continued to serve in the Marine Corps through the Korean War. Rumors of the deployment of the Navajo code into the Korean War and after have never been proven. The code remained classified until 1968. The Navajo code is the only spoken military code never to have been deciphered.\nNubian.\nIn the 1973 Arab\u2013Israeli War, Egypt employed Nubian-speaking Nubian people as code talkers.\nTlingit.\nDuring World War II, American soldiers used their native Tlingit as a code against Japanese forces. Their actions remained unknown, even after the declassification of code talkers and the publication of the Navajo code talkers. The memory of five deceased Tlingit code talkers was honored by the Alaska legislature in March 2019.\nWelsh.\nA system employing the Welsh language was used by British forces during World War II, but not to any great extent. In 1942, the Royal Air Force developed a plan to use Welsh for secret communications, but it was never implemented. Welsh was used more recently in the Yugoslav Wars for non-vital messages.\nWenzhounese.\nChina used Wenzhounese-speaking people as code talkers during the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese War.\nPost-war recognition.\nThe Navajo code talkers received no recognition until 1968 when their operation was declassified. In 1982, the code talkers were given a Certificate of Recognition by US President Ronald Reagan, who also named August 14, 1982 as Navajo Code Talkers Day.\nOn December 21, 2000, President Bill Clinton signed Public Law 106\u2013554, 114 Statute 2763, which awarded the Congressional Gold Medal to the original 29 World War II Navajo code talkers and Silver Medals to each person who qualified as a Navajo code talker (approximately 300). In July 2001, President George W. Bush honored the code talkers by presenting the medals to four surviving original code talkers (the fifth living original code talker was unable to attend) at a ceremony held in the Capitol Rotunda in Washington, DC. Gold medals were presented to the families of the deceased 24 original code talkers.\nJournalist Patty Talahongva directed and produced a documentary, \"The Power of Words: Native Languages as Weapons of War\", for the Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian in 2006, bringing to light the story of Hopi code talkers. In 2011, Arizona established April 23, as an annual recognition day for the Hopi code talkers. The Texas Medal of Valor was awarded posthumously to 18 Choctaw code talkers for their World War II service on September 17, 2007, by the Adjutant General of the State of Texas.\nThe Code Talkers Recognition Act of 2008 (Public Law 110\u2013420) was signed into law by President George W. Bush on November 15, 2008. The Act recognized every Native American code talker who served in the United States military during WWI or WWII (except the already-awarded Navajo) with a Congressional Gold Medal. Approximately 50 tribes were recognized. The act was designed to be distinct for each tribe, with silver duplicates awarded to the individual code talkers or their next-of-kin. As of 2013, 33 tribes have been identified and been honored at a ceremony at Emancipation Hall at the US Capitol Visitor Center. One surviving code talker was present, Edmond Harjo.\nOn November 27, 2017, three Navajo code talkers, joined by the President of the Navajo Nation, Russell Begaye, appeared with President Donald Trump in the Oval Office in an official White House ceremony. They were there to \"pay tribute to the contributions of the young Native Americans recruited by the United States military to create top-secret coded messages used to communicate during World War II battles.\" The executive director of the National Congress of American Indians, Jacqueline Pata, noted that Native Americans have \"a very high level of participation in the military and veterans' service.\" A statement by a Navajo Nation Council Delegate and comments by Pata and Begaye, among others, objected to Trump's remarks during the event, including his use \"once again ... [of] the word \"Pocahontas\" in a negative way towards a political adversary Elizabeth Warren who claims 'Native American heritage'.\" The National Congress of American Indians objected to Trump's use of the name Pocahontas, a historical Native American figure, as a derogatory term.\nOn March 17, 2025, \"Axios\" reported that at least 10 articles pertaining to Native American code talkers had disappeared from U.S. Army and Department of Defense websites. Pentagon Press Secretary John Ullyot is quoted in response: \"As Secretary [Pete] Hegseth has said, DEI is dead at the Defense Department. ... We are pleased by the rapid compliance across the Department with the directive removing DEI content from all platforms.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48878", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48878", "title": "Salmonidae", "text": "Family of ray-finned fishes\nSalmonidae (, lit.\u2009'salmon-like') is a family of ray-finned fish, the only extant member of the suborder Salmonoidei, consisting of 11 extant genera and over 200 species collectively known as \"salmonids\" or \"salmonoids\". The family includes salmon (both Atlantic and Pacific species), trout (both ocean-going and landlocked), char, graylings, freshwater whitefishes, taimens and lenoks, all coldwater mid-level predatory fish that inhabit the subarctic and cool temperate waters of the Northern Hemisphere. The Atlantic salmon (\"Salmo salar\"), whose Latin name became that of its genus \"Salmo\", is also the eponym of the family and order names.\nSalmonids have a relatively primitive appearance among teleost fish, with the pelvic fins being placed far back, and an adipose fin towards the rear of the back. They have slender bodies with rounded scales and forked tail fins, and their mouths contain a single row of sharp teeth. Although the smallest salmonid species is just long for adults, most salmonids are much larger, with the largest reaching .\nAll salmonids are migratory fish that spawn in the shallow gravel beds of freshwater headstreams, spend the growing juvenile years in rivers, creeks, small lakes and wetlands, but migrate downstream upon maturity and spend most of their adult lives at much larger waterbodies. Many salmonid species are euryhaline and migrate to the sea or brackish estuaries as soon as they approach adulthood, returning to the upper streams only to reproduce. Such sea-run life cycle is described as \"anadromous\", and other freshwater salmonids that migrate purely between lakes and rivers are considered \"potamodromous\". Salmonids are carnivorous predators of the middle food chain, feeding on smaller fish, crustaceans, aquatic insects and larvae, tadpoles and sometimes fish eggs (even those of their own kind), and in turn being preyed upon by larger predators. Many species of salmonids are thus considered keystone organisms important for both freshwater and terrestrial ecosystems due to the biomass transfer provided by their mass migration from oceanic to inland waterbodies.\nEvolution.\nCurrent salmonids comprise three main clades taxonomically treated as subfamilies: Coregoninae (freshwater whitefishes), Thymallinae (graylings), and Salmoninae (trout, salmon, char, taimens and lenoks). Generally, all three lineages are accepted to allocate a suite of derived traits indicating a monophyletic group.\nThe suborder Salmonoidei, containing only Salmonidae, is one of two extant clades within the order Salmoniformes, which first appeared during the Santonian and Campanian stages of the Late Cretaceous. The other is the Esocoidei, which contains the pikes and mudminnows. Formerly, many more families were included within this group, but all have since been reclassified into their own orders. During the early 21st century, Salmoniformes was redefined to include only Salmonidae as a monotypic order. However, as recent phylogenetic studies have affirmed the relationship between the Salmonoidei and Esocoidei, the latter have returned to being considered a suborder of Salmoniformes.It is thought that salmon and pike diverged from one another during the Cretaceous, but until 2025, there was no fossil evidence of salmonids occurring during this time period. In 2025, the earliest known fossil salmonid, \"Sivulliusalmo alaskensis\", was described from the early Maastrichtian-aged Prince Creek Formation of Alaska, with indeterminate remains of this genus also being identified from the older Campanian-aged Dinosaur Park Formation of Alberta. The occurrence of \"Sivulliusalmo\" in these northern habitats suggests that the modern salmonid preference for cool, high-latitude waters is an ancient, conserved trait.\nPrior to the description of \"Sivulliusalmo\", the earliest record of salmonids was the Early Eocene-aged \"Eosalmo driftwoodensis\", a stem-salmonine, which was first described from fossils found at Driftwood Creek, central British Columbia, and has been recovered from most sites in the Eocene Okanagan Highlands. This genus shares traits found in all three subfamily lineages. Hence, \"E. driftwoodensis\" is an archaic salmonid, representing an important stage in salmonid evolution. Fossil scales of coregonines are known from the Late Eocene or Early Oligocene of California.\nA gap appears in the salmonine fossil record after \"E. driftwoodensis\" until about 7 million years ago (mya), in the Late Miocene, when trout-like fossils appear in Idaho, in the Clarkia Lake beds. Several of these species appear to be \"Oncorhynchus\" \u2014 the current genus for Pacific salmon and Pacific trout. The presence of these species so far inland established that \"Oncorhynchus\" was not only present in the Pacific drainages before the beginning of the Pliocene (~5\u20136 mya), but also that rainbow and cutthroat trout, and Pacific salmon lineages had diverged before the beginning of the Pliocene. Consequently, the split between \"Oncorhynchus\" and \"Salmo\" (Atlantic salmon and European trout) must have occurred well before the Pliocene. Suggestions have gone back as far as the Early Miocene (about 20 mya).\nGenetics.\nBased on the most current evidence, salmonids diverged from the rest of teleost fish no later than 88 million years ago, during the late Cretaceous. This divergence was marked by a whole-genome duplication event in the ancestral salmonid, where the diploid ancestor became tetraploid. This duplication is the fourth of its kind to happen in the evolutionary lineage of the salmonids, with two having occurred commonly to all bony vertebrates, and another specifically in the teleost fishes.\nExtant salmonids all show evidence of partial tetraploidy, as studies show the genome has undergone selection to regain a diploid state. Work done in the rainbow trout (\"Onchorhynchus mykiss\") has shown that the genome is still partially-tetraploid. Around half of the duplicated protein-coding genes have been deleted, but all apparent miRNA sequences still show full duplication, with potential to influence regulation of the rainbow trout's genome. This pattern of partial tetraploidy is thought to be reflected in the rest of extant salmonids.\nThe earliest presumed crown-group salmonid fish (\"E. driftwoodensis\") does not appear until the middle Eocene. This fossil already displays traits associated with extant salmonids, but as the genome of E. \"driftwoodensis\" cannot be sequenced, it cannot be confirmed if polyploidy was present in this animal at this point in time.\nGiven a lack of earlier transition fossils, and the inability to extract genomic data from specimens other than extant species, the dating of the whole-genome duplication event in salmonids was historically a very broad categorization of times, ranging from 25 to 100 million years in age. New advances in calibrated relaxed molecular clock analyses have allowed for a closer examination of the salmonid genome, and has allowed for a more precise dating of the whole-genome duplication of the group, that places the latest possible date for the event at 88 million years ago.\nThis more precise dating and examination of the salmonid whole-genome duplication event has allowed more speculation on the radiation of species within the group. Historically, the whole-genome duplication event was thought to be the reason for the variation within Salmonidae. Current evidence done with molecular clock analyses revealed that much of the speciation of the group occurred during periods of intense climate change associated with the last ice ages, with especially high speciation rates being observed in salmonids that developed an anadromous lifestyle.\nClassification.\nTogether with the closely related orders Esociformes (pikes and mudminnows), Osmeriformes (true smelts) and Argentiniformes (marine smelts and barreleyes), Salmoniformes comprise the superorder Protacanthopterygii.\nThe only extant family within Salmoniformes, Salmonidae, is divided into three subfamilies and around 10 genera containing about 220 species. The concepts of the number of species recognised vary among researchers and authorities; the numbers presented below represent the higher estimates of diversity:\nOrder Salmoniformes\nHybrid crossbreeding.\nThe following table shows results of hybrid crossbreeding combination in Salmonidae.\nnote :- : The identical kind, O : (survivability), X : (Fatality)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48879", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48879", "title": "Salmoniformes", "text": "Order of fishes\nSalmoniformes (, lit. \"salmon-shaped\") is an order of ray-finned fishes native to the temperate and subarctic Northern Hemisphere. It contains two suborders: Salmonoidei (containing only the Salmonidae) and Esocoidei (containing pikes and mudminnows). In addition, potential fossil members of the group, dating back to the Late Cretaceous, are also known from Europe and Africa. Both large-sized members of this order (Salmonidae and Esocidae) are important food and sport fish of the Northern Hemisphere. \nTaxonomy.\nThe relationship between salmons, pikes, and mudminnows has long been well-attested based on phylogenetic and morphological studies, and all three groups were long placed in the Salmoniformes. In the early 21st century, pikes and mudminnows were split from the Salmoniformes and placed into their own order, Esociformes. However, as recent studies have reaffirmed their close relationship, more recent taxonomic authorities again place the Esociformes as a group within the Salmoniformes (Esocoidei).\nThe following classification is based on \"Eschmeyer's Catalog of Fishes\":\nThe following fossil taxa are also considered much more basal members of this order:\nIndeterminate potential salmoniform remains are known from Santonian-aged freshwater deposits of Hungary.\nIn the past, other euteleost fish such as the smelts or tubeshoulders were also placed within this order, but such a placement is now known to be inaccurate. Phylogenetic studies generally recover either the Argentiniformes or the Galaxiiformes as the closest relatives of the Salmoniformes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48880", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48880", "title": "Esocidae", "text": "Family of ray-finned fishes\nEsocidae is a family of ray-finned fish in the order Salmoniformes, which contains pike, pickerel, and mudminnows. While the family traditionally only contained the genus \"Esox\", recent genetic and paleontological research have recovered \"Novumbra\" and \"Dallia\" as members of the family Esocidae, being closer related to \"Esox\" than \"Umbra\". Fossil specimens from the Mesozoic in North America have been assigned as two additional genera in this family, although they may actually be more basal.\nTaxonomy.\nThe family is classified as follows:\nClassification.\n\"Esox\" is the youngest genus, with \"Dallia\" and \"Novumbra\" branching off further up the line. The cladogram below has been found by L\u00f3pez \"et al.\", with the two additional fossil genera included at the base of the tree. \nThe fossil genera \"Estesesox\" and \"Oldmanesox\" have been recovered in North America. \"Estesesox\" fossils have been described from the Lance, Hell Creek, Oldman, Foremost, and Milk River Formations. \"Oldmanesox\" fossils have been described from the Oldman Formation. In 2025, two more fossil esocid genera were described from the Prince Creek Formation of Alaska: \"Archaeosiilik\" and \"Nunikuluk\".\nDue to the fragmentary nature of \"Oldmanesox\" and \"Estesesox\", little information on the exact relationships between the two genera and the rest of the species in the family has been published. More recent genetic studies which place \"Dallia\" and \"Novumbra\" in Esocidae may influence future studies on placement of \"Estesesox\" and \"Oldmanesox\" within the Esocidae and/or Esociformes family trees.\nDistribution.\nEsocidae has a holarctic distribution. Species in the genus \"Esox\" can be found in Eurasia and North America, while \"Dallia\" has a more restricted range in Alaska and eastern Siberia. Of extant esocids, \"Novumbra\" has the most restricted range of all, being found only on the Olympic Peninsula in Washington state.\nBehavior.\nDespite differing size and mouth shape, all extant species of esocids are sight-based ambush predators, taking any animal they can fit in their mouth. Both pike and blackfishes display cannibalistic tendencies. While the Olympic mudminnow is aggressively territorial to fish of the same size during the spawning season, it will generally leave its fry alone.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48881", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48881", "title": "Esocoidei", "text": "Order of ray-finned fishes\nThe Esocoidei () is a small suborder of freshwater ray-finned fish, one of two suborders in the order Salmoniformes. It contains two families, Umbridae and Esocidae. The pikes of genus \"Esox\" give the order its name.\nThis order is closely related to the Salmonoidei, the two comprising the order Salmoniformes. The esociform fishes first appeared in the late Cretaceous \u2014 early products of the Euteleostei radiation of that time. They diverged from their sister group Salmoniformes about 110 million years ago, with the extant species having evolved from a common ancestor that lived about 90 million years ago. Today, they are found in weed-choked freshwater habitats in North America and northern Eurasia.\nTaxonomy.\nIn the past, they were often placed in the order Salmoniformes as the suborder Esocoidei. During the early 21st century, due to their morphological divergence from Salmoniformes, they were instead treated as their own order, Esociformes. However, as phylogenetic studies have increasingly affirmed the relationship of Salmoniformes and Esociformes, more recent taxonomic authorities have revived the old classification of placing esocoids as a suborder of the Salmoniformes.\nThe following families are placed in this group:\nSeveral esocid genera are known from the Late Cretaceous of North America, including \u2020\"Estesesox\" , \u2020\"Oldmanesox\" , \u2020\"Archaeosiilik\" &amp; \u2020\"Nunikuluk\" . Their presence makes esocids one of the few North American freshwater teleost groups to have diversified prior to the Cretaceous-Paleogene extinction event.\nThe three extant esocid genera (\"Esox\", \"Novumbra\", and \"Dallia\") together comprise a holarctic distribution. Two additional genera have been described from fossils dating to the Cretaceous of North America. \"Umbra\" remains the only extant genus in the family Umbridae, and can be found in eastern North America and Europe. Three additional genera have been described from fossils dating from the Paleocene of Europe; however, genetic studies on the extant species of \"Umbra\" have recovered a split between the North American and European species dating to the Late Cretaceous and earliest half of the Paleogene.\nRelationships.\nWhile the family Esocidae traditionally only contained the genus Esox, recent genetic and paleontological research have recovered \"Novumbra\" and \"Dallia\" as members of the family Esocidae, being closer related to \"Esox\" than \"Umbra\". \"Umbra\" is the only remaining extant species in Umbridae. Various fossils have been described as members of Esociformes and are placed on the following tree accordingly.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48884", "revid": "27645623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48884", "title": "Sculpin", "text": "Fish of the superfamily Cottoidea\nA sculpin is a type of fish that belongs to the superfamily Cottoidea in the order Perciformes. As of 2025, this superfamily contains 5 families, 112 genera, and 405 species.\nSculpins occur in many types of habitat, including ocean and freshwater zones. They live in rivers, submarine canyons, kelp forests, and shallow littoral habitat types, such as tidepools.\nFamilies and subfamilies.\nFamilies include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48885", "revid": "38411991", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48885", "title": "Scorpaeniformes", "text": "Obsolete order of ray-finned fishes\nThe Scorpaeniformes are a diverse order of ray-finned fish, encompassing species such as the stonefish, lionfish, and sculpins, but have also been called the Scleroparei. It is one of the five largest orders of bony fishes by number of species, with over 1,320.\nThey are known as \"mail-cheeked\" fishes due to their distinguishing characteristic, the suborbital stay: a backwards extension of the third circumorbital bone (part of the lateral head/cheek skeleton, below the eye socket) across the cheek to the preoperculum, to which it is connected in most species.\nScorpaeniform fishes are carnivorous, mostly feeding on crustaceans and on smaller fish. Most species live on the sea bottom in relatively shallow waters, although species are known from deep water, from the midwater, and even from fresh water. They typically have spiny heads, and rounded pectoral and caudal fins. Most species are less than in length, but the full size range of the order varies from the velvetfishes belonging to the family Aploactinidae, which can be just long as adults, to the skilfish (\"Erilepis zonifer\"), which can reach in total length.\nOne of the suborders of the Scorpaeniformes is the Scorpaenoidei. This suborder is usually found in the benthic zone, which is the lowest region of any water body like oceans or lakes. \nThere are two groups of the Scorpaenoidei. The sea robins is the first, which are further classified into two families: the sea robins and the armored sea robins. One significant difference between the two families of sea robins is the presence of spine-bearing plate on the armored sea robins which is absent in the sea robins family.\nThe second group of the Scorpaenoidei suborder is the scorpionfishes, which according to Minouri Ishida's work in 1994 and recent studies, have twelve families. The scorpionfishes are very dynamic in size with the smallest one having a range of 2\u20133\u00a0cm, while the largest have a length of approximately 100\u00a0cm.\nClassification.\nThe division of Scorpaeniformes into families is not settled; accounts range from 26 to 35 families. The 5th edition of \"Fishes of the World\" classifies the order as follows:\nOrder Scorpaeniformes\nThis classification is not settled, however, and some authorities classify these groupings largely within the Order Perciformes as the suborders Scorpaenoidei, Platycephaloidei, Triglioidei and Cottoidei, Cottodei including the infraorders Anoplopomatales, Zoarcales, Gasterosteales, Zaniolepidoales, Hexagrammales and Cottales. These infraorders largely correspond with the superfamilies in the Cottoidei set out in the 5th edition of Fishes of the World.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48886", "revid": "37078343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48886", "title": "Pomatomidae", "text": ""}
{"id": "48889", "revid": "3499605", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48889", "title": "Manx Gaelic", "text": ""}
{"id": "48891", "revid": "43431276", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48891", "title": "Joe DiMaggio", "text": "American baseball player (1914\u20131999)\nJoseph Paul DiMaggio (; born Giuseppe Paolo DiMaggio, ; November 25, 1914 \u2013 March 8, 1999), nicknamed \"Joltin' Joe\", \"the Yankee Clipper\" and \"Joe D.\", was an American professional baseball center fielder who played his entire 13-year career in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the New York Yankees. Born to Italian immigrants in California, he is considered to be one of the greatest baseball players of all time and set the record for the longest hitting streak (56 games from May 15 \u2013 July 16, 1941).\nDiMaggio was a three-time American League (AL) Most Valuable Player Award winner and an All-Star in each of his 13 seasons. During his tenure with the Yankees, the club won ten American League pennants and nine World Series championships. His nine career World Series rings put him second only to his fellow Yankee Yogi Berra, who won 10.\nAt the time of his retirement after the 1951 season, he ranked fifth in career home runs (361) and sixth in career slugging percentage (.579). He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1955 and was voted the sport's greatest living player in a poll taken during baseball's centennial year of 1969. His brothers Vince (1912\u20131986) and Dom (1917\u20132009) also were major league center fielders. Outside of baseball, DiMaggio is also widely known for his marriage and lifelong devotion to Marilyn Monroe.\nEarly life.\nGiuseppe Paolo DiMaggio was born on November 25, 1914, in Martinez, California, the eighth of nine children born to Italian immigrants Giuseppe and Rosalia DiMaggio, from Isola delle Femmine (Sicily). His Italian birth name was Giuseppe Paolo DiMaggio. Rosalia named her son \"Giuseppe\" after his father in the hopes he would be her last child; \"Paolo\" was in honor of Giuseppe's favorite saint, Paul of Tarsus.\nGiuseppe was a fisherman, as were generations of DiMaggios before him. DiMaggio's brother Tom told Maury Allen that Rosalia's father wrote to her saying Giuseppe could earn a better living in California. Giuseppe and Rosalia decided that he would go to the United States for one year: if things were better, he would send for her; if not, he would return home. After being processed on Ellis Island, Giuseppe worked his way across the country, eventually settling near Rosalia's father in Pittsburg, California, on the east side of the San Francisco Bay Area. After four years, he had earned enough money to send for Rosalia and their daughter, who was born after he left. When Joe was a toddler, Giuseppe moved his family to the North Beach section of San Francisco. Giuseppe hoped that his five sons would become fishermen.\nDiMaggio recalled that he would do anything to get out of cleaning his father's boat, as the smell of dead fish nauseated him. Giuseppe called him \"lazy\" and \"good-for-nothing\". At age ten, he took up baseball, playing third base at the North Beach playground near his home. After attending Hancock Elementary and Francisco Middle School, DiMaggio dropped out of Galileo High School and worked odd jobs.\nBy 1931, DiMaggio was playing semi-pro ball. Nearing the end of the 1932 season, his brother Vince, playing for the San Francisco Seals of the Pacific Coast League (PCL), talked his manager into letting DiMaggio fill in at shortstop. He made his professional debut on October 1, 1932, playing the last three games. In less than two years, DiMaggio made the jump from the playground to the PCL, one notch below the majors. In his full rookie year, from May 27 to July 25, 1933, he hit safely in 61 consecutive games, a PCL-record, and second-longest in Minor League Baseball history. \"Baseball didn't really get into my blood until I knocked off that hitting streak,\" he said. \"Getting a daily hit became more important to me than eating, drinking, or sleeping.\u201d\nIn 1934, DiMaggio suffered a potentially career-threatening knee injury when he tore ligaments of his right knee while stepping out of a jitney. Convinced the injury would heal, Yankees scout Bill Essick pestered his bosses to give DiMaggio another look. After he passed a physical, the team bought him for $50,000 () and five players, with the Seals keeping him for the 1935 season. DiMaggio batted .398 with 154 runs batted in (RBIs) and 34 home runs. The Seals won the 1935 PCL title, and he was named the league's Most Valuable Player.\nProfessional career.\nNew York Yankees (1936\u20131942, 1946\u20131951).\nDiMaggio made his Major League debut on May 3, 1936, batting ahead of Lou Gehrig in the lineup. The Yankees had not been to the World Series since 1932, but they won the next four World Series. Over the course of his 13-year Major League career, DiMaggio led the Yankees to nine World Series championships, where he trails only Yogi Berra (10) in that category.\nDiMaggio set a franchise record for rookies in 1936 by hitting 29 home runs. DiMaggio accomplished the feat in 138 games. His record stood for over 80 years until it was shattered by Aaron Judge, who tallied 52 homers in 2017.\nIn 1937, DiMaggio built upon his rookie season by leading the majors with 46 home runs, 151 runs scored, 167 runs batted in and 418 total bases, all career highs. He also hit safely in 43 of 44 games from June 27 to August 12. He finished second in American League MVP voting in a close race with Charlie Gehringer of the Detroit Tigers.\nIn 1939, DiMaggio was nicknamed \"the Yankee Clipper\" by Yankee's play-by-play announcer Arch McDonald, when he likened DiMaggio's speed and range in the outfield to the then-new Pan American airliner. That year in August, DiMaggio recorded 53 RBIs, tying Hack Wilson's 1930 record for most in a single month. He also won his first career batting title and MVP award, as well as leading the Yankees to their fourth consecutive World Series championship.\nDiMaggio was pictured with his son on the cover of the inaugural issue of \"SPORT\" magazine in September 1946.\nIn 1947, DiMaggio won his third MVP award and his sixth World Series with the Yankees. That year, Boston Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey and Yankees GM Larry MacPhail verbally agreed to trade DiMaggio for Ted Williams, but the trade was canceled when MacPhail refused to include Yogi Berra.\nIn the September 1949 issue of \"SPORT\", Hank Greenberg said that DiMaggio covered so much ground in center field that the only way to get a hit against the Yankees was \"to hit 'em where Joe wasn't.\" DiMaggio also stole home five times in his career.\nOn February 7, 1949, DiMaggio signed a contract worth $100,000 () ($70,000 plus bonuses), and became the first baseball player to break $100,000 in earnings. By 1950, he was ranked the second-best center fielder by the \"Sporting News\", after Larry Doby. After a poor 1951 season, various injuries, and a scouting report by the Brooklyn Dodgers that was turned over to the New York Giants and leaked to the press, DiMaggio announced his retirement at age 37 on December 11, 1951. When remarking on his retirement to the \"Sporting News\" on December 19, 1951, he said:\nI feel like I have reached the stage where I can no longer produce for my club, my manager, and my teammates. I had a poor year, but even if I had hit .350, this would have been my last year. I was full of aches and pains and it had become a chore for me to play. When baseball is no longer fun, it's no longer a game, and so, I've played my last game.\nThrough May 2009[ [update]], DiMaggio was tied with Mark McGwire for third place all-time in home runs over the first two calendar years in the major leagues (77), behind Phillies Hall of Famer Chuck Klein (83) and Milwaukee Brewers' Ryan Braun (79). Through 2011[ [update]], he was one of seven major leaguers to have had at least four 30-homer, 100-RBI seasons in their first five years, along with Klein, Ted Williams, Ralph Kiner, Mark Teixeira, Albert Pujols, and Braun. DiMaggio holds the record for most seasons with more home runs than strikeouts (minimum 20 home runs), a feat he accomplished seven times, and five times consecutively from 1937 to 1941. DiMaggio could have possibly exceeded 500 home runs and 2,000 RBIs had he not served in the military during World War II, causing him to miss the 1943, 1944, and 1945 seasons.\nDiMaggio might have had better power-hitting statistics had his home park not been Yankee Stadium. In \"The House That Ruth Built\", its nearby right field favored the Babe's left-handed power. For right-handed hitters, its deep left and center fields made home runs almost impossible. Mickey Mantle recalled that he and Whitey Ford witnessed many DiMaggio blasts that would have been home runs anywhere other than Yankee Stadium (Ruth himself fell victim to that problem, as he also hit many long flyouts to center). Bill James calculated that DiMaggio lost more home runs due to his home park than any other player in history. Left-center field went as far back as 457\u00a0ft [139\u00a0m], whereas left-center rarely reaches 380\u00a0ft [116\u00a0m] in today's ballparks. Al Gionfriddo's famous catch in the 1947 World Series, which was close to the 415-foot mark [126\u00a0m] in left-center, just in front of the visitors bullpen, would have been a home run in the Yankees' current ballpark and most other ballparks at that time, except perhaps the Polo Grounds, home of the New York Giants. DiMaggio hit 148 home runs in 3,360 at-bats at home versus 213 home runs in 3,461 at-bats on the road. His slugging percentage at home was .546, and on the road, it was .610. Statistician Bill Jenkinson commented on these figures:\nFor example, Joe DiMaggio was acutely handicapped by playing at Yankee Stadium. Every time he batted in his home field during his entire career, he did so knowing that it was physically impossible for him to hit a home run to the half of the field directly in front of him. If you look at a baseball field from foul line to foul line, it has a 90-degree radius. From the power alley in the left-center field (430 in Joe's time) to the fence in the deep right-center field (407 ft), it is 45 degrees. And Joe DiMaggio never hit a single home run over the fences at Yankee Stadium in that 45-degree graveyard. It was just too far. Joe was plenty strong; he routinely hit balls in the 425-foot range. But that just wasn't good enough in the cavernous Yankee Stadium. Like Ruth, he benefited from a few easy homers each season due to the short foul line distances. But he lost many more than he gained by constantly hitting long flyouts toward center field. Whereas most sluggers perform better on their home fields, DiMaggio hit only 41 percent of his career home runs in the Bronx. He hit 148 homers at Yankee Stadium. If he had hit the same exact pattern of batted balls with a typical modern stadium as his home, he would have belted about 225 homers during his home-field career.\nDiMaggio became eligible for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1953 but he was not elected until 1955. The Hall of Fame rules on the post-retirement induction waiting period had been revised in the interim, extending the waiting period from one to five years, but DiMaggio and Ted Lyons were exempted from the rule. DiMaggio told \"Baseball Digest\" in 1963 that the Brooklyn Dodgers had offered him their managerial job in 1953, but he turned it down. After being out of baseball since his retirement as an active player, DiMaggio joined the newly relocated Oakland Athletics as a vice president in 1968 and 1969 and a coach in just the first of those two seasons. The appointment allowed him to qualify \nfor MLB's maximum pension allowance of which he had fallen two years short upon his retirement. During his only campaign as a coach, he helped improve the talents of players such as Reggie Jackson, Sal Bando, and Joe Rudi who became part of the team's nucleus which won three consecutive World Series in 1972, 1973, and 1974.\nAfter he resigned from the Athletics, DiMaggio was named the acting manager for the East team in the East-West Major League Baseball Classic which was held in honor of the late Martin Luther King Jr., raising charity money for King's causes.\n1941 hitting streak.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDiMaggio's streak is the most extraordinary thing that ever happened in American sports.\n\u2014 Stephen Jay Gould\nDiMaggio's most famous achievement is his MLB record-breaking 56-game hitting streak in 1941. The streak began on May 15, a couple of weeks before the death of Lou Gehrig\u2014who had been DiMaggio's teammate from 1936 to 1939\u2014when DiMaggio went one-for-four against Chicago White Sox pitcher Eddie Smith. Major newspapers began to write about DiMaggio's streak early on, but as he approached George Sisler's modern-era record of 41 games, it became a national phenomenon. Initially, DiMaggio showed little interest in breaking Sisler's record, saying: \"I'm not thinking a whole lot about it... I'll either break it or I won't.\" As he approached Sisler's record, DiMaggio showed more interest, saying, \"At the start, I didn't think much about it... but naturally I'd like to get the record since I am this close.\" On June 29, 1941, DiMaggio doubled in the first game of a doubleheader against the Washington Senators at Griffith Stadium to tie Sisler's record and then singled in the nightcap to extend his streak to 42.\nA Yankee Stadium crowd of 52,832 fans watched DiMaggio tie the all-time hitting streak record (44 games, Wee Willie Keeler in 1897) on July 1. The next day against the Boston Red Sox, he homered into Yankee Stadium's left-field stands to extend his streak to 45, setting a new record. DiMaggio recorded 67 hits in 179 at-bats during the first 45 games of his streak, while Keeler recorded 88 hits in 201 at-bats. DiMaggio continued hitting after breaking Keeler's record, reaching 50 straight games on July 11 against the St. Louis Browns. On July 17 at Cleveland's Municipal Stadium, DiMaggio's streak was finally snapped at 56 games, thanks in part to two backhand stops by Indians third baseman Ken Keltner. DiMaggio batted .408 during the streak with 15 home runs and 55 RBI. The day after the streak ended DiMaggio started another streak that lasted 16 games, therefore hitting safely in 72 of 73 games. The closest anyone has come to equaling DiMaggio is Pete Rose, who hit safely in 44 straight games in 1978. During the streak, DiMaggio played in seven doubleheaders. The Yankees' record during the streak was 41\u201313\u20132.\nSome consider DiMaggio's streak a uniquely outstanding and unbreakable record and a statistical near-impossibility. Nobel Prize-winning physicist and sabermetrician Edward Mills Purcell calculated that, to have the likelihood of a hitting streak of 50 games occurring in the history of baseball up to the late 1980s be greater than 50%, 52 .350 lifetime hitters would have to have existed instead of the actual three (Ty Cobb, Rogers Hornsby, and Shoeless Joe Jackson). His Harvard colleague Stephen Jay Gould, citing Purcell's work, called DiMaggio's 56-game achievement \"the most extraordinary thing that ever happened in American sports\". Samuel Arbesman and Steven Strogatz of Cornell University disagree. They conducted 10,000 computer simulations of Major League Baseball from 1871 to 2005, 42% of which produced streaks as long or longer, with record streaks ranging from 39 to 109 games and typical record streaks between 50 and 64 games.\nWorld War II.\nDiMaggio enlisted in the United States Army Air Forces on February 17, 1943, rising to the rank of Staff Sergeant. He was stationed at Santa Ana, California, Hawaii, and Atlantic City, New Jersey, as a physical education instructor. He was released on a medical discharge in September 1945, due to chronic stomach ulcers. Other than being paid $21 a month, DiMaggio's service was as comfortable as a soldier's life could be. He spent most of his military career playing for baseball teams and in exhibition games against fellow Major Leaguers and minor league players, and superiors gave him special privileges due to his prewar fame. DiMaggio ate so well from an athlete-only diet that he gained 10 pounds, and while in Hawaii he and other players mostly tanned on the beach and drank. Embarrassed by his lifestyle, DiMaggio requested that he be given a combat assignment but was turned down.\nParents as \"enemy aliens\".\nGiuseppe and Rosalia DiMaggio, both from Isola delle Femmine, were among the thousands of German, Japanese, and Italian immigrants classified as \"enemy aliens\" by the government after the attack on Pearl Harbor. Each was required to carry photo ID booklets at all times and was not allowed to travel outside a five-mile radius from their home without a permit. Giuseppe was barred from San Francisco Bay, where he had fished for decades, and his boat was seized. Rosalia became an American citizen in 1945, followed by Giuseppe in 1946.\nMarriages.\nDorothy Arnold.\nIn January 1937, DiMaggio met actress Dorothy Arnold on the set of \"Manhattan Merry-Go-Round\", in which he had a minor role, and she was an extra. He announced their engagement on April 25, 1939, just before the Yankees were to meet the Philadelphia Athletics. They married at Saints Peter and Paul Church, San Francisco on November 19, 1939, as 20,000 well-wishers jammed the streets. The couple's son, Joseph Paul DiMaggio Jr. (1941\u20131999), was born at Doctors' Hospital in Staten Island. Their marriage was troubled, as Arnold wanted DiMaggio to settle down and be a father to their son and a nearby husband to her; DiMaggio was more interested in the public eye. The couple divorced in 1944, while DiMaggio was on leave from the Yankees during World War II.\nMarilyn Monroe.\nAccording to her autobiography \"My Story\", co-written with Ben Hecht, American actress Marilyn Monroe originally did not want to meet DiMaggio, fearing he was a stereotypical arrogant athlete. However, they did meet in Los Angeles while on a blind date. After dating for two years, they eloped at San Francisco City Hall on January 14, 1954. Although she suffered from endometriosis, Monroe and DiMaggio each expressed to reporters their desire to start a family.\nThe union was troubled from the start by DiMaggio's jealousy, controlling attitude, and him physically abusing Monroe, as well as her busy life as an actress. A violent fight entailing physical assault between the couple occurred immediately after Monroe filmed the skirt-blowing scene in \"The Seven Year Itch\" that was filmed on September 14, 1954, in front of Manhattan's Trans-Lux 52nd Street Theater, as DiMaggio disapproved of the scene. Then 20th Century Fox's East Coast correspondent Bill Kobrin told the \"Palm Springs Desert Sun\" that it was director Billy Wilder's idea to turn the shoot into a media circus. Monroe and DiMaggio then had a \"yelling battle\" in the theater lobby. After returning from New York City to Hollywood in October 1954, Monroe filed for divorce from DiMaggio after only nine months of marriage. However, she was devastated to leave DiMaggio, and throughout the procedures in court, she could be seen weeping openly.\nDiMaggio was also devastated, and wrote to Monroe, saying, \"I love you and want to be with you\u2026There is nothing I would like better than to restore your confidence in me\u2026My heart split even wider seeing you cry in front of all those people.\" He also wrote, \u201c[I don't] know what your thoughts are about me, but I can tell you I love you sincerely \u2014 way deep in my heart, regardless of anything.\" After the divorce, DiMaggio underwent therapy, stopped drinking alcohol, and expanded his interests beyond baseball.\nOn August 1, 1956, an International News wire photo of DiMaggio with Lee Meriwether gave rise to speculation that they were engaged, but DiMaggio biographer Richard Ben Cramer wrote that it was a rumor started by columnist Walter Winchell. Monroe biographer Donald Spoto claimed that DiMaggio was \"very close to marrying\" 1957 Miss America Marian McKnight, who won the crown with a Marilyn Monroe act, but McKnight denied it. He was also linked to Liz Renay, Cleo Moore, Rita Gam, Marlene Dietrich, and Gloria DeHaven during this period, and years later to Elizabeth Ray and Morgan Fairchild, but he never publicly confirmed any involvement with any woman.\nDiMaggio re-entered Monroe's life as her marriage to Arthur Miller was ending. On February 10, 1961, he secured her release from Payne Whitney Psychiatric Clinic in Manhattan. She joined him in Florida where he was a batting coach for the Yankees. Their \"just friends\" claim did not stop remarriage rumors from flying. Reporters staked out her Manhattan apartment building. Bob Hope \"dedicated\" Best Song nominee \"The Second Time Around\" to them at the 33rd Academy Awards. In one of her last interviews, given to Redbook magazine and published in August 1962, Monroe explained : \"I've always been able to count on Joe as a friend after that first bitterness of our parting faded. Believe me, there is no spark to be kindled. I just like being with him and we have a better understanding than we've ever had.\"\nOn August 5, 1962, Monroe was found dead in her Brentwood, Los Angeles home after her housekeeper Eunice R. Murray telephoned Monroe's psychiatrist, Ralph Greenson. DiMaggio's son had spoken to Monroe on the phone the night of her death and said she seemed fine. Her death was deemed a probable suicide by \"Coroner to the Stars\" Thomas Noguchi. It has also been the subject of conspiracy theories.\nThe funeral service was arranged by DiMaggio, Monroe's half-sister Berniece Baker Miracle, and Monroe's business manager Inez Melson. He barred Hollywood's elite and members of the Kennedy family from attending the funeral, including President John F. Kennedy. He had a half-dozen red roses delivered to her crypt three times a week for 20 years. Oftentimes, he refused to talk about her publicly or otherwise exploit their relationship, and in the rare moments when he did speak to reporters, he was unable to hold back tears. He never married again.\nAccording to DiMaggio's attorney Morris Engelberg, DiMaggio's last words were \"I'll finally get to see Marilyn.\" Though DiMaggio's brother Dominic challenged Engelberg's version of Joe's final moments and his motives, Engelberg continuously denied those who questioned DiMaggio's last words, reporting that one night when he and a terminally ill DiMaggio were sitting together, DiMaggio told him, \"I don\u2019t feel bad about dying. At least I\u2019ll be with Marilyn again.\"\nAdvertising.\nIn the 1970s, DiMaggio became a spokesman for Mr. Coffee, and was the face of the electric drip coffee makers for over 20 years. Vincent Marotta, the CEO of North American Systems, which manufactured Mr. Coffee at the time, recruited DiMaggio for the advertising campaign. DiMaggio's spots were successful with consumers. In a 2007 interview with \"The Columbus Dispatch\", Marotta joked that \"millions of kids grew up thinking Joe DiMaggio was a famous appliance salesman.\" Despite the commercials, DiMaggio rarely drank coffee due to ulcers, and when he did drink coffee, he preferred Sanka instant coffee rather than coffee brewed by Mr. Coffee machines.\nIn 1972, DiMaggio became a spokesman for the Bowery Savings Bank. Except for a five-year hiatus in the 1980s, he regularly made commercials for them until 1992. In 1986, he became a spokesperson for Florida's Cross Keys Village, an active retirement community.\nTelevision programs.\nBeginning in April 1952, DiMaggio had 10-minute programs on Channel 11 in New York City before and after each Yankees' home game. Episodes included interviews with guests and DiMaggio's comments about baseball. The team owned the program, with DiMaggio under contract to the Yankees. He also did \"Joe DiMaggio's Dugout\" on Channel 4 in New York City, a weekly filmed program unrelated to the pre-and post-game shows. It featured instructional sessions and quizzes for young people.\nDeath.\nDiMaggio was a heavy smoker for much of his adult life. He was admitted to Memorial Regional Hospital in Hollywood, Florida, on October 12, 1998, for lung cancer surgery and remained there for 99\u00a0days. He returned to his home in Hollywood, Florida, on January 19, 1999, where he died on March 8 at age 84. DiMaggio's attorney, Morris Engelberg reported that his last words were, \"I'll finally get to see Marilyn,\" referring to his ex-wife Marilyn Monroe.\nDiMaggio's funeral was held on March 11, 1999, at Saints Peter and Paul Church in San Francisco, and he was interred three months later at Holy Cross Cemetery in Colma, California. His son also died that year, on August 6, at age 57.\nLegacy.\nAt his death, \"The New York Times\" called DiMaggio's 1941 56-game hitting streak \"perhaps the most enduring record in sports.\"\nAccording to American geneticist Mary-Claire King, in the spring of 1981 DiMaggio babysat her daughter at the San Francisco airport so King could drop her mother off to her flight to Chicago. According to King, if it were not for DiMaggio's kindness, she would have almost certainly missed her own flight that was taking her and her daughter to Washington, D.C., a trip that eventually resulted in King's getting her first major grant from the National Institutes of Health and the discovery of the breast and ovarian cancer-causing gene BRCA1.\nOn September 17, 1992, the doors were opened at Joe DiMaggio Children's Hospital at Memorial Regional Hospital in Hollywood, Florida, for which he raised over $4\u00a0million.\nOn April 13, 1998, DiMaggio was given the Sports Legend Award at the 13th annual American Sportscasters Association Hall of Fame Awards Dinner in New York City. Henry Kissinger, former Secretary of State and a longtime fan of DiMaggio, made the presentation to the Yankee great. The event was one of DiMaggio's last public appearances before taking ill.\nYankee Stadium's fifth monument was dedicated to DiMaggio on April 25, 1999, and the West Side Highway was officially renamed The Joe DiMaggio Highway in his honor. The Yankees wore DiMaggio's number 5 on the left sleeves of their uniforms for the 1999 season. He is ranked No. 11 on \"The Sporting News\"' list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and he was elected by fans to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In addition to his number 5 being retired by the New York Yankees, DiMaggio's number was also retired by the Florida Marlins, who retired it in honor of their first team president, Carl Barger, who died five months before the team took the field for the first time in 1993. DiMaggio had been his favorite player.\nIn 2000 after some negotiations, the heirs of Joe DiMaggio's estate, two granddaughters and their four children, welcomed the renaming of San Francisco's North Beach playground, the place where Joe DiMaggio first took up baseball as a boy, as the Joe DiMaggio North Beach Playground.\nIn 2001, Major League Baseball introduced an online daily fantasy game called \"Beat the Streak\" which required players to pick one or two MLB players to get a hit in a game that day. The goal was to pick correctly 57 times in a row to beat DiMaggio's record streak. The prize money for beating the streak is $5.6 million. Through August 2021, more than 4.5 million players had combined to make over 100 million attempts but none had reached even 52 consecutive hits in the game's history.\nIn May 2006, the adopted daughters of DiMaggio's son held an auction of DiMaggio's personal items. Highlights included the ball he hit in breaking Wee Willie Keeler's hitting-streak record ($63,250); his 2,000th career hit ball ($29,900); his 1947 Most Valuable Player Award ($281,750); the uniform worn in the 1951 World Series ($195,500); his Hall of Fame ring ($69,000); a photograph Marilyn autographed \"I love you Joe\" ($80,500); her passport ($115,000); and their marriage certificate ($23,000). Lot 758, DiMaggio's white 1991 Mercedes 420 SEL sedan, which was a gift from the New York Yankees commemorating the 50th anniversary of DiMaggio's 1941 season, sold for $18,000. The event netted a total of $4.1\u00a0million ().\nOn August 8, 2011, the United States Postal Service announced that an image of DiMaggio would appear on a stamp for the first time. It was issued as part of the \"Major League Baseball All-Star Stamp Series,\" which came out in July 2012.\nDiMaggio insisted on being introduced as the \"Greatest Living Ballplayer\" at events, including Yankee Old-Timers Day, and he once punched Billy Crystal in the stomach for not introducing him as such.\nIn 2013, the Bob Feller Act of Valor Award honored DiMaggio as one of 37 Baseball Hall of Fame members for his service in the United States Army Air Force during World War II.\nThe Joe DiMaggio Fields in his hometown of Martinez, California, are named after him.\nThere is a Joe DiMaggio Street in San Antonio, Texas.\nCareer statistics.\nDiMaggio played in 10 World Series, winning 9. His only loss was in the 1942 World Series. He batted .271 (54\u2013199), with 27 runs scored, 8 home runs, and 30 RBI in 51 post-season games.\nIn popular culture.\nAn American icon, DiMaggio's popularity during his career was such that he was referred to in film, television, literature, art, and music both during his career and decades after he retired.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48892", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48892", "title": "Dandenong Ranges National Park", "text": "The Dandenong Ranges National Park is a national park located in the Greater Melbourne region of Victoria, Australia. The national park is situated from at its westernmost points at Ferntree Gully and Boronia to at its easternmost point at Silvan, east of the Melbourne central business district.\nThe park was proclaimed on , amalgamating the Ferntree Gully National Park, Sherbrooke Forest and Doongalla Estate. In 1997 the Olinda State Forest, Mt. Evelyn and Montrose Reserve were formally added to the national park.\nHistory.\nThe region was originally inhabited by the Bunurong and Woewurrong Aboriginal people. Most of the forest got cleared when it became a significant source of timber for Melbourne. During the late last century, farming began in the area as roads and railways were built and the 'Puffing Billy' narrow-gauge line from Ferntree Gully to Gembrook started in 1900. Tourism flourished from the 1870s. The Fern Tree Gully was the first to be reserved as a park in 1882 followed by other areas. The present day national park was established in 1987.\nFeatures.\nDandenong Ranges National Park is divided into five sections:\nFeral pests.\nBecause the park is located in an urban area, the park has a long history of major problems with feral and roaming animals. A cat curfew was introduced in the entire Dandenong Ranges area in 1991, and since then the numbers and variety of lyrebirds and some other native species have climbed dramatically.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48894", "revid": "8138645", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48894", "title": "Hooke", "text": "Hooke may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48896", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48896", "title": "Lyrebird", "text": "Genus of birds\nA lyrebird is either of two species of ground-dwelling Australian birds that compose the genus Menura, and the family Menuridae. They are most notable for their ability to mimic a variety of natural and artificial sounds from their environment, and the striking beauty of the male bird's huge tail when it is fanned out in courtship display. Lyrebirds have unique plumes of neutral-coloured tailfeathers and are among Australia's best-known native birds.\nTaxonomy.\nThe classification of lyrebirds was the subject of much debate after the first specimens reached European scientists after 1798. Based on specimens sent from New South Wales to England, Major-General Thomas Davies illustrated and described this species as the superb lyrebird, which he called \"Menura superba\", in an 1800 presentation to the Linnean Society of London, but this work was not published until 1802; in the intervening time period, however, the species was described and named \"Menura novaehollandiae\" by John Latham in 1801, and this is the accepted name by virtue of nomenclatural priority.\nThe genus name \"Menura\" refers to the pattern of repeated transparent crescents (or \"lunules\") on the superb lyrebird's outer tail-feathers, from the Ancient Greek words \"m\u0113n\u0113\" \"moon\" and \"our\u00e1\" \"tail\".\nLyrebirds are named because their outer tail feathers are broad and curved in a S shape that together resemble the shape of a lyre. \nSystematics.\nLyrebirds were thought to be Galliformes like the broadly similar looking partridge, junglefowl, and pheasants familiar to Europeans, reflected in the early names given to the superb lyrebird, including native pheasant. They were also called peacock-wrens and Australian birds-of-paradise. The idea that they were related to the pheasants was abandoned when the first chicks, which are altricial, were described. They were not classed with the passerines until a paper was published in 1840, twelve years after they were assigned a discrete family, Menuridae. Within that family they compose a single genus, \"Menura\".\nIt is generally accepted that the lyrebird family is most closely related to the scrub-birds (Atrichornithidae) and some authorities combine both in a single family, but evidence that they are also related to the bowerbirds remains controversial.\nLyrebirds are ancient Australian animals: the Australian Museum has fossils of lyrebirds dating back to about 15 million years ago. The prehistoric \"Menura tyawanoides\" has been described from Early Miocene fossils found at the famous Riversleigh site.\nSpecies.\nTwo species of lyrebird are extant:\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Common name\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:25%;\"|Scientific name and subspecies\n!scope=\"col\" style=\"width:15%; min-width:180px;\"|Range\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:29%;\"\n!scope\n\"col\" style\n\"width:16%; min-width:112px;\"\n!scope=\"row\"|Superb lyrebird called \"weringerong\", \"woorail\", and \"bulln-bulln\" in Aboriginal languages. \n!scope=\"row\"|Albert's lyrebird or Northern lyrebird\nDescription.\nThe lyrebirds are large passerine birds, amongst the largest in the order. They are ground living birds with strong legs and feet and short rounded wings. They are poor fliers and rarely fly except for periods of downhill gliding. The superb lyrebird is the larger of the two species. Lyrebirds measure 31 to 39 inches in length, including their tail. Males tend to be slightly larger than females. Females weigh around 2 pounds, and males weigh around 2.4 pounds.\nDistribution and habitat.\nThe superb lyrebird is found in areas of rainforest in Victoria, New South Wales, and south-east Queensland. It is also found in Tasmania where it was introduced in the 19th century. Many superb lyrebirds live in the Dandenong Ranges National Park and Kinglake National Park around Melbourne, the Royal National Park and Illawarra region south of Sydney, in many other parks along the east coast of Australia, and non protected bushland. Albert's lyrebird is found only in a small area of Southern Queensland rainforest.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nLyrebirds are shy and difficult to approach, particularly the Albert's lyrebird, with the result that little information about its behaviour has been documented. When lyrebirds detect potential danger, they pause and scan the surroundings, sound an alarm, and either flee the area on foot, or seek cover and freeze. Firefighters sheltering in mine shafts during bushfires have been joined by lyrebirds.\nDiet and feeding.\nLyrebirds feed on the ground and as individuals. A range of invertebrate prey is taken, including insects such as cockroaches, beetles (both adults and larvae), earwigs, fly larvae, and the adults and larvae of moths. Other prey taken includes centipedes, spiders, earthworms. Less commonly taken prey includes stick insects, bugs, amphipods, lizards, frogs, and occasionally seeds. They find food by scratching with their feet through the leaf litter.\nMixing and aerating soil and leaf litter while scratching for food amounts to a form of ecosystem engineering, or farming; foraging by superb lyrebirds has been shown to thus create microhabitats which nurture larger and more abundant prey. This activity also improves forest health by burying potential wildfire fuel and by measurably increasing the diversity of invertebrates. Such positive effects cover millions of hectares of land.\nBreeding.\nLyrebirds are long-lived birds that can live as long as 30 years. They have long breeding cycles and start breeding later in life than other passerine birds. Female superb lyrebirds start breeding at the age of five or six, and males at the age of six to eight. Males defend territories from other males, and those territories may contain the breeding territories of up to eight females. Within the male territories, the males create or use display platforms; for the superb lyrebird, this is a mound of bare soil; for the Albert's lyrebird, it is a pile of twigs on the forest floor.\nMale lyrebirds call mostly during winter, when they construct and maintain an open arena-mound in dense bush, on which they sing and dance in an elaborate courtship display performed for potential mates, of which the male lyrebird has several. The strength, volume, and location of the nest built by the female lyrebird is dependent on the rainfall and predation during the nest building period. It is important for the nest to be water resistant and hidden in secluded areas so predators cannot attack. Once the nest is made in the preferred location, the female lyrebird lays a single egg. The egg is incubated over 50 days solely by the female, and the female also fosters the chick alone.\nVocalizations and mimicry.\nA lyrebird's song is one of the more distinctive aspects of its behavioural biology. Lyrebirds sing throughout the year, but the peak of the breeding season, from June to August, is when they sing with the most intensity. During this peak males may sing for four hours of the day, almost half the hours of daylight. The song of the lyrebird is a mixture of elements of its own song and mimicry of other species. Lyrebirds render with great fidelity the individual songs of other birds and the chatter of flocks of birds, and also mimic other animals such as possums, koalas and dingoes. Lyrebirds have been recorded mimicking human sounds such as a mill whistle, a cross-cut saw, chainsaws, car engines and car alarms, fire alarms, rifle-shots, camera shutters, dogs barking, crying babies, music, mobile phone ring tones, and even the human voice. However, while the mimicry of human noises is widely reported, the extent to which it happens is exaggerated. Parts of the lyrebird's own song can resemble human-made sound effects, which has given rise to the urban legend that they frequently imitate video game or film sounds.\nThe superb lyrebird's mimicked calls are learned from the local environment, including from other superb lyrebirds. An instructive example is the population of superb lyrebirds in Tasmania, which have retained the calls of species not native to Tasmania in their repertoire, with some local Tasmanian endemic bird songs added. The female lyrebirds of both species are also mimics capable of complex vocalisations. Superb lyrebird females are silent during courtship; however, they regularly produce sophisticated vocal displays during foraging and nest defense. A recording of a superb lyrebird mimicking sounds of an electronic shooting game, workmen and chainsaws was added to the National Film and Sound Archive's Sounds of Australia registry in 2013.\nBoth species of lyrebird produced elaborate lyrebird-specific vocalisations including 'whistle songs'. Males also sing songs specifically associated with their song and dance displays.\nOne researcher, Sydney Curtis, has recorded flute-like lyrebird calls in the vicinity of the New England National Park. Similarly, in 1969, a park ranger, Neville Fenton, recorded a lyrebird song which resembled flute sounds in the New England National Park, near Dorrigo in northern coastal New South Wales. After much detective work by Fenton, it was discovered that in the 1930s, a flute player living on a farm adjoining the park used to play tunes near his pet lyrebird. The lyrebird adopted the tunes into his repertoire, and retained them after release into the park. Neville Fenton forwarded a tape of his recording to Norman Robinson. Because a lyrebird is able to carry two tunes at the same time, Robinson filtered out one of the tunes and put it on the phonograph for the purposes of analysis. One witness suggested that the song represents a modified version of two popular tunes in the 1930s: \"The Keel Row\" and \"Mosquito's Dance\". Musicologist David Rothenberg has endorsed this information. However, a \"flute lyrebird\" research group (including Curtis and Fenton) formed to investigate the veracity of this story found no evidence of \"Mosquito Dance\" and only remnants of \"Keel Row\" in contemporary and historical lyrebird recordings from this area. Neither were they able to prove that a lyrebird chick had been a pet, although they acknowledged compelling evidence on both sides of the argument.\nStatus and conservation.\nUntil the 2019\u20132020 Australian bushfire season, superb lyrebirds were not considered threatened in the short to medium term. Concern has since grown as early analyses have shown the extent of destruction of the lyrebird's preferred wet-forest habitats, which in less intense previous bushfire seasons have been spared, in large part due to their moisture content. Albert's lyrebird has a very restricted habitat and had been listed as vulnerable by the IUCN, but because the species and its habitat were carefully managed, the species was re-assessed to near threatened in 2009. The superb lyrebird had already been seriously threatened by habitat destruction in the past. Its population had since recovered, but the 2019\u20132020 bushfires damaged much of its habitat, which may lead to a reclassification of its status from \"common\" to \"threatened\". Beyond this new threat are the long-term vulnerabilities to predation by cats and foxes, as well as human population pressure on its habitat.\nIn culture.\nPainting by John Gould.\nThe lyrebird is so called because the male bird has a spectacular tail, consisting of 16 highly modified feathers (two long slender \"lyrates\" at the centre of the plume, two broader \"medians\" on the outside edges and twelve \"filamentaries\" arrayed between them), which was originally thought to resemble a lyre. This happened when a superb lyrebird specimen (which had been taken from Australia to England during the early 19th century) was prepared for display at the British Museum by a taxidermist who had never seen a live lyrebird. The taxidermist mistakenly thought that the tail would resemble a lyre, and that the tail would be held in a similar way to that of a peacock during courtship display, and so he arranged the feathers in this way. Later, John Gould (who had also never seen a live lyrebird), painted the lyrebird from the British Museum specimen.\nThe male lyrebird's tail is not held as in John Gould's painting. Instead, the male lyrebird's tail is fanned over the lyrebird during courtship display, with the tail completely covering his head and back\u2014as can be seen in the image in the \"breeding\" section of this page, and also the image of the 10-cent coin, where the superb lyrebird's tail (in courtship display) is portrayed accurately.\nLyrebird emblems and logos.\nThe lyrebird has been featured as a symbol and emblem many times, especially in New South Wales and Victoria (where the superb lyrebird has its natural habitat), and in Queensland (where Albert's lyrebird has its natural habitat).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48898", "revid": "29036493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48898", "title": "SIMSCRIPT II.5", "text": ""}
{"id": "48899", "revid": "1358022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48899", "title": "Simulation language", "text": "Programming language used to describe the operation of a simulation on a computer\nA computer simulation language is used to describe the operation of a simulation on a computer. There are two major types of simulation: continuous and discrete event though more modern languages can handle more complex combinations. Most languages also have a graphical interface and at least a simple statistic gathering capability for the analysis of the results. An important part of discrete-event languages is the ability to generate pseudo-random numbers and variants from different probability distributions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48900", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48900", "title": "Atomic radius", "text": "Measure of the size of an atom\nThe atomic radius of a chemical element is a measure of the size of its atom, usually the mean or typical distance from the center of the nucleus to the outermost isolated electron. Since the boundary is not a well-defined physical entity, there are various non-equivalent definitions of atomic radius. Four widely used definitions of atomic radius are: Van der Waals radius, ionic radius, metallic radius and covalent radius. Typically, because of the difficulty to isolate atoms in order to measure their radii separately, atomic radius is measured in a chemically bonded state; however theoretical calculations are simpler when considering atoms in isolation. The dependencies on environment, probe, and state lead to a multiplicity of definitions.\nDepending on the definition, the term may apply to atoms in condensed matter, covalently bonding in molecules, or in ionized and excited states; and its value may be obtained through experimental measurements, or computed from theoretical models. The value of the radius may depend on the atom's state and context.\nElectrons do not have definite orbits nor sharply defined ranges. Rather, their positions must be described as probability distributions that taper off gradually as one moves away from the nucleus, without a sharp cutoff; these are referred to as atomic orbitals or electron clouds. Moreover, in condensed matter and molecules, the electron clouds of the atoms usually overlap to some extent, and some of the electrons may roam over a large region encompassing two or more atoms.\nUnder most definitions the radii of isolated neutral atoms range between 30 and 300 pm (trillionths of a meter), or between 0.3 and 3 \u00e5ngstr\u00f6ms. Therefore, the radius of an atom is more than 10,000 times the radius of its nucleus (1\u201310 fm), and less than 1/1000 of the wavelength of visible light (400\u2013700 nm).\nFor many purposes, atoms can be modeled as spheres. This is only a crude approximation, but it can provide quantitative explanations and predictions for many phenomena, such as the density of liquids and solids, the diffusion of fluids through molecular sieves, the arrangement of atoms and ions in crystals, and the size and shape of molecules.\nHistory.\nThe first to estimate the radius of an atom was Johann Chrysostom Magnenus in 1646. He was at Mass and noticed the smell of incense permeating the church. He knew the size of the incense and estimated the size of the church. He presumed that he could detect the incense if one atom was in each nostril. He also presumed that the incense was distributed homogenously throughout the church. With these assumptions he was able to estimate the size of an atom to be about 10 to the power of \u221224 cubic metres. (The units he used have been converted to metric to make comparisons with later estimates easier.) Taking the cube root this gives an estimate of the atomic radius to be about 10 to the power of \u22128 metres. This is somewhat larger than current estimates but given the assumptions made in the calculation is very good. These calculations were published in his work \"Democritus reviviscens sive de atomis\". \nThe concept of atomic radius was preceded in the 19th century by the concept of atomic volume, a relative measure of how much space would on average an atom occupy in a given solid or liquid material. By the end of the century this term was also used in an absolute sense, as a molar volume divided by Avogadro constant. Such a volume is different for different crystalline forms even of the same compound, but physicists used it for rough, order-of-magnitude estimates of the atomic size, getting 10\u22128\u201310\u22127 cm for copper.\nThe earliest estimates of the atomic size was made by opticians in the 1830s, particularly Cauchy, who developed models of light dispersion assuming a lattice of connected \"molecules\". In 1857 Clausius developed a gas-kinetic model which included the equation for mean free path. In the 1870s it was used to estimate gas molecule sizes, as well as an aforementioned comparison with visible light wavelength and an estimate from the thickness of soap bubble film at which its contractile force rapidly diminishes. By 1900, various estimates of mercury atom diameter averaged around 275\u00b120 pm (modern estimates give 300\u00b110 pm, see below).\nIn 1920, shortly after it had become possible to determine the sizes of atoms using X-ray crystallography, it was suggested that all atoms of the same element have the same radii. However, in 1923, when more crystal data had become available, it was found that the approximation of an atom as a sphere does not necessarily hold when comparing the same atom in different crystal structures.\nDefinitions.\nWidely used definitions of atomic radius include:\nEmpirically measured atomic radius.\nThe following table shows empirically measured covalent radii for the elements, as published by J. C. Slater in 1964. The values are in picometers (pm or 1\u00d710\u221212\u00a0m), with an accuracy of about 5 pm. The shade of the box ranges from red to yellow as the radius increases; gray indicates lack of data.\nExplanation of the general trends.\nElectrons in atoms fill electron shells from the lowest available energy level. As a consequence of the Aufbau principle, each new period begins with the first two elements filling the next unoccupied s-orbital. Because an atom's s-orbital electrons are typically farthest from the nucleus, this results in a significant increase in atomic radius with the first elements of each period.\nThe atomic radius of each element generally decreases across each period due to an increasing number of protons, since an increase in the number of protons increases the attractive force acting on the atom's electrons. The greater attraction draws the electrons closer to the protons, decreasing the size of the atom. Down each group, the atomic radius of each element typically increases because there are more occupied \nelectron energy levels and therefore a greater distance between protons and electrons.\nThe increasing nuclear charge is partly counterbalanced by the increasing number of electrons\u2014a phenomenon that is known as shielding\u2014which explains why the size of atoms usually increases down each column despite an increase in attractive force from the nucleus. Electron shielding causes the attraction of an atom's nucleus on its electrons to decrease, so electrons occupying higher energy states farther from the nucleus experience reduced attractive force, increasing the size of the atom. However, elements in the 5d-block (lutetium to mercury) are much smaller than this trend predicts due to the weak shielding of the 4f-subshell. This phenomenon is known as the lanthanide contraction. A similar phenomenon exists for actinides; however, the general instability of transuranic elements makes measurements for the remainder of the 5f-block difficult and for transactinides nearly impossible. Finally, for sufficiently heavy elements, the atomic radius may be decreased by relativistic effects. This is a consequence of electrons near the strongly charged nucleus traveling at a sufficient fraction of the speed of light to gain a nontrivial amount of mass.\nThe following table summarizes the main phenomena that influence the atomic radius of an element:\nLanthanide contraction.\nThe electrons in the 4f-subshell, which is progressively filled from lanthanum (\"Z\"\u00a0= 57) to ytterbium (\"Z\"\u00a0= 70), are not particularly effective at shielding the increasing nuclear charge from the sub-shells further out. The elements immediately following the lanthanides have atomic radii which are smaller than would be expected and which are almost identical to the atomic radii of the elements immediately above them. Hence lutetium is in fact slightly smaller than yttrium, hafnium has virtually the same atomic radius (and chemistry) as zirconium, and tantalum has an atomic radius similar to niobium, and so forth. The effect of the lanthanide contraction is noticeable up to platinum (\"Z\"\u00a0= 78), after which it is masked by a relativistic effect known as the inert-pair effect.\nDue to lanthanide contraction, the 5 following observations can be drawn:\nd-block contraction.\nThe d-block contraction is less pronounced than the lanthanide contraction but arises from a similar cause. In this case, it is the poor shielding capacity of the 3d-electrons which affects the atomic radii and chemistries of the elements immediately following the first row of the transition metals, from gallium (\"Z\"\u00a0= 31) to bromine (\"Z\"\u00a0= 35).\nCalculated atomic radius.\nThe following table shows atomic radii computed from theoretical models, as published by Enrico Clementi and others in 1967. The values are in picometres (pm).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48901", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48901", "title": "Conversion factor", "text": ""}
{"id": "48902", "revid": "199747", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48902", "title": "Kilogram per cubic metre", "text": "SI derived unit of density\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nThe kilogram per cubic metre (symbol: kg\u00b7m\u22123, or kg/m3) is the unit of density in the International System of Units (SI). It is defined by dividing the SI unit of mass, the kilogram, by the SI unit of volume, the cubic metre.\nRelation to other measures.\nThe density of water is about 1000\u00a0kg/m3 or 1 g/cm3, because the size of the gram was originally based on the mass of a cubic centimetre of water. \nIn chemistry, g/cm3 is more commonly used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48903", "revid": "8390765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48903", "title": "Nucleosynthesis", "text": "Process of creating new atomic nuclei from existing nucleons\nNucleosynthesis is the process that creates new atomic nuclei from pre-existing nucleons (protons and neutrons) and nuclei. According to current theories, the first nuclei were formed a few minutes after the Big Bang, through nuclear reactions in a process called Big Bang nucleosynthesis. After about 20 minutes, the universe had expanded and cooled to a point at which these high-energy collisions among nucleons ended, so only the fastest and simplest reactions occurred, leaving our universe containing hydrogen and helium. The rest is traces of other elements such as lithium and the hydrogen isotope deuterium. Nucleosynthesis in stars and their explosions later produced the variety of elements and isotopes that we have today, in a process called cosmic chemical evolution. The amounts of total mass in elements heavier than hydrogen and helium (called 'metals' by astrophysicists) remains small (few percent), so that the universe still has approximately the same composition.\nStars fuse light elements to heavier ones in their cores, giving off energy in the process known as stellar nucleosynthesis. Nuclear fusion reactions create many of the lighter elements, up to and including iron and nickel in the most massive stars. Products of stellar nucleosynthesis remain trapped in stellar cores and remnants except if ejected through stellar winds and explosions. The neutron capture reactions of the r-process and s-process create heavier elements, from iron upwards.\nSupernova nucleosynthesis within exploding stars is largely responsible for the elements between oxygen and rubidium: from the ejection of elements produced during stellar nucleosynthesis; through explosive nucleosynthesis during the supernova explosion; and from the r-process (absorption of multiple neutrons) during the explosion.\nNeutron star mergers are a recently discovered major source of elements produced in the r-process. When two neutron stars collide, a significant amount of neutron-rich matter may be ejected which then quickly forms heavy elements.\nCosmic ray spallation is a process wherein cosmic rays impact nuclei and fragment them. It is a significant source of the lighter nuclei, particularly 3He, 9Be and 10,11B, that are not created by stellar nucleosynthesis. Cosmic ray spallation can occur in the interstellar medium, on asteroids and meteoroids, or on Earth in the atmosphere or in the ground.\nThis contributes to the presence on Earth of cosmogenic nuclides.\nOn Earth new nuclei are also produced by radiogenesis, the decay of long-lived, primordial radionuclides such as uranium, thorium, and potassium-40.\nHistory.\nTimeline.\nIt is thought that the primordial nucleons themselves were formed from the quark\u2013gluon plasma around 13.8 billion years ago during the Big Bang as it cooled below two trillion degrees. A few minutes afterwards, starting with only protons and neutrons, nuclei up to lithium and beryllium (both with mass number 7) were formed, but hardly any other elements. Some boron may have been formed at this time, but the process stopped before significant carbon could be formed, as this element requires a far higher product of helium density and time than were present in the short nucleosynthesis period of the Big Bang. That fusion process essentially shut down at about 20 minutes, due to drops in temperature and density as the universe continued to expand. This first process, Big Bang nucleosynthesis, was the first type of nucleogenesis to occur in the universe, creating the so-called primordial elements.\nA star formed in the early universe produces heavier elements by combining its lighter nuclei\u00a0\u2013 hydrogen, helium, lithium, beryllium, and boron\u00a0\u2013 which were found in the initial composition of the interstellar medium and hence the star. Interstellar gas therefore contains declining abundances of these light elements, which are present only by virtue of their nucleosynthesis during the Big Bang, and also cosmic ray spallation. These lighter elements in the present universe are therefore thought to have been produced through thousands of millions of years of cosmic ray (mostly high-energy proton) mediated breakup of heavier elements in interstellar gas and dust. The fragments of these cosmic-ray collisions include helium-3 and the stable isotopes of the light elements lithium, beryllium, and boron. Carbon was not made in the Big Bang, but was produced later in larger stars via the triple-alpha process.\nThe subsequent nucleosynthesis of heavier elements (\"Z\"\u00a0\u2265\u00a06, carbon and heavier elements) requires the extreme temperatures and pressures found within stars and supernovae. These processes began as hydrogen and helium from the Big Bang collapsed into the first stars after about 500 million years. Star formation has been occurring continuously in galaxies since that time. The primordial nuclides were created by Big Bang nucleosynthesis, stellar nucleosynthesis, supernova nucleosynthesis, and by nucleosynthesis in exotic events such as neutron star collisions. Other nuclides, such as 40Ar, formed later through radioactive decay. On Earth, mixing and evaporation has altered the primordial composition to what is called the natural terrestrial composition. The heavier elements produced after the Big Bang range in atomic numbers from \"Z\"\u00a0=\u00a06 (carbon) to \"Z\"\u00a0=\u00a094 (plutonium). Synthesis of these elements occurred through nuclear reactions involving the strong and weak interactions among nuclei, and called nuclear fusion (including both rapid and slow multiple neutron capture), and include also nuclear fission and radioactive decays such as beta decay. The stability of atomic nuclei of different sizes and composition (i.e. numbers of neutrons and protons) plays an important role in the possible reactions among nuclei. Cosmic nucleosynthesis, therefore, is studied among researchers of astrophysics and nuclear physics (\"nuclear astrophysics\").\nHistory of nucleosynthesis theory.\nThe first ideas on nucleosynthesis were simply that the chemical elements were created at the beginning of the universe, but no rational physical scenario for this could be identified. Gradually it became clear that hydrogen and helium are much more abundant than any of the other elements. All the rest constitute less than 2% of the mass of the Solar System, and of other star systems as well. At the same time it was clear that oxygen and carbon were the next two most common elements, and also that there was a general trend toward high abundance of the light elements, especially those with isotopes composed of whole numbers of helium-4 nuclei (alpha nuclides).\nArthur Stanley Eddington first suggested in 1920 that stars obtain their energy by fusing hydrogen into helium and raised the possibility that the heavier elements may also form in stars. This idea was not generally accepted, as the nuclear mechanism was not understood. In the years immediately before World War II, Hans Bethe first elucidated those nuclear mechanisms by which hydrogen is fused into helium.\nFred Hoyle's original work on nucleosynthesis of heavier elements in stars, occurred just after World War II. His work explained the production of all heavier elements, starting from hydrogen. Hoyle proposed that hydrogen is continuously created in the universe from vacuum and energy, without need for universal beginning.\nHoyle's work explained how the abundances of the elements increased with time as the galaxy aged. Subsequently, Hoyle's picture was expanded during the 1960s by contributions from William A. Fowler, Alastair G. W. Cameron, and Donald D. Clayton, followed by many others. The seminal 1957 review paper by E. M. Burbidge, G. R. Burbidge, Fowler and Hoyle is a well-known summary of the state of the field in 1957. That paper defined new processes for the transformation of one heavy nucleus into others within stars, processes that could be documented by astronomers.\nThe Big Bang itself had been proposed in 1931, long before this period, by Georges Lema\u00eetre, a Belgian physicist, who suggested that the evident expansion of the Universe in time required that the Universe, if contracted backwards in time, would continue to do so until it could contract no further. This would bring all the mass of the Universe to a single point, a \"primeval atom\", to a state before which time and space did not exist. Hoyle is credited with coining the term \"Big Bang\" during a 1949 BBC radio broadcast, saying that Lema\u00eetre's theory was \"based on the hypothesis that all the matter in the universe was created in one big bang at a particular time in the remote past\". It is popularly reported that Hoyle intended this to be pejorative, but Hoyle explicitly denied this and said it was just a striking image meant to highlight the difference between the two models. Lema\u00eetre's model was needed to explain the existence of deuterium and nuclides between helium and carbon, as well as the fundamentally high amount of helium present, not only in stars but also in interstellar space. As it happened, both Lema\u00eetre and Hoyle's models of nucleosynthesis would be needed to explain the elemental abundances in the universe.\nThe goal of the theory of nucleosynthesis is to explain the vastly differing abundances of the chemical elements and their several isotopes from the perspective of natural processes. The primary stimulus to the development of this theory was the shape of a plot of the abundances versus the atomic number of the elements. Those abundances, when plotted on a graph as a function of atomic number, have a jagged sawtooth structure that varies by factors up to ten million. A very influential stimulus to nucleosynthesis research was an abundance table created by Hans Suess and Harold Urey that was based on the unfractionated abundances of the non-volatile elements found within unevolved meteorites. Such a graph of the abundances is displayed on a logarithmic scale below, where the dramatically jagged structure is visually suppressed by the many powers of ten spanned in the vertical scale of this graph.\nProcesses.\nThere are a number of astrophysical processes which are believed to be responsible for nucleosynthesis. The majority of these occur within stars, and the chain of those nuclear fusion processes are known as hydrogen burning (via the proton\u2013proton chain or the CNO cycle), helium burning, carbon burning, neon burning, oxygen burning and silicon burning. These processes are able to create elements up to and including iron and nickel. This is the region of nucleosynthesis within which the isotopes with the highest binding energy per nucleon are created.\nHeavier elements can be assembled within stars by a neutron capture process known as the s-process or in explosive environments, such as supernovae and neutron star mergers, by a number of other processes. Some of those others include the r-process, which involves rapid neutron captures, the rp-process, and the p-process (sometimes known as the gamma process), which results in the photodisintegration of existing nuclei.\nMajor types.\nBig Bang nucleosynthesis.\nBig Bang nucleosynthesis occurred within the first three minutes of the beginning of the universe and is responsible for much of the abundance of 1H (protium), 2H (D, deuterium), 3He (helium-3), and 4He (helium-4). Although 4He continues to be produced by stellar fusion and alpha decays and trace amounts of 1H continue to be produced by spallation and certain types of radioactive decay, most of the mass of the isotopes in the universe are thought to have been produced in the Big Bang. The nuclei of these elements, along with some 7Li and 7Be are considered to have been formed between 100 and 300 seconds after the Big Bang when the primordial quark\u2013gluon plasma froze out to form protons and neutrons. Because of the very short period in which nucleosynthesis occurred before it was stopped by expansion and cooling (about 20 minutes), no elements heavier than beryllium (or possibly boron) could be formed. Elements formed during this time were in the plasma state, and did not cool to the state of neutral atoms until much later.\nformula_1 Chief nuclear reactions responsible for the relative abundances of light atomic nuclei observed throughout the universe.\nStellar nucleosynthesis.\nStellar nucleosynthesis is the nuclear process by which new nuclei are produced. It occurs in stars during stellar evolution. It is responsible for the galactic abundances of elements from carbon to iron. Stars are thermonuclear furnaces in which H and He are fused into heavier nuclei by increasingly high temperatures as the composition of the core evolves. Of particular importance is carbon because its formation from He is a bottleneck in the entire process. Carbon is produced by the triple-alpha process in all stars. Carbon is also the main element that causes the release of free neutrons within stars, giving rise to the s-process, in which the slow absorption of neutrons converts iron into elements heavier than iron and nickel.\nThe products of stellar nucleosynthesis are generally dispersed into the interstellar gas through mass loss episodes and the stellar winds of low mass stars. The mass loss events can be witnessed today in the planetary nebulae phase of low-mass star evolution, and the explosive ending of stars, called supernovae, of those with more than eight times the mass of the Sun.\nThe first direct proof that nucleosynthesis occurs in stars was the astronomical observation that interstellar gas has become enriched with heavy elements as time passed. As a result, stars that were born from it late in the galaxy, formed with much higher initial heavy element abundances than those that had formed earlier. The detection of technetium in the atmosphere of a red giant star in 1952, by spectroscopy, provided the first evidence of nuclear activity within stars. Because technetium is radioactive, with a half-life much less than the age of the star, its abundance must reflect its recent creation within that star. Equally convincing evidence of the stellar origin of heavy elements is the large overabundances of specific stable elements found in stellar atmospheres of asymptotic giant branch stars. Observation of barium abundances some 20\u201350 times greater than found in unevolved stars is evidence of the operation of the s-process within such stars. Many modern proofs of stellar nucleosynthesis are provided by the isotopic compositions of stardust, solid grains that have condensed from the gases of individual stars and which have been extracted from meteorites. Stardust is one component of cosmic dust and is frequently called presolar grains. The measured isotopic compositions in stardust grains demonstrate many aspects of nucleosynthesis within the stars from which the grains condensed during the star's late-life mass-loss episodes.\nExplosive nucleosynthesis.\nSupernova nucleosynthesis occurs in the energetic environment in supernovae, in which the elements between silicon and nickel are synthesized in quasiequilibrium established during fast fusion that attaches by reciprocating balanced nuclear reactions to 28Si. Quasiequilibrium can be thought of as \"almost equilibrium\" except for a high abundance of the 28Si nuclei in the feverishly burning mix. This concept was the most important discovery in nucleosynthesis theory of the intermediate-mass elements since Hoyle's 1954 paper because it provided an overarching understanding of the abundant and chemically important elements between silicon (\"A\" = 28) and nickel (\"A\" = 60). It replaced the incorrect although much cited alpha process of the B2FH paper, which inadvertently obscured Hoyle's 1954 theory. Further nucleosynthesis processes can occur, in particular the r-process (rapid process) described by the B2FH paper and first calculated by Seeger, Fowler and Clayton, in which the most neutron-rich isotopes of elements heavier than nickel are produced by rapid absorption of free neutrons. The creation of free neutrons by electron capture during the rapid compression of the supernova core along with the assembly of some neutron-rich seed nuclei makes the r-process a \"primary process\", and one that can occur even in a star of pure H and He. This is in contrast to the B2FH designation of the process as a \"secondary process\". This promising scenario, though generally supported by supernova experts, has yet to achieve a satisfactory calculation of r-process abundances. The primary r-process has been confirmed by astronomers who had observed old stars born when galactic metallicity was still small, that nonetheless contain their complement of r-process nuclei; thereby demonstrating that the metallicity is a product of an internal process. The r-process is responsible for our natural cohort of radioactive elements, such as uranium and thorium, as well as the most neutron-rich isotopes of each heavy element.\nThe rp-process (rapid proton) involves the rapid absorption of free protons as well as neutrons, but its role and its existence are less certain.\nExplosive nucleosynthesis occurs too rapidly for radioactive decay to decrease the number of neutrons, so that many abundant isotopes with equal and even numbers of protons and neutrons are synthesized by the silicon quasi-equilibrium process. During this process, the burning of oxygen and silicon fuses nuclei that themselves have equal numbers of protons and neutrons to produce nuclides which consist of whole numbers of helium nuclei, up to 15 (representing 60Ni). Such multiple-alpha-particle nuclides are totally stable up to 40Ca (made of 10 helium nuclei), but heavier nuclei with equal and even numbers of protons and neutrons are tightly bound but unstable. The quasi-equilibrium produces radioactive isobars 44Ti, 48Cr, 52Fe, and 56Ni, which (except 44Ti) are created in abundance but decay after the explosion and leave the most stable isotope of the corresponding element at the same atomic weight. The most abundant and extant isotopes of elements produced in this way are 48Ti, 52Cr, and 56Fe. These decays are accompanied by the emission of gamma-rays (radiation from the nucleus), whose spectroscopic lines can be used to identify the isotope created by the decay. The detection of these emission lines were an important early product of gamma-ray astronomy.\nThe most convincing proof of explosive nucleosynthesis in supernovae occurred in 1987 when those gamma-ray lines were detected emerging from supernova 1987A. Gamma-ray lines identifying 56Co and 57Co nuclei, whose half-lives limit their age to about a year, proved that their radioactive cobalt parents created them. This nuclear astronomy observation was predicted in 1969 as a way to confirm explosive nucleosynthesis of the elements, and that prediction played an important role in the planning for NASA's Compton Gamma-Ray Observatory.\nOther proofs of explosive nucleosynthesis are found within the stardust grains that condensed within the interiors of supernovae as they expanded and cooled. Stardust grains are one component of cosmic dust. In particular, radioactive 44Ti was measured to be very abundant within supernova stardust grains at the time they condensed during the supernova expansion. This confirmed a 1975 prediction of the identification of supernova stardust (SUNOCONs), which became part of the pantheon of presolar grains. Other unusual isotopic ratios within these grains reveal many specific aspects of explosive nucleosynthesis.\nAnother type of explosive nucleosynthesis through the r-process was suggested in the flaring of magnetars. Some direct evidence for this was published in 2025. It is estimated that this kind of events has created ~1%\u201310% of the heavier elements in the universe.\nNeutron star mergers.\nThe merger of binary neutron stars (BNSs) is now believed to be the main source of r-process elements. Being neutron-rich by definition, mergers of this type had been suspected of being a source of such elements, but definitive evidence was difficult to obtain. In 2017 strong evidence emerged, when LIGO, VIRGO, the Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope and INTEGRAL, along with a collaboration of many observatories around the world, detected both gravitational wave and electromagnetic signatures of a likely neutron star merger, GW170817, and subsequently detected signals of numerous heavy elements such as gold as the ejected degenerate matter decays and cools. The first detection of the merger of a neutron star and black hole (NSBHs) came in July 2021 and more after but analysis seem to favor BNSs over NSBHs as the main contributors to heavy metal production.\nBlack hole accretion disk nucleosynthesis.\nNucleosynthesis may happen in accretion disks of black holes.\nCosmic ray spallation.\nCosmic ray spallation process reduces the atomic weight of interstellar matter by the impact with cosmic rays, to produce some of the lightest elements present in the universe (though not a significant amount of deuterium). Most notably spallation is believed to be responsible for the generation of almost all of 3He and the elements lithium, beryllium, and boron, although some Li and Be are thought to have been produced in the Big Bang. The spallation process results from the impact of cosmic rays (mostly fast protons) against the interstellar medium. These impacts fragment carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen nuclei present. The process results in the light elements beryllium, boron, and lithium in the cosmos at much greater abundances than they are found within solar atmospheres. The quantities of the light elements 1H and 4He produced by spallation are negligible relative to their primordial abundance.\nBeryllium and boron are not significantly produced by stellar fusion processes, since 8Be has an extremely short half-life of seconds.\nEmpirical evidence.\nTheories of nucleosynthesis are tested by calculating isotope abundances and comparing those results with observed abundances. Isotope abundances are typically calculated from the transition rates between isotopes in a network. Often these calculations can be simplified as a few key reactions control the rate of other reactions.\nMinor mechanisms and processes.\nTiny amounts of certain nuclides are produced on Earth by artificial means. Those are our primary source, for example, of technetium. However, some nuclides are also produced by a number of natural means that have continued after primordial elements were in place. These often act to create new elements in ways that can be used to date rocks or to trace the source of geological processes. Although these processes do not produce the nuclides in abundance, they are assumed to be the entire source of the existing natural supply of those nuclides.\nThese mechanisms include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48906", "revid": "50617091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48906", "title": "People's Bank of China", "text": "Central bank of the People's Republic of China\nThe People's Bank of China (officially PBC and unofficially PBOC) is the central bank of the People's Republic of China. It is responsible for carrying out monetary policy as determined by the \"PRC People's Bank Law\" and the \"PRC Commercial Bank Law\".\nThe PBC was established in 1948 as the bank serving areas of mainland China under Chinese Communist Party (CCP) control and became China's sole central bank after the founding of the People's Republic of China in 1949. From 1969 to 1978, the PBC was demoted to a bureau of the Ministry of Finance. The PBC was extensively reformed during the 1990s, when its provincial and local branches were abolished, instead opening nine regional branches. In 2023, these reforms were reversed as when the regional branches were abolished and the provincial branches restored, and new arrangements essentially ended the PBC's longstanding role in financial supervision.\nThe PBC is the 25th-ranked of 26 ministerial-level departments of the State Council. The PBC lacks central bank independence and is required to implement the policies of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) under the direction of the party's Central Financial Commission. The PBC is led by a governor assisted by several deputy governors and a CCP Committee Secretary. Since 2023, the roles of governor and CCP Committee Secretary have been held jointly by Pan Gongsheng.\nHistory.\nMao era.\nThe bank was established on December 1, 1948, based on the consolidation of the Huabei Bank, the Beihai Bank and Northwestern Farmers' Bank.37 The headquarters was first located in Shijiazhuang, Hebei, and then moved to Beijing in 1949. Between 1950 and 1978 the PBC was the only bank in the People's Republic of China and was responsible for both central banking and commercial banking operations.225 All other banks within mainland China such as the Bank of China were either organized as divisions of the PBC or were non-deposit taking agencies.449\nFrom 1952 to 1955 government shares were added to private banks to make state-private banks, until under the first Five Year plan from 1955 to 1959 the PBC had complete control of the private banks, making them branches of the PBC, closely resembling the vision of Vladimir Lenin. With aid from the Soviet Union, the shares of private enterprises and with them industrial output followed a similar path, forming a Soviet-style planned economy.\nDuring the Cultural Revolution, the PBC suspended its commercial banking service.38 In June 1969, the State Council approved the consolidation of PBC's headquarters as a bureau within the Ministry of Finance.38 In that context, the PBC's head office was downsized to no more than eighty staff. Local PBC branches were correspondingly merged into local government finance departments.38\nEarly reform era.\nThe institutional demotion of the PBC was reversed in March 1978 as it was separated from the Finance Ministry and granted ministerial ranking.62\nBy then and with the exception of special allocations for rural development, the monolithic PBC dominated all business transactions and credit. In 1979, China initiated a transition from that single-tier banking system to a two-tier system, which was largely completed by 1984. In March 1979, as part of the Chinese economic reforms, the State Council split off state-owned banks from the PBC, first the Agricultural Bank of China (ABC) and the Bank of China (BOC). The People's Construction Bank of China, which had been run separately under the Ministry of Finance, was also made autonomous (and later renamed China Construction Bank in 1986). In January 1984, the PBC's own commercial banking operations were spun off as the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC).63450 In September 1983, the State Council had promulgated that the PBC would function exclusively as the central bank of China and no longer undertake commercial banking activities.42\nModernization efforts continued in the late 1980s and early 1990s. In 1990, the PBC moved into its new head office building, prominently located on West Chang'an Avenue. In 1991, Vice Governor Chen Yuan spearheaded the creation of the Electronic Interbank System (EIS), the PBC's first state-of-the-art financial market infrastructure.285 In 1992, however, the PBC had to reluctantly concede the spinning off of its securities regulatory duties to the newly established China Securities Regulatory Commission,149 whose first chair was former PBC vice governor Liu Hongru.\nAs part of the State Council's 1993 Resolution on Financial System Reform and its effort to modernize the financial sector, the PBC was assigned the role of managing the currency and preserving macroeconomic and financial stability.36\nThe bank's profile was greatly raised by the appointment of Zhu Rongji as its governor in 1993, simultaneously as his role as Vice Premier in charge of economic and financial affairs.125 Its central bank status was legally confirmed on March 18, 1995, by the 3rd Plenum of the 8th National People's Congress, and was granted a higher degree of autonomy than other State Council ministries by an act that year.203 In 1996 and 1996, the PBC established fundamental regulations on loans and consumer credit.20\nIn 1998, the PBC underwent a major restructuring. All provincial and local branches were abolished, and the PBC opened nine regional branches, whose boundaries did not correspond to local administrative boundaries. The nine branches were located in Chengdu, Guangzhou, Jinan, Nanjing, Shanghai, Shenyang, Tianjin, Wuhan, and Xi'an, complemented by a sub-provincial network of city-level and county-level sub-branches.144 That same year, the so-called credit plan, a key feature of China's former state planning process, was finally abandoned, allowing the PBC to play a genuine role as monetary policy authority.99\n21st century.\nIn 2003, the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress approved an amendment law for strengthening the role of PBC in the making and implementation of monetary policy for safeguarding the overall financial stability and provision of financial services. That year, the long overdue restructuring of China's banking sector made major progress with the creation of Central Huijin Investment, a PBC-managed fund that allowed the PBC to take the lead from the Ministry of Finance on the restructuring process and from the CCP Central Organization Department on the appointment of senior bank executives.279-281 That same year, however, the PBC reluctantly lost its direct authority over banking supervision with the creation of the China Banking Regulatory Commission.149\nIn 2005, the PBC elevated its branch in Shanghai to the status of \"second head office\", in a move intended to mirror the prominent market-facing role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York within the US Federal Reserve System.123 In 2006, the PBC established the Credit Reference Centre to provide financial credit reporting.47 In 2008, the PBC lost the direct ownership stakes it had built up in much of China's financial sector as the ownership of Central Huijin was transferred to the China Investment Corporation (CIC), a newly created sovereign wealth fund.287\nDuring the Great Recession, the PBC helped address bank liquidity crisis by signing swap agreements with numerous other countries to provide them with liquidity based on the renminbi.267 As of 2021[ [update]], China has swap agreements with 40 countries.271\nIn 2010, the PBC issued administrative measures regarding online non-financial payment services.33 These measures retroactively recognized the legal status of online third-party payment platforms like Alipay.33 Prior to the 2010 measures, these services existed in a legal grey area.32\nIn 2015, the PBC hosted China's first formal deposit insurance scheme. In 2019, this scheme was reorganized as a subsidiary of the PBC, the Deposit Insurance Fund Management Company. Meanwhile, in 2017, the PBC was tasked with the secretariat of China's newly established Financial Stability and Development Committee chaired by Vice Premier Liu He. In 2020, the PBC initiated supervision of significant financial holding companies.\nThe PBC underwent through another major restructuring in 2023 as part of the plan on reforming Party and state institutions, with the abolition of the nine regional branches established in 1998, which had already seen their authority watered down by a change in 2004 that had returned authority to the PBC's branches at the provincial level and further changes in 2018. Additionally, the PBC's county-level branches were absorbed by city-level branches. The new branches were inaugurated on August 18, 2023. The oversight over financial holding companies and financial consumer protection was also transferred from the PBC to the newly established National Financial Regulatory Administration (NFRA). Around 1,600 county-level branches of the PBC are planned to be absorbed to the NFRA; the PBC had 1,761 such branches at the end of 2021.\nOperations.\nThe PBC is a cabinet-level executive department of the State Council.203 The top management of the PBC are composed of the governor and a certain number of deputy governors. The governor is nominated by the premier of the State Council, who is then approved by the National People's Congress or its Standing Committee and appointed by the president.The deputy governors of the PBC are appointed to or removed from office by the premier.\nThe PBC adopts the governor responsibility system under which the governor supervises the overall work of the PBC while the deputy governors provide assistance to the governor to fulfill his or her responsibility. The current governor is Pan Gongsheng. Deputy governors of the management team include: Zhu Hexin, Zhang Qingsong, Xuan Changneng, Lu Lei, and Tao Ling. The PBC does not have central bank independence and is required to implement the policies of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). It operates under the direction of the CCP's Central Financial Commission. The CCP committee secretary of the PBC is the most powerful position in the bank and can hold more sway than the governor. The current CCP committee secretary is Pan Gongsheng.\nThe PBC Monetary Policy Committee is an advisory body chaired by the PBC governor. It typically includes the directors and deputy directors of other financial agencies, as well as a few influential academic economists.\nCentral departments.\nThe current head office building of the PBC was inaugurated in 2021 on Beijing Financial Street in Beijing. It replaced an earlier building bordering West Chang'an Avenue, constructed in 1987\u20131990 on a design by a team of architects led by Zhou Ru.49 That building's shape referred to two traditional Chinese motifs, namely yuanbao ingots and \"wealth vases\" () from Chinese folklore.176 It remains used by the PBC following the 2021 relocation. \nAs of 2019[ [update]], the PBC consisted of functional departments (bureaus) as below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBranches and offices.\nThe PBC has branches in each 31 provincial-level administrative divisions in China, branches in five cities (Shenzhen, Dalian, Ningbo, Qingdao, and Xiamen), and 317 branches in prefecture-level divisions. \nIt has 6 overseas representative offices (PBC Representative Office for America, PBC Representative Office (London) for Europe, PBC Tokyo Representative Office, PBC Frankfurt Representative Office, PBC Representative Office for Africa, Liaison Office of the PBC in the Caribbean Development Bank).\nAffiliate institutions.\nThe following enterprises and institutions were directly under the PBC as of 2012:\nThe PBC is active in promoting financial inclusion policy and a member of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48907", "revid": "218586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48907", "title": "Rules of chess", "text": "Rules of play for the game of chess\nThe rules of chess (also known as the laws of chess) govern the play of the game of chess. Chess is a two-player abstract strategy board game. Each player controls sixteen pieces of six types on a chessboard. Each type of piece moves in a distinct way. The object of the game is to checkmate the opponent's king; checkmate occurs when a king is threatened with capture and has no escape. A game can end in various ways besides checkmate: a player can resign, and there are several ways a game can end in a draw.\nWhile the exact origins of chess are unclear, modern rules first took form during the Middle Ages. The rules continued to be slightly modified until the early 19th century, when they reached essentially their current form. The rules also varied somewhat from region to region. Today, the standard rules are set by FIDE (F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale des \u00c9checs), the international governing body for chess. Slight modifications are made by some national organizations for their own purposes. There are variations of the rules for fast chess, correspondence chess, online chess, and Chess960.\nBesides the basic moves of the pieces, rules also govern the equipment used, time control, conduct and ethics of players, accommodations for physically challenged players, and recording of moves using chess notation. Procedures for resolving irregularities that can occur during a game are provided as well.\nInitial setup.\nChess is played on a chessboard, a square board divided into a grid of 64 squares (eight-by-eight) of alternating color (similar to the board used in draughts). Regardless of the actual colors of the board, the lighter-colored squares are called \"light\" or \"white\", and the darker-colored squares are called \"dark\" or \"black\". Sixteen \"white\" and sixteen \"black\" pieces are placed on the board at the beginning of the game. The board is placed so that a white square is in each player's near-right corner. Horizontal rows are called \"&lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;ranks&lt;/dfn&gt;\", and vertical columns are called \"&lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;files&lt;/dfn&gt;\".\nEach player controls sixteen pieces:\nAt the beginning of the game, the pieces are arranged as shown in the diagram: for each side one king, one queen, two rooks, two bishops, two knights, and eight pawns. The pieces are placed, one per square, as follows:\nPopular mnemonics used to remember the setup are \"queen on her own color\" and \"white on right\". The latter refers to setting up the board so that the square closest to each player's right is white.\nGameplay.\nWhite and black.\nThe player controlling the white pieces is named \"White\"; the player controlling the black pieces is named \"Black\". White moves first, then players alternate moves. Making a move is required; it is not legal to skip a move, even when having to move is detrimental. Play continues until a king is checkmated, a player resigns, or a draw is declared, as explained below. In addition, if the game is being played under a time control, a player who exceeds the time limit loses the game unless they cannot be checkmated.\nThe official chess rules do not include a procedure for determining who plays White. Instead, this decision is left open to tournament-specific rules (e.g. a Swiss system tournament or round-robin tournament) or, in the case of casual play, mutual agreement, in which case some kind of random choice such as flipping a coin can be employed. A common method is for one player to conceal a pawn of each color in either hand; the other player chooses a hand to open and receives the color of the piece that is revealed.\nMovement.\nBasic moves.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEach type of chess piece has its own method of movement. A piece moves to a vacant square except when &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;capturing&lt;/dfn&gt; an opponent's piece.\nExcept for any move of the knight and castling, pieces cannot jump over other pieces. A piece is \"captured\" (or \"taken\") when an attacking enemy piece replaces it on its square. The captured piece is thereby permanently removed from the game. The king can be put in check but cannot be captured (see below).\n* A pawn moves straight forward one square, if that square is vacant. If it has not yet moved, a pawn also has the option of moving two squares straight forward, provided both squares are vacant. Pawns cannot move backwards.\n* A pawn, unlike other pieces, captures differently from how it moves. A pawn can capture an enemy piece on either of the two squares diagonally in front of the pawn. It cannot move to those squares when vacant except when capturing \"en passant\".\n The pawn is also involved in the two special moves \"en passant\" and promotion.\nCastling.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCastling consists of moving the king two squares towards a rook, then placing the rook on the other side of the king, adjacent to it. Castling is only permissible if all of the following conditions hold:\nAn unmoved king and an unmoved rook of the same color on the same rank are said to have \"castling rights\".\n\"En passant\".\nWhen a pawn advances two squares on its initial move and ends the turn adjacent to an enemy pawn on the same &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;rank&lt;/dfn&gt;, it may be captured \"en passant\" by the enemy pawn as if it had moved only one square. This capture is legal only on the move immediately following the pawn's advance. The diagrams demonstrate an instance of this: if the white pawn moves from a2 to a4, the black pawn on b4 can capture it \"en passant\", moving from b4 to a3, and the white pawn on a4 is removed from the board.\nPromotion.\nIf a player advances a pawn to its eighth rank, the pawn is then \"promoted\" (converted) to a queen, rook, bishop, or knight of the same color at the choice of the player (a queen is most common). The choice is not limited to previously &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;captured&lt;/dfn&gt; pieces. Hence it is theoretically possible for a player to have up to nine queens or up to ten rooks, bishops, or knights if all of the player's pawns are promoted.\nCheck.\nA king is \"in check\" when it is under attack by at least one enemy piece. A piece unable to move because it would place its own king in check (it is pinned against its own king) may still deliver check to the opposing player.\nIt is illegal to make a move that places or leaves one's king in check. The possible ways to get out of check are:\nIn informal games, it is customary to announce \"check\" when making a move that puts the opponent's king in check. In formal competitions, however, check is rarely announced.\nEnd of the game.\nCheckmate.\nIf a player's king is placed in check and there is no legal move that player can make to escape check, then the king is said to be \"checkmated\", the game ends, and that player loses. Unlike the other pieces, the king is never captured.\nThe diagram shows an example checkmate position. The white king is threatened by the black queen; the empty square to which the king could move is also threatened; and the king cannot capture the queen, because it would then be in check by the rook.\nResigning.\nEither player may \"resign\" at any time, conceding the game to the opponent. To indicate resignation, the player may say \"I resign\". Tipping over the king also indicates resignation, but it should be distinguished from accidentally knocking the king over. Stopping both clocks is not an indication of resigning, since clocks can be stopped to call the arbiter. An offer of a handshake is sometimes used, but it could be mistaken for a draw offer.\nUnder FIDE Laws, a resignation by one player results in a draw if their opponent has no way to checkmate them via any series of legal moves, or a loss by that player otherwise.\nDraws.\nThe game ends in a draw if any of these conditions occur:\nIn addition, in the FIDE rules, if a player has run out of time (see below), or has resigned, but the position is such that there is no way for the opponent to give checkmate by any series of legal moves, the game is a draw.\nFIDE's competitive rules of play allow a player to claim a draw in either of two situations:\nThese rules help prevent games from being extended indefinitely in tournaments.\nThere is no longer a rule specifically defining perpetual check as a draw. In such a situation, either the threefold repetition rule or the fifty-move rule will eventually come into effect. More often, the players will simply agree to a draw.\nDead position.\nA \"dead position\" is defined as a position where neither player can checkmate their opponent's king by any sequence of legal moves. According to the rules of chess the game is immediately terminated the moment a dead position appears on the board. \nSome basic endings are always dead positions; for example:\nBlocked positions can arise in which progress is impossible for either side, such as the diagrammed position; these too are dead positions.\nUSCF rules, for games played under a time control that does not include delay or increment, allow draw claims for \"insufficient losing chances\". For example, if each player has only a king and a knight, checkmate is only achievable with the co-operation of both players, even if it is not a dead position.\nTouch-move rule.\nThe touch-move rule is a fundamental principle in chess, ensuring that players commit to moves deliberated mentally, without physically experimenting on the board. According to this rule, a player who touches a piece with the intention of moving it must then move it if legally possible. This rule also applies to capturing: a player who touches an opponent's piece must capture it if a legal capture is available. Special considerations apply for castling and pawn promotion, reflecting their unique nature in the game.\nA player who touches a piece to adjust its physical position within a square must first alert the opponent by saying \"J'adoube\" or \"I adjust\". Once the game has started, only the player with the move may touch the pieces on the board.\nCompetitive rules of play.\nThe following rules are applicable to games in organized tournaments and matches, sanctioned by FIDE. They mention timing (chess clocks), arbiters (or, in USCF play, directors), keeping score, and adjournment. The FIDE Laws of Chess define the rules for standard chess, rapid chess, blitz chess, and guidelines for Chess960. For standard chess, the players must record the moves, which is optional in rapid chess and blitz Chess. Some rules are specifically adapted for blind and visually impaired players.\nThese rules are used for &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;over-the-board&lt;/dfn&gt; (OTB) games. The rules for correspondence chess are defined by the ICCF. Rules for computer chess and for online chess played on a computer device are published by other organizers and governing bodies.\nMoving the pieces.\nAlthough the touch-move rule is generally observed even in non-organized, non-sanctioned play, the interpretation of that rule to special situations such as capturing, castling, and promotion is not obvious; thus it is elaborated further in FIDE rules.\nThe movement of pieces is to be done with one hand. Once the hand is taken off a piece after moving it, the move cannot be retracted unless the &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;move is illegal&lt;/dfn&gt;. As for the touch-move rule, an arbiter who observes a violation of this rule must intervene immediately.\nWhen castling, a player should first move the king with one hand and then move the rook with the same hand. In the case of a promotion, if a player releases the pawn on the eighth rank, the player must promote the pawn. After the pawn has moved, the player may touch any piece not on the board and the promotion is not finalized until the new piece is released on the promotion square. Although it is a common practice in informal play, under FIDE rules an upturned rook may not be used to represent a promoted queen; such a move would be treated as a legal rook promotion. If the correct piece is not immediately available, the player may stop the clocks and call the arbiter.\nTiming.\nTournament games are played under time constraints, called time controls, using a chess clock. Each player is timed separately and must make moves within the time control or forfeit the game. There are different types of time controls applied. For standard chess, different periods can be defined with different fixed times (e.g. first 40 moves in 100 minutes, next 20 moves in 50 minutes, remaining moves in 15 minutes). For rapid and blitz chess, only one period can be defined where all moves must be performed. Additionally, an increment or delay per move may be defined.\nThe United States Chess Federation (USCF) rule is different. USCF Rule 14E defines \"insufficient material to win on time\", that is lone king, king plus knight, king plus bishop, and king plus two knights opposed by no pawns, and there is no forced win in the final position. Hence to win on time with this material, the USCF rule requires that a win can be forced from that position, while the FIDE rule merely requires a win to be possible. (See Monika So\u0107ko rules appeal in 2008 and Women's World Chess Championship 2008 for a famous instance of this rule.)\nWith mechanical clocks only, flag-fall for both players can occur. With digital clocks, the clock indicates which flag fell first, and this information is valid.\nIn the last period of a standard chess game or rapid games, if played without increment, a special set of rules applies regarding the clock, referenced as \"Quickplay Finishes\". These rules allow a player with under two minutes time to request an increment introduced, or request a draw based on claiming no progress or no effort, to be ruled by the arbiter. These rules have been relevant when playing with mechanical clocks, which do not allow setting an increment and are today with digital clocks of second importance only, as playing with increment is recommended.\nRecording moves.\nEach square of the chessboard is identified with a unique pair of a letter and a number. The vertical &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;files&lt;/dfn&gt; are labeled a through h, from White's left (i.e. the queenside) to White's right. Similarly, the horizontal &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;ranks&lt;/dfn&gt; are numbered from 1 to 8, starting from the one nearest White's side of the board. Each square of the board, then, is uniquely identified by its file letter and rank number. The white king, for example, starts the game on square e1. The black knight on b8 can move to a6 or c6.\nIn formal competition, each player is obliged to record each move as it is played in algebraic chess notation in order to settle disputes about illegal positions, overstepping time control, and making claims of draws by the fifty-move rule or repetition of position. Moves recorded in any other systems of notation cannot be used in evidence in such a dispute. Other chess notation systems include ICCF numeric notation for international correspondence chess and descriptive chess notation, formerly standard in English speaking countries. The current rule is that a move must be made on the board before it is written on paper or recorded with an electronic device.\nBoth players should indicate offers of a draw by writing \"=\" at that move on their score sheets. Notations about the time on the clocks can be made. A player with less than five minutes left to complete all the remaining moves is not required to record the moves (unless a delay of at least thirty seconds per move is being used). The score sheet must be made available to the &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;arbiter&lt;/dfn&gt; at all times. A player may respond to an opponent's move before writing it down.\nSee. \nAdjournment.\nFormerly common, adjournments are no longer standard practice in chess competition.\nWhen an adjournment is made, the player whose move it is writes their next move on their scoresheet but does not make the move on the chessboard. This is referred to as a &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;sealed move&lt;/dfn&gt;. Both opponents' scoresheets are then placed in the sealed-move envelope and the envelope is sealed. The names of the players, the colors, the position, the time on the clocks and other game data are recorded on the envelope; the envelope may also be signed by both players. The arbiter then keeps possession of the envelope until it is time to restart the game, at which time the arbiter opens the envelope, makes the sealed move on the board, and starts the opponent's clock.\nIrregularities.\nIllegal move.\nAn illegal move is a move not made according to a piece's possible defined movements or made according to its possible movements but such that its own king is left or placed in check. Furthermore, pressing the clock without making a move or making a move with two hands is considered and penalized as an illegal move.\nA player who makes an &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;illegal move&lt;/dfn&gt; must retract that move and make a legal move. That move must be made with the same piece if possible, because the touch-move rule applies. If the illegal move was an attempt to castle, the touch-move rule applies to the king but not to the rook. If the mistake is noticed, the game should be restarted from the position in which the error occurred. The arbiter should adjust the time on the clock according to the best evidence. Some regional organizations have different rules.\nA player may correct an illegal move if the player has not pressed the clock. In standard chess, if a move is found during the game, the position immediately before the irregularity is reinstated. In the most used form of rapid chess and blitz chess if the move is found before the opponent moves, the position immediately before the irregularity is also reinstated.\nAccording to the FIDE Laws of Chess, the first stated completed illegal move results in a time penalty. The time penalty consists of giving the opponent two minutes extra time in standard chess, or one minute extra time in rapid or blitz. The second stated completed illegal move by the same player results in the loss of the game, unless the position is such that it is impossible for the opponent to win by any series of legal moves (e.g. if the opponent has a bare king) in which case the game is drawn. A move is completed when it has been made and the player has pressed the clock.\nUnder USCF rules, if a player completes an illegal move in blitz chess, the player's opponent may claim a win before making a move (if the opponent has enough material to win). One way to claim this win is to take a King left in check by the opponent. Once the illegal move has been answered, the move stands.\nIncorrect setup.\nFor standard chess and the most used form of rapid and blitz chess there are the following rules. If it is discovered during the game that the starting position was incorrect, the game is restarted. If it is discovered during the game that the board is oriented incorrectly, the game is continued with the pieces transferred to a correctly oriented board. If the game starts with colors reversed, the game is restarted if less than 10 moves have been made by both players, otherwise the game is continued. If the clock setting is found to be incorrect during the game, it is corrected according to best judgement. Some regional organizations have different rules.\nPiece displacement.\nIf a player knocks over pieces, it is the same player's responsibility to restore them to their correct positions, on that player's time. If it is discovered that an illegal move has been made, or that pieces have been displaced, the game is restored to the position before the irregularity. If that position cannot be determined, the game is restored to the last known correct position.\nIllegal position.\nAn illegal position is a position which cannot be reached by any series of legal moves.\nConduct.\nPlayers may not use any notes, outside sources of information (including computers), or advice from other people. Analysis on another board is not permitted. Scoresheets are to record objective facts about the game only, such as time on the clock or draw offers. Players may not leave the competition area without permission of the arbiter.\nHigh standards of etiquette and ethics are expected. Players should shake hands before and after the game. Generally a player should not speak during the game, except to offer a draw, resign, or to call attention to an irregularity. An announcement of \"check\" is commonly made in informal games but is not recommended in officially sanctioned games. A player may not distract or annoy another player by any means, including repeatedly offering a draw.\nDue to increasing concerns about the use of chess engines and outside communication, mobile phone usage is banned. The first forfeit by a high-profile player, for phone ringing during play, occurred in 2003. In 2014 FIDE extended this to ban all mobile phones from the playing area during chess competitions, under penalty of forfeiture of the game or even expulsion from the tournament. The rules allow for less rigid enforcement in minor events.\nEquipment.\nPieces of the Staunton chess set design are the standard and are usually made of wood or plastic. They are often black and white; other colors may be used (like a dark wood or even red for the dark pieces) but they would still be called the \"white\" and \"black\" pieces (see White and Black in chess). The height of the king should be about 95\u00a0mm, within 10 percent. The diameter of the king should be 40 to 50% of its height. The size of the other pieces should be in proportion to the king. The pieces should be well balanced.\nThe size of the squares of the chessboard should be approximately 1.25 to 1.3 times the diameter of the base of the king, or 50 to 65\u00a0mm. Squares of approximately 57\u00a0mm (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20444\u00a0inches) normally are well-suited for pieces with the kings in the preferred size range; four pawns should fit on a square. Squares may be the natural color of the wood, or other combinations of dark and light colors.\nIn games subject to time control, a chess clock is used, consisting of two adjacent clocks and buttons to stop one clock while starting the other, such that the two component clocks never run simultaneously. The clock can be analog or digital though a digital clock is preferred under both USCF and FIDE rulesets. This is because most tournaments now include either an increment (extra time being added prior or after the move) or delay (a countdown to when a clock starts again) to their time controls. Before the start of the game, in FIDE competitions the arbiter decides where the chess clock is placed; in USCF competitions the director may decide, or the director may leave it to the players, in which case the player with the black pieces will decide.\nHistory.\nThe rules of chess have evolved much over the centuries from the early chess-like games played in India in the 6th century. For much of that time the rules have varied from area to area. The modern rules first took form in southern Europe during the 13th century, giving more mobility to pieces that previously had more restricted movement (such as the queen and bishop). Such modified rules entered into an accepted form during the late 15th century or early 16th century. The basic moves of the king, rook, and knight are unchanged. A pawn originally did not have the option of moving two squares on its first move, and promoted only to a queen upon reaching the eighth rank. The queen was originally the \"fers\" or \"farzin\", which could move one square diagonally in any direction. In European chess it became able to leap two squares diagonally, forwards, backwards, or to left or right on its first move; some areas also gave this right to a newly promoted pawn. In the Persian and Arabic game the bishop was a \"p\u012bl\" (Persian) or \"f\u012bl\" (Arabic) (meaning \"elephant\") which moved two squares diagonally with jump. In the Middle Ages the pawn could only be promoted to the equivalent of a queen (which at that time was a weak piece) if it reached its eighth rank. During the 12th century, the squares on the board sometimes alternated colors, and this became the standard in the 13th century; whence the word \"chequered\"/\"checkered\".\nBetween 1200 and 1600 several laws emerged that drastically altered the game. Checkmate became a requirement to win; a player could not win by capturing all of the opponent's pieces. Stalemate was added, although the outcome has changed several times (see History of the stalemate rule). Pawns gained the option of moving two squares on their first move, and the \"en passant\" rule was a natural consequence of that new option. The king and rook acquired the right to castle (see for different versions of the rule).\nBetween 1475 and 1500, the queen and the bishop also acquired their current moves, which made them much stronger pieces. When all of these changes were accepted, the game was in essentially its modern form.\nThe rules for promotion have changed several times. As stated above, originally the pawn could only be promoted to the queen, which at that time was a weak piece. When the queen acquired its current move and became the most powerful piece, the pawn could then be promoted to a queen or a rook, bishop, or knight. In the 18th century rules allowed only the promotion to a piece already captured, e.g. the rules published in 1749 by Fran\u00e7ois-Andr\u00e9 Danican Philidor. In the 19th century, this restriction was lifted, which allowed for a player to have more than one queen, e.g. the 1828 rules by Jacob Sarratt.\nTwo new rules concerning draws were introduced, each of which has changed through the years:\nAnother group of new laws included (1) the touch-move rule and the accompanying \"j'adoube/adjust\" rule; (2) that White moves first (in 1889); (3) the orientation of the board; (4) the procedure if an illegal move was made; (5) the procedure if the king had been left in check for some moves; and (6) issues regarding the behavior of players and spectators. The Staunton chess set was introduced in 1849 and it became the standard style of pieces. The size of pieces and squares of the board was standardized.\nUntil the middle of the 19th century, chess games were played without any time limit. In an 1834 match between Alexander McDonnell and Louis-Charles Mah\u00e9 de La Bourdonnais, McDonnell took an inordinate amount of time to move, sometimes up to 1\u00bd hours. In 1836 Pierre Charles Fournier de Saint-Amant suggested a time limit, but no action was taken. At the 1851 London tournament, Staunton blamed his loss in his match against Elijah Williams on Williams' slow play; one game was adjourned for the day after only 29 moves. The next year a match between Daniel Harrwitz and Johann L\u00f6wenthal used a limit of 20 minutes per move. The first use of a modern-style time limit was in an 1861 match between Adolph Anderssen and Ign\u00e1c Kolisch.\nCodification.\nThe first known publication of chess rules was in a book by Luis Ram\u00edrez de Lucena about 1497, shortly after the movement of the queen, bishop, and pawn were changed to their modern form. Ruy L\u00f3pez de Segura gave rules of chess in his 1561 book Libro de la invencion liberal y arte del juego del axedrez. In the 16th and 17th centuries, there were local differences concerning rules such as castling, promotion, stalemate, and \"en passant\". Some of these differences persisted until the 19th century; for example, differences in castling rules persisted in Italy until the late 19th century.\nAs chess clubs arose and tournaments became common, there was a need to formalize the rules. In 1749 Philidor (1726\u20131795) wrote a set of rules that were widely used, as well as rules by later writers such as the 1828 rules by Jacob Sarratt (1772\u20131819) and rules by George Walker (1803\u20131879). In the 19th century, many major clubs published their own rules, including The Hague in 1803, London in 1807, Paris in 1836, and St. Petersburg in 1854. In 1851 Howard Staunton (1810\u20131874) called for a \"Constituent Assembly for Remodeling the Laws of Chess\" and proposals by Tassilo von Heydebrand und der Lasa (1818\u20131889) were published in 1854. Staunton had published rules in \"Chess Player's Handbook\" in 1847, and his new proposals were published in 1860 in \"Chess Praxis\"; they were generally accepted in English-speaking countries. German-speaking countries usually used the writings of chess authority Johann Berger (1845\u20131933) or \"Handbuch des Schachspiels\" by Paul Rudolf von Bilguer (1815\u20131840), first published in 1843.\nIn 1924, F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale des \u00c9checs (FIDE) was formed and in 1928 it took up the task of standardizing the rules. At first FIDE tried to establish a universal set of rules, but translations to various languages differed slightly. Although FIDE rules were used for international competition under their control, some countries continued to use their own rules internally. In 1952, FIDE created the Permanent Commission for the Rules of Chess (also known as the Rules Commission) and published a new edition of the rules. The third official edition of the laws was published in 1966. The first three editions of the rules were published in French, with that as the official version. In 1974 FIDE published the English version of the rules (which was based on an authorized 1955 translation). With that edition, English became the official language of the rules. Another edition was published in 1979. Throughout this time, ambiguities in the laws were handled by frequent interpretations that the Rules Commission published as supplements and amendments. In 1982, the Rules Commission rewrote the laws to incorporate the interpretations and amendments. In 1984, FIDE abandoned the idea of a universal set of laws, although FIDE rules are the standard for high-level play. With the 1984 edition, FIDE implemented a four-year moratorium between changes to the rules. Other editions were issued in 1988 and 1992.\nThe rules of national FIDE affiliates (such as the United States Chess Federation, or USCF) are based on the FIDE rules, with slight variations. Some other differences are noted above. Kenneth Harkness published popular rulebooks in the United States starting in 1956, and the USCF continues to publish rulebooks for use in tournaments it sanctions.\nIn 2008, FIDE added the variant Chess960 to the appendix of the \"Laws of Chess\". Chess960 uses a random initial set-up of main pieces, with the conditions that the king is placed somewhere between the two rooks, and bishops on opposite-color squares. The castling rules are extended to cover all these positions.\nIn the 21st century, rules about such things as mobile phones and unauthorized use of chess engines were introduced.\nCustomizations in tournament play.\nUnder FIDE's Laws of Chess, tournament organizers have the option to parameterize some rules to fit their events. This flexibility covers time controls for standard, rapid, and blitz chess, and setting the 'default time' - the period before a player forfeits for being late, which is zero unless otherwise specified. Additionally, measures can be introduced to discourage players from agreeing to short draws. One such case was the \"no drawing or resigning during the first 30 moves\" rule used at the .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpecific rules\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48908", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48908", "title": "Apparent retrograde motion", "text": "Apparent backward motion of a planet\nApparent retrograde motion is the apparent motion of a planet in a direction opposite to that of other bodies within its system, as observed from a particular vantage point. Direct motion or prograde motion is motion in the same direction as other bodies.\nWhile the terms \"direct\" and \"prograde\" are equivalent in this context, the former is the traditional term in astronomy. The earliest recorded use of \"prograde\" was in the early 18th century, although the term is now less common.\nEtymology and history.\nThe term \"retrograde\" is from the Latin word \u2013 \"backward-step\", the affix meaning \"backwards\" and \"step\". \"Retrograde\" is most commonly an adjective used to describe the path of a planet as it travels through the night sky, with respect to the zodiac, stars, and other bodies of the celestial canopy. In this context, the term refers to planets, as they appear from Earth, stopping briefly and reversing direction at certain times, though in reality, of course, we now understand that they perpetually orbit in the same uniform direction.\nAlthough planets can sometimes be mistaken for stars as one observes the night sky, the planets actually change position from night to night in relation to the stars. Retrograde (backward) and prograde (forward) are observed as though the stars revolve around the Earth. Ancient Greek astronomer Ptolemy in 150\u00a0AD believed that the Earth was the center of the Solar System and therefore used the terms \"retrograde\" and \"prograde\" to describe the movement of the planets in relation to the stars. Although it is known today that the planets revolve around the Sun, the same terms continue to be used in order to describe the movement of the planets in relation to the stars as they are observed from Earth. Like the Sun, the planets appear to rise in the East and set in the West. When a planet travels eastward in relation to the stars, it is called \"prograde\". When the planet travels westward in relation to the stars (opposite path) it is called \"retrograde\".\nThis apparent retrogradation puzzled ancient astronomers, and was one reason they named these bodies 'planets' in the first place: 'Planet' comes from the Greek word for 'wanderer'. In the geocentric model of the Solar System proposed by Apollonius in the third century BCE, retrograde motion was explained by having the planets travel in deferents and epicycles. It was not understood to be an illusion until the time of Copernicus, although the Greek astronomer Aristarchus in 240 BCE proposed a heliocentric model for the Solar System.\nGalileo's drawings show that he first observed Neptune on December 28, 1612, and again on January 27, 1613. On both occasions, Galileo mistook Neptune for a fixed star when it appeared very close\u2014in conjunction\u2014to Jupiter in the night sky, hence, he is not credited with Neptune's discovery. During the period of his first observation in December 1612, Neptune was stationary in the sky because it had just turned retrograde that very day. Since Neptune was only beginning its yearly retrograde cycle, the motion of the planet was far too slight to be detected with Galileo's small telescope.\nApparent motion.\nFrom Earth.\nWhen standing on the Earth looking up at the sky, it would appear that the Moon travels from east to west, just as the Sun and the stars do. Day after day however, the Moon appears to move to the east with respect to the stars. In fact, the Moon orbits the Earth from west to east, as do the vast majority of manmade satellites such as the International Space Station. The apparent westward motion of the Moon from the Earth's surface is actually an artifact of its being in a supersynchronous orbit. This means that the Earth completes one sidereal rotation before the Moon is able to complete one orbit. As a result, it looks like the Moon is travelling in the opposite direction, otherwise known as apparent retrograde motion. A person standing on Earth \"catches up\" to the Moon and passes it because the Earth completes one rotation before the Moon completes one orbit.\nThis phenomenon also occurs on Mars, which has two natural satellites, Phobos and Deimos. Both moons orbit Mars in an eastward (prograde) direction; however, Deimos has an orbital period of 1.23 Martian sidereal days, making it supersynchronous, whereas Phobos has an orbital period of 0.31 Martian sidereal days, making it subsynchronous. Consequently, although both moons are traveling in an eastward (prograde) direction, they appear to be traveling in opposite directions when viewed from the surface of Mars due to their orbital periods in relation to the rotational period of the planet.\nAll other planetary bodies in the Solar System also appear to periodically switch direction as they cross Earth's sky. Though all stars and planets appear to move from east to west on a nightly basis in response to the rotation of Earth, the outer planets generally drift slowly eastward relative to the stars. Asteroids and Kuiper Belt objects (including Pluto) exhibit apparent retrograde motion. This motion is normal for the planets, and so is considered direct motion. However, since Earth completes its orbit in a shorter period of time than the planets outside its orbit, it periodically overtakes them, like a faster car on a multi-lane highway. When this occurs, the planet being passed will first appear to stop its eastward drift, and then drift back toward the west. Then, as Earth swings past the planet in its orbit, it appears to resume its normal motion west to east.Inner planets Venus and Mercury appear to move in retrograde in a similar mechanism, but as they can never be in opposition to the Sun as seen from Earth, their retrograde cycles are tied to their inferior conjunctions with the Sun. They are unobservable in the Sun's glare and in their \"new\" phase, with mostly their dark sides toward Earth; they occur in the transition from evening star to morning star.\nThe more distant planets retrograde more frequently, as they do not move as much in their orbits while Earth completes an orbit itself. The retrograde motion of a hypothetical extremely distant (and nearly non-moving) planet would take place during a half-year, with the planet's apparent yearly motion being reduced to a parallax ellipse.\nThe center of the retrograde motion occurs at the planet's opposition which is when the planet is exactly opposite the Sun. This position is halfway, or 6 months, around the ecliptic from the Sun. The planet's height in the sky is opposite that of the Sun's height. The planet is at its highest at the winter solstice, and at its lowest at the summer solstice, on those (rare) occasions when it passes through the center of its retrograde motion near a solstice. Note particularly that the hemisphere the observer is in is critical to what they observe. The December Solstice will place the planet high in the northern hemisphere sky where it is winter and place it low in the southern hemisphere sky where it is summer. The opposite is true if this happens at the June Solstice. \nSince the planet's opposition retrograde motion is when the Earth passes closest, the planet appears at its brightest for the year.\nThe period between the center of such retrogradations is the synodic period of the planet.\nFrom Mercury.\nFrom any point on the daytime surface of Mercury when the planet is near perihelion (closest approach to the Sun), the Sun undergoes apparent retrograde motion. This occurs because, from approximately four Earth days before perihelion until approximately four Earth days after it, Mercury's angular orbital speed exceeds its angular rotational velocity. Mercury's elliptical orbit is farther from circular than that of any other planet in the Solar System, resulting in a substantially higher orbital speed near perihelion. As a result, at specific points on Mercury's surface an observer would be able to see the Sun rise part way, then reverse and set before rising again, all within the same Mercurian day.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48909", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48909", "title": "Zenith", "text": "Imaginary point directly above a particular location, on the imaginary celestial sphere\nThe zenith (, ) is the imaginary point on the celestial sphere directly \"above\" a particular location. \"Above\" means in the vertical direction (plumb line) opposite to the gravity direction at that location (nadir). The zenith is the \"highest\" point on the celestial sphere. The direction opposite of the zenith is the nadir.\nOrigin.\nThe word \"zenith\" derives from an inaccurate reading of the Arabic expression (), meaning \"direction of the head\" or \"path above the head\", by Medieval Latin scribes in the Middle Ages (during the 14th century), possibly through Old Spanish. It was reduced to \"samt\" (\"direction\") and miswritten as \"senit\"/\"cenit\", the \"m\" being misread as \"ni\". Through the Old French \"cenith\", \"zenith\" first appeared in the 17th century.\nRelevance and use.\nThe term \"zenith\" sometimes means the highest point, way, or level reached by a celestial body on its daily apparent path around a given point of observation. This sense of the word is often used to describe the position of the Sun (\"The sun reached its zenith...\"), but to an astronomer, the Sun does not have its own zenith and is at the zenith only if it is directly overhead.\nIn a scientific context, the zenith is the direction of reference for measuring the zenith angle (or zenith angular distance), the angle between a direction of interest (e.g. a star) and the local zenith - that is, the complement of the altitude angle (or elevation angle).\nThe Sun reaches the observer's zenith when it is 90\u00b0 above the horizon, and this only happens between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn. The point where this occurs is known as the subsolar point. In Islamic astronomy, the passing of the Sun over the zenith of Mecca becomes the basis of the qibla observation by shadows twice a year on 27/28 May and 15/16 July.\nAt a given location during the course of a day, the Sun reaches not only its zenith but also its nadir, at the antipode of that location 12 hours from solar noon.\nIn astronomy, the altitude in the horizontal coordinate system and the zenith angle are complementary angles, with the horizon perpendicular to the zenith. The astronomical meridian is also determined by the zenith, and is defined as a circle on the celestial sphere that passes through the zenith, nadir, and the celestial poles.\nA zenith telescope is a type of telescope designed to point straight up at or near the zenith, and used for precision measurement of star positions, to simplify telescope construction, or both. The NASA Orbital Debris Observatory and the Large Zenith Telescope are both zenith telescopes, since the use of liquid mirrors meant these telescopes could only point straight up.\nOn the International Space Station, \"zenith\" and \"nadir\" are used instead of \"up\" and \"down\", referring to directions within and around the station, relative to the earth.\nZenith star.\nZenith stars (also \"star on top\", \"overhead star\", \"latitude star\") are stars whose declination equals the latitude of the observers location, and hence at some time in the day or night pass culminate (pass) through the zenith. When at the zenith the right ascension of the star equals the local sidereal time at your location. In celestial navigation this allows latitude to be determined, since the declination of the star equals the latitude of the observer. If the current time at Greenwich is known at the time of the observation, the observers longitude can also be determined from the right ascension of the star. Hence \"Zenith stars\" lie on or near the circle of declination equal to the latitude of the observer (\"zenith circle\"). Zenith stars are not to be confused with \"steering stars\" of a sidereal compass rose of a sidereal compass.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48910", "revid": "3093489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48910", "title": "Horizon", "text": "Apparent curve that separates earth from sky\nThe horizon is the border between the surface of a celestial body and its sky when viewed from the perspective of an observer on or above the surface of the celestial body. This concept is further refined as -\nThere is also an imaginary astronomical, celestial, or theoretical horizon, part of the horizontal coordinate system, which is an infinite eye-level plane perpendicular to a line that runs (a) from the center of a celestial body (b) through the observer and (c) out to space (see graphic). It is used to calculate \"horizon dip,\" which is the difference between the astronomical horizon and the sea horizon measured in arcs. Horizon dip is one factor taken into account in navigation by the stars.\nIn perspective drawing, the horizon line (also referred to as \"eye-level\") is the point of view from which the drawn scene is presented. It is an imaginary horizontal line across the scene. The line may be above, level with, or below the center of the drawing, corresponding to looking down, straight at, or up to the drawn scene. Vanishing lines run from the foreground to one or more vanishing points on the horizon line.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"horizon\" derives from the Greek () 'separating circle', where is from the verb \u1f41\u03c1\u03af\u03b6\u03c9 () '(I) divide, (I) separate', which in turn derives from () 'boundary, landmark'.\nTrue horizon.\nThe true horizon surrounds the observer and it is typically assumed to be a circle, drawn on the surface of a perfectly spherical model of the relevant celestial body, i.e., a small circle of the local osculating sphere. With respect to Earth, the center of the true horizon is below the observer and below sea level. Its radius or horizontal distance from the observer varies slightly from day to day due to atmospheric refraction, which is greatly affected by weather conditions. Also, the higher the observer's eyes are from sea level, the farther away the horizon is from the observer. For instance, in standard atmospheric conditions, for an observer with eye level above sea level by , the horizon is at a distance of about .\nWhen observed from very high standpoints, such as a space station, the horizon is much farther away and it encompasses a much larger area of Earth's surface. In this case, the horizon would no longer be a perfect circle, not even a plane curve such as an ellipse, especially when the observer is above the equator, as the Earth's surface can be better modeled as an oblate ellipsoid than as a sphere.\nDistance to the horizon.\nFormula.\nThe distance to the true (geometric) horizon (not accounting for atmospheric refraction) from an observer at height formula_1 above the surface of a celestial body assumed to be perfectly spherical can be calculated using the formula:\nformula_2\nWhere:\nExamples.\nAssuming no atmospheric refraction and a spherical Earth with radius R=:\nOther planets.\nOn terrestrial planets and other solid celestial bodies with negligible atmospheric effects, the distance to the horizon for a \"standard observer\" varies as the square root of the planet's radius. Thus, the horizon on Mercury is 62% as far away from the observer as it is on Earth, on Mars the figure is 73%, on the Moon the figure is 52%, on Mimas the figure is 18%, and so on.\nDerivation.\nIf the Earth is assumed to be a featureless sphere (rather than an oblate spheroid) with no atmospheric refraction, then the distance to the horizon can be calculated. using the Pythagorean theorem.\nAt the horizon, the line of sight is a tangent to the Earth and is also perpendicular to Earth's radius. \nThis sets up a right triangle, with the sum of the radius and the height as the hypotenuse. \nWith\nreferring to the second figure at the right leads to the following:\nformula_6\nwhich may be solved to yield\nformula_7\nwhere \"R\" is the radius of the Earth (\"R\" and \"h\" must be in the same units). For example,\nif a satellite is at a height of 2000\u00a0km, the distance to the horizon is ;\nneglecting the second term in parentheses would give a distance of , a 7% error.\nApproximation.\nIf the observer is close to the surface of the Earth, then \"h\" is a negligible fraction of \"R\" and can be disregarded the term (2\"R\" + \"h\"), and the formula becomes-\nformula_8\nUsing kilometres for \"d\" and \"R\", and metres for \"h\", and taking the radius of the Earth as 6371\u00a0km, the distance to the horizon is\nformula_9.\nUsing imperial units, with \"d\" and \"R\" in statute miles (as commonly used on land), and \"h\" in feet, the distance to the horizon is\nformula_10.\nIf \"d\" is in nautical miles, and \"h\" in feet, the constant factor is about 1.06, which is close enough to 1 that it is often ignored, giving:\nformula_11\nThese formulas may be used when \"h\" is much smaller than the radius of the Earth (6371\u00a0km or 3959\u00a0mi), including all views from any mountaintops, airplanes, or high-altitude balloons. With the constants as given, both the metric and imperial formulas are precise to within 1% (see the next section for how to obtain greater precision).\nIf \"h\" is significant with respect to \"R\", as with most satellites, then the approximation is no longer valid, and the exact formula is required.\nRelated measures.\nArc distance.\nAnother relationship involves the great-circle distance \"s\" along the arc over the curved surface of the Earth to the horizon; this is more directly comparable to the geographical distance on a map.\nIt can be formulated in terms of \"\u03b3\" in radians,\nformula_12\nthen\nformula_13\nSolving for \"s\" gives\nformula_14\nThe distance \"s\" can also be expressed in terms of the line-of-sight distance \"d\"; from the second figure at the right,\nformula_15\nsubstituting for \"\u03b3\" and rearranging gives\nformula_16\nThe distances \"d\" and \"s\" are nearly the same when the height of the object is negligible compared to the radius (that is, \"h\"\u00a0\u226a\u00a0\"R\").\nZenith angle.\nWhen the observer is elevated, the horizon zenith angle can be greater than 90\u00b0. The maximum visible zenith angle occurs when the ray is tangent to Earth's surface; from triangle OCG in the figure at right,\nformula_17\nwhere formula_1 is the observer's height above the surface and formula_19 is the angular dip of the horizon. It is related to the horizon zenith angle formula_20 by:\nformula_21\nFor a non-negative height formula_1, the angle formula_20 is always \u2265 90\u00b0.\nObjects above the horizon.\nTo compute the greatest distance \"D\"BL at which an observer B can see the top of an object L above the horizon, simply add the distances to the horizon from each of the two points:\n\"D\"BL = \"D\"B + \"D\"L\nFor example, for an observer B with a height of \"h\"B\n1.70\u00a0m standing on the ground, the horizon is \"D\"B\n4.65\u00a0km away. For a tower with a height of \"h\"L\n100\u00a0m, the horizon distance is \"D\"L\n35.7\u00a0km. Thus an observer on a beach can see the top of the tower as long as it is not more than \"D\"BL\n40.35\u00a0km away. Conversely, if an observer on a boat (\"h\"B\n1.7m) can just see the tops of trees on a nearby shore (\"h\"L\n10m), the trees are probably about \"D\"BL\n16\u00a0km away.\nReferring to the figure at the right, and using the approximation above, the top of the lighthouse will be visible to a lookout in a crow's nest at the top of a mast of the boat if\nformula_24\nwhere \"D\"BL is in kilometres and \"h\"B and \"h\"L are in metres.\nAs another example, suppose an observer, whose eyes are two metres above the level ground, uses binoculars to look at a distant building which he knows to consist of thirty stories, each 3.5 metres high. He counts the stories he can see and finds there are only ten. So twenty stories or 70 metres of the building are hidden from him by the curvature of the Earth. From this, he can calculate his distance from the building:\nformula_25\nwhich comes to about 35 kilometres.\nIt is similarly possible to calculate how much of a distant object is visible above the horizon. Suppose an observer's eye is 10 metres above sea level, and he is watching a ship that is 20\u00a0km away. His horizon is:\nformula_26\nkilometres from him, which comes to about 11.3 kilometres away. The ship is a further 8.7\u00a0km away. The height of a point on the ship that is just visible to the observer is given by:\nformula_27\nwhich comes to almost exactly six metres. The observer can therefore see that part of the ship that is more than six metres above the level of the water. The part of the ship that is below this height is hidden from him by the curvature of the Earth. In this situation, the ship is said to be hull-down.\nRefracted horizon.\nHistorically, the distance to the refracted horizon has long been vital to survival and successful navigation, especially at sea, because it determined an observer's maximum range of vision and thus of communication, with all the obvious consequences for safety and the transmission of information that this range implied. This importance lessened with the development of the radio and the telegraph, but even today, when flying an aircraft under visual flight rules, a technique called attitude flying is used to control the aircraft, where the pilot uses the visual relationship between the aircraft's nose and the horizon to control the aircraft. Pilots can also retain their spatial orientation by referring to the horizon.\nEffect of atmospheric refraction.\nDue to atmospheric refraction the distance to the visible horizon is further than the distance based on a simple geometric calculation. If the ground (or water) surface is colder than the air above it, a cold, dense layer of air forms close to the surface, causing light to be refracted downward as it travels, and therefore, to some extent, to go around the curvature of the Earth. The reverse happens if the ground is hotter than the air above it, as often happens in deserts, producing mirages. As an approximate compensation for refraction, surveyors measuring distances longer than 100 meters subtract 14% from the calculated curvature error and ensure lines of sight are at least 1.5 metres from the ground, to reduce random errors created by refraction.\nIf the Earth were an airless world like the Moon, the above calculations would be accurate. However, Earth has an atmosphere of air, whose density and refractive index vary considerably depending on the temperature and pressure. This makes the air refract light to varying extents, affecting the appearance of the horizon. Usually, the density of the air just above the surface of the Earth is greater than its density at greater altitudes. This makes its refractive index greater near the surface than at higher altitudes, which causes light that is travelling roughly horizontally to be refracted downward. This makes the actual distance to the horizon greater than the distance calculated with geometrical formulas. With standard atmospheric conditions, the difference is about 8%. This changes the factor of 3.57, in the metric formulas used above, to about 3.86. For instance, if an observer is standing on seashore, with eyes 1.70 m above sea level, according to the simple geometrical formulas given above the horizon should be 4.7\u00a0km away. Actually, atmospheric refraction allows the observer to see 300 metres farther, moving the true horizon 5\u00a0km away from the observer.\nThis correction can be, and often is, applied as a fairly good approximation when atmospheric conditions are close to standard. When conditions are unusual, this approximation fails. Refraction is strongly affected by temperature gradients, which can vary considerably from day to day, especially over water. In extreme cases, usually in springtime, when warm air overlies cold water, refraction can allow light to follow the Earth's surface for hundreds of kilometres. Opposite conditions occur, for example, in deserts, where the surface is very hot, so hot, low-density air is below cooler air. This causes light to be refracted upward, causing mirage effects that make the concept of the horizon somewhat meaningless. Calculated values for the effects of refraction under unusual conditions are therefore only approximate. Nevertheless, attempts have been made to calculate them more accurately than the simple approximation described above.\nOutside the visual wavelength range, refraction will be different. For radar (e.g. for wavelengths 300 to 3\u00a0mm i.e. frequencies between 1 and 100\u00a0GHz) the radius of the Earth may be multiplied by 4/3 to obtain an effective radius giving a factor of 4.12 in the metric formula i.e. the radar horizon will be 15% beyond the geometrical horizon or 7% beyond the visual. The 4/3 factor is not exact, as in the visual case the refraction depends on atmospheric conditions.\nIf the density profile of the atmosphere is known, the distance \"d\" to the horizon is given by\nformula_28\nwhere \"R\"E is the radius of the Earth, \"\u03c8\" is the dip of the horizon and \"\u03b4\" is the refraction of the horizon. The dip is determined fairly simply from\nformula_29\nwhere \"h\" is the observer's height above the Earth, \"\u03bc\" is the index of refraction of air at the observer's height, and \"\u03bc\"0 is the index of refraction of air at Earth's surface.\nThe refraction must be found by integration of\nformula_30\nwhere formula_31 is the angle between the ray and a line through the center of the Earth. The angles \"\u03c8\" and formula_31 are related by\nformula_33\nA much simpler approach, which produces essentially the same results as the first-order approximation described above, uses the geometrical model but uses a radius \"R\u2032\" = 7/6 \"R\"E. The distance to the horizon is then\nformula_34\nTaking the radius of the Earth as 6371\u00a0km, with \"d\" in km and \"h\" in m,\nformula_35\nwith \"d\" in mi and \"h\" in ft,\nformula_36\nIn the case of radar one typically has \"R\u2032\" = 4/3 \"R\"E resulting (with \"d\" in km and \"h\" in m) in\nformula_37\nResults from Young's method are quite close to those from Sweer's method, and are sufficiently accurate for many purposes.\nAstronomical horizon.\nIn astronomy, the horizon is the horizontal plane through the eyes of the observer. It is the fundamental plane of the horizontal coordinate system, the locus of points that have an altitude of zero degrees. While similar in ways to the geometrical horizon, in this context a horizon may be considered to be a plane in space, rather than a line on a picture plane.\nPerspective.\nIn many contexts, especially perspective drawing, the curvature of the Earth is disregarded and the horizon is considered the theoretical line to which points on any horizontal plane converge (when projected onto the picture plane) as their distance from the observer increases. For observers near sea level, the difference between this \"geometrical horizon\" (which assumes a perfectly flat, infinite ground plane) and the \"true horizon\" (which assumes a spherical Earth surface) is imperceptible to the unaided eye. However, for someone on a hill looking out across the sea, the true horizon will be about a degree below a horizontal line.\nVanishing points.\nThe horizon is a key feature of the picture plane in the science of graphical perspective. Assuming the picture plane stands vertical to ground, and \"P\" is the perpendicular projection of the eye point \"O\" on the picture plane, the horizon is defined as the horizontal line through \"P\". The point \"P\" is the vanishing point of lines perpendicular to the picture. If \"S\" is another point on the horizon, then it is the vanishing point for all lines parallel to \"OS\". But Brook Taylor (1719) indicated that the horizon plane determined by \"O\" and the horizon was like any other plane:\nThe term of Horizontal Line, for instance, is apt to confine the Notions of a Learner to the Plane of the Horizon, and to make him imagine, that that Plane enjoys some particular Privileges, which make the Figures in it more easy and more convenient to be described, by the means of that Horizontal Line, than the Figures in any other plane;\u2026But in this Book I make no difference between the Plane of the Horizon, and any other Plane whatsoever...\nThe peculiar geometry of perspective where parallel lines converge in the distance, stimulated the development of projective geometry which posits a point at infinity where parallel lines meet. In her book \"Geometry of an Art\" (2007), Kirsti Andersen described the evolution of perspective drawing and science up to 1800, noting that vanishing points need not be on the horizon. In a chapter titled \"Horizon\", John Stillwell recounted how projective geometry has led to incidence geometry, the modern abstract study of line intersection. Stillwell also ventured into foundations of mathematics in a section titled \"What are the Laws of Algebra ?\" The \"algebra of points\", originally given by Karl von Staudt deriving the axioms of a field was deconstructed in the twentieth century, yielding a wide variety of mathematical possibilities. Stillwell states\nThis discovery from 100 years ago seems capable of turning mathematics upside down, though it has not yet been fully absorbed by the mathematical community. Not only does it defy the trend of turning geometry into algebra, it suggests that both geometry and algebra have a simpler foundation than previously thought.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48911", "revid": "7131173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48911", "title": "Prince regent", "text": "Prince who rules in place of a monarch due to incapacity or absence\nA prince regent or princess regent is a prince or princess who, due to their position in the line of succession, rules a monarchy as regent in the stead of a monarch, e.g., as a result of the sovereign's incapacity (minority or illness) or absence (e.g., by remoteness, such as exile or long voyage, or the absence of an incumbent).\nWhile the term itself can have the generic meaning and refer to any prince or princess who fills the role of regent, historically it has mainly been used to describe a small number of individual princes and princesses who were regents of non-principalities.\nPrince Regent of the United Kingdom.\nIn the English language the title \"Prince Regent\" is most commonly associated with George IV, who held the style His Royal Highness The Prince Regent during the Regency era due to the incapacity (by dint of mental illness) of his father, George III (see Regent for other regents). Regent's Park, Regent Street and Regent's Canal (which he commissioned) in London, were all named in honour of him. The architect John Nash, under the patronage of HRH The Prince Regent, planned a palatial summer residence for the prince, 50 detached villas in a parkland setting and elegant terraces around the exterior of the park. This was all part of an ambitious plan, to develop The Regent's Park and lay out an elegant new street, Regent's Street, to link it to St James's Park and the prince's London residence, Carlton House. Regent Terrace in Edinburgh is also named after the Prince Regent, who visited the area in 1822.\nThis period is known as the British Regency, or just the Regency.\nThe title was conferred by the Regency Act on 5 February 1811. Subject to certain limitations for a period, the prince regent was able to exercise the full powers of the King. The precedent of the Regency Crisis of 1788 (from which George III recovered before it was necessary to appoint a regent) was followed. The Prince of Wales continued as regent until his father's death in 1820, when he became George IV.\nPrince regent in Germany.\nIn Germany, the title \"Prinzregent\" (literally prince regent) is most commonly associated with Prince Luitpold of Bavaria, who served as regent for two of his nephews, King Ludwig II of Bavaria, who was declared mentally incompetent in 1886, and King Otto of Bavaria (who had been declared insane in 1875) from 1886 until 1912.\nThe years of Luitpold's regency were marked by tremendous artistic and cultural activity in Bavaria, where they are known after the regencies as the \"Prinzregentenjahre\" or the \"Prinzregentenzeit\". Numerous streets in Bavarian cities and towns are called \"Prinzregentenstra\u00dfe\". Many institutions are named in Luitpold's honour, \"e.g.\", the \"Prinzregententheater\" in Munich. \"Prinzregententorte\" is a multi-layered cake with chocolate butter cream named in Luitpold's honour.\nAt Luitpold's death in 1912, his son Prince Ludwig succeeded as prince regent. Ludwig held the title for less than a year, since the Bavarian Legislature decided to set aside his cousin King Otto I of Bavaria and recognize him as king.\nPrince regent in Bulgaria.\nKiril, Prince of Preslav was appointed head of a regency council by the Bulgarian parliament following the death of his brother, Tsar Boris III on 28 August 1943, to act as Head of State until the late Tsar's son and successor, Tsar Simeon II, reached the age of 18 years. On 5 September 1944 the Soviet Union declared war on the Kingdom of Bulgaria and on 8 September Soviet armies crossed the Romanian border and occupied the country. On 1 February 1945 the prince regent Kyril, and the two other former regents \u2013 Professor Bogdan Filov and General Nikola Mikhov \u2013 as well as a range of former cabinet ministers, royal advisors and 67 MPs, were executed.\nPrince Lieutenant in Luxembourg.\nThe heir-apparent or heir-presumptive to the grand duke of Luxembourg may be titled \"prince-lieutenant\" ('prince deputy') during a period in which the incumbent remains formally on the grand ducal throne, but (progressively, most) functions of the crown are performed by the 'monarch apprentice', as prince Jean did 4 May 1961 \u2013 12 November 1964 in the last years of his mother Charlotte's reign until she abdicated and he succeeded to the grand ducal throne (she lived until 1985), and Jean's own son prince Henri 3 March 1998 \u2013 7 October 2000 until his father abdicated and he succeeded (Jean lived until 2019).\nQueen regent.\nIf a king is unable to perform his duties then his queen consort or the queen mother may act for him as a \"Queen Regent\". Queen mothers have acted in this way in the Kingdom of Eswatini.\n\"More prince-regents (often without such specific title) are to be found in List of regents.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48913", "revid": "36418353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48913", "title": "Caroline of Brunswick", "text": "Queen of the United Kingdom and Hanover from 1820 to 1821\nCaroline of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel (Caroline Amelia Elizabeth; 17 May 1768\u00a0\u2013 7 August 1821) was Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and Queen of Hanover from 29 January 1820 until her death in 1821 as the estranged wife of King George IV. She was Princess of Wales from 1795 to 1820.\nThe daughter of Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, and Princess Augusta of Great Britain, Caroline was engaged in 1794 to her first cousin George, Prince of Wales, whom she had never met. He was already illegally married to Maria Fitzherbert. George and Caroline married the following year but separated shortly after the birth of their only child, Princess Charlotte, in 1796. By 1806, rumours that Caroline had taken multiple lovers and had an illegitimate child led to an investigation into her private life. The dignitaries who led the investigation concluded that there was \"no foundation\" to the rumours, but Caroline's access to her daughter was still restricted. In 1814, Caroline moved to Italy, where she employed Bartolomeo Pergami as a servant. Pergami soon became Caroline's closest companion, and it was widely assumed that they were lovers. In 1817, Caroline was devastated when Charlotte died in childbirth. She heard the news from a passing courier as George had refused to write and tell her. He was determined to divorce Caroline and set up a second investigation to collect evidence of her adultery.\nIn January 1820, George became King of the United Kingdom and Hanover, and Caroline became nominal queen consort. George insisted on a divorce from Caroline, which she refused. A legal divorce was possible but difficult to obtain. Caroline returned to Britain to assert her position as queen. She was wildly popular with the British people, who sympathised with her and despised the new king for his immoral behaviour. On the basis of the loose evidence collected against her, George attempted to divorce Caroline by introducing the Pains and Penalties Bill 1820 to Parliament, but he and the bill were so unpopular and Caroline so popular with the masses that it was withdrawn by the Liverpool ministry. The King barred Caroline from his coronation in July 1821. She fell ill in London and died three weeks later. Her funeral procession passed through London on its way to her native Brunswick, where she was buried in Brunswick Cathedral.\nEarly life.\nCaroline was born a princess of Braunschweig, known in English as \"Brunswick\", with the courtesy title of Duchess of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, on 17 May 1768 at Braunschweig in Germany. She was the daughter of Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, and his wife Princess Augusta of Great Britain, eldest sister of King George III. Caroline was brought up in a difficult family situation. Her mother resented her father's open adultery with Baroness Luise von Hertefeld, whom he had installed as his official mistress in 1777, and Caroline was later to confide to Lady Charlotte Campbell that she was often tired of being a \"shuttlecock\" between her parents, as whenever she was civil to one of them, she was scolded by the other.\nShe was educated by governesses, but the only subject in which she was given a higher education was music. From 1783 until 1791, Countess Eleonore von M\u00fcnster was her governess, and won her affection, but never managed to teach her to spell correctly, as Caroline preferred to dictate to a secretary. Caroline could understand English and French, but her father admitted that she was lacking in education. According to Caroline's mother, all German princesses learned English in the hope that they would be chosen to marry George, Prince of Wales, George III's eldest son and heir apparent and Caroline's first cousin.\nJohn Stanley, later 1st Baron Stanley of Alderley, saw her in 1781, and noted that she was an attractive girl with curly, fair hair. In 1784, she was described as a beauty, and two years later, Honor\u00e9 Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau described her as \"most amiable, lively, playful, witty and handsome\". Caroline was brought up with extremely limited contact with the opposite sex even by the standards of her own time. She was reportedly constantly supervised by her governess and elder ladies, restricted to her room when the family was entertaining and ordered to keep away from the windows. She was normally refused permission to attend balls and court functions, and when allowed, she was forbidden to dance. Abb\u00e9 Baron commented during the winter of 1789\u201390: \"She is supervised with the greatest severity, as they claim she is already aware of what she is missing. I doubt if the torches of Hymen will illuminate for her [i.e.I think she will never marry]. Although always attired with style and elegance, she is never allowed to dance\", and that as soon as the first dance began, she was forced to sit down at the whist table with three old ladies.\nA rare occasion was the wedding of her elder brother Charles, when she was finally allowed to dance, though only with the groom and his new brother-in-law, the Prince of Orange \u2013 she was, however, still forbidden to dine alone with her brother. Her secluded isolation tormented her, which was demonstrated when she was later again banned from attending a ball. She simulated an illness so severe that her parents left the ball to see her. When they arrived, she claimed to be in labour and forced them to send for a midwife. When the midwife arrived, she stopped her simulation and asked her mother: \"Now, Madam, will you keep me another time from a ball?\"\nHer mother early favoured a match between one of her children and a member of her English family, and when her nephew Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany visited Brunswick in June 1781, she lamented the fact that Caroline, because of her age, could not be present very often. Caroline was given a number of proposals from 1782 onward. Marriage with the Prince of Orange, Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt, Charles, Duke of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, and the second son of the Margrave of Baden were all suggested, while her mother and father supported an English and a Prussian Prince, respectively, but none came to fruition. Caroline was later to state that her father had forbidden her to marry a man she had fallen in love with because of his low status. The identity of this man is not clear, but contemporaries point out an officer who was referred to at the time as the \"Handsome Irishman\" who lived in Brunswick, and with whom Caroline was said to have been in love. There was also a rumour that Caroline had given birth at the age of fifteen.\nThough she was not allowed to socialise with men, she was allowed to ride, and during riding, she visited the cottages of the peasantry. She had done this already as a child, during which she had met children to play with, and as an adult, one of these visits allegedly led to a pregnancy. There is no confirmation of this rumour, but it was well known during her life, and referred to as a reason why she married at an older age than was usual, despite being regarded as good-looking and having been given so many proposals.\nEngagement.\nIn 1794, Caroline and the Prince of Wales were engaged. They had never met\u2014George had agreed to marry her because he was heavily in debt, and if he contracted a marriage with an eligible princess, Parliament would increase his allowance. Caroline seemed eminently suitable: she was a Protestant of royal birth, and the marriage would ally Brunswick and Britain. Although Brunswick was only a small country, Britain was at war with revolutionary France and so was eager to obtain allies on the European mainland. Brunswick was ruled by Caroline's father, the esteemed soldier Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick, who himself had married Princess Augusta, the sister of George III. On 20 November 1794, Lord Malmesbury arrived at Brunswick to escort Caroline to her new life in Britain. In his diary, Malmesbury recorded his reservations about Caroline's suitability as a bride for the prince: she lacked judgement, decorum and tact, spoke her mind too readily, acted indiscreetly, and often neglected to wash, or change her dirty clothes. He went on to say that she had \"some natural but no acquired morality, and no strong innate notions of its value and necessity\". However, Malmesbury was impressed by her bravery; on the journey to England, the party heard cannon fire, as they were not far from the French lines. While Caroline's mother, who was accompanying them to the coast as chaperone, was concerned for their safety, Caroline was unfazed.\nOn 28 March 1795, Caroline and Malmesbury left Cuxhaven on the \"Jupiter\". Delayed by poor weather, they landed a week later, on Easter Sunday, 5 April, at Greenwich. There, she met Frances Villiers, Countess of Jersey, George's mistress, who had been appointed Caroline's Lady of the Bedchamber. Smith concludes that:\n She was chosen as the intended bride of George, Prince of Wales partly because her mother was a favourite sister of George III, partly through the favourable reports of her given by his brothers the Dukes of York and Clarence when they visited Germany, and partly for lack of a suitable alternative German Protestant princess.\nOn meeting his future wife for the first time, George called for a glass of brandy. He was evidently disappointed. Similarly, Caroline told Malmesbury, \"[the Prince is] very fat and he's nothing like as handsome as his portrait.\" At dinner that evening, the Prince was appalled by Caroline's garrulous nature and her gibes at the expense of Lady Jersey. She was upset and disappointed by George's obvious partiality for Lady Jersey over her.\nTroubled marriage.\nCaroline and George were married on 8 April 1795 at the Chapel Royal, St. James's Palace, in London. At the ceremony, George was drunk. He regarded Caroline as unattractive and unhygienic, and told Malmesbury that he suspected that she was not a virgin when they married. He had already undergone a form of marriage with Maria Fitzherbert, but as this violated the Royal Marriages Act 1772, both George and Maria knew it was not legally valid.\nIn a letter to a friend, the prince claimed that the couple only had sexual intercourse three times: twice the first night of the marriage, and once the second night. He wrote, \"it required no small [effort] to conquer my aversion and overcome the disgust of her person.\" Caroline claimed George was so drunk that he \"passed the greatest part of his bridal night under the grate, where he fell, and where I left him\".\nNine months after the wedding, Caroline gave birth to Princess Charlotte, George's only legitimate child, and at that point the king's only legitimate grandchild, at Carlton House on 7 January 1796. Charlotte was second in the line of succession to the British throne after her father. Just three days after Charlotte's birth, George made out a new will. He left all his property to \"Maria Fitzherbert, my wife\", while to Caroline he left one shilling.\nGossip about Caroline and George's troubled marriage was already circulating. The newspapers claimed that Lady Jersey opened, read and distributed the contents of Caroline's private letters. She despised Lady Jersey and could not visit or travel anywhere without George's permission. The press vilified George for his extravagance and luxury at a time of war and portrayed Caroline as a wronged wife. She was cheered in public and gained plaudits for her \"winning familiarity\" and easy, open nature. George was dismayed at her popularity and his own unpopularity, and felt trapped in a loveless marriage with a woman he loathed. He wanted a separation.\nIn April 1796, George wrote to Caroline, \"We have unfortunately been oblig'd to acknowledge to each other that we cannot find happiness in our union.\u00a0... Let me therefore beg you to make the best of a situation unfortunate for us both.\" In June, Lady Jersey resigned as Caroline's Lady of the Bedchamber. George and Caroline were already living separately, and in August 1797 Caroline moved to a private residence: The Vicarage or Old Rectory in Charlton, London. Later, she moved to Montagu House in Blackheath. No longer constrained by her husband, or, according to rumour, her marital vows, she entertained whomever she pleased. She flirted with Admiral Sir Sidney Smith and Captain Thomas Manby, and may have had a brief relationship with the politician George Canning.\nDelicate Investigation.\nCharlotte was placed in the care of a governess, in a mansion near Montagu House in the summers, and Caroline visited her often. It seems that a single daughter was not sufficient to sate Caroline's maternal instincts, and she adopted eight or nine poor children who were fostered out to people in the district. In 1802, she adopted a three-month-old boy, William Austin, and took him into her home. By 1805, Caroline had fallen out with her near neighbours, Sir John and Lady Douglas, who claimed that Caroline had sent them obscene and harassing letters. Lady Douglas accused Caroline of infidelity, and alleged that William Austin was Caroline's illegitimate son.\nIn 1806, a secret commission was set up, known as the \"Delicate Investigation\", to examine Lady Douglas's claims. The commission comprised four of the most eminent men in the country: Prime Minister Lord Grenville, the Lord Chancellor Lord Erskine, the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales Lord Ellenborough and the Home Secretary Lord Spencer. Lady Douglas testified that Caroline herself had admitted to her in 1802 that she was pregnant, and that Austin was her son. She further alleged that Caroline had been rude about the royal family, touched her in an inappropriately sexual way, and had admitted that any woman friendly with a man was sure to become his lover. In addition to Smith, Manby and Canning, artist Thomas Lawrence and Henry Hood, son of Lord Hood, were also mentioned as potential paramours. Caroline's servants could or would not confirm that these gentlemen were her lovers, nor that she had been pregnant, and said that the child had been brought to Caroline's house by his true mother, Sophia Austin. Sophia was summoned before the commissioners, and testified that the child was hers.\nThe commissioners decided that there was \"no foundation\" for the allegations, but despite being a supposedly secret investigation, it proved impossible to prevent gossip from spreading, and news of the investigation leaked to the press. Caroline's conduct with her gentlemen friends was considered improper, but there was no direct proof that she had been guilty of anything more than flirtation. Perhaps Caroline had told Lady Douglas that she was pregnant out of frustrated maternal desire, or as part of a foolish prank that, unfortunately for her, backfired. Later in the year, Caroline received further bad news as Brunswick was overrun by the French, and her father was killed in the battle of Jena-Auerstadt. Her mother and brother, Frederick William, Duke of Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel, fled to England. Caroline had wanted to return to Brunswick and leave Britain behind her, but with much of Europe controlled by the French she had no safe haven to run to.\nDuring the Delicate Investigation, Caroline was not permitted to see her daughter, and afterwards her visits were essentially restricted to once a week and only in the presence of Caroline's own mother, the Dowager Duchess of Brunswick. Meetings took place at either Blackheath or an apartment in Kensington Palace designated for Caroline's use.\nSocial isolation.\nBy the end of 1811, King George III had become permanently insane, and the Prince of Wales was appointed regent. He restricted Caroline's access to Princess Charlotte further, and Caroline became more socially isolated as members of high society chose to patronise George's extravagant parties rather than hers. She moved her London residence to Connaught House in Bayswater. Caroline needed a powerful ally to help her oppose George's increasing ability to prevent her from seeing her daughter. In league with Henry Brougham, an ambitious Whig politician who favoured reform, she began a propaganda campaign against George. George countered by leaking Lady Douglas's testimony from the \"Delicate Investigation\", which Brougham repudiated by leaking the testimonies of the servants and Mrs Austin. Charlotte favoured her mother's point of view, as did most of the public. Jane Austen wrote of Caroline: \"Poor woman, I shall support her as long as I can, because she \"is\" a Woman and because I hate her Husband.\"\nIn 1814, after Napoleon's defeat, nobility from throughout Europe attended celebrations in London, but Caroline was excluded. George's relationship with his daughter was also deteriorating, as Charlotte sought greater freedom from her father's strictures. On 12 July, he informed Charlotte that she would henceforth be confined at Cranbourne Lodge, Windsor, that her household would be replaced, and that she could have no visitors except her grandmother Queen Charlotte once a week. Horrified, Princess Charlotte ran away to her mother's house in Bayswater. After an anxious night, Charlotte was eventually persuaded to return to her father by Brougham, since legally she could be placed in her father's care and there was a danger of public disorder against George, which might prejudice Charlotte's position if she continued to disobey him.\nCaroline, unhappy at her situation and treatment in Britain, negotiated a deal with the Foreign Secretary, Lord Castlereagh. She agreed to leave the country in exchange for an annual allowance of \u00a335,000. Both Brougham and Charlotte were dismayed by Caroline's decision, as they both realised that Caroline's absence would strengthen George's power and weaken theirs. On 8 August 1814, Caroline left Britain.\nExile.\nAfter a two-week visit to Brunswick, Caroline headed for Italy through Switzerland. Along the way, possibly in Milan, she hired Bartolomeo Pergami as a servant. Pergami soon rose to the head of Caroline's household, and managed to get his sister, Angelica, Countess of Oldi, appointed as Caroline's lady-in-waiting. In mid-1815, Caroline bought a house, Villa d'Este, on the shores of Lake Como, even though her finances were stretched.\nFrom early 1816, she and Pergami went on a cruise around the Mediterranean, visiting Napoleon's former palace on Elba, and Sicily, where Pergami obtained the Order of Malta and a barony. By this time, Caroline and Pergami were openly eating together, and it was widely rumoured that they were lovers. They visited Tunis, Malta, Milos, Athens, Corinth, Constantinople, and Nazareth. Caroline entered Jerusalem riding on a donkey in a convoy of camels. Pergami was made a Knight of the Order of Saint Lazarus. Caroline instituted the Order of Saint Caroline, nominating Pergami its Grand Master. In August, they returned to Italy, stopping at Rome to visit Pope Pius VII.\nBy this time, gossip about Caroline was everywhere. Lord Byron wrote to his publisher that Caroline and Pergami were lovers, and Sir Francis Ronalds described and made a sketch of their sleeping arrangements in Karlsruhe. Baron Friedrich Ompteda, a Hanoverian spy, bribed one of Caroline's servants so that he could search her bedroom for proof of adultery. He found none. By August 1817, Caroline's debts were growing, so she sold Villa d'Este and moved to the smaller Villa Caprile near Pesaro. Pergami's mother, brother and daughter, but not his wife, joined Caroline's household.\nThe previous year, Caroline's daughter, Princess Charlotte, had married Prince Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and the future of the British monarchy looked bright. Then tragedy struck: in November 1817, Charlotte died after giving birth to her only child, a stillborn son. For the most part, Charlotte had been immensely popular with the public, and her death was a blow to the country. George refused to write to Caroline to inform her, leaving it for their son-in-law Leopold to do, but Leopold was deep in grief and delayed writing. George did, however, write to the Pope of the tragedy, and by chance the courier carrying the letter passed by Pesaro, and so it was that Caroline heard the devastating news. Caroline had lost her daughter, but she had also lost any chance of regaining position through the succession of her daughter to the throne.\nGeorge was determined to press ahead with a divorce and set up a commission chaired by the Vice-Chancellor John Leach to gather evidence of Caroline's adultery. Leach sent three commissioners to Milan to interrogate Caroline's former servants, including Theodore Majocchi and Caroline's maid, Louise Demont. In London, Brougham was still acting as Caroline's agent. Concerned that the \"Milan commission\" might threaten Caroline, he sent his brother James to Caroline's villa in the hope of establishing whether George had any grounds for divorce. James wrote back to his brother of Caroline and Pergami, \"they are to all appearances man and wife, never was anything so obvious.\" The Milan commission was assembling more and more evidence, and by 1819 Caroline was worried. She informed James Brougham that she would agree to a divorce in exchange for money. However, at this time in England divorce by mutual consent was illegal; it was only possible to divorce if one of the partners admitted or was found guilty of adultery. Caroline said it was \"impossible\" for her to admit that, so the Broughams advised that only formal separation was possible. Both keen to avoid publicity, the Broughams and the Government discussed a deal where Caroline would be called by a lesser title, such as \"Duchess of Cornwall\" rather than \"Princess of Wales\". As the negotiations continued at the end of 1819, Caroline travelled to France, which gave rise to speculation that she was on her way back to England. In January 1820, however, she made plans to return to Italy, but then on 29 January 1820 George III died. Caroline's husband became king and, at least nominally, she was queen of the United Kingdom.\nQueen consort.\nInstead of being treated like a queen, Caroline found that her estranged husband's accession paradoxically made her position worse. On visiting Rome, Pope Pius VII refused her an audience, and the Pope's minister Cardinal Consalvi insisted that she be greeted only as a duchess of Brunswick, and not as a queen. In an attempt to assert her rights, she made plans to return to Britain. The King demanded that his ministers get rid of her. He successfully persuaded them to remove her name from the liturgy of the Church of England, but they would not agree to a divorce because they feared the effect of a public trial. The government was weak and unpopular, and a trial detailing salacious details of both Caroline's and George's separate love lives was certain to destabilise it further. Rather than run the risk, the government entered into negotiations with Caroline, and offered her an increased annuity of \u00a350,000 if she stayed abroad.\nBy the beginning of June 1820, Caroline had travelled north from Italy, and was at St Omer near Calais. Acting on the advice of Alderman Matthew Wood and her lady-in-waiting Lady Anne Hamilton, she rejected the government's offer. She bade farewell to Pergami, and embarked for England. When she arrived on 5 June, riots broke out in support of her. Caroline was a figurehead for the growing Radical movement that demanded political reform and opposed the unpopular king. Nevertheless, the King still adamantly desired a divorce and, the following day, he submitted the evidence gathered by the Milan commission to Parliament in two green bags. On 15 June the guards in the King's Mews mutinied. The mutiny was contained, but the government was fearful of further unrest. Examination of the bags of evidence was delayed as Parliament debated the form of the investigation, but eventually, on 27 June, they were opened and examined in secret by 15 peers. The peers considered the contents scandalous, and a week later, after their report to the House, the government introduced a bill in Parliament, the Pains and Penalties Bill 1820, to strip Caroline of the title of queen and dissolve her marriage. It was claimed that Caroline had committed adultery with a low-born man: Bartolomeo Pergami. Various witnesses, such as Theodore Majocchi, were called during the reading of the bill, which was effectively a public trial of the Queen. The trial caused a sensation, as details of Caroline's familiarity with Pergami were revealed. Witnesses said the couple had slept in the same room, kissed, and been seen together in a state of undress. The bill passed the House of Lords, but was not submitted to the House of Commons as there was little prospect that the Commons would pass it. To her friends Caroline joked that she had indeed committed adultery once\u2014with the husband of Mrs. Fitzherbert, the King.\nEven during the trial, the Queen remained immensely popular, as witnessed by over 800 petitions and nearly a million signatures that favoured her cause. As a figurehead of the opposition movement demanding reform, many revolutionary pronouncements were made in Caroline's name.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All classes will ever find in me a sincere friend to their liberties, and a zealous advocate of their rights.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A government cannot stop the march of intellect any more than they can arrest the motion of the tides or the course of the planets. \u2014\u200a\nBut with the end of the trial, her alliance with the radicals came to an end. The government again extended the offer of \u00a350,000 a year, this time without preconditions, and Caroline accepted.\nOn 5 May 1821, Napoleon died on St Helena. Sir Edmund Nagle informed George, \"Sir, your bitterest enemy is dead\". He replied, \"Is she, by God!\".\nDespite the King's best attempts, Caroline retained a strong popularity among the masses, and pressed ahead with plans to attend the coronation service on 19 July 1821 as queen. Lord Liverpool told Caroline that she should not go to the service, but she turned up anyway. George had Caroline turned away from the coronation at the doors of Westminster Abbey. Refused entry at both the doors to the East Cloister and the doors to the West Cloister, Caroline attempted to enter via Westminster Hall, where many guests were gathered before the service began. A witness described how the Queen stood at the door fuming as bayonets were held under her chin until the deputy lord chamberlain had the doors slammed in her face. Caroline then proceeded back to an entrance near Poets' Corner, where she was met by Sir Robert Inglis, who held the office of \"Gold Staff\". Inglis persuaded her to return to her carriage, and she left. Caroline lost support through her exhibition at the coronation; the crowds jeered her as she rode away, and even Brougham recorded his distaste at her undignified behaviour.\nDeath.\nThe night following Caroline's failed attempt to attend her husband's coronation, she fell ill and took a large dose of milk of magnesia and some drops of laudanum. Over the next three weeks, she suffered more and more pain as her condition deteriorated. She realised she was nearing death and put her affairs in order. Her papers, letters, memoirs, and notebooks were burned. She wrote a new will, and settled her funeral arrangements: she was to be buried in her native Brunswick in a tomb bearing the inscription \"Here lies Caroline, the Injured Queen of England\". She died at Brandenburgh House in Hammersmith at 10:25\u00a0pm on 7 August 1821 at the age of 53. Her physicians thought she had an intestinal obstruction, but she may have had cancer, and there were rumours at the time that she had been poisoned.\nAfraid that a procession of the funeral bier through London could spark public unrest, Lord Liverpool decided the Queen's cort\u00e8ge would avoid the city, passing to the north on the way to Harwich and Brunswick. The crowd accompanying the procession was incensed and blocked the intended route with barricades to force a new route through Westminster and London. The scene soon descended into chaos; the soldiers forming the honour guard opened fire and rode through the crowd with drawn sabres. People in the crowd threw cobblestones and bricks at the soldiers, and two members of the public\u2014Richard Honey, a carpenter, and George Francis, a bricklayer\u2014were killed. Eventually, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Sir Robert Baker ordered that the official route be abandoned, and the cort\u00e8ge passed through the city. As a result, Baker was dismissed from office.\nThe final route (in heavy rain) took the following course: Hammersmith, Kensington (blocked), Kensington Gore (blocked), Hyde Park, Park Lane (blocked), return to Hyde Park where soldiers forced the gates open, Cumberland Gate (blocked), Edgware Road, Tottenham Court Road, Drury Lane, the Strand, and from there through the City of London, then by way of Romford and Chelmsford to Colchester. The coffin was kept overnight at St Peter's Church, Colchester, where Caroline's executors tried unsuccessfully to replace the official inscription plate with one including the phrase \"Injured Queen of England\". The next day, the coffin was taken to the seaport of Harwich, and placed on a ship bound for Germany. Brunswick Cathedral is Caroline's final resting place.\nLegacy.\nThe American historian Thomas W. Laqueur emphasises that the sordid royal squabble captivated all Britons:\n During much of 1820 the \"queen's business\" captivated the nation. \"It was the only question I have ever known,\" wrote the radical critic William Hazlitt, \"that excited a thorough popular feeling. It struck its roots into the heart of the nation; it took possession of every house or cottage in the kingdom.\"\nIn 1822, the publishers of the newspaper \"John Bull\" were found guilty over a series of libels published in the Queen's lifetime, including one that alluded to her as \"a shameless woman\". It was alleged the libels had embittered the Queen and shortened her life.\nCaroline was the subject of Richard Condon's 1977 novel \"The Abandoned Woman.\" The story of the royal marriage and Caroline's battle to be recognised as queen served as the basis for the 1996 BBC docudrama \"A Royal Scandal\" with Susan Lynch as Caroline and Richard E. Grant as George IV. The 2008 radio play \"The People's Princess\", with Alex Jennings as George IV and Rebecca Saire as Caroline, drew parallels with the marriage and divorce of Charles, Prince of Wales (later Charles III), and Diana, Princess of Wales.\nArms.\nThe royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom are impaled with her father's arms as Duke of Brunswick. The arms were Quarterly of twelve, 1st, Or, a sem\u00e9 of hearts Gules, a lion rampant Azure (L\u00fcneburg); 2nd, Gules, two lions passant guardant Or (Brunswick); 3rd, Azure, a lion rampant Argent crowned Or (Eberstein); 4th, Gules a lion rampant Or, within a border compon\u00e9 Argent and Azure (Homburg); 5th, Or, a lion rampant Gules crowned Azure (Diepholz); 6th, Gules, a lion rampant Or (Lauterberg); 7th, Per fess, in chief Or, two bears' paws erect Sable (Hoya), in the base a gyronny, Argent and Azure (Old Bruckhausen); 8th, Azure, an eagle displayed Argent, langued, beaked and membered Gules (Diepholz eagle); 9th, Chequy Argent and Gules (Hohnstein); 10th, Argent, a stag's attire in bend Gules (Regenstein); 11th, Argent, a stag trippant Sable (); 12th, Argent, a stag's attire in bend sinister Sable (Blankenburg).\nAs Princess of Wales she used the arms of her husband (the royal arms with a label of three points Argent) impaled with those of her father, the whole surmounted by a coronet of the heir apparent.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48916", "revid": "39496867", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48916", "title": "Model (person)", "text": "Person serving as a visual aid\nA model is a person with a role either to display commercial products (notably fashion clothing in fashion shows) or to serve as an artist's model.\nModelling (\"modeling\" in American English) entails using one's body to represent someone else's body or someone's artistic imagination of a body. For example, a woman modelling for shoes uses her foot to model the potential customers' feet. Modelling thus is different from posing for portrait photography, portrait painting, and distinct from other types of public performance, such as acting or dancing. Personal opinions are normally not expressed, and a model's reputation and image are considered critical.\nTypes of modelling include: fine art, fashion, glamour, fitness, and body-part promotional modelling. Models are featured in various media formats, including books, magazines, films, newspapers, the Internet, and television. Fashion modelling is sometimes featured in reality TV shows (\"America's Next Top Model\"). Modelling often is a part-time activity.\nArtists' models.\nArtists' models pose for any visual artist as part of the creative process. Although sometimes friends or relatives, artists' models are more often paid professionals who provide a reference or inspiration for a work of art that includes the human figure. The most common types of art created using models are figure drawing, figure painting, sculpture and photography, but almost any medium may be used. Although commercial motives dominate over aesthetics in illustration, its artwork commonly employs models. Models are most frequently employed for art classes or by informal groups of experienced artists who gather to share the expense of a model.\nFashion modelling.\nHistory of fashion modelling.\nEarly years.\nIn 14th-century Europe, fashion had been displayed in miniature form to (often royal) clients by fashion dolls, before the clothes were made in human size.\nModelling as a profession was first established in 1853 by Charles Frederick Worth, the \"father of haute couture\", when he asked his wife, Marie Vernet Worth, to model the potential clients for the clothes he designed. The term \"house model\" was coined to describe this type of work. Eventually, this became common practice for Parisian fashion houses where such women were called \"mannequins\", a meaning of that word adopted and retained in British English in the 1880s then used less commonly after World War II. There were no standard physical measurement requirements for a model, and most designers would use women of varying sizes to demonstrate variety in their designs.\nThe modelling profession expanded to photo modelling with the development of fashion photography. Models remained fairly anonymous, and relatively poorly paid, until the late 1940s, when the world's first three supermodels, Barbara Goalen, Bettina Graziani and Lisa Fonssagrives began commanding very large sums. During the 1940s and 1950s, Graziani was the most photographed woman in France and the undisputed queen of couture, while Fonssagrives appeared on over 200 \"Vogue\" covers; her name recognition led to the importance of \"Vogue\" in shaping the careers of fashion models. One of the most popular models during the 1940s was Jinx Falkenburg, who was paid $25 per hour, a large sum at the time; through the 1950s, Wilhelmina Cooper, Jean Patchett, Dovima, Dorian Leigh, Suzy Parker, Evelyn Tripp and Carmen Dell'Orefice also dominated fashion. Dorothea Church was among the first black models in the industry to gain recognition in Paris. However, these models were unknown outside the fashion community. Wilhelmina Cooper's measurements were 38\"-24\"-36\" whereas Chanel Iman's measurements are 32\"-23\"-33\". In 1946, Ford Models was established by Eileen and Gerard Ford in New York, making it one of the oldest model agencies in the world.\nThe 1960s and the beginning of the industry.\nIn the 1960s, the modelling world established modelling agencies. Throughout Europe, secretarial services acted as models' agents charging them weekly rates for their messages and bookings. For the most part, models were responsible for their own billing. In Germany, agents were not allowed to work for a percentage of a person's earnings, so they referred to themselves as secretaries. Except for a few models travelling to Paris or New York, travelling was relatively unheard of for a model. Most models only worked in one market due to different labour laws governing modelling in various countries. In the 1960s, Italy had many fashion houses and fashion magazines but desperately needed models. Italian agencies often coerced models to return to Italy without work visas by withholding their pay. They would also pay their models in cash, which models would have to hide from customs agents. It was not uncommon for models staying in hotels such as La Louisiana in Paris or the Arena in Milan to have their hotel rooms raided by the police looking for their work visas. It was rumoured that competing agencies were behind the raids. This led many agencies to form worldwide chains; for example, the Marilyn Agency has branches in Paris and New York.\nBy the late 1960s, London was considered the best market in Europe due to its more organised and innovative approach to modelling. It was during this period that models began to become household names. Models such as Jean Shrimpton, Tania Mallet, Celia Hammond, Twiggy, and Penelope Tree dominated the London fashion scene and were well paid, unlike their predecessors. Twiggy became The Face of '66 at the age of 16. At this time, model agencies were not as restrictive about the models they represented, although it was uncommon for them to sign shorter models. Twiggy, who stood at with a 32\" bust and had a boy's haircut, is credited with changing model ideals. At that time, she earned \u00a3 an hour, while the average wage was \u00a3 a week.\nIn 1967, seven of the top model agents in London formed the Association of London Model Agents. The formation of this association helped legitimise modelling and changed the fashion industry. Even with a more professional attitude towards modelling, models were still expected to have their hair and makeup done before they arrived at a shoot. Meanwhile, agencies took responsibility for a model's promotional materials and branding. That same year, former top fashion model Wilhelmina Cooper opened up her own fashion agency with her husband called Wilhelmina Models. By 1968, FM Agency and Models\u00a01 were established and represented models in a similar way that agencies do today. By the late 1960s, models were treated better and were making better wages. One of the innovators, Ford Models, was the first agency to advance models money they were owed and would often allow teen models, who did not live locally, to reside in their house, a precursor to model housing.\nThe 1970s and 1980s.\nThe innovations of the 1960s flowed into the 1970s fashion scene. As a result of model industry associations and standards, model agencies became more business minded, and more thought went into a model's promotional materials. By this time, agencies were starting to pay for a model's publicity. In the early 1970s, Scandinavia had many tall, leggy, blonde-haired, blue-eyed models and not enough clients. It was during this time that Ford Models pioneered scouting. They would spend time working with agencies holding modeling contests. This was the precursor to the Ford Models Supermodel of the World competition, established in 1980. Ford also focused its attention on Brazil, which had a wide array of seemingly \"exotic\" models, which eventually led to the establishment of Ford Models Brazil. During this time, the \"Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue\" debuted. The magazine set the trend by photographing \"bigger and healthier\" California models, and printing their names by their photos, thus turning many of them into household names and establishing the issue as a hallmark of supermodel status.\nThe 1970s marked numerous milestones in fashion. Beverly Johnson was the first black woman to appear on the cover of U.S. \"Vogue\" in 1974. Models, including Iman, Grace Jones, Pat Cleveland, Alva Chinn, Donyale Luna, Minah Bird, Naomi Sims, and Toukie Smith were some of the top black fashion models who paved the way for black women in fashion. In 1975, Margaux Hemingway landed a then-unprecedented million-dollar contract as the face of Faberg\u00e9's Babe perfume and the same year appeared on the cover of \"Time\" magazine, labeled one of the \"New Beauties\", giving further name recognition to fashion models.\nMany of the world's most prominent modeling agencies were established in the 1970s and early 1980s. These agencies created the standard by which agencies now run. In 1974, Nevs Models was established in London with only a men's board, the first of its kind. Elite Models was founded in Paris in 1975, as well as Friday's Models in Japan. The next year Cal-Carries was established in Singapore, the first of a chain of agencies in Asia. In 1977, Select Model Management and Why Not Models in Milan opened its doors. By the 1980s, agencies such as Premier Model Management, Storm Models, Mikas, Marilyn, and Metropolitan Models had been established.\nIn October 1981, \"Life\" cited Shelley Hack, Lauren Hutton and Iman for Revlon, Margaux Hemingway for Faberg\u00e9, Karen Graham for Est\u00e9e Lauder, Cristina Ferrare for Max Factor, and Cheryl Tiegs for CoverGirl by proclaiming them the \"million dollar faces\" of the beauty industry. These models negotiated previously unheard-of lucrative and exclusive deals with giant cosmetics companies, were instantly recognizable, and their names became well known to the public.\nBy the 1980s, most models could make modeling a full-time career. Patti Hansen, one of the top earning models in 1980, earned $200 an hour for print and $2,000 for television plus residuals; it was estimated that she earned about $300,000 a year in 1980 (equivalent to $ in 2024). It was common for models to travel abroad and work throughout Europe. As modeling became global, numerous agencies began to think globally. In 1980, Ford Models, the innovator of scouting, introduced the Ford Models Supermodel of the World contest. That same year, John Casablancas opened Elite Models in New York. In 1981, cosmetics companies began contracting top models to lucrative endorsement deals. By 1983, Elite had developed its own contest, the Elite Model Look competition. In New York, during the 1980s there were so-called \"model wars\" in which the Ford and Elite agencies fought over models and campaigns. Models were jumping back and forth between agencies such Elite, Wilhelmina, and Ford. In New York, the late 1980s trend was the boyish look in which models had short cropped hair and looked androgynous. In Europe, the trend was the exact opposite. During this time, many American models who were considered more feminine-looking moved abroad. By the mid-1980s, big hair was made popular by some musical groups, and the boyish look was out. The hourglass figure, a fashionable trend from the late 1940s to the early 1960s, has made a comeback.\n1990s.\nThe high fashion models of the late 1980s dominated the early 1990s. In 1990, Linda Evangelista famously said to \"Vogue\", \"we don't wake up for less than $10,000 a day\". Evangelista and her contemporaries, Naomi Campbell, Cindy Crawford, Christy Turlington, Tatjana Patitz, Stephanie Seymour, and Yasmeen Ghauri became arguably the most recognisable models in the world, earning the moniker of \"supermodel\", and were boosted to global recognition and new heights of wealth for the industry. In 1991, Turlington signed a contract with Maybelline that paid her $800,000 for twelve days' work each year.\nBy the mid\u20111990s, the new \"heroin chic\" trend became popular amongst New York and London editorial clients. Kate Moss became its poster child through her ads for Calvin Klein. Moss' friend, socialite Annabelle Neilson, was becoming increasingly well known at this time. With the popularity of lingerie retailer Victoria's Secret, and the \"Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue\", there was a need for healthier-looking supermodels such as Tyra Banks and Heidi Klum to meet commercial modelling demand. The mid\u20111990s also saw many Asian countries establishing modelling agencies.\nBy the late 1990s, the heroin chic era had run its course. Teen-inspired clothing infiltrated mainstream fashion, teen pop music was on the rise, and artists such as Britney Spears, Aaliyah and Christina Aguilera popularised pleather and bare midriffs. As fashion changed to a more youthful demographic, the models who rose to fame had to be sexier for the digital age. Following Gisele B\u00fcndchen's breakthrough, a wave of Brazilian models including Adriana Lima and Alessandra Ambrosio rose to fame on runways and became popular in commercial modelling throughout the 2000s. Some have tied this increase in Brazilian models to the trend of magazines featuring celebrities instead of models on their covers.\n2000s and since.\nIn the late 2000s, the Brazilians fell out of favour on the runways. Editorial clients were favouring models with a china-doll or alien look to them, such as Gemma Ward and Lily Cole. During the 2000s, Ford Models and NEXT Model Management were engaged in a legal battle, with each agency alleging that the other was stealing its models.\nHowever, the most significant controversy of the 2000s was the health of high-fashion models participating in fashion week. While the health of models had been a concern since the 1970s, there were several high-profile news stories surrounding the deaths of young fashion models due to eating disorders and drug abuse. The British Fashion Council subsequently asked designers to sign a contract stating they would not use models under the age of sixteen. On March 3, 2012, \"Vogue\" banned models under the age of sixteen as well as models who appeared to have an eating disorder. Similarly, other countries placed bans on unhealthy, and underage models, including Spain, Italy, Israel and France, which all enacted a minimum body mass index (BMI) requirement. The French law also requires digitally altered pictures of models to be identified as such.\nIn 2013, New York toughened its child labour law protections for models under the age of eighteen by passing New York Senate Bill No. 5486, which gives underage models the same labour protections afforded to child actors. Key new protections included the following: underage models are not to work before 5:00 pm or after 10:00 pm on school nights, nor were they to work later than 12:30 am on non-school nights; the models may not return to work less than twelve hours after they leave; a pediatric nurse must be on-site; an adult chaperone must accompany models under sixteen; parents or guardians of underage models must create a trust fund account into which employers will transfer a minimum of 15% of the child model's gross earnings; and employers must set aside time and a dedicated space for educational instruction.\nRunway modelling.\nCatwalk or runway models, also called live models, display clothes from fashion designers, fashion media, and consumers. During runway shows, models have to constantly change clothes and makeup. Models walk, turn, and stand to demonstrate a garment's key features. Models also go to interviews (called \"go and sees\") to present their portfolios. A runway model can also work in other areas, such as department store fashion shows, and the most successful models sometimes create their own product lines or go into acting.\nTop runway models travel around the world to attend fashion shows. The most prestigious events are held in New York City, London, Paris, and Milan. Second-tier international fashion centre cities include Rome, Florence, Venice, Brescia, Barcelona, Los Angeles, Tokyo, and Moscow.\nThe criteria for runway models include certain height and weight requirements. The British Association of Model Agents (AMA) says that female models should be around 34\"-24\"-34\" and between and tall. The average model is very slender. Those not meeting the size requirement may try to become a plus-size model. According to the New York Better Business Career Services website, the preferred dimensions for a male model are a height of to , a waist of and a chest measurement of . Male runway models are notably skinny and well toned.\nMale and female models must also possess clear skin, healthy hair, and attractive facial features. Stringent weight and body proportion guidelines form the selection criteria by which established, and would\u2011be, models are judged for their placement suitability, on an ongoing basis. There can be some variation regionally, and by market tier, subject to current prevailing trends at any point, in any era, by agents, agencies and end-clients.\nFormerly, the required measurements for models were 35\"-23.5\"-35\"\u00a0in (90-60-90\u00a0cm), the alleged measurements of Marilyn Monroe. Today's fashion models tend to have measurements closer to the AMA-recommended shape, but some \u2013 such as Afghan model Zohre Esmaeli \u2013 still have 35\"-23.5\"-35\" measurements. Although in some fashion centres, a size\u00a000 is more desirable than a size\u00a00.\nThe often thin shape of many fashion models has been criticised for warping girls' body image and encouraging eating disorders. Organisers of a fashion show in Madrid in September 2006 turned away models who were judged to be underweight by medical personnel who were on hand. In February 2007 a Uruguayan model, Luisel Ramos, died from heart problems secondary to malnutrition. Her sister Eliana Ramos also was a model and had died immediately after a runway show several months prior. They were amongst the three fashion models to die of malnutrition in a six-month span. The other victim was Ana Carolina Reston. Luisel Ramos died of heart failure caused by anorexia nervosa just after stepping off the catwalk. In 2015, France passed a law requiring models to be declared healthy by a doctor to participate in fashion shows. The law also requires re-touched images to be marked as such in magazines.\nMagazine modelling.\nFashion modelling also includes modelling clothing in fashion magazines. In Japan, there are different types of fashion magazine models. are models who regularly appear in a fashion magazine and model exclusively for it. On the other hand, street models, or , are amateur models who model part-time for fashion magazines in conjunction to school work and their main jobs. Unlike professional models, street models are meant to represent the average person in appearance and do not appear on runways. Street models are not exclusively contracted to fashion magazines. If a street model is popular enough, some become exclusive models. Many fashion icons and musicians in Japan began their careers as street models, including Kaela Kimura and Kyary Pamyu Pamyu.\nPlus-size.\nPlus-size models are models who generally have larger measurements than editorial fashion models, and are not necessarily overweight. The primary use of plus-size models is to appear in advertising and runway shows for plus-size labels. Plus-size models are also engaged in work not strictly related to selling large-sized clothing, e.g., stock photography and advertising photography for cosmetics, household and pharmaceutical products and sunglasses, footwear and watches. Therefore, plus-size models do not exclusively wear garments marketed as plus-size clothing. This is especially true when participating in fashion editorials for mainstream fashion magazines. Some plus-size models have appeared in runway shows and campaigns for mainstream retailers and designers such as Gucci, Guess, Jean-Paul Gaultier, Levi's and Versace Jeans.\nNormal-size.\nAlso known as the \"in-between\" and \"middle models\", they are neither considered catalogue size (0\u20132) nor plus-size (10 up). There is criticism that these models have been left out of the conversation because fashion companies and brands opt to employ the extremes of the spectrum.\nModel Camille Kostek who was on a solo cover of \"Sports Illustrated\" Swimsuit Issue in 2019 has stated that she was told by a well-known international modelling agency \"...that it was too bad that I wasn't a size 10. That plus size is a big market right now and it's too bad I wasn't measuring bigger. My size (4/6) is considered an \"in-between size\", meaning I'm not a straight model nor plus model, I'm right in the middle. Actress Mindy Kaling has described this body type in her 2011 book \"Is Everybody Hanging Out Without Me?\" writing, \"Since I am not model-skinny, but also not super-fat... I fall into that nebulous, 'Normal American Woman Size' that legions of fashion stylists detest... Many stylists hate that size because, I think, to them, I lack the self-discipline to be an aesthetic, or the sassy confidence to be a total fatty hedonist. They're like, 'Pick a lane.'\"\nBlack models.\nThe arrival of black women modelling as a profession began in early postwar America. It started most notably from the need of advertisers and a rise of black photography magazines. The women who advanced in such careers were those in a middle-class system emphasising the conservative value of marriage, motherhood, and domesticity. Originally titled the \"Brownskin\" model, black women refined the social, sexual, and racial realities confined in the gender expectations of the modelling world. There was a profound need for black women to partake in the advertising process for the new \"Negro Market\". With the help of Branford Models, the first black agency, 1946 was the beginning of the black modelling era. Branford Models' was able to \"overturn the barriers facing African Americans in the early postwar period,\" especially by lifting at least one economic freedom. In this postwar America, the demand for such presence in magazines advanced \"as a stage for models to display consumer goods\" while assisting \"in constructing a new visual discourse of urban middle-class African America\". In March 1966, Donyale Luna became the first Black model to appear on the cover of the British edition of \"Vogue\".\nWhile they represented diversity, a major gap in the fashion industry, it was only until the 1970s that black models had a substantial presence in the modelling world. Known as the \"Black is Beautiful\" movement, the 1970s became the era of the black model. With growing disenfranchisement and racial inequality, the United States recognised the urgency of opening the \"doors of social access and visibility to black Americans\". The world of fashion was the gateway for social change. \"The world of fashion was similarly looked to as a place where the culture could find signs of racial progress. Expressions of beauty and glamour mattered. Good race relations required taking note of who was selling women lipsticks and mini skirts, which meant that advertisers began looking for black models\" Black models were looked to as the vehicle of social change. They were given the opportunity to balance out the lack of presence of black individuals in the mainstream culture. Agencies were beginning to scout black models and focus on the social change they were contributing to. \"Life\" magazine in October 1969, covered their issue with Naomi Sims, one of the most influential black models in the industry. Her rise to fame led to her being hired by international magazines and working on individual projects with designers across the globe. In the Life Magazine issue, Black Beauty, a new agency that represented black models, had a spread in the magazine that showcased 39 black models. Each one of the models had unique features, allowing black expression to progress through this historic magazine spread.\nWith the movement's presence both in magazines and on the runway, designers began to realise the need to include black models on their runways and advertisements. The Battle of Versailles was one of the most notable moments in fashion history that put black models on the map. Eleanor Lambert, creator of Fashion Week and a major \"[controller] of the narrative of American fashion\", set up a dinner and a fundraiser to both increase American fashion visibility and restore the palace of Versailles. Five French designers and five American designers battled it out on the runway, showing off the fashion, and for the Americans, black models as well. Oscar de la Renta stated \"it was the black models that had made the difference.\" Pat Cleveland, Bethann Hardison, Billie Blair, Jennifer Brice, Alva Chinn, and Ramona Saunders, were among the many black models that helped Team America win and stun the French competition. This competition made the black model a worldwide phenomenon. The French were beginning to welcome diversity on the runway and in their advertising. With the recognition Versailles had given, black presence in the modelling world carried out into the 1980s and the 1990s. The models were now known by name and the publicity that came with the designers they were modelling for. With the rise of the supermodel, models like Naomi Campbell and Tyra Banks paved the way for black success. Naomi Campbell, born in London, was the first black model to cover American Vogue, TIME magazine, Russian Vogue, and the first British black model to cover British vogue. Brands like Chanel, Louis Vitton, Balmain, Prada, and more have all featured Campbell in their campaigns. She used her remarkable success to achieve more than fashion excellence.\nBy the mid-1990s, black presence in the modelling world had dramatically decreased. Designers began to favour a consistent aesthetic and elected for skinnier white models. This reality was paved by models such as Kate Moss and Stella Tennant, who provided a more consistent look for the runway. At this time, \"the number of working black models in high-profile runway presentation... became so dire that stories began appearing in the mainstream media about the whitewashing of the runway\". In response, models like Campbell, Iman, and Bethann Hardison, joined forces throughout the\"Diversity Coalition\" in an attempt to \"call out and accuse prominent fashion houses for snubbing Black and Asian models on the catwalk, editorial spreads, and campaigns\". The lack of representation was, in part, due to the belief that \"black girls don't push products\", which \"encouraged people who work directly and indirectly in the industry to speak out on the injustices that go on within it\". In the 1990s, it was quite clear that the top designers simply preferred a new aesthetic that excluded models of colour, which resulted in only 6% of runway models to be women of colour. Campbell's Diversity Coalition's primary mission was to \"expedite inclusion on the runway by deliberately calling out designers who have executed acts of racism on the runway\". According to Campbell, it was their choice to not include black models on the runway and desire a uniformed runway that resulted in a racist act. Although such a dramatic effort to exclude black presence from the fashion world, models like Tyra Banks and Veronica Webb persisted. Banks not only dominated the runway as a teen, she took over countless pop culture platforms. Being the first black model to cover Sports Illustrated, Banks was one of the most prominent models in the early 2000s. Covering \"Sports Illustrated\", \"Elle\", \"Essence\", \"Vogue\", and walking for Chanel, Chrisitan Dior, and Claude Monanta, Banks was truly dominating the fashion world. In addition, she acted in \"Fresh Prince of Bel Air\" and created her own reality competition show called America's Next Top Model. In conversation with Trebay of Los the New York Times, Banks stated that her first cover on Sports Illustrated \"changed [her] life overnight. You have to think back to remember what that did for an appreciation of black beauty to have a black girl, a girl next door type, on the cover of one of the most mass mainstream magazines of our lives. It was a societal statement, a political statement, and an economic one\". Now, models like Joan Smalls, Winne Harlow, Slick Woods, Jasmine Sanders and more are continuing the fight for black presence in the modelling world and using their successors as inspiration.\nFitting models.\nA fit model (sometimes fitting model) is a person who is used by a fashion designer or clothing manufacturer to check the fit, drape and visual appearance of a design on a representative human being, effectively acting as a live mannequin.\nParts models.\nSome models are employed for their body parts. For example, hand models may be used to promote products held in the hand and nail-related products. (e.g. rings, other jewelry or nail polish). They are frequently part of television commercials. Many parts models have exceptionally attractive body parts, but there is also demand for unattractive or unusual looking body parts for particular campaigns.\nHands are the most in-demand body parts. Feet models are also in high demand, particularly those that fit sample-size shoes. Models are also successful modelling other specific parts including abs, arms, back, bust or chest, legs, and lips. Some petite models (females who are under and do not qualify as fashion models) have found success in women's body part modelling.\nParts model divisions can be found at agencies worldwide. Several agencies solely represent parts models, including Hired Hands in London, Body Parts Models in Los Angeles, Carmen Hand Model Management in New York and Parts Models in New York. Parts Models is the largest parts agency, representing over 300 parts models.\nPetite models.\nPetite models are models that are under the typical height requirements that are expected of fashion models. Petite models typically work more often in commercial and print modelling (rather than runway modelling).\nThe height of fashion models is typically and above for women, and and above for men. Models who are shorter than these heights usually fall under the category of petite or commercial models.\nPodium models.\nPodium models differ from runway models in that they do not walk down a runway, but rather just stand on an elevated platform. They resemble live mannequins placed in various places throughout an event. Attendees can walk up to the models and inspect and even feel the clothing. Podium Modelling is a practical alternative way of presenting a fashion show when space is too limited to have a full runway fashion show.\nEarnings and demographics.\nAccording to the Bureau of Labor Statistics the median earnings for a model in the United States, as of 2021, is $34,000 annually. There are approximately 3,200 men and women who work as models full-time in the United States.\nGlamour models.\nGlamour modelling focuses on sexuality; thus, general requirements are often unclear, depending more on each case. Glamour models can be any size or shape. A study from 2014 that analysed glamour model profiles estimated that the mean values of female models were height, weight and 0.73 waist-to-hip ratio.\nThere is no industry standard for glamour modelling and it varies greatly by country. For the most part, glamour models are limited to modelling in calendars, men's magazines, such as \"Playboy\", bikini modelling, lingerie modelling, fetish modelling, music videos, and extra work in films. However, some extremely popular glamour models transition into commercial print modelling, appearing in swimwear, bikini and lingerie campaigns.\nIn the UK, glamour modelling became a prominent feature of the newspaper industry when \"The Sun\" established Page 3 in 1969, a section in their newspaper which featured sexually suggestive images of \"Penthouse\" and \"Playboy\" models. From 1970 models appeared topless. In the 1980s, \"The Sun\"'s competitors followed suit and produced their own Page 3 sections. It was during this time that glamour models first came to prominence with the likes of Samantha Fox. As a result, the United Kingdom has a very large glamour market and numerous glamour modelling agencies.\nIt was not until the 1990s that modern glamour modelling was established. During this time, the fashion industry was promoting models with waif bodies and androgynous-looking women, which left a void. Several fashion models, who were deemed too commercial, and too curvaceous, were frustrated with industry standards, and took a different approach. Models such as Victoria Silvstedt left the fashion world and began modelling for men's magazines. In the previous decades, posing nude for \"Playboy\" resulted in models losing their agencies and endorsements. \"Playboy\" was a stepping stone which catapulted the careers of Victoria Silvstedt, Pamela Anderson, Jenny McCarthy, and Anna Nicole Smith. Pamela Anderson became so popular from her \"Playboy\" spreads that she was able to land roles on \"Home Improvement\" and \"Baywatch\".\nIn the mid-1990s, a series of men's magazines were established such as \"Maxim\", \"FHM\", and \"Stuff\". At the same time, magazines including Sweden's \"Slitz\" (formerly a music magazine) re-branded themselves as men's magazines. Pre-internet, these magazines were popular among men in their late teens and early twenties because they were considered more tasteful than their predecessors. With the glamour market growing, fashion moved away from the waifs and onto Brazilian bombshells. The glamour market, consisting mostly of commercial fashion and print models, became its own genre due to its popularity. Even in a large market like the United Kingdom, however, glamour models are not usually signed exclusively to one agency as they can not rely financially on one agency to provide them with enough work. It was, and still is, a common practice for glamour models to partake in kiss-and-tell interviews about their dalliances with famous men. The notoriety of their alleged bed-hopping often propels their popularity and they are often promoted by their current or former fling. With Page 3 models becoming fixtures in the British tabloids, glamour models such as Jordan, now known as Katie Price, became household names. By 2004, Page 3 regulars earned anywhere from \u00a330,000 to 40,000, where the average salary of a non-Page 3 model, as of 2011, was between \u00a310,000 and 20,000. In the early 2000s, glamour models, and aspiring glamour models, appeared on reality television shows such as \"Big Brother\" to gain fame. Several \"Big Brother\" alumni parlayed their fifteen minutes of fame into successful glamour modelling careers. However, partly because of competition from the upcoming internet -giving audiences access to large amounts of, often free, online content- and its own glamour stars, such as , the offline glamour market became saturated by the mid-2000s, and numerous men's magazines including \"Arena\", \"Stuff\" and \"FHM\" in the United States went under. During this time, there was a growing trend of glamour models, including Kellie Acreman and Lauren Pope, becoming DJs to supplement their income. In a 2012 interview, Keeley Hazell said that going topless is not the best way to achieve success and that \"[she] was lucky to be in that 1% of people that get that, and become really successful.\"\nGravure idols.\nIn Japan, a , often abbreviated to , is a female model who primarily models for magazines, especially men's magazines, photobooks or DVDs. It is considered part of the overall idol industry in Japan. is a wasei-eigo term derived from \"rotogravure\", which is a type of intaglio printing process that was once a staple of newspaper photo features. The rotogravure process is still used for commercial printing of magazines, postcards, and cardboard product packaging.\nGravure idols appear in a wide range of photographic styles and genres. Their photos are largely aimed at male audiences with poses or activities intended to be provocative or suggestive, generally accentuated by an air of playfulness and innocence rather than aggressive sexuality. Although gravure idols may sometimes wear clothing that exposes most of their body, they seldom appear fully nude. Gravure idols may be as young as pre-teen age up to their early thirties. In addition to appearing in mainstream magazines, gravure idols often release their own professional photobooks and DVDs for their fans. Many popular female idols in Japan started their careers as gravure idols.\nAlternative models.\nAn alternative model is any model who does not fit into the conventional model types and may include punk, goth, fetish, and tattooed models or models with distinctive attributes. This type of modelling is usually a cross between glamour modelling and art modelling. Publishers such as Goliath Books in Germany introduced alternative models and punk photography to larger audiences. Billi Gordon, then known as Wilbert Anthony Gordon, was the top greeting card model in the world and inspired a cottage industry, including greeting cards, T-shirts, fans, stationery, gift bags, etc.\nFitness models.\nFitness modelling focuses on displaying a healthy, toned physique. Fitness models usually have defined muscle groups. The model's body weight is greater due to muscle being denser than fat; however, they have a lower body fat percentage and a higher degree of muscle definition.\nFitness models are often used in magazine advertising; they can also in some cases be certified personal fitness trainers. However, other fitness models are also athletes and compete as professionals in fitness and figure competitions.\nThere are several agencies in large markets such as New York, London, and Germany that have fitness modelling agencies. While there is a large market for these models, most of these agencies are secondary agencies promoting models who typically earn their primary income as commercial models. There are also magazines that are geared towards specifically fitness modelling or getting fit and in shape.\nCommercial models.\nPromotional models.\nA promotional model is a model hired to drive consumer demand for a product, service, brand, or concept by interacting in person with potential consumers. The vast majority of promotional models tend to be attractive in physical appearance. They serve to provide information about the product or service and make it appealing to consumers. While the interaction length may be short, the promotional model delivers a live experience that reflects on the product or service he or she represents. This form of marketing touches fewer consumers for the cost than traditional advertising media (such as print, radio, and television); however, the consumer's perception of a brand, product, service, or company is often more profoundly affected by a live person-to-person experience.\nMarketing campaigns that make use of promotional models may take place in stores or shopping malls, at tradeshows, special promotional events, clubs, or even at outdoor public spaces. Promotional models may also be used as TV hosts/anchors for interviewing celebrities at film awards, sports events, etc. They are often held at high-traffic locations to reach as many consumers as possible or at venues where a particular type of target consumer is expected to be present.\nSpokesmodels.\n\"Spokesmodel\" is a term used for a model who is employed to be associated with a specific brand in advertisements. A spokesmodel may be a celebrity used only in advertisements (in contrast to a brand ambassador who is also expected to represent the company at various events), but more often the term refers to a model who is not a celebrity in their own right. A classic example of the spokesmodel is the models hired to be the Marlboro Man between 1954 and 1999.\nTrade show models.\nTrade show models work a trade show floorspace or booth and represent a company to attendees. Trade show models are typically not regular employees of the company, but are freelancers hired by the company renting the booth space. They are hired for several reasons: trade show models can make a company's booth more visible from the hundreds of other booths competing for attendee attention. They are articulate and quickly learn and explain or disseminate information on the company and its product(s) and service(s). And they can assist a company in handling a large number of attendees, which the company might otherwise not have enough employees to accommodate, possibly increasing the number of sales or leads resulting from participation in the show.\nAtmosphere models.\nAtmosphere models are hired by the producers of themed events to enhance the atmosphere or ambience of their event. They are usually dressed in costumes exemplifying the event's theme and are often placed strategically in various locations around the venue. It is common for event guests to have their picture taken with atmosphere models. For example, if someone is throwing a \"Brazilian Day\" celebration, they would hire models dressed in samba costumes and headdresses to stand or walk around the party.\nInstagram models.\nInstagram models are people who have accumulated a large number of followers on Instagram by posting engaging photos of themselves and their lifestyles, and are consequently hired by a company to advertise products as their influence and popularity can increase sales. They should not be confused with established models such as Cara Delevingne and Gigi Hadid, who use Instagram to promote their traditional modelling careers, although some models, such as \"Playboy\" model Lindsey Pelas, begin their careers conventionally and subsequently become Instagram models. Some models use Instagram success to develop their careers, such as Rosie Roff, who worked as a fashion model before being discovered via Instagram and gaining work as a ring girl in American boxing. In some cases, Instagram gives unsigned models a platform to attract the attention of agencies and talent scouts. American model Matthew Noszka entered the profession as a result of being discovered on Instagram by Wilhelmina Models.\nThe Instagram model concept originated in the late 2000s, when the boyfriends of fashion bloggers such as Rumi Neely and Chiara Ferragni began photographing their girlfriends in various outfits. Instagram models often attempt to become social media influencers and engage in influencer marketing, promoting products such as fashion brands and detox teas. High-profile influencers can earn thousands of dollars for promoting commercial brands. When choosing whom to employ, brands have become less concerned with the number of followers an influencer has and more focused on their engagement marketing strategy. Research indicates that 89% of influencers use Instagram to promote themselves, compared to 20% using Twitter and 16% using Facebook.\nSome Instagram models have gained high-profile modelling jobs and become celebrities. Fitness model Jen Selter had become an Internet celebrity by 2014 and modelled for \"Vanity Fair\" magazine. Cosplayer and model Anna Faith acquired over 250,000 Instagram followers by 2014, gaining success from her ability to impersonate the Disney character Elsa. With Facebook's continuing decrease in post reach, Instagram has increasingly become cosplayers' favourite platform. American actress Caitlin O'Connor had almost 300,000 Instagram followers in 2016, earning most of her social media income from endorsing products on Instagram. American model Kayla Simmons has a million Instagram followers after posting images of herself in swimsuits. Australian personal trainer Kayla Itsines acquired 5.5 million Instagram followers, allowing her to build a business in the fitness industry. Brazilian model Claudia Alende gained a following of 2.8 million people on Instagram by 2015 and developed a career as a lingerie model. Plus-size models Iskra Lawrence and Tess Holliday have used Instagram to demonstrate their potential as models. Yashika Aannand, an Indian teenage actress, rose to prominence in the Tamil film industry after gaining popularity as an Instagram model with over 145,000 followers on her account by 2017. Iraqi cross-dressing model, Noor Alsaffar, was killed in September 2023 as part of an increase in violence against LGBTQ+ people.\nInstagram model techniques and aesthetics have also been used in unconventional or parody profiles. Instagram model Lil Miquela has blurred the line between reality and social media, amassing more than 200,000 followers without revealing whether she is real or computer-generated. Australian comedian Celeste Barber had acquired 1.8 million Instagram followers by 2017, parodying celebrity fashion photographs with real-life reenactments. In 2016, French organisation Addict Aide ran a campaign to raise awareness for alcohol abuse among young people in which a model posed as Louise Delage, a fictitious 25-year-old Parisian whose Instagram photos nearly always featured alcohol. The account amassed 65,000 followers in a month, after which a reveal video posted to it had over 160,000 views.\nSome reports suggest that a number of Instagram models obtain extra income by covertly working as prostitutes. Websites accusing various models of this, often without reliable evidence, have increased in popularity recently, sometimes with the unintended effect of increasing their earnings. But false accusations on these sites can harm legitimate models' reputations, and some women in the industry consider them a way for men to exert power over women.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48917", "revid": "1248300931", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48917", "title": "Dancer", "text": "Person who dances"}
{"id": "48918", "revid": "50980018", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48918", "title": "Alexandra of Denmark", "text": "Queen of the United Kingdom from 1901 to 1910\nAlexandra of Denmark (Alexandra Caroline Marie Charlotte Louise Julia; 1 December 1844 \u2013 20 November 1925) was Queen of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Empress of India, from 22 January 1901 to 6 May 1910 as the wife of King Edward VII.\nAlexandra's family had been relatively obscure until 1852, when her father, Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gl\u00fccksburg, was chosen (with the consent of the major European powers) to succeed his second cousin Frederick VII as King of Denmark. At the age of 16, she was chosen as the future wife of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, the son and heir apparent of Queen Victoria. The couple married 18 months later in 1863, the year in which her father became king of Denmark as Christian IX and her brother William was appointed king of Greece as George I. \nAlexandra was Princess of Wales from 1863 to 1901, the longest anyone has ever held that title, and became generally popular; fashion-conscious women copied her style of dress and bearing. Largely excluded from wielding any political power, she unsuccessfully attempted to sway the opinion of British ministers and her husband's family to favour Greek and Danish interests. Her public duties were restricted to uncontroversial involvement in charitable work.\nOn the death of Queen Victoria in 1901, Albert Edward became king-emperor as Edward VII, with Alexandra as queen-empress consort. She became queen mother on Edward VII's death in 1910, at which point their son George V acceded to the throne. Alexandra died aged 80 in 1925.\nEarly life.\nAlexandra Caroline Marie Charlotte Louise Julia of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gl\u00fccksburg, or \"Alix\", as her immediate family knew her, was born on 1 December 1844 at the Yellow Palace, an 18th-century town house at 18 Amaliegade, immediately adjacent to the Amalienborg Palace complex in Copenhagen. Her father was Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gl\u00fccksburg and her mother was Princess Louise of Hesse-Kassel. She had five siblings: Frederick, William (later George I of Greece), Dagmar (later Empress Maria of Russia), Thyra and Valdemar.\nHer father's family was a distant cadet branch of the Danish royal House of Oldenburg, which was descended from King Christian III of Denmark. Although they were of royal blood, the family lived a comparatively modest life. They did not possess great wealth; her father's income from an army commission was about \u00a3800 per year, and their house was a rent-free grace and favour property. Occasionally, Hans Christian Andersen was invited to call and tell the children stories before bedtime.\nIn 1848, Christian VIII of Denmark died and his only son Frederick acceded to the throne. Frederick was childless, had been through two unsuccessful marriages, and was assumed to be infertile. A succession crisis arose because Frederick ruled in both Denmark and Schleswig-Holstein, and the succession rules of each territory differed. In Holstein, the Salic law prevented inheritance through the female line, whereas no such restrictions applied in Denmark. Holstein, being predominantly German, proclaimed independence and called in the aid of Prussia. In 1852, the major European powers called a conference in London to discuss the Danish succession. An uneasy peace was agreed, which included the provision that Prince Christian of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Gl\u00fccksburg would be Frederick's heir in all his dominions and the prior claims of others (who included Christian's own mother-in-law, brother-in-law and wife) were surrendered.\nPrince Christian was given the title Prince of Denmark and his family moved into a new official residence, Bernstorff Palace. Although the family's status had risen, there was little or no increase in their income; and they did not participate in court life in Copenhagen, for they refused to meet Frederick's third wife and former mistress, Louise Rasmussen, because she had an illegitimate child by a previous lover. \nAlexandra shared a draughty attic bedroom with her sister, Dagmar, made her own clothes, and waited at table along with her sisters. Alexandra and Dagmar were given swimming lessons by the Swedish pioneer of women's swimming, Nancy Edberg. At Bernstorff, Alexandra grew into a young woman; she was taught English by the English chaplain in Copenhagen and was confirmed in Christiansborg Palace. She was devout throughout her life, and followed high church practice.\nMarriage and family.\nGiven that Albert Edward, the Prince of Wales, would reach the age of twenty in November 1861, his parents Queen Victoria and her husband, Prince Albert, were taking steps to find a bride for him. They enlisted the aid of their eldest (and already-married) daughter, Crown Princess Victoria of Prussia, in seeking a suitable candidate. Alexandra was not their first choice because the Danes were at loggerheads with the Prussians over the Schleswig-Holstein Question, and most of the British royal family's relations were German. Eventually, after rejecting other possibilities, they settled on her as \"the only one to be chosen\".\nOn 24 September 1861, Crown Princess Victoria introduced her brother Albert Edward to Alexandra at Speyer. Almost a year later on 9 September 1862 (after his affair with Nellie Clifden and the death of his father Prince Albert), Albert Edward proposed to Alexandra at the Royal Castle of Laeken, the home of his great-uncle, King Leopold I of Belgium.\nA few months later, Alexandra travelled from Denmark to Britain aboard the royal yacht \"Victoria and Albert\" and arrived in Gravesend, Kent, on 7 March 1863. Sir Arthur Sullivan composed music for her arrival and Poet Laureate Alfred, Lord Tennyson, wrote an ode in Alexandra's honour:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;Sea King's daughter from over the sea,\nAlexandra!\nSaxon and Norman and Dane are we,\nBut all of us Danes in our welcome of thee,\nAlexandra!&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nThomas Longley, the Archbishop of Canterbury, married the couple on 10 March 1863 at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle. The choice of venue was criticised. As the ceremony took place outside London, the press complained that large public crowds would not be able to view the spectacle. Prospective guests thought it awkward to get to and, as the venue was small, some people who had expected invitations were disappointed. The Danes were dismayed because only Alexandra's closest relations were invited. The British court was still in mourning for Prince Albert, so ladies were restricted to wearing grey, lilac, or mauve. As the couple left Windsor for their honeymoon at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight, they were cheered by the schoolboys of neighbouring Eton College, including Lord Randolph Churchill.\nBy the end of the following year, Alexandra's father had acceded to the throne of Denmark, her brother William had become King George I of Greece, her sister Dagmar was engaged to Nicholas Alexandrovich, Tsesarevich of Russia, and Alexandra had given birth to her first child. Her father's accession gave rise to further conflict over the fate of Schleswig-Holstein. The German Confederation successfully invaded Denmark, reducing the area of Denmark by two-fifths. To the great irritation of Queen Victoria and the Crown Princess of Prussia, Alexandra and Albert Edward supported the Danish side in the war. The Prussian conquest of former Danish lands heightened Alexandra's profound dislike of the Germans, a feeling which stayed with her for the rest of her life.\nAlexandra's first child, Albert Victor, was born two months premature in early 1864. Alexandra showed devotion to her children: \"She was in her glory when she could run up to the nursery, put on a flannel apron, wash the children herself and see them asleep in their little beds.\" Albert Edward and Alexandra had six children in total: Albert Victor, George, Louise, Victoria, Maud, and Alexander. All of Alexandra's children were apparently born prematurely; biographer Richard Hough thought Alexandra deliberately misled Queen Victoria as to her probable delivery dates, as she did not want the Queen to be present at their births. During the birth of her third child in 1867, the added complication of a bout of rheumatic fever threatened Alexandra's life and left her with a permanent limp.\nIn public, Alexandra was dignified and charming; in private, affectionate and jolly. She enjoyed many social activities, including dancing and ice-skating, and was an expert horsewoman and tandem driver. She also enjoyed hunting, to the dismay of Queen Victoria, who asked her to stop, but without success. Even after the birth of her first child, she continued to socialise much as before, which led to some friction between the Queen and the young couple, exacerbated by Alexandra's loathing of Prussians and the Queen's partiality towards them.\nPrincess of Wales.\nAlbert Edward and Alexandra visited Ireland in April 1868. After her illness the previous year, she had only just begun to walk again without the aid of two walking sticks, and was already pregnant with her fourth child. The royal couple undertook a six-month tour taking in Austria, Egypt and Greece over 1868 and 1869, which included visits to her brother George I of Greece, to the Crimean battlefields and, for her only, to the harem of the Khedive Ismail. In Turkey she became the first woman to sit down to dinner with the Sultan (Abdulaziz).\nThe couple made Sandringham House their preferred residence, with Marlborough House their London base. Biographers agree that their marriage was in many ways a happy one; however, some have asserted that Albert Edward did not give his wife as much attention as she would have liked and that they gradually became estranged, until his attack of typhoid fever (the disease which was believed to have killed his father) in late 1871 brought about a reconciliation. This is disputed by others, who point out Alexandra's frequent pregnancies throughout this period and use family letters to deny the existence of any serious rift. Nevertheless, the prince was severely criticised from many quarters of society for his apparent lack of interest in her very serious illness with rheumatic fever. Throughout their marriage Albert Edward continued to keep company with other women, including the actress Lillie Langtry, Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick, humanitarian Agnes Keyser, and society matron Alice Keppel. Alexandra knew about most of these relationships and later permitted Alice Keppel to visit her husband as he lay dying. Alexandra herself remained faithful throughout her marriage.\nAn increasing degree of deafness, caused by hereditary otosclerosis, led to Alexandra's social isolation; she spent more time at home with her children and pets. Her sixth and final pregnancy ended with the birth of a son in April 1871, but the infant died the next day. Despite Alexandra's pleas for privacy, Queen Victoria insisted on announcing a period of court mourning, which led unsympathetic elements of the press to describe the birth as \"a wretched abortion\" and the funeral arrangements as \"sickening mummery\", even though the infant was not buried in state with other members of the royal family at Windsor, but in strict privacy in the churchyard at Sandringham, where he had lived out his brief life.\nFor eight months over 1875\u201376, Albert Edward was absent from Britain on a tour of India, but to her dismay Alexandra was left behind. The prince had planned an all-male group and intended to spend much of the time hunting and shooting. During his tour, one of Albert Edward's friends who was travelling with him, Lord Aylesford, was told by his wife that she was going to leave him for another man, Lord Blandford, who was himself married. Aylesford was appalled and decided to seek a divorce.\nMeanwhile, Lord Blandford's brother, Lord Randolph Churchill, persuaded the lovers against an elopement. Now concerned by the threat of divorce, Lady Aylesford sought to dissuade her husband from proceeding, but Lord Aylesford was adamant and refused to reconsider. In an attempt to pressure Lord Aylesford to drop his divorce suit, Lady Aylesford and Lord Randolph Churchill called on Alexandra and told her that if the divorce was to proceed they would subpoena her husband as a witness and implicate him in the scandal. Distressed at their threats, and following the advice of Sir William Knollys and the Duchess of Teck, Alexandra informed the Queen, who then wrote to the Prince of Wales. The prince was incensed. Eventually, the Blandfords and the Aylesfords both separated privately. Although Lord Randolph Churchill later apologised, for years afterwards the Prince of Wales refused to speak to or see him.\nAlexandra spent the spring of 1877 in Greece recuperating from a period of ill health and visiting her brother King George of Greece. During the Russo-Turkish War, Alexandra was clearly partial against Turkey and towards Russia, where her sister was married to the Tsarevitch, and she lobbied for a revision of the border between Greece and Turkey in favour of the Greeks. Alexandra spent the next three years largely parted from her two sons as the boys were sent on a worldwide cruise as part of their naval and general education. The farewell was very tearful and, as shown by her regular letters, she missed them terribly. In 1881, Alexandra and Albert Edward travelled to Saint Petersburg after the assassination of Alexander II of Russia, both to represent Britain and so that Alexandra could provide comfort to her sister, who had become tsarina.\nAlexandra undertook many public duties; in the words of Queen Victoria, \"to spare me the strain and fatigue of functions. She opens bazaars, attends concerts, visits hospitals in my place\u00a0... she not only never complains, but endeavours to prove that she has enjoyed what to another would be a tiresome duty.\" She took a particular interest in the London Hospital, visiting it regularly. Joseph Merrick, the so-called \"Elephant Man\", was one of the patients whom she met. Crowds usually cheered Alexandra rapturously, but during a visit to Ireland in 1885, she suffered a rare moment of public hostility when visiting the City of Cork, a hotbed of Irish nationalism. She and her husband were booed by a crowd of two to three thousand people brandishing sticks and black flags. She smiled her way through the ordeal, which the British press still portrayed in a positive light, describing the crowds as \"enthusiastic\". As part of the same visit, she received a Doctorate in Music from Trinity College Dublin.\nAlexandra was deeply saddened by the death of her eldest son, Prince Albert Victor, in 1892. His room and possessions were kept exactly as he had left them, much as those of his grandfather Prince Albert were left after his death in 1861. Alexandra said, \"I have buried my angel and with him my happiness.\" Surviving letters between Alexandra and her children indicate that they were mutually devoted. In 1894, her brother-in-law Alexander III of Russia died and her nephew Nicholas II became Tsar. Alexandra's widowed sister, Dowager Empress Maria of Russia, leant heavily on her for support; Alexandra, who had gone to Russia accompanied by her husband, slept, prayed, and stayed beside Maria for the next two weeks until Alexander's burial. Alexandra and Albert Edward stayed on for the wedding of Nicholas to their niece Princess Alix of Hesse and by Rhine, who had taken the Russian name Alexandra Feodorovna and became the new tsarina.\nQueen and empress consort.\nWith the death of her mother-in-law, Queen Victoria, in 1901, Alexandra became queen-empress with her husband's accession as Edward VII. Just two months later, her son George and daughter-in-law Mary left on an extensive tour of the empire, leaving their young children in the care of Alexandra and Edward, who doted on their grandchildren. On George's return, preparations for Edward and Alexandra's coronation in Westminster Abbey were well in hand, but just a few days before the scheduled coronation in June 1902, the King became seriously ill with appendicitis. Alexandra deputised for him at a military parade and attended the Royal Ascot races without him, in an attempt to prevent public alarm. Eventually, the coronation had to be postponed and Edward had an operation performed by Frederick Treves of the London Hospital to drain the infected appendix. After his recovery, Alexandra and Edward were crowned together in August: the King by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Frederick Temple, and the Queen by the Archbishop of York, William Dalrymple Maclagan.\nDespite being queen, Alexandra's duties changed little, and she kept many of the same retainers. Alexandra's Woman of the Bedchamber, Charlotte Knollys, the daughter of Sir William Knollys, served Alexandra loyally for many years. On 10 December 1903, Knollys woke to find her bedroom full of smoke. She roused Alexandra and shepherded her to safety. In the words of Grand Duchess Augusta of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, \"We must give credit to old Charlotte for \"really\" saving [Alexandra's] life.\"\nAlexandra again looked after her grandchildren when George and Mary went on a second tour, this time to British India, over the winter of 1905\u201306. Her father, Christian IX of Denmark, died that January. Eager to retain their family links, both to each other and to Denmark, in 1907 Alexandra and her sister, Dowager Empress Maria, purchased a villa north of Copenhagen, Hvid\u00f8re, as a private getaway.\nAlexandra was denied access to the King's briefing papers and excluded from some of his foreign tours to prevent her meddling in diplomatic matters. She was deeply distrustful of Germans, particularly her nephew German Emperor Wilhelm II, and she invariably opposed anything that favoured German expansion or interests. For example, in 1890 Alexandra wrote a memorandum, distributed to senior British ministers and military personnel, warning against the planned exchange of the British North Sea island of Heligoland for the German colony of Zanzibar, pointing out Heligoland's strategic significance and that it could be used either by Germany to launch an attack, or by Britain to contain German aggression. Despite this, the exchange went ahead. The Germans fortified the island and, in the words of Robert Ensor and as Alexandra had predicted, it \"became the keystone of Germany's maritime position for offence as well as for defence\". The \"Frankfurter Zeitung\" was outspoken in its condemnation of Alexandra and her sister Maria, saying that the pair were \"the centre of the international anti-German conspiracy\". Alexandra despised and distrusted Emperor Wilhelm, calling him \"inwardly our enemy\" in 1900.\nIn 1910, Alexandra became the first queen consort to visit the British House of Commons during a debate. In a remarkable departure from precedent, for two hours she sat in the Ladies' Gallery overlooking the chamber while the Parliament Bill, to remove the right of the House of Lords to veto legislation, was debated. Privately, Alexandra disagreed with the bill. Shortly afterwards, she left to visit her brother George in Corfu. While there, she received news that King Edward was seriously ill. Alexandra returned at once and arrived only the day before her husband died. In his last hours, she personally administered oxygen from a gas cylinder to help him breathe. She told Frederick Ponsonby, \"I feel as if I had been turned into stone, unable to cry, unable to grasp the meaning of it all.\" Later that year she moved out of Buckingham Palace to Marlborough House, but she retained possession of Sandringham. The new king, Alexandra's son George\u00a0V, soon faced a decision over the Parliament Bill. Despite her personal views, Alexandra supported her son's reluctant agreement to Prime Minister H. H. Asquith's request to create sufficient Liberal peers after a general election if the Lords continued to block the legislation.\nQueen mother.\nFrom Edward's death, Alexandra was queen mother, being a dowager queen and the mother of the reigning monarch. She did not attend the coronation of her son and daughter-in-law in 1911 since it was not customary for a crowned queen to attend the coronation of another king or queen, but otherwise continued the public side of her life, devoting time to her charitable causes. One such cause was Alexandra Rose Day, where artificial roses made by people with disabilities were sold in aid of hospitals by women volunteers. During the First World War the custom of hanging the banners of foreign princes invested with Britain's highest order of knighthood, the Order of the Garter, in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, came under criticism, as the German members of the Order were fighting against Britain. Alexandra joined calls to \"have down those hateful German banners\". Driven by public opinion, but against his own wishes, the King had the banners removed; but to Alexandra's dismay, he had taken down not only \"those vile Prussian banners\" but also those of her Hessian relations who were, in her opinion, \"simply soldiers or vassals under that brutal German Emperor's orders\". On 17 September 1916, she was at Sandringham during a Zeppelin air raid, but far worse was to befall other members of her family. In Russia, her nephew Tsar Nicholas II was overthrown and he, his wife and their children were killed by revolutionaries. Dowager Empress Maria was rescued from Russia in 1919 by and brought to England, where she lived for some time with her sister Alexandra.\nLast years and death.\nAlexandra retained a youthful appearance into her senior years, but during the war her age caught up with her. She took to wearing elaborate veils and heavy makeup, which was described by gossips as having her face \"enamelled\". She made no more trips abroad, and her health worsened. In 1920, a blood vessel in her eye burst, leaving her with temporary partial blindness. Towards the end of her life, her memory and speech became impaired. Alexandra died at 5:25\u00a0pm on 20 November 1925 at Sandringham House from a heart attack, aged 80. She lay in state at Westminster Abbey and was interred on 28 November next to her husband in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.\nLegacy.\nThe Queen Alexandra Memorial by Alfred Gilbert was unveiled on Alexandra Rose Day 8 June 1932 at Marlborough Gate, London. An ode in her memory, \"So many true princesses who have gone\", composed by the then Master of the King's Musick Sir Edward Elgar to words by the Poet Laureate John Masefield, was sung at the unveiling and conducted by the composer.\nAlexandra was highly popular with the British public. Unlike her husband and mother-in-law, Alexandra was not castigated by the press. Funds that she helped to collect were used to buy a river launch, called \"Alexandra\", to ferry the wounded during the Sudan campaign, and to fit out a hospital ship, named \"The Princess of Wales\", to bring back wounded from the Boer War. During the Boer War, Queen Alexandra's Imperial Military Nursing Service, later renamed Queen Alexandra's Royal Army Nursing Corps, was founded under Royal Warrant.\nAlexandra had little understanding of money. The management of her finances was left in the hands of her loyal comptroller, Sir Dighton Probyn VC, who undertook a similar role for her husband. In the words of her grandson, Edward VIII (later the Duke of Windsor), \"Her generosity was a source of embarrassment to her financial advisers. Whenever she received a letter soliciting money, a cheque would be sent by the next post, regardless of the authenticity of the mendicant and without having the case investigated.\" Though she was not always extravagant (she had her old stockings darned for re-use and her old dresses were recycled as furniture covers), she would dismiss protests about her heavy spending with a wave of a hand or by claiming that she had not heard.\nAlexandra hid a small scar on her neck, which was probably the result of a childhood operation, by wearing choker necklaces and high necklines, setting fashions which were adopted for fifty years. Alexandra's effect on fashion was so profound that society ladies even copied her limping gait, after her serious illness in 1867 left her with a stiff leg. This came to be known as the \"Alexandra limp\". She used predominantly the London fashion houses; her favourite was Redfern's, but she shopped occasionally at Doucet and Fromont of Paris.\nAlexandra has been portrayed on television by Deborah Grant and Helen Ryan in \"Edward the Seventh\", Ann Firbank in \"Lillie\", Maggie Smith in \"All the King's Men\", and Bibi Andersson in \"The Lost Prince\". She was portrayed in film by Helen Ryan again in the 1980 film \"The Elephant Man\", Sara Stewart in the 1997 film \"Mrs Brown\", and Julia Blake in the 1999 film \"Passion\". In a 1980 stage play by Royce Ryton, \"Motherdear\", she was portrayed by Margaret Lockwood in her last acting role. Also, in 1907, the Royal Alexandra Theatre was built in Toronto, Canada, as North America's first royal theatre. The venue was named after her, after a patent letter was granted by the King, her husband Edward VII.\nHonours.\nBritish\nShe was the first woman since 1488 to be made a Lady of the Garter.\nForeign\nArms.\nQueen Alexandra's arms upon the accession of her husband in 1901 were the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom impaled with the arms of her father, the King of Denmark. The shield is surmounted by the imperial crown, and supported by the crowned lion of England and a wild man or savage from the Danish royal arms.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48919", "revid": "19275268", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48919", "title": "Prince Albert", "text": "Prince Albert most commonly refers to:\nPrince Albert may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48921", "revid": "1316732794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48921", "title": "Aspen, Colorado", "text": "Home-rule city and seat of Pitkin County, Colorado, USA\nAspen is the most populous municipality in and the county seat of Pitkin County, Colorado, United States. The city population was 7,004 at the 2020 United States census. Aspen is in a remote area of the Rocky Mountains' Sawatch Range and Elk Mountains, along the Roaring Fork River at an elevation just below on the Western Slope, west of the Continental Divide. Aspen is now a part of the Glenwood Springs, CO Micropolitan Statistical Area and governed as a home rule city.\nFounded as a mining camp during the Colorado Silver Boom and later named Aspen for the abundance of aspen trees in the area, the city boomed during the 1880s, its first decade. The boom ended when the Panic of 1893 led to a collapse of the silver market. For the next half-century, known as \"the quiet years\", the population steadily declined, reaching a nadir of fewer than 1000 by 1930. Aspen's fortunes recovered in the mid-20th century when neighboring Aspen Mountain was developed into a ski resort, and industrialist Walter Paepcke bought many properties in the city in the 1950s and redeveloped them. Today it is home to three institutions, two of which Paepcke helped found, having international importance: the Aspen Music Festival and School, the Aspen Institute, and the Aspen Center for Physics.\nIn the late 20th century, the town became a popular retreat for celebrities. Gonzo journalist Hunter S. Thompson worked out of a downtown hotel and ran unsuccessfully for county sheriff. Singer John Denver wrote two songs about Aspen after settling there. Both figures popularized Aspen among the counter-cultural youth of the 1970s as an ideal place to live, and the city continued to grow even as it gained notoriety for some of the era's hedonistic excesses (particularly its drug culture).\nAspen remains popular as a year-round destination for locals, second-home buyers and tourists. Outdoor recreation in the surrounding White River National Forest serves as a summertime counterpart to the city's four ski areas. Prime residential real estate in Aspen is the most expensive of any ski resort in the world on a per-square-foot basis, according to a study of 44 global ski resorts. Aspen is the world's second-highest-rated ski resort in terms of \"the quality and reliability of their conditions and their capacity to withstand climate change.\"\nHistory.\nThe city's roots are traced to the winter of 1879, when a group of miners ignored pleas by Frederick Pitkin, Governor of Colorado, to return across the Continental Divide to avoid a Ute uprising. The Utes were fighting to maintain possession of their land and communities. Originally named Ute City, the small community was renamed Aspen. The Aspen, Colorado, post office opened on June 7, 1880. Pitkin County was created on February 23, 1881, with Aspen as its first and only seat. The Town of Aspen was incorporated on April 1, 1881. In its peak production years of 1891 and 1892, Aspen surpassed Leadville as the United States' most productive silver-mining district. Production expanded due to the passage of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act of 1890, which doubled the government's purchase of silver. In 1883, the Apostolic Vicarate of Colorado's Bishop Machebeuf had the Reverend Edward Downey establish the first Catholic mission in Aspen.\nBy 1893, Aspen had banks, a hospital, a police department, two theaters, an opera house, and electric lights. Economic collapse came with the Panic of 1893, when President Cleveland called a special session of Congress and repealed the act. Within weeks, many of the Aspen mines were closed and thousands of miners were put out of work. It was proposed that silver be recognized as legal tender and the People's Party (populists) adopted that as one of its main issues. Davis H. Waite, an Aspen newspaperman and agitator, was elected governor of Colorado on the Democratic ticket, but in time the movement failed.\nEventually, after wage cuts, mining revived somewhat, but production declined and by the 1930 census only 705 residents remained. Remaining, however, were stocks of old commercial buildings and residences, along with excellent snow. Aspen's development as a ski resort began in the 1930s when investors conceived of a ski area, but the project was interrupted by World War II. Friedl Pfeifer, a member of the 10th Mountain Division who had trained in the area, returned to the area and linked up with industrialist Walter Paepcke and his wife Elizabeth. The Aspen Skiing Company was founded in 1946 and the city quickly became a well-known resort, hosting the FIS World Championships in 1950. Paepcke also played an important role in bringing the Goethe Bicentennial Convocation to Aspen in 1949, an event held in a newly designed tent by the architect Eero Saarinen. Aspen was then on the path to becoming an internationally known ski resort and cultural center, home of the Aspen Music Festival and School. The area would continue to grow with the development of three additional ski areas, Buttermilk (1958), Aspen Highlands (1958), and Snowmass (1967).\nIn the 1970s, Aspen became known as a playground for the rich and famous. Notable celebrities frequented the town and ski slopes, also John Denver was one of the more famous permanent residents. In 1978, Aspen was thoroughly photographed for the Aspen Movie Map project funded by the U.S. Department of Defense. The Movie Map is one of the earliest examples of virtual reality software.\nIn 1999, the city council passed a resolution to petition the US Congress and President Clinton to restrict US immigration. Aspen residents cited concerns about the environmental impacts of increased immigration on their community, including urban and suburban sprawl, pollution from the older automobiles typically driven by immigrants, and litter accumulating in the mountains attributable to the increasing population. The impetus for the resolution was the increasing number of trailer parks that housed the migrant workers employed locally in the service sector and ski industry. The parks were perceived to be degrading to the town's image, property values, and environment. The move was led by Terry Paulson, an Aspen City Council member, and supported and guided by national groups such as the Carrying Capacity Network, and the Center for Immigration Studies. The resolution was discussed on the \"American Patrol Report\" website, contributing to a controversy over whether or not the resolution was racially motivated. Councilman Terry Paulson and some Aspen citizens insisted that it was motivated entirely by environmental concerns.\nAspen is notable as the smallest radio market tracked by Arbitron, ranked number 302.\nLocal media in Aspen include a public radio station, KJAX, a public television station, the Grassroots TV network; three commercial radio stations, KSNO, KTND, and KSPN; two daily newspapers, \"The Aspen Times\" and \"The Aspen Daily News\"; three local lifestyle magazines, \"Aspen Sojourner\", \"Aspen Magazine\" and the biannual \"Aspen Peak\"; and a local, live, commercial lifestyle television channel, Aspen 82.\nImage.\nThe city's character has transformed dramatically in recent decades by skyrocketing property values and the proliferation of second homes, increasingly shutting low- and middle-income workers out of the city and creating a large pool of commuters from nearby bedroom communities such as Snowmass, Basalt, Carbondale, and Glenwood Springs. At the same time, in stark contrast to its historic character, the city has emerged into international fame as a glitzy playground of the wealthy and famous. Aspen has become a second and third home to many international jet-setters. Many people from the U.S. and abroad vacation in Aspen, especially during the winter.\nThe downtown has been largely transformed into an upscale shopping district that includes high-end restaurants, salons, and boutiques. Stores such as Gucci, Prada and Fendi dot South Mill Street and act as a \"Rodeo Drive\" of Aspen.\nGeography.\nThe city sits along the southeast (upper) end of the Roaring Fork Valley, along the Roaring Fork River, a tributary of the Colorado River about south of Glenwood Springs, Colorado. It is surrounded by mountain and wilderness areas on three sides: Red Mountain to the north, Smuggler Mountain to the east, and Aspen Mountain to the south.\nAspen is located along State Highway 82.\nAt the 2020 United States census, the city had a total area of , all of it land.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Aspen has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Dfb\"). It has a large diurnal temperature variation with moderately warm summer days very cold winter nights. Summer lows and winter highs are relatively moderate, and frosts are rare in summer and winter days often averaging above freezing.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2003, there were 5,914 people, 2,903 households, and 1,082 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 4,354 housing units at an average density of 1,233.5 per square mile (476.2 per km2). The racial makeup of the city was 94.94 percent White, 0.44 percent Black or African American, 0.24 percent Native American, 1.45 percent Asian, 0.08 percent Pacific Islander, 1.64 percent from other races, and 1.2 percent from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.14 percent of the population.\nThere were 2,903 households, of which 16.5 percent had children under the age of 18 living with them, 28.8 percent were married couples living together, 5.6 percent had a female householder with no husband present, and 62.7 percent were non-families. Single individuals composed 43.8 percent of all households, and 4.8 percent had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.94 and the average family size was 2.67.\nThe ages of the population were 13.1 percent under the age of 18, 9.8 percent from 18 to 24, 42.1 percent from 25 to 44, 27.6 percent from 45 to 64, and 7.4 percent who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females, there were 115.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 117.5 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $53,750, and the median income for a family was $70,300. Males had a median income of $41,011 versus $32,023 for females. The per capita income for the city was $40,680. About 3.6 percent of families and 8.2 percent of the population were below the poverty line, including 4.4 percent of those under age 18 and 2.6 percent of those age 65 or over.\nHousing.\nAspen's single-family home prices are among the highest of any town in the country. Real estate supply is restricted due to a moratorium on new housing construction, housing renovation and short-term rentals. The median sales price of a single family home in 2021 in Aspen was $9.5 million. A 2023 study by Savills, a global real estate broker, declared that prime Aspen real estate was the most expensive on a per-square-foot-basis of the 44 global ski resort markets it studied.\nRelatively less expensive housing can be found outside the city limits, in nearby Snowmass Village (median single family home price $5.2 million in 2021), or in the city's condos, many of which date to the 1960s and 1970s.\nAffordability of housing is a severe challenge for workers in the Aspen area. The Aspen Pitkin County Housing Authority oversees an extensive program of properties intended for people who primarily live and work in the Roaring Fork Valley and whose income falls below certain limits, known as Employee Housing. Homes purchased through Employee Housing programs typically contain deed restrictions to maintain a degree of affordability for local residents, but even deed-restricted properties in the area can cost close to $1 million.\nSports.\nThe Winter X Games sports event has been held in Aspen at Buttermilk (ski area) since 2002. Aspen natives Torin Yater-Wallace and Alex Ferreira are both freestyle skiers who compete in the Winter X Games and have very successful careers. Both Torin and Alex have represented the United States of America in Men's Ski SuperPipe at the Olympic Games.\nThe Gentlemen of Aspen is the local rugby team. The Gentlemen of Aspen won the Rugby Super League several times: 1997, 2001, 2002.\nGovernment.\nAspen is a home rule municipality under Colorado law. It has a council-manager government. An elected council of four members and the mayor supervise the city's operations, managed on a day-to-day basis by the city manager, an appointed official who serves at their pleasure.\nThe city's main office is at City Hall, the former Armory Hall listed on the National Register of Historic Places at the intersection of South Galena Street and East Hopkins Avenue. Because of its expansion in the late-20th century, it has outgrown that space. Several city departments are housed in satellite offices around the city.\nEducation.\nAs of 2012[ [update]], based on data from the 2009\u201310 school year, according to \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\", Aspen High School, the only high school in the Aspen School District, is the top ranked high school in Colorado and ranked 59th in the United States. The high school has grades 9 to 12, 540 students, and 41 teachers. Olympic cross-country skier Noah Hoffman is a 2007 graduate.\nMinorities, mostly Hispanic, make up 13 percent of the school's enrollment. Four percent of the students are economically disadvantaged. The school has a high rate of participation in the International Baccalaureate program.\nSister cities.\nAspen's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48922", "revid": "11639", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48922", "title": "Leadville, Colorado", "text": "City in Colorado, United States\nLeadville ( ) is a statutory city that is the county seat of, the most populous community in, and the only incorporated municipality in Lake County, Colorado, United States. The city population was 2,633 at the 2020 United States census. It is situated at an elevation of . Leadville is the highest incorporated city in the United States and is surrounded by the two tallest peaks in the state, Mount Elbert and Mount Massive.\nLeadville is a former silver mining town that lies among the headwaters of the Arkansas River within the Rocky Mountains. The Leadville Historic District, designated a National Historic Landmark in 1961, contains many historic structures and sites of Leadville's mining era. In the late 19th century, Leadville was the second most populous city in Colorado, after Denver.\nHistory.\nSettlement.\nThe Leadville area was first settled in 1859 when placer gold was discovered by A. G. Kelley in California Gulch, and by Abe Lee in April (25/26) 1860, during the Pikes Peak Gold Rush. Prospectors panned for gold in the stream that ran through California Gulch in what became the town of Oro City (\"oro\" is the Spanish word for gold). Horace Tabor, who became known as the \"Leadville Silver King\", and his wife Augusta were among the first prospectors to arrive in Oro City. Horace was appointed as the postmaster of Oro City on November 30, 1868. His wife made money as postmistress, banker, cook, and laundress while Tabor was a prospector.\nThe early miners had noted that mining for placer gold was hampered by heavy black sand in the sluice boxes, and in 1874 it was discovered that the heavy sand that impeded gold recovery was the lead mineral cerussite, which has a high silver content. Prospectors traced the cerussite to its source, present day Leadville, and by 1876 had discovered several silver-lead lode deposits. As the gold has been tapped out of the gulch and attention was averted to nearby Leadville, a mile or two away, Oro City became a ghost town.\nFounding of Leadville.\nLeadville was founded in 1877 by mine owners Horace Tabor and August Meyer at the start of the Colorado Silver Boom. Tabor's house was also built in 1877, at 116 E. 5th Street. The town was built on desolate flat land below the tree line. The first miners lived in a rough tented camp near the silver deposits in California Gulch. Initially, the settlement was called \"Slabtown\", but when the residents petitioned for a post office, the name \"Leadville\" was chosen. By 1880, Tabor and Meyer's new town had gas lighting, water mains, of streets, five churches, three hospitals, six banks, and a school for 1,100 students. Many business buildings were constructed with bricks hauled in by wagons. \nIn early 1878, Meyer, along with Leadville's pioneer smelter entrepreneur, Edwin Harrison, after whom the famed Harrison Avenue is named, and Tabor established a post office in Leadville, with George L. Henderson designated as postmaster on July 16, 1877. The post office and the telegraph office both prospered, with Tabor serving as postmaster from February 19 to December 13, 1878. It was said that the Leadville post office was the busiest one between St. Louis and San Francisco. In 1878, the town's first hospital, St. Vincent's, was opened.\nThe town's first newspaper was \"The Reveille\", a Republican weekly, in 1878. Three months later, a competing Democratic weekly, \"The Eclipse\", emerged. \"The Chronicle\" was the town's first daily and first newspaper in America to employ a full-time female reporter. Like the \"Rocky Mountain News\", \"The Chronicle\" took the lead in outing criminals and thieves, in an attempt to clean up the town's shady business culture. Despite violent threats, the \"Chronicle\" survived without major incident.\nWilliam Nye opened the first saloon in 1877, and it was followed by many others. The same year the Coliseum Novelty was the first theater to open. It offered sleeping rooms upstairs for a nightly rate and provided a variety of entertainments: dancing girls, dogfights, cockfighting, wrestling and boxing matches, and rooms for gambling. In June 1881, it burned to the ground. Ben Wood, who arrived in Leadville in 1878, opened the first legitimate theater, Wood's Opera House, with a thousand seats. It was a first-class theater, where gentleman removed their hats and did not smoke or drink in the presence of a lady. Less than a year later, Wood opened the Windsor Hotel. His opera house was regarded as the largest and best theater constructed in the West, an honor it held until the opening of the Tabor Opera House. Horace Tabor's Opera House was the most costly structure in Colorado at the time. Building materials were brought by wagons from Denver. The massive three-story opera house, constructed of stone, brick, and iron, opened on November 20, 1879. Tabor, originally from Vermont, became the town's first mayor. After striking it rich, he had an estimated net worth of 10 million dollars and was known for his extravagant lifestyle. In February 1879 the Lake County seat was moved to Leadville, where it has remained ever since. In 1879, An impressive courthouse was built on the west side of Harrison Avenue, joined by a new post office that same year. Telephone service was introduced by Western Union on May 15, 1879, and gas lighting downtown was installed on November 18 that same year. Billings and Eilers Smelter installed a generator and lights for the town on May 13, 1881. On May 19, 1882, a large fire broke out at the corner of Harrison Avenue and East Chestnut.\nHorace Tabor divorced his wife of 25 years and married Baby Doe McCourt on September 30, 1882, who was half his age. Tabor was by then a US senator, and the divorce and marriage caused a scandal in Colorado and beyond. For several years, the couple lived a lavish lifestyle in a Denver mansion, but Tabor, one of the wealthiest men in Colorado, lost his fortune when the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act caused the Panic of 1893. He died on April 10, 1899, of appendicitis, destitute but remained convinced that the price of silver would rebound. According to legend, he told Baby Doe to \"hold on the Matchless mine... it will make millions again when silver comes back.\" She returned to Leadville with her daughters, Silver Dollar and Lily, where she spent the rest of her life believing Tabor's prediction. At one time the \"best dressed woman in the West\", she lived in a cabin at the Matchless Mine for the last three decades of her life. On March 7, 1935, after a snowstorm, she was found frozen in her cabin, aged about 81 years.\nMining and smelting.\nMining in the Leadville area began in 1859 when prospectors discovered gold at the mouth of California Gulch. By 1872, placer mining in California Gulch yielded more than $2,500,000, roughly . In 1876, black sand, once considered bothersome to placer gold miners, was discovered to contain lead carbonates, leading to a rush of miners to the area and the founding of the town in 1877. By 1880, Leadville was one of the world's largest and richest silver camps, with a population of more than 15,000. Income from more than thirty mines and ten large smelting works produced gold, silver, and lead amounting to $15,000,000 annually. The Leadville strike of 1880 was the first major labor conflict in the central Colorado silver boomtown, shutting down most of the area\u2019s mining district from May 26, 1880.\nAccording to one historian of the era, \"The outpouring of the precious metal from Leadville transformed the struggling Centennial State into a veritable autocrat in the colony of states. As if by magic the rough frontier town of Denver became a metropolis; stately buildings arose on the site of shanties; crystal streams flowed through the arid plains and the desert blossomed and became fruitful. Poverty gave way to the annoyance of wealth and the fame of silver state spread throughout the world.\"\nSwindles were not uncommon in the mining community. When the Little Pittsburg mine was exhausted of its rich ore body, its managers sold their shares while concealing the mine's actual condition from the other stockholders. \"Chicken Bill\" Lovell dumped a wheelbarrow load of silver-rich ore into a barren pit on his Chrysolite claim in order to sell it to Horace Tabor for a large price. Tabor had the last laugh when his miners dug a few feet farther and discovered a rich ore body. Some time later the manager of the Chrysolite mine fooled an outside mining engineer into overestimating the mine's ore reserves.\nThe city's fortunes declined with the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act in 1893, although afterwards there was another small gold boom. Mining companies came to rely increasingly on income from the lead and zinc. The district is credited with producing over 2.9 million troy ounces of gold, 240 million troy ounces of silver, 1 million short tons of lead, 785 thousand short tons of zinc (discovered in 1911), and 53 thousand short tons of copper.\nA bitter strike by Leadville's hard rock miners in 1896\u201397 led to bloodshed, at least five deaths, and the burning of the Coronado Mine. In a letter to a London business contact, mine owner Eben Smith wrote, \"The strikers got the worst of it in the raid on the Coronado and Emmet [mines], there were 10 or 12 killed; we do not know how many, and a great number wounded; they take care of their wounded the same as the Indians but every now and then a fellow turns up that the rats have been eating or who has gone to decay that we know must have been shot ...\"\nWorld War II caused an increase in the demand for molybdenum, used to harden steel. It was mined at the nearby Climax mine, which at one time produced 75 percent of the world's output. By 1980, the Climax Mine was the largest underground mine in the world. Taxes paid by the mine provided Leadville with good schools and libraries and provided employment for many residents. When the market dropped in 1981, Leadville's economy suffered and many people lost their jobs. With little industry other than the tourist trade, most of the former miners left, and the standard of living declined. Climax reopened in 2008 and started production in 2010. It currently is the most efficient mine producing molybdenum in Colorado and is estimated to have a production life of thirty years.\nThe many years of mining left behind substantial contamination of the soil and water and the Environmental Protection Agency designated some former mines Superfund sites, such as California Gulch. As of 2019, the EPA reports: \"A vast majority of the cleanup at the site has been completed, so current risk of exposure is low. Pregnant women, nursing mothers and young children are still encouraged to have their blood-lead levels checked.\"https://\nNotable historical figures.\nAs the population boomed, by 1878, Leadville had the reputation as one of the most lawless towns in the West. The first city marshal was run out of town a few days after he was appointed, and his replacement was shot dead within a month by one of his deputies. Fearing the town would be lost to the lawless element, Mayor Horace Tabor sent for Mart Duggan, who was living in Denver, as a replacement. Duggan was well known at the time as a fearless gunfighter. Using strong-arm and lawless tactics, during his two stints as marshal, Duggan brought order to Leadville by 1880 when he stepped down. He was shot and killed in 1888 by an unknown assailant, most likely an enemy he had made when he was a Leadville marshal. Historian Robert Dearment writes, \"Mart Duggan was a quick-shooting, hard-drinking, brawling tough Irish man, but he was exactly the kind of man a tough, hard-drinking, quick-shooting camp like Leadville needed in its earliest days. His name is all but forgotten today, but the name \"Matt Dillon\" is recognized around the world. Such are the vagaries of life.\"\nAlice Ivers, better known as Poker Alice, was a card player and dealer of the Old West who learned her trade in Leadville. Born in Devonshire, her family moved to America when she was a small girl. They first settled in Virginia, where she attended an elite girls' boarding school. When she was a teenager, her family moved to Leadville when the silver boom drew hundreds of new residents to the area. At the age of twenty she married a mining engineer who, like many of the men at that time, frequented the numerous gambling halls in Leadville. Alice went along, at first just observing, but eventually she began to sit in on the games as well. After a few years of marriage her husband was killed in a mining accident and she turned to cards to support herself. Alice was attractive, dressed in the latest fashions, and was in great demand as a dealer. Eventually Alice left Leadville to travel the gambling circuit, as was common of the male gamblers of that time. She continued to dress in the latest fashions but took to smoking cigars. Well known throughout the West, gambling halls welcomed her because she was good for business. Alice said that she won more than $250,000 by gambling during her lifetime.\nIn the spring of 1880, Texas Jack Omohundro and his wife Giuseppina Morlacchi arrived in Leadville. Morlacchi, a famous Italian prima ballerina who had introduced the Can-can dance to the United States, performed several plays at the Grand Central Theatre, including Around the World in 80 Days and The Black Crook. Texas Jack, who had starred in The Scouts of the Prairie with Buffalo Bill Cody and Ned Buntline, and later in The Scouts of the Plains with Buffalo Bill and Wild Bill Hickok, played shows at the Chestnut Street Theatre. Texas Jack had served in the Confederate Army at age 16 and subsequently joined the Tabor Light Guard, a local militia unit. Jack died of pneumonia on June 28, 1880. His funeral was held at the Tabor Opera House, and he was buried in Evergreen Cemetery. On September 8, 1908, Texas Jack's best friend and former costar Buffalo Bill Cody visited Leadville with his Wild West Show and dedicated the permanent memorial that marks Texas Jack's grave today. The Texas Jack Association erected highway historical markers on roads in and out of Leadville.\nIn the summer of 1879, American author and illustrator Mary Hallock Foote arrived in Leadville. It is believed her time in Leadville inspired her writing.\nIn 1882, shortly after the gun fight at the O.K. Corral, Doc Holliday arrived in Leadville, where he dealt faro. On August 19, 1884, he shot ex-Leadville policeman Billy Allen, who had threatened him for failing to pay a $5 debt. Despite overwhelming evidence implicating him, a jury found Holliday not guilty of the shooting or attempted murder.\nGunfighter and professional gambler Luke Short also spent time in Leadville.\nMargaret \"Molly\" Brown, who became known as \"The Unsinkable Molly Brown\", moved to Leadville in 1885, when she was 18 years old. In 1886 she married a mining engineer who was twelve years older, James Joseph Brown at the Church of Annunciation. The Brown family acquired great wealth in 1893 when Brown was instrumental in the discovery of a substantial gold ore seam at the Little Jonny Mine.\nThe mine was owned by his employers, the Ibex Mining Company. Margaret Brown became famous because of her survival of the 1912 sinking of the RMS \"Titanic\", after exhorting the crew of Lifeboat No. 6 to return to look for survivors. A 1960 Broadway musical based on her life was produced, along with a 1964 film adaptation of the musical, both titled \"The Unsinkable Molly Brown\". Her home in Denver has been preserved as the Molly Brown House Museum.\nMeyer Guggenheim of the Guggenheim family started out in Leadville in mining and smelting. The family went on to possess one of the largest fortunes in the world. Family members have become known for their philanthropy in diverse areas such as modern art and aviation, including several Guggenheim Museums.\nOscar Wilde appeared in April at the Tabor Opera House during his 1882 American Aesthetic Movement lecture tour. The reviews were mixed, and the press satirized Wilde in cartoons as an English dandy decorated with sunflowers and lilies, the floral emblems of the Aesthetic Movement. A Kansas newspaper described the event:\nOscar Wilde's visit to Leadville excited a great deal of interest and curiosity. The Tabor-opera house where he lectured was packed full. It was rumored that an attempt would be made by a number of young men to ridicule him by coming to the lecture in exaggerated costume with enormous sunflowers and lilies and to introduce a number of characters in the costume of the Western \"bad men\". Probably, however, better counsel prevailed and no disturbance took place.\nMayor David H. Dougan invited Wilde to tour the Matchless Mine and name its new lode \"The Oscar\". Wilde later recounted a visit to a local saloon, \"where I saw the only rational method of art criticism I have ever come across. Over the piano was printed a notice \u2013 'Please do not shoot the pianist. He is doing his best.'\"\nSeveral other notable figures visited the Tabor Opera House, including boxer Jack Dempsey.\nPost-mining era.\nThe town has made major efforts to improve its economy by encouraging tourism and emphasizing its history and opportunities for outdoor recreation. The National Mining Museum and Hall of Fame opened in 1987 with a federal charter that was drawn in by Leadville offering a good deal on the former high school building.\nIn 1983, Ken Chlouber partnered with Merilee Maupin to founded the Leadville Trail 100 Run, a 100-mile ultramarathon through the rugged mountain terrain around the town. It succeeded, leading them to found the still-extant Leadville Race Series, which contains a variety of races. The Leadville Race Series has become a popular endurance race series, attracting hundreds of athletes to Leadville each year. Leadville is often used as a base for altitude training and hosts a number of other events for runners and mountain bicyclists.\nGeography.\nAt an elevation of , Leadville lies close to timberline, which in Colorado is from . The surrounding peaks are all well above 12,000 feet, and are thus bare of trees. Leadville has the highest elevation of any city in the United States.\nLeadville lies in a valley at the headwaters of the Arkansas River which flows through the southern Rocky Mountains and eventually empties into the Mississippi River. It is situated between two mountain ranges, the Mosquito Range to the east and the Sawatch Range to the west, both of which include several nearby peaks with elevations above , the so-called fourteeners. Mount Elbert, southwest of Leadville, is the highest summit of the Rocky Mountains of North America and the highest point in the Colorado and the entire Mississippi River drainage basin. An ultra-prominent fourteener, Mount Elbert is the highest summit of the Sawatch Range and the second-highest summit in the contiguous United States after Mount Whitney in California. Mount Massive, west-southwest of Leadville, at is the second highest summit in the Rocky Mountains and state of Colorado, and the third highest in the contiguous United States.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city of Leadville has an area of , all land. The lower part of California Gulch runs past the southern edge of the city, flowing west to the Arkansas River.\nClimate.\nLeadville has an alpine subarctic climate (Dfc) with cold winters and mild summers, bordering on a cold semi-arid climate (Bsk). The average January temperatures are a maximum of and a minimum of . The average July temperatures are a maximum of and a minimum of . There are an average of 271.7 mornings annually with freezing temperatures, which can occur in any month of the year. The record high temperature was on July 17, 2023. The record low temperature was on February 1, 1985.\nAverage annual precipitation is . The wettest calendar year was 2014 with and the driest 1994 with . The most precipitation in one month was in January 1996. The most precipitation in 24 hours was on February 13, 1986. Average annual snowfall is . The most snowfall in one year was in 1995. The most snowfall in one month was in May 1995.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 2,821 people, 1,253 households, and 675 families residing in the city. The population density was . There were 1,514 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 83.52% White, 0.14% African American, 1.28% Native American, 0.32% Asian, 0.11% Pacific Islander, 12.34% from other races, and 2.30% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 25.45% of the population.\nThere were 1,253 households, out of which 24.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.7% were married couples living together, 8.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 46.1% were non-families. 35.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.23 and the average family size was 2.91.\nIn the city, the population was spread out, with 22.1% under the age of 18, 12.1% from 18 to 24, 34.4% from 25 to 44, 22.0% from 45 to 64, and 10.4% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 34 years. For every 100 females, there were 109.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 107.8 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $36,714, and the median income for a family was $44,444. Males had a median income of $28,125 versus $23,512 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,607. About 9.1% of families and 13.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.5% of those under age 18 and 7.5% of those age 65 or over.\nArts and culture.\nHistoric sites and districts.\nThe Leadville Historic District was designated a National Historic Landmark District in 1961. The district encompasses 67 mines east of the city up to the elevation, and a defined portion of the village area, with specific exclusions for various buildings. The principal historic buildings are the Tabor Grand Hotel, St George's Church, Temple Israel, African Methodist Episcopal Church (est. 1881), the Annunciation Church, Tabor Opera House, City Hall, Healy House, Dexter Cabin, Engelbach House, Tabor House, and the Golden Burro Cafe and Lounge, as well as mining structures and small homes.\nThe National Mining Hall of Fame on West 9th Street is dedicated to commemorating the work of miners and people that work with natural resources. It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Major exhibits include an elaborate model railroad, a walk-through replica of an underground hardrock mine, the Gold Rush Room with specimens of native gold, a large collection of mineral specimens, and a mining art gallery. The site also includes the Matchless Mine and cabin, former home of Baby Doe Tabor.\nSome historic sites are linked by the Mineral Belt National Recreation Trail, an all-season biking/walking trail that loops around Leadville and through its historic mining district. In part it follows old mining-camp railbeds. Interpretative kiosks recount the history and a photograph of what was on that particular site more than a century ago. The trail is well-marked with interpretive signs and altitude and mileage markers.\nCreated by Executive Order in 1889 to increase the supply of fish for inland waters, the Leadville National Fish Hatchery was established.\nCamp Hale is located north of Leadville in the Eagle River valley north of Tennessee Pass. It was a U.S. Army ski warfare training facility constructed in 1942 for what became the 10th Mountain Division. Some of the nation's finest skiers were employed as instructors. Soldiers were trained in mountain climbing, Alpine and Nordic skiing, and cold-weather survival, as well as various weapons and ordnance. When it was in full operation, approximately 15,000 soldiers were housed there. As the only source of recreation for the trainees, Leadville was persuaded to change its moral character, perceived \"to be on a rather low plane\" at the time. In 2019, Camp Hale was designated as a National Historic Site offering a self-guiding tour with interpretive signs at ten stops and a larger interpretive site at the main entrance. President Biden used his authority under the Antiquities Act in 2022 to establish the 53,804-acre Camp Hale-Continental Divide National Monument, preserving the area\u2019s important historic, prehistoric, natural, and recreational values.\n north of Leadville the old downhill training slope, Cooper Hill, located atop Tennessee Pass on the Continental Divide, now operates as the Ski Cooper resort. Much of the area is above the tree line, providing a panoramic view of the peaks of the Sawatch Range to visitors. A memorial to troops of the 10th Mountain Division is located at the summit.\nThe Evergreen Cemetery was the first cemetery in Leadville, established on November 1, 1879.\nThe town's first library was built in 1904.\nA federal building was built in 1905 on Harrison Avenue and 8th Street. It served as the town post office until 1973.\nEvents.\nBoom Days, held on the first full weekend of August, is a tribute to the city's mining past. The event has been honored by Congress as a Local Legacy Event. The festivities held over three days include mining competitions and burro racing, motorcycle games, a rod and gun show, live music, a craft fair and parade. The annual skijoring event and Crystal Carnival take place in March. This is a horse-drawn skiing for the family since the 1960s. The town has frequent, sometimes small parades held in the downtown area, such as the quirky St Patrick's Day Practice Parade.\nThe Leadville Trail 100, an ultramarathon, takes place each August since 1983 on an out-and-back course on trails around Turquoise Lake, over Hagerman Pass, the Colorado Trail, through Twin Lakes, across the Arkansas River, up and over Hope Pass, to the ghost town of Winfield.\nThe \"Route of the Silver Kings\" is a driving tour of the historic mining district. The tour passes mines, power plants, ghost towns and mining camps.\nParks and recreation.\nSituated within the San Isabel National Forest and surrounded by three wilderness areas, Leadville is popular with hikers and campers. The Mount Massive Wilderness and Buffalo Peaks Wilderness are within of the city, and the Collegiate Peaks Wilderness is within .\nMosquito Pass is located east of Leadville. It can be traversed only on foot, an off-road motorcycle, or with a proper four-wheel drive vehicle. It is typically passable only during the summer months.\nThe Mineral Belt Trail is an , two-way non-motorized paved trail around the city that was opened in 2000. Five access points offer opportunities to walk shorter sections: Ice Palace Park, Lake County Middle School, Dutch Henry Hill, California Gulch, and the East 5th Street Bridge. Mineral Belt is completely ADA-accessible for wheelchairs and strollers, cyclists, runners and in-line skaters.\nEducation.\nK-12 Education.\nLeadville's K-12 education is served by the Lake County School District.\nHigher Education.\nLeadville is home to a campus of Colorado Mountain College. At an elevation of 10,200 feet, CMC Leadville is the highest elevation college campus in the United States. The Leadville campus is also home to Colorado Mountain College's cross-country team.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\nLeadville is served by Lake County Airport, North America's highest public use airport at an altitude of 9,934 feet. However, there is no scheduled airline service available from this airport. The closest airports to provide scheduled services are Eagle County Regional Airport and Aspen/Pitkin County Airport, both away.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48923", "revid": "50831835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48923", "title": "Pike's Peak gold rush", "text": "Nineteenth-century gold-prospecting frenzy in Colorado, US\nThe Pike's Peak gold rush (later known as the Colorado gold rush) was the boom in gold prospecting and mining in the Pike's Peak Country of western Kansas Territory and southwestern Nebraska Territory of the United States that began in July 1858 and lasted until roughly the creation of the Colorado Territory on February 28, 1861. An estimated 100,000 gold seekers took part in one of the greatest gold rushes in North American history.\nThe participants in the gold rush were known as \"Fifty-Niners\" after 1859, the peak year of the rush and often used the motto Pike's Peak or Bust! In fact, the location of the Pike's Peak gold rush was centered north of Pikes Peak. The name Pike's Peak gold rush was used mainly because of how well known and important Pike's Peak was at the time. The rush created a few towns such as Denver and Boulder that would develop into cities.\nOverview.\nThe Pike's Peak gold rush, which followed the California gold rush by approximately a decade, produced a dramatic but temporary influx of migrants and immigrants into the Pike's Peak Country of the Southern Rocky Mountains. The rush was exemplified by the slogan \"Pike's Peak or Bust!\", a reference to the prominent mountain at the eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains that guided many early prospectors to the region westward over the Great Plains. The prospectors provided the first major European-American population in the region.\nThe rush created a few gold rush towns such as Denver City and Boulder City that would develop into cities. Many smaller camps such as Auraria and Saint Charles City were absorbed by larger camps and towns. Scores of other mining camps have faded into ghost towns, but quite a few camps such as Central City, Black Hawk, Georgetown, and Idaho Springs survived.\nDiscovery.\nFor many years, people had suspected the mountains in present-day Colorado contained numerous rich gold deposits. In 1835, French trapper Eustace Carriere lost his party and ended up wandering through the mountains for many weeks. During those weeks he found many gold specimens which he later took back to New Mexico for examination. Upon examination, they turned out to be \"pure gold\". But when he tried to lead an expedition back to the location of where he found the gold, they came up short because he could not quite remember the location.\nOn January 24, 1848, James W. Marshall found placer gold near Coloma, California, and unbeknownst nine days later, Mexico ceded California and the rest of northern Mexico to the United States with the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The California Gold Rush ensued. In the spring of 1850, John Beck led a party of predominately Cherokee veterans of the Georgia Gold Rush to the California gold fields. The party followed the Trail of Tears west, and on June 22, 1850, they crossed the South Platte River (a few miles north of what is today Denver) and camped near the confluence of two streams. One of the prospectors, Lewis Ralston panned for gold near the mouth of the smaller stream (in what is now Gold Strike Park in Arvada, Colorado.) He found about \u00bc troy ounce (8\u00a0g) of gold, then worth about five dollars (about $1,000 USD today.) While Ralston was elated, the rest of the party was unimpressed and continued on to California the next morning. Ralston continued panning for gold, but gave up after a few days and caught up with his party.\nAs the hysteria of the California Gold Rush faded, many discouraged gold seekers returned home. Rumors of gold in the Rocky Mountains persisted and several small parties explored the region. In the summer of 1857, a party of Spanish-speaking gold seekers from Taos, New Mexico, worked a placer deposit along the South Platte River about above Cherry Creek at a location later known as Mexican Diggings near the Overland Park Golf Course in Denver.\nWilliam Greeneberry \"Green\" Russell was a Georgian who worked in the California gold fields in the 1850s. Russell was married to a Cherokee woman, and through his connections to the tribe, he heard about Ralston's 1850 discovery of gold along the South Platte River. Green Russell organized a party to prospect along the South Platte River, setting off with his two brothers and six companions in February 1858. They rendezvoused with Cherokee tribe members along the Arkansas River in present-day Oklahoma and continued westward along the Santa Fe Trail. Others joined the party along the way until their number reached 107.\nUpon reaching Bent's Fort, they turned to the northwest, reaching the confluence of Cherry Creek and the South Platte on June 23. The site of their initial explorations is in present-day Confluence Park in Denver. They began prospecting in the river beds, exploring Cherry Creek and nearby Ralston Creek but without success. In the first week of July 1858, Green Russell and Sam Bates found a small placer deposit near the mouth of Little Dry Creek that yielded about 20 troy ounces (620\u00a0g) of gold, then worth about 380 dollars (about $80,000 USD today.) This was the first significant gold discovery in the Rocky Mountain region. The site of the discovery is in the present-day Denver suburb of Englewood, just north of the junction of U.S. Highway 285 and U.S. Highway 85. This discovery was announced with great excitement by the \"Kansas City Journal of Commerce\" on 26 August 1858 with the headline, \"THE NEW ELDORADO!! GOLD IN KANSAS!!\"\nInitial boom.\nThe first decade of the boom was largely concentrated along the South Platte River at the base of the Rocky Mountains, in the canyon of Clear Creek in the mountains west of Golden City, at Breckenridge and in South Park at Como, Fairplay, and Alma. By 1860, Denver City, Golden City, and Boulder City were substantial towns that served the mines. Rapid population growth led to the creation of the Colorado Territory in 1861.\nThe Pike's Peak gold rush sent many Americans into a frenzy, prompting them to pack up their belongings and head to Colorado. This initial boom influenced people to begin falsifying information, often sending people out to the west without any proof of a true presence of gold. As early as the spring of 1859, people raced to the Pike's Peak country. Some even dared to go out in the winter of 1858 to try to get a head start, only to realize that they would have to wait until the snow melted to begin mining.\nFree gold.\nHardrock mining boomed for a few years, but then declined in the mid-1860s as the miners exhausted the shallow parts of the veins that contained free gold, and found that their amalgamation mills could not recover gold from the deeper sulfide ores. Colorado produced 150,000 troy ounces of gold in 1861 and 225,000 troy ounces in 1862. This led Congress to establish the Denver Mint. Cumulative Colorado production by 1865 was 1.25 million ounces, of which sixty percent was placer gold.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48925", "revid": "50548440", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48925", "title": "Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester", "text": "English nobleman and rebel (c.1208 \u2013 1265)\nSimon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, 1st Earl of Chester (c.\u20091208 \u2013 4 August 1265), also known as Simon V de Montfort, was an English nobleman of French origin and a member of the English peerage, who led the baronial opposition to the rule of King Henry III, culminating in the Second Barons' War. Following his initial victories over royal forces, he became \"de facto\" ruler of England, and played a major role in the constitutional development of England.\nDuring his rule, Montfort called two famous parliaments: the Oxford Parliament stripped Henry of his unlimited authority, while the second included ordinary citizens from the towns. For this reason, Montfort is regarded today as one of the progenitors of modern parliamentary democracy. As Earl of Leicester he expelled Jews from that city; as he became ruler of England he also cancelled debts owed to Jews through violent seizures of records. Montfort's party massacred the Jews of London, Worcester and Derby, killing scores of Jews from Winchester to Lincoln. After a rule of just over a year, Montfort was killed by forces loyal to the king in the Battle of Evesham.\nFamily.\nMontfort was a younger son of Alix de Montmorency and Simon de Montfort, 5th Earl of Leicester, a French nobleman, and leader of a crusade against the Cathars in south-west France. His paternal grandmother was Amicia de Beaumont, the senior co-heiress to the Earldom of Leicester and a large estate owned by her brother Robert de Beaumont, 4th Earl of Leicester, in England.\nWith the irrevocable loss of Normandy, King John refused to allow the elder Simon to succeed to the earldom of Leicester and instead placed the estates and title into the hands of Montfort senior's cousin Ranulf, the Earl of Chester. The elder Simon had also acquired vast domains during the Albigensian Crusade, but was killed during the Siege of Toulouse in 1218 and his eldest son Amaury was not able to retain them. When Amaury was rebuffed in his attempt to get the earldom back, he agreed to allow his younger brother Simon to claim it in return for all family possessions in France.\nSimon arrived in England in 1229, with some education but no knowledge of English, and received a sympathetic hearing from King Henry III, who became well disposed towards foreigners speaking French, then the language of the English court. Henry was in no position to confront the powerful Earl of Chester, so Simon approached the older, childless man himself and persuaded him to cede him the earldom. It would take another nine years before Henry formally invested him with the title Earl of Leicester.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nAs a younger son, Simon de Montfort attracted little public attention during his youth, and the date of his birth remains unknown. He is first mentioned when his mother made a grant to him in 1217. As a boy, Montfort accompanied his parents during his father's campaigns against the Cathars. He was with his mother at the Siege of Toulouse in 1218, where his father died after being struck on the head by a stone pitched by a mangonel. In addition to Amaury, Simon had another older brother, Guy, who was killed at the siege of Castelnaudary in 1220. As a young man, Montfort probably took part in the Albigensian Crusades of the early 1220s. He and Amaury both took part in the Barons' Crusade.\nIn 1229 the two surviving brothers (Amaury and Simon) came to an arrangement with King Henry whereby Simon gave up his rights in France and Amaury gave up his rights in England. Thus freed from any allegiance to the king of France, Montfort successfully petitioned for the English inheritance, which he received the next year, although he did not take full possession for several years, and did not win formal recognition as Earl of Leicester until February 1239. Montfort became a favourite of King Henry III and even issued a charter as \"Earl of Leicester\" in 1236, despite having not yet been granted the title.\nIn that same year, Simon tried to persuade Joan, Countess of Flanders to marry him. The idea of an alliance between the rich County of Flanders and a close associate of Henry III of England did not sit well with the French crown. The French Queen Dowager Blanche of Castile convinced Joan to marry Thomas II of Savoy instead, who himself became Count of Flanders.\nRoyal marriage.\nIn January 1238, Montfort married Eleanor of England, daughter of King John and Isabella of Angoul\u00eame and sister of King Henry III. While this marriage took place with the king's approval, the act itself was performed secretly and without consulting the great barons, as a marriage of such importance warranted. Eleanor had previously been married to William Marshal, 2nd Earl of Pembroke, and she had sworn a vow of perpetual chastity upon his death, when she was sixteen, which she broke by marrying Montfort.\nThe archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund Rich, condemned the marriage for this reason. The English nobles protested the marriage of the king's sister to a foreigner of modest rank. Most notably, the king's and Eleanor's brother Richard, 1st Earl of Cornwall, rose up in revolt when he learned of the marriage. King Henry eventually bought off Richard with 6,000 marks and peace was restored.\nThe marriage brought the manor of Sutton Valence in Kent into Montfort's possession.\nRelations between King Henry and Montfort were cordial at first. Henry lent him his support when Montfort embarked for Rome in March 1238 to seek papal approval for his marriage. When Simon and Eleanor's first son was born in November 1238 (despite rumours, more than nine months after the wedding), he was baptised Henry in honour of his royal uncle. In February 1239, Montfort was finally invested with the Earldom of Leicester. He also acted as the king's counsellor and was one of the nine godfathers of Henry's eldest son, Edward Longshanks.\nExpulsion of Jews from Leicester.\nAs Earl of Leicester, Montfort expelled the small Jewish community from Leicester city in 1231, banishing them \"in my time or in the time of any of my heirs to the end of the world\". He justified his action as being \"for the good of my soul, and for the souls of my ancestors and successors\". Expelling the Jews enhanced Montfort's popularity in his new domains because it removed the practice of usury, which was practised exclusively by Jews (it was forbidden to Christians). Leicester's Jews were allowed to move to the eastern suburbs, which were controlled by Montfort's great-aunt Margaret, Countess of Winchester.\nHis parents had shown a similar hostility to Jews in France, where his father had taken part in the Albigensian Crusade, during which his mother had given the Jews of Toulouse a choice of conversion, expulsion or death. Robert Grosseteste \u2013 then Archdeacon of Leicester and, according to Matthew Paris, de Montfort's confessor \u2013 may have encouraged the expulsion, though he is known to have argued that Jews' lives should be spared.\nCrusade and turning against the king.\nShortly after Prince Edward's birth in 1239, Montfort fell out with his brother-in-law, Henry III. Montfort owed a great sum of money to Thomas, Count of Flanders, Queen Eleanor's uncle, and named King Henry as security for his repayment. The king evidently had not approved this, and was enraged when he discovered that Montfort had used his name. On 9 August 1239, he confronted Montfort, called him an excommunicant and threatened to imprison him in the Tower of London. Matthew Paris reported that Henry said \"You seduced my sister and when I discovered this, I gave her to you, against my will, to avoid scandal.\" Simon and Eleanor fled to France to escape Henry's wrath.\nHaving announced his intention to go on crusade two years before, Simon raised funds and travelled to the Holy Land during the Barons' Crusade, but does not seem to have faced combat there. He was part of the crusading host which, under Richard of Cornwall, negotiated the release of Christian prisoners including Simon's older brother, Amaury. In autumn 1241, he left Syria and joined King Henry's campaign against King Louis IX in Poitou in July 1242. The campaign was a failure, and an exasperated Montfort declared that Henry should be locked up like King Charles the Simple. Like his father, Simon was a soldier as well as a capable administrator. His dispute with King Henry came about due to the latter's determination to ignore the swelling discontent within the country, caused by a combination of factors, including famine and a sense, among the English Barons, that King Henry was too quick to dispense favour to his Poitevin relatives and Savoyard in-laws.\nIn 1248, Montfort again took the cross with the idea of following Louis IX of France to Egypt. However, at the repeated requests of King Henry, he gave up this project in order to act as the king's Lieutenant of the Duchy of Aquitaine (Gascony). Bitter complaints were excited by the rigour with which Montfort suppressed the excesses of the Seigneurs and of contending factions in the great communes. Henry yielded to the outcry and instituted a formal inquiry into Simon's administration. Simon was formally acquitted on the charges of oppression, but his accounts were disputed by Henry, and Simon retired to France in 1252. The nobles of France offered him the Regency of the kingdom, vacated by the death of Queen Blanche of Castile. The earl preferred to make his peace with Henry III, which he did in 1253, in obedience to the exhortations of the dying Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln. He helped the king deal with disaffection in Gascony, but their reconciliation was a hollow one. In the Parliament of 1254, Simon led the opposition in resisting a royal demand for a subsidy. In 1256\u201357, when the discontent of all classes was coming to a head, Montfort nominally adhered to the royal cause. He undertook, with Peter of Savoy, the Queen's uncle, the difficult task of extricating the king from the pledges which he had given to the Pope with reference to the Crown of Sicily; and Henry's writs of this date mention Montfort in friendly terms. However, at the \"Mad Parliament\" of Oxford (1258) Montfort appeared with the Earl of Gloucester, at the head of the opposition. He was part of the Council of Fifteen who were to constitute the supreme board of control over the administration. The king's success in dividing the barons and in fostering a reaction, however, rendered such projects hopeless. In 1261, Henry revoked his assent to the Provisions of Oxford and Montfort, in despair, left the country.\nWar against the king.\nSimon de Montfort returned to England in 1263, at the invitation of the barons who were now convinced of the king's hostility to all reform, and raised a rebellion with the avowed object of restoring the form of government which the Provisions had ordained. Cancellation of debts (owed to Jews) was part of his call to arms.\nAt the time, the King was periodically raising punitive taxation on the Jews, causing them to sell their debt bonds cheaply to raise cash to pay their taxes. The bonds were sold to the richest courtiers at cut down prices, leading many indebted middling landowners to lose their lands. This fed into rising anti-Semitic beliefs, fuelled by the church. Measures against the Jews and controls over debts and usury dominated debates about royal power and finances among the classes that were beginning to be involved in Parliament.\nThe debt \"cancellations\" however involved massacres of Jews by his followers, to obtain their financial records, for instance in Worcester and London. The Worcester attack and killings were led by de Montfort's son Henry, and Robert Earl Ferrers. In London, one of his key followers John FitzJohn led the attack, and is said to have killed leading Jewish figures Isaac fil Aaron and Cok fil Abraham with his bare hands. He allegedly shared the loot with Montfort. Five hundred Jews died.\nHis son Simon led a further attack on Jews in Winchester. Jews in Canterbury, were murdered or driven out by a force led by Gilbert de Clare. De Montfort's followers massacred most of the Jews who lived in Derby in February 1262. There was further violence in Lincoln, Cambridge, Wilton and Northampton.\nEach attack was aimed at the seizure of the records of debts, stored in locked chests within each community, called 'archae'. Archae were legally mandated by the king for Jews to be allowed to conduct any business. They were destroyed or gathered for instance at Ely by the rebels.\nHenry quickly gave in and allowed Montfort to take control of the council. His son Edward, however, began using patronage and bribes to win over many of the barons. Their disruption of parliament in October led to a renewal of hostilities, which saw the royalists able to trap Simon in London. With few other options available, Montfort agreed to allow Louis IX of France to arbitrate their dispute. Simon was prevented from presenting his case to Louis directly on account of a broken leg, but few suspected that the king of France, known for his innate sense of justice, would completely annul the Provisions in his Mise of Amiens in January 1264. Civil war broke out almost immediately, with the royalists again able to confine the reformist army in London. In early May 1264, Simon marched out to give battle to the king and scored a spectacular triumph at the Battle of Lewes on 14 May 1264, capturing the king, together with Prince Edward and Richard of Cornwall, Henry's brother and the titular King of Germany.\nMontfort announced after the Battle of Lewes that all debts owed to the Jews were cancelled, as he had promised.\nRule and parliamentary reform.\nMontfort used his victory to set up a government based on the provisions first established at Oxford in 1258. Henry retained the title and authority of King, but all decisions and approval now rested with his council, led by Montfort and subject to consultation with parliament. His Great Parliament of 1265 (Montfort's Parliament) was a packed assembly to be sure, but it can hardly be supposed that the representation which he granted to the towns was intended to be a temporary expedient.\nMontfort sent his summons, in the king's name, to each county and to a select list of boroughs, asking each to send two representatives. This body was not the first elected parliament in England. In 1254, Henry was in Gascony and in need of money. He gave instructions for his regent, Queen Eleanor, to summon a parliament consisting of knights elected by their shires to ask for this 'aid'. Montfort, who was in that parliament, took the innovation further by including ordinary citizens from the boroughs, also elected, and it was from this period that parliamentary representation derives. The list of boroughs which had the right to elect a member grew slowly over the centuries as monarchs granted charters to more English towns. (The last charter was given to Newark in 1674.)\nThe right to vote in Parliamentary elections for county constituencies was uniform throughout the country, related to land ownership. In the Boroughs, the electoral franchise varied and individual boroughs had varying arrangements.\nFall from power and death.\nThe reaction against Montfort's government was baronial rather than popular. The Welsh marcher lords were friends and allies of Prince Edward, and when he escaped in May 1265, they rallied around his opposition. The final nail was the defection of Gilbert de Clare, the Earl of Gloucester, the most powerful baron and Simon's ally at Lewes. Clare had grown resentful of Simon's fame and growing power. When he and his brother Thomas fell out with Simon's sons Henry, Simon the Younger, and Guy, they deserted the reforming cause and joined Edward.\nThough boosted by Welsh infantry sent by Montfort's ally Llywelyn ap Gruffudd, Simon's forces were severely depleted. Prince Edward attacked his cousin, his godfather's son Simon's forces at Kenilworth, capturing more of Montfort's allies. Montfort himself had crossed the Severn with his army, intending to rendezvous with his son Simon the Younger. When he saw an army approaching Evesham, Montfort initially thought it was his son's forces. It was, however, Edward's army flying the Montfort banners they had captured at Kenilworth. At that point, Simon realised he had been out-manoeuvred by Edward.\nAn ominous black cloud hung over the field of Evesham on 4 August 1265 as Montfort led his army in a desperate uphill charge against superior forces, described by one chronicler as the \"murder of Evesham, for battle it was none\". On hearing that his son Henry had been killed, Montfort replied, \"Then it is time to die.\" Before the battle, Prince Edward had appointed a twelve-man death squad to stalk the battlefield, their sole aim being to find the earl and cut him down. Montfort was hemmed in; Roger Mortimer killed Montfort by stabbing him in the neck with a lance. Montfort's last words were said to have been \"Thank God\". Also slain with Montfort were other leaders of his movement, including Peter de Montfort and Hugh Despenser.\nMontfort's body was mutilated in a frenzy by the royalists. News reached the mayor and sheriffs of London that \"the head of the earl of Leicester ... was severed from his body, and his testicles cut off and hung on either side of his nose\"; and in such guise the head was sent to Wigmore Castle by Roger Mortimer, 1st Baron Mortimer, as a gift to his wife, Maud. His hands and feet were also cut off and sent to diverse places to enemies of his as a great mark of dishonour to the deceased. Such remains as could be found were buried before the altar of Evesham Abbey church by the canons. The grave was visited as holy ground by many commoners until King Henry caught wind of it. He declared that Montfort deserved no spot on holy ground, and had his remains reburied in another \"secret\" location, probably in the crypt. The remains of some of Montfort's soldiers who had fled the battlefield were found in the nearby village of Cleeve Prior.\nMontfort's niece, Margaret of England, later killed one of the soldiers responsible for his death, purposely or inadvertently.\nMatthew Paris reports that the Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Grosseteste, once said to Montfort's eldest son, Henry, \"My beloved child, both you and your father will meet your deaths on one day, and by one kind of death, but it will be in the name of justice and truth.\"\nLegacy.\nFollowing Montfort's death, he became the focus of an unofficial popular miracle cult, centred on his grave in Evesham Abbey. It was practised in secret for at least two years because of an official ban, but lasted until c.1280, with pilgrims continuing to visit his grave for some years thereafter. The so-called Evesham \"miracle book\" documents some 200 alleged miracles associated with his name.\nNapoleon Bonaparte described Simon de Montfort as \"one of the greatest Englishmen\". Today, Montfort is principally remembered as one of the fathers of representative government.\nMontfort bears responsibility for persecution of Jews. In addition to his expulsion of Jews from Leicester, his faction in the Second Baron's War initiated pogroms killing perhaps the majority of Jews in Derby and Worcester and around 500 in London. The violence and killings unleashed by the war targeting Jews carried on after his death. Jews were living in such terror that King Henry appointed burgesses and citizens of certain towns to protect and defend them because \"they fear[ed] grave peril\" and were in a \"deplorable state.\" Leicester City Council made a formal statement in 2001 that \"rebuked De Montfort for his blatant anti-Semitism\".\nEvesham Abbey and the site of Montfort's grave were destroyed with the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 16th century. In 1965, a memorial of stone from Montfort-l'Amaury was laid on the site of the former altar by Speaker of the House of Commons Sir Harry Hylton-Foster and Archbishop of Canterbury, Michael Ramsey.\nVarious local honours were dedicated to his memory, and he has become eponymous several times over. De Montfort University in Leicester is named after him, as is the nearby De Montfort Hall, a concert venue. A statue of Montfort is one of four to adorn the Haymarket Memorial Clock Tower in Leicester. A relief of Montfort adorns the wall of the Chamber of the United States House of Representatives.\nMontfort's banner, known as the \"Arms of Honour of Hinckley\", blazoned \"Party per pale indented argent and gules\", and displayed in stained glass in Chartres Cathedral, is used in the coat of arms of the town of Hinckley, part of his earldom in Leicestershire, and by many of its local organisations. Combined with his personal coat of arms, the banner forms part of the club crest for the town's football club Hinckley A.F.C.\nA school and a bridge on the north-east stretch of the A46 in Evesham are named after him.\nDescendants.\nSimon de Montfort and Eleanor of England had seven children, many of whom were notable in their own right:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48926", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48926", "title": "Autogynephilia", "text": ""}
{"id": "48927", "revid": "219723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48927", "title": "Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns", "text": "French composer (1835\u20131921)\nCharles-Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns (, , 9October 1835\u00a0\u2013 16 December 1921) was a French composer, organist, conductor and pianist of the Romantic era. His best-known works include Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso (1863), the Second Piano Concerto (1868), the First Cello Concerto (1872), \"Danse macabre\" (1874), the opera \"Samson and Delilah\" (1877), the Third Violin Concerto (1880), the Third (\"Organ\") Symphony (1886) and \"The Carnival of the Animals\" (1886).\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was a musical prodigy; he made his concert debut at the age of ten. After studying at the Paris Conservatoire he followed a conventional career as a church organist, first at Saint-Merri, Paris and, from 1858, La Madeleine, the official church of the French Empire. After leaving the post twenty years later, he was a successful freelance pianist and composer, in demand in Europe and the Americas.\nAs a young man, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was enthusiastic for the most modern music of the day, particularly that of Schumann, Liszt and Wagner, although his own compositions were generally within a conventional classical tradition. He was a scholar of musical history, and remained committed to the structures worked out by earlier French composers. This brought him into conflict in his later years with composers of the impressionist and expressionist schools of music; although there were neoclassical elements in his music, foreshadowing works by Stravinsky and Les Six, he was often regarded as a reactionary in the decades around the time of his death.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns held only one teaching post, at the \u00c9cole Niedermeyer in Paris, and remained there for less than five years. It was nevertheless important in the development of French music: his students included Gabriel Faur\u00e9, among whose own later pupils was Maurice Ravel. Both of them were strongly influenced by Saint-Sa\u00ebns, whom they revered as a genius.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was born in Paris, the only child of Jacques-Joseph-Victor Saint-Sa\u00ebns, an official in the French Ministry of the Interior, and Fran\u00e7oise-Cl\u00e9mence, \"n\u00e9e\" Collin. Victor Saint-Sa\u00ebns was of Norman ancestry, and his wife was from an Haute-Marne family; their son, born in the Rue du Jardinet in the 6th arrondissement of Paris, and baptised at the nearby church of Saint-Sulpice, always considered himself a true Parisian. Less than two months after the christening, Victor Saint-Sa\u00ebns died of consumption (tuberculosis) on the first anniversary of his marriage. The young Camille was taken to the country for the sake of his health, and for two years lived with a nurse at Corbeil, to the south of Paris.\nWhen Saint-Sa\u00ebns was brought back to Paris he lived with his mother and her widowed aunt, Charlotte Masson. Before he was three years old he displayed perfect pitch and enjoyed picking out tunes on the piano. His great-aunt taught him the basics of pianism, and when he was seven he became a pupil of Camille-Marie Stamaty, a former pupil of Friedrich Kalkbrenner. Stamaty required his students to play while resting their forearms on a bar situated in front of the keyboard, so that all the pianist's power came from the hands and fingers rather than the arms, which, Saint-Sa\u00ebns later wrote, was good training. Cl\u00e9mence Saint-Sa\u00ebns, well aware of her son's precocious talent, did not wish him to become famous too young. The music critic Harold C. Schonberg wrote of Saint-Sa\u00ebns in 1969, \"It is not generally realized that he was the most remarkable child prodigy in history, and that includes Mozart.\" The boy gave occasional performances for small audiences from the age of five, but it was not until he was ten that he made his official public debut, at the Salle Pleyel, in a programme that included Mozart's Piano Concerto in B\u266d (K450), and Beethoven's Third Piano Concerto. Through Stamaty's influence, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was introduced to the composition professor Pierre Maleden and the organ teacher Alexandre Pierre Fran\u00e7ois Bo\u00ebly. From the latter he acquired a lifelong love of the music of Bach, which was then little known in France.\nAs a schoolboy Saint-Sa\u00ebns was outstanding in many subjects. In addition to his musical prowess, he distinguished himself in the study of French literature, Latin and Greek, divinity, and mathematics. His interests included philosophy, archaeology and astronomy, of which, particularly the last, he remained a talented amateur in later life.\nIn 1848, at the age of thirteen, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was admitted to the Paris Conservatoire, France's foremost music academy. The director, Daniel Auber, had succeeded Luigi Cherubini in 1842, and brought a more relaxed regime than that of his martinet predecessor, though the curriculum remained conservative. Students, even outstanding pianists like Saint-Sa\u00ebns, were encouraged to specialise in organ studies, because a career as a church organist was seen to offer more opportunities than that of a solo pianist. His organ professor was Fran\u00e7ois Benoist, whom Saint-Sa\u00ebns considered a mediocre organist but a first-rate teacher; his pupils included Adolphe Adam, C\u00e9sar Franck, Charles Alkan, Louis Lef\u00e9bure-W\u00e9ly and Georges Bizet. In 1849 Saint-Sa\u00ebns won the Conservatoire's second prize for organists, and in 1851 the top prize; in the same year he began formal composition studies. His professor was a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Cherubini, Fromental Hal\u00e9vy, whose pupils included Charles Gounod and Bizet.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns's student compositions included a symphony in A major (1850) and a choral piece, \"Les Djinns\" (1850), after an eponymous poem by Victor Hugo. He competed for France's premier musical award, the Prix de Rome, in 1852 but was unsuccessful. Auber believed that the prize should have gone to Saint-Sa\u00ebns, considering him to have more promise than the winner, L\u00e9once Cohen, who made little mark during the rest of his career. In the same year Saint-Sa\u00ebns had greater success in a competition organised by the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Sainte-C\u00e9cile, Paris, with his \"Ode \u00e0 Sainte-C\u00e9cile\", for which the judges unanimously voted him the first prize. The first piece the composer acknowledged as a mature work and gave an opus number was \"Trois Morceaux\" for harmonium (1852).\nEarly career.\nOn leaving the Conservatoire in 1853, Saint-Sa\u00ebns accepted the post of organist at the ancient Parisian church of Saint-Merri near the . The parish was substantial, with 26,000 parishioners; in a typical year there were more than two hundred weddings, the organist's fees from which, together with fees for funerals and his modest basic stipend, gave Saint-Sa\u00ebns a comfortable income. The organ, the work of Fran\u00e7ois-Henri Clicquot, had been badly damaged in the aftermath of the French Revolution and imperfectly restored. The instrument was adequate for church services but not for the ambitious recitals that many high-profile Parisian churches offered. With enough spare time to pursue his career as a pianist and composer, Saint-Sa\u00ebns composed what became his opus 2, the Symphony in E\u266d (1853). This work, with military fanfares and augmented brass and percussion sections, caught the mood of the times in the wake of the popular rise to power of Napoleon III and the restoration of the French Empire. The work brought the composer another first prize from the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Sainte-C\u00e9cile.\nAmong the musicians who were quick to spot Saint-Sa\u00ebns's talent were the composers Gioachino Rossini, Hector Berlioz and Franz Liszt, and the influential singer Pauline Viardot, who all encouraged him in his career. In early 1858 Saint-Sa\u00ebns moved from Saint-Merri to the high-profile post of organist of La Madeleine, the official church of the Empire; Liszt heard him playing there and declared him the greatest organist in the world.\nAlthough in later life he had a reputation for outspoken musical conservatism, in the 1850s Saint-Sa\u00ebns supported and promoted the most modern music of the day, including that of Liszt, Robert Schumann and Richard Wagner. Unlike many French composers of his own and the next generation, Saint-Sa\u00ebns, for all his enthusiasm for and knowledge of Wagner's operas, was not influenced by him in his own compositions. He commented, \"I admire deeply the works of Richard Wagner in spite of their bizarre character. They are superior and powerful, and that is sufficient for me. But I am not, I have never been, and I shall never be of the Wagnerian religion.\"\n1860s: Teacher and growing fame.\nIn 1861 Saint-Sa\u00ebns accepted his only post as a teacher, at the \u00c9cole Niedermeyer de Paris, which Louis Niedermeyer had established in 1853 to train first-rate organists and choirmasters for the churches of France. Niedermeyer himself was professor of piano; when he died in March 1861, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was appointed to take charge of piano studies. He scandalised some of his more austere colleagues by introducing his students to contemporary music, including that of Schumann, Liszt and Wagner. His best-known pupil, Gabriel Faur\u00e9, recalled in old age:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After allowing the lessons to run over, he would go to the piano and reveal to us those works of the masters from which the rigorous classical nature of our programme of study kept us at a distance and who, moreover, in those far-off years, were scarcely known.\u00a0... At the time I was 15 or 16, and from this time dates the almost filial attachment\u00a0... the immense admiration, the unceasing gratitude I [have] had for him, throughout my life.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns further enlivened the academic regime by writing, and composing incidental music for, a one-act farce performed by the students (including Andr\u00e9 Messager). He conceived what would eventually become his best-known piece, \"The Carnival of the Animals\", with his students in mind, but did not finish composing it until 1886, more than twenty years after he left the Niedermeyer school.\nIn 1864 Saint-Sa\u00ebns caused some surprise by competing a second time for the Prix de Rome. Many in musical circles were puzzled by his decision to enter the competition again, now that he was establishing a reputation as a soloist and composer. He was once more unsuccessful. Berlioz, one of the judges, wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We gave the Prix de Rome the other day to a young man who wasn't expecting to win it and who went almost mad with joy. We were all expecting the prize to go to Camille Saint-Sa\u00ebns, who had the strange notion of competing. I confess I was sorry to vote against a man who is truly a great artist and one who is already well known, practically a celebrity. But the other man, who is still a student, has that inner fire, inspiration, he feels, he can do things that can't be learnt and the rest he'll learn more or less. So I voted for him, sighing at the thought of the unhappiness that this failure must cause Saint-Sa\u00ebns. But, whatever else, one must be honest.\nAccording to the musical scholar Jean Gallois, it was apropos of this episode that Berlioz made his well-known \"bon mot\" about Saint-Sa\u00ebns, \"He knows everything, but lacks inexperience\" (\"Il sait tout, mais il manque d'inexp\u00e9rience\"). The winner, Victor Sieg, had a career no more notable than that of the 1852 winner, but Saint-Sa\u00ebns's biographer Brian Rees speculates that the judges may \"have been seeking signs of genius in the midst of tentative effort and error, and considered that Saint-Sa\u00ebns had reached his summit of proficiency\". The suggestion that Saint-Sa\u00ebns was more proficient than inspired dogged his career and posthumous reputation. He himself wrote, \"Art is intended to create beauty and character. Feeling only comes afterwards and art can very well do without it. In fact, it is very much better off when it does.\" The biographer Jessica Duchen writes that he was \"a troubled man who preferred not to betray the darker side of his soul\". The critic and composer Jeremy Nicholas observes that this reticence has led many to underrate the music; he quotes such slighting remarks as \"Saint-Sa\u00ebns is the only great composer who wasn't a genius\", and \"Bad music well written\".\nWhile teaching at the Niedermeyer school Saint-Sa\u00ebns put less of his energy into composing and performing, although an overture entitled \"Spartacus\" was crowned at a competition instituted in 1863 by the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Sainte C\u00e9cile of Bordeaux. But after he left the school in 1865 he pursued both aspects of his career with vigour. In 1867 his cantata \"Les noces de Prom\u00e9th\u00e9e\" beat more than a hundred other entries to win the composition prize of the Grande F\u00eate Internationale in Paris, for which the jury included Auber, Berlioz, Gounod, Rossini and Giuseppe Verdi. In 1868 he premiered the first of his orchestral works to gain a permanent place in the repertoire, his Second Piano Concerto. Playing this and other works he became a noted figure in the musical life of Paris and other cities in France and abroad during the 1860s.\n1870s: War, marriage and operatic success.\nIn 1870, concerned at the dominance of German music and the lack of opportunity for young French composers to have their works played, Saint-Sa\u00ebns and Romain Bussine, professor of singing at the Conservatoire, discussed the founding of a society to promote new French music. Before they could take the proposal further the Franco-Prussian War broke out. Saint-Sa\u00ebns served in the National Guard during the war. During the brief but bloody Paris Commune that followed in March to May 1871 his superior at the Madeleine, the Abb\u00e9 Deguerry, was murdered by rebels; Saint-Sa\u00ebns escaped to a brief exile in England. With the help of George Grove and others he supported himself in London, giving recitals. Returning to Paris in May, he found that anti-German sentiments had considerably enhanced support for the idea of a pro-French musical society. The Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale de Musique, with its motto, \"Ars Gallica\", had been established in February 1871, with Bussine as president, Saint-Sa\u00ebns as vice-president and Henri Duparc, Faur\u00e9, Franck and Jules Massenet among its founder-members.\nAs an admirer of Liszt's innovative symphonic poems, Saint-Sa\u00ebns enthusiastically adopted the form; his first \"po\u00e8me symphonique\" was \"Le Rouet d'Omphale\" (1871), premiered at a concert of the Soci\u00e9te Nationale in January 1872. In the same year, after more than a decade of intermittent work on operatic scores, Saint-Sa\u00ebns finally had one of his operas staged. \"La princesse jaune\" (\"The Yellow Princess\"), a one-act, light romantic piece, was given at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique, Paris in June. It ran for five performances.\nThroughout the 1860s and early 1870s, Saint-Sa\u00ebns had continued to live a bachelor existence, sharing a large fourth-floor flat in the Rue du Faubourg Saint-Honor\u00e9 with his mother. In 1875, he surprised many by marrying. The groom was approaching forty and his bride was nineteen; she was Marie-Laure Truffot, the sister of one of the composer's pupils. The marriage was not a success. In the words of the biographer Sabina Teller Ratner, \"Saint-Sa\u00ebns's mother disapproved, and her son was difficult to live with\". Saint-Sa\u00ebns and his wife moved to the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince, in the Latin Quarter; his mother moved with them. The couple had two sons, both of whom died in infancy. In 1878, the elder, Andr\u00e9, aged two, fell from a window of the flat and was killed; the younger, Jean-Fran\u00e7ois, died of pneumonia six weeks later, aged six months. Saint-Sa\u00ebns and Marie-Laure continued to live together for three years, but he blamed her for Andr\u00e9's accident; the double blow of their loss effectively destroyed the marriage.\nFor a French composer of the 19th century, opera was seen as the most important type of music. Saint-Sa\u00ebns's younger contemporary and rival, Massenet, was beginning to gain a reputation as an operatic composer, but Saint-Sa\u00ebns, with only the short and unsuccessful \"La princesse jaune\" staged, had made no mark in that sphere. In February 1877, he finally had a full-length opera staged. His four-act \"drame lyricque\", \"Le timbre d'argent\" (\"The Silver Bell\"), to Jules Barbier's and Michel Carr\u00e9's libretto, reminiscent of the Faust legend, had been in rehearsal in 1870, but the outbreak of war halted the production. The work was eventually presented by the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Lyrique company of Paris; it ran for eighteen performances.\nThe dedicatee of the opera, Albert Libon, died three months after the premiere, leaving Saint-Sa\u00ebns a large legacy \"To free him from the slavery of the organ of the Madeleine and to enable him to devote himself entirely to composition\". Saint-Sa\u00ebns, unaware of the imminent bequest, had resigned his position shortly before his friend died. He was not a conventional Christian, and found religious dogma increasingly irksome; he had become tired of the clerical authorities' interference and musical insensitivity; and he wanted to be free to accept more engagements as a piano soloist in other cities. After this he never played the organ professionally in a church service, and rarely played the instrument at all. He composed a \"Messe de Requiem\" in memory of his friend, which was performed at Saint-Sulpice to mark the first anniversary of Libon's death; Charles-Marie Widor played the organ and Saint-Sa\u00ebns conducted.\nIn December 1877, Saint-Sa\u00ebns had a more solid operatic success with \"Samson et Dalila\", his one opera to gain and keep a place in the international repertoire. Because of its biblical subject, the composer had met many obstacles to its presentation in France, and through Liszt's influence the premiere was given at Weimar in a German translation. Although the work eventually became an international success it was not staged at the Paris Op\u00e9ra until 1892.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was a keen traveller. From the 1870s until the end of his life he made 179 trips to 27 countries. His professional engagements took him most often to Germany and England; for holidays, and to avoid Parisian winters which affected his weak chest, he favoured Algiers and various places in Egypt.\n1880s: International figure.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was elected to the Institut de France in 1881, at his second attempt, having to his chagrin been beaten by Massenet in 1878. In July of that year he and his wife went to the Auvergnat spa town of La Bourboule for a holiday. On 28 July he disappeared from their hotel, and a few days later his wife received a letter from him to say that he would not be returning. They never saw each other again. Marie Saint-Sa\u00ebns returned to her family, and lived until 1950, dying near Bordeaux at the age of ninety-five. Saint-Sa\u00ebns did not divorce his wife and remarry, nor did he form any later intimate relationship with a woman. Rees comments that although there is no firm evidence, some biographers believe that Saint-Sa\u00ebns was more attracted to his own sex than to women. After the death of his children and collapse of his marriage, Saint-Sa\u00ebns increasingly found a surrogate family in Faur\u00e9 and his wife, Marie, and their two sons, to whom he was a much-loved honorary uncle. Marie told him, \"For us you are one of the family, and we mention your name ceaselessly here.\"\nIn the 1880s Saint-Sa\u00ebns continued to seek success in the opera house, an undertaking made the more difficult by an entrenched belief among influential members of the musical establishment that it was unthinkable that a pianist, organist and symphonist could write a good opera. He had two operas staged during the decade, the first being \"Henry VIII\" (1883) commissioned by the Paris Op\u00e9ra. Although the libretto was not of his choosing, Saint-Sa\u00ebns, normally a fluent, even facile composer, worked at the score with unusual diligence to capture a convincing air of 16th-century England. The work was a success, and was frequently revived during the composer's lifetime. When it was produced at Covent Garden in 1898, \"The Era\" commented that though French librettists generally \"make a pretty hash of British history\", this piece was \"not altogether contemptible as an opera story\".\nThe open-mindedness of the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 Nationale had hardened by the mid-1880s into a dogmatic adherence to Wagnerian methods favoured by Franck's pupils, led by Vincent d'Indy. They had begun to dominate the organisation and sought to abandon its \"Ars Gallica\" ethos of commitment to French works. Bussine and Saint-Sa\u00ebns found this unacceptable, and resigned in 1886. Having long pressed the merits of Wagner on a sometimes sceptical French public, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was now becoming worried that the German's music was having an excessive impact on young French composers. His increasing caution towards Wagner developed in later years into stronger hostility, directed as much at Wagner's political nationalism as at his music.\nBy the 1880s Saint-Sa\u00ebns was an established favourite with audiences in England, where he was widely regarded as the greatest living French composer. In 1886 the Philharmonic Society of London commissioned what became one of his most popular and respected works, the Third (\"Organ\") Symphony. It was premiered in London at a concert in which Saint-Sa\u00ebns appeared as conductor of the symphony and as soloist in Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto, conducted by Sir Arthur Sullivan. The success of the symphony in London was considerable, but was surpassed by the ecstatic welcome the work received at its Paris premiere early the following year. Later in 1887 Saint-Sa\u00ebns's \"drame lyrique\" \"Proserpine\" opened at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique. It was well received and seemed to be heading for a substantial run when the theatre burnt down within weeks of the premiere and the production was lost.\nIn December 1888 Saint-Sa\u00ebns's mother died. He felt her loss deeply, and was plunged into depression and insomnia, even contemplating suicide. He left Paris and stayed in Algiers, where he recuperated until May 1889, walking and reading but unable to compose.\n1890s: Marking time.\nDuring the 1890s Saint-Sa\u00ebns spent much time on holiday, travelling overseas, composing less and performing more infrequently than before. A planned visit to perform in Chicago fell through in 1893. He wrote one opera, the comedy \"Phryn\u00e9\" (1893), and together with Paul Dukas helped to complete \"Fr\u00e9d\u00e9gonde\" (1895) an opera left unfinished by Ernest Guiraud, who died in 1892. \"Phryn\u00e9\" was well received, and prompted calls for more comic operas at the Op\u00e9ra-Comique, which had latterly been favouring grand opera. His few choral and orchestral works from the 1890s are mostly short; the major concert pieces from the decade were the single movement fantasia \"Africa\" (1891) and his Fifth (\"Egyptian\") Piano Concerto, which he premiered at a concert in 1896 marking the fiftieth anniversary of his d\u00e9but at the Salle Pleyel in 1846. Before playing the concerto he read out a short poem he had written for the event, praising his mother's tutelage and his public's long support.\nAmong the concerts that Saint-Sa\u00ebns undertook during the decade was one at Cambridge in June 1893, when he, Bruch and Tchaikovsky performed at an event presented by Charles Villiers Stanford for the Cambridge University Musical Society, marking the award of honorary degrees to all three visitors. Saint-Sa\u00ebns greatly enjoyed the visit, and even spoke approvingly of the college chapel services: \"The demands of English religion are not excessive. The services are very short, and consist chiefly of listening to good music extremely well sung, for the English are excellent choristers\". His mutual regard for British choirs continued for the rest of his life, and one of his last large-scale works, the oratorio \"The Promised Land\", was composed for the Three Choirs Festival of 1913.\n1900\u201321: Last years.\nIn 1900, after ten years without a permanent home in Paris, Saint-Sa\u00ebns took a flat in the rue de Courcelles, not far from his old residence in the rue du Faubourg Saint-Honor\u00e9. This remained his home for the rest of his life. He continued to travel abroad frequently, but increasingly often to give concerts rather than as a tourist. He revisited London, where he was always a welcome visitor, went to Berlin, where until the First World War, he was greeted with honour, and travelled in Italy, Spain, Monaco and provincial France. In 1906 and 1909 he made highly successful tours of the United States, as a pianist and conductor. In New York on his second visit he premiered his \"Praise ye the Lord\" for double choir, orchestra and organ, which he composed for the occasion.\nDespite his growing reputation as a musical reactionary, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was, according to Gallois, probably the only French musician who travelled to Munich to hear the premiere of Mahler's Eighth Symphony in 1910. Nonetheless, by the 20th century Saint-Sa\u00ebns had lost much of his enthusiasm for modernism in music. Though he strove to conceal it from Faur\u00e9, he did not understand or like the latter's opera \"P\u00e9n\u00e9lope\" (1913), of which he was the dedicatee. In 1917 Francis Poulenc, at the beginning of his career as a composer, was dismissive when Ravel praised Saint-Sa\u00ebns as a genius. By this time, various strands of new music were emerging with which Saint-Sa\u00ebns had little in common. His classical instincts for form put him at odds with what seemed to him the shapelessness and structure of the musical impressionists, led by Debussy. Nor did Arnold Sch\u00f6nberg's atonality commend itself to Saint-Sa\u00ebns:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no longer any question of adding to the old rules new principles which are the natural expression of time and experience, but simply of casting aside all rules and every restraint. \"Everyone ought to make his own rules. Music is free and unlimited in its liberty of expression. There are no perfect chords, dissonant chords or false chords. All aggregations of notes are legitimate.\" That is called, and they believe it, the \"development of taste\".\nHolding such conservative views, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was out of sympathy \u2013 and out of fashion \u2013 with the Parisian musical scene of the early 20th century, fascinated as it was with novelty. It is often said that he walked out, scandalised, from the premiere of Vaslav Nijinsky and Igor Stravinsky's ballet \"The Rite of Spring\" in 1913. In fact, according to Stravinsky, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was not present on that occasion, but at the first concert performance of the piece the following year he expressed the firm view that Stravinsky was insane.\nWhen a group of French musicians led by Saint-Sa\u00ebns tried to organise a boycott of German music during the First World War, Faur\u00e9 and Messager dissociated themselves from the idea, though the disagreement did not affect their friendship with their old teacher. They were privately concerned that their friend was in danger of looking foolish with his excess of patriotism, and his growing tendency to denounce in public the works of rising young composers, as in his condemnation of Debussy's \"En blanc et noir\" (1915): \"We must at all costs bar the door of the Institut against a man capable of such atrocities; they should be put next to the cubist pictures.\" His determination to block Debussy's candidacy for election to the Institut was successful, and caused bitter resentment from the younger composer's supporters. Saint-Sa\u00ebns's response to the neoclassicism of Les Six was equally uncompromising: of Darius Milhaud's polytonal symphonic suite \"Prot\u00e9e\" (1919) he commented, \"fortunately, there are still lunatic asylums in France\".\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns gave what he intended to be his farewell concert as a pianist in Paris in 1913, but his retirement was soon in abeyance as a result of the war, during which he gave many performances in France and elsewhere, raising money for war charities. These activities took him across the Atlantic, despite the danger from German submarines.\nIn November 1921, Saint-Sa\u00ebns gave a recital at the Institut for a large invited audience; it was remarked that his playing was as vivid and precise as ever, and that his personal bearing was admirable for a man of eighty-six. He left Paris a month later for Algiers, with the intention of wintering there, as he had long been accustomed to do. While there he died of a heart attack on 16 December 1921. His body was taken back to Paris, and after a state funeral at the Madeleine he was buried at the cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse. Heavily veiled, in an inconspicuous place among the mourners from France's political and artistic \u00e9lite, was his widow, Marie-Laure, whom he had last seen in 1881.\nMusic.\nIn the early years of the 20th century, the anonymous author of the article on Saint-Sa\u00ebns in \"Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Saint-Sa\u00ebns is a consummate master of composition, and no one possesses a more profound knowledge than he does of the secrets and resources of the art; but the creative faculty does not keep pace with the technical skill of the workman. His incomparable talent for orchestration enables him to give relief to ideas which would otherwise be crude and mediocre in themselves\u00a0... his works are on the one hand not frivolous enough to become popular in the widest sense, nor on the other do they take hold of the public by that sincerity and warmth of feeling which is so convincing.\nAlthough a keen modernist in his youth, Saint-Sa\u00ebns was always deeply aware of the great masters of the past. In a profile of him written to mark his eightieth birthday, the critic DCParker wrote, \"That Saint-Sa\u00ebns knows Rameau... Bach and Handel, Haydn and Mozart, must be manifest to all who are familiar with his writings. His love for the classical giants and his sympathy with them form, so to speak, the foundation of his art.\"\nLess attracted than some of his French contemporaries to the continuous stream of music popularised by Wagner, Saint-Sa\u00ebns often favoured self-contained melodies. Though they are frequently, in Ratner's phrase, \"supple and pliable\", more often than not they are constructed in three- or four-bar sections, and the \"phrase pattern AABB is characteristic\". An occasional tendency to neoclassicism, influenced by his study of French baroque music, is in contrast with the colourful orchestral music more widely identified with him. \"Grove\" observes that he makes his effects more by characterful harmony and rhythms than by extravagant scoring. In both of those areas of his craft he was normally content with the familiar. Rhythmically, he inclined to standard double, triple or compound metres (although \"Grove\" points to a 5/4 passage in the Piano Trio and another in 7/4 in the Polonaise for two pianos). From his time at the Conservatoire he was a master of counterpoint; contrapuntal passages crop up, seemingly naturally, in many of his works.\nOrchestral works.\nThe authors of the 1955 \"The Record Guide\", Edward Sackville-West and Desmond Shawe-Taylor write that Saint-Sa\u00ebns's brilliant musicianship was \"instrumental in drawing the attention of French musicians to the fact that there are other forms of music besides opera.\" In the 2001 edition of \"Grove's Dictionary\", Ratner and Daniel Fallon, analysing Saint-Sa\u00ebns's orchestral music rate the unnumbered Symphony in A (c.\u20091850) as the most ambitious of the composer's juvenilia. Of the works of his maturity, the First Symphony (1853) is a serious and large-scale work, in which the influence of Schumann is detectable. The \"Urbs Roma\" Symphony (1856, unnumbered) in some ways represents a backward step, being less deftly orchestrated, and \"thick and heavy\" in its effect. Ratner and Fallon praise the Second Symphony (1859) as a fine example of orchestral economy and structural cohesion, with passages that show the composer's mastery of fugal writing. The best known of the symphonies is the Third (1886) which, unusually, has prominent parts for piano and organ. It opens in C minor and ends in C major with a stately chorale tune. The four movements are clearly divided into two pairs, a practice Saint-Sa\u00ebns used elsewhere, notably in the Fourth Piano Concerto (1875) and the First Violin Sonata (1885). The work is dedicated to the memory of Liszt, and uses a recurring \"motif\" treated in a Lisztian style of thematic transformation.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns's four symphonic poems follow the model of those by Liszt, though, in Sackville-West's and Shawe-Taylor's view, without the \"vulgar blatancy\" to which the earlier composer was prone. The most popular of the four is \"Danse macabre\" (1874) depicting skeletons dancing at midnight. Saint-Sa\u00ebns generally achieved his orchestral effects by deft harmonisation rather than exotic instrumentation, but in this piece he featured the xylophone prominently, representing the rattling bones of the dancers. \"Le Rouet d'Omphale\" (1871) was composed soon after the horrors of the Commune, but its lightness and delicate orchestration give no hint of recent tragedies. Rees rates \"Pha\u00e9ton\" (1873) as the finest of the symphonic poems, belying the composer's professed indifference to melody, and inspired in its depiction of the mythical hero and his fate. A critic at the time of the premiere took a different view, hearing in the piece \"the noise of a hack coming down from Montmartre\" rather than the galloping fiery horses of Greek legend that inspired the piece. The last of the four symphonic poems, \"La jeunesse d'Hercule\" (\"Hercules's Youth\", 1877) was the most ambitious of the four, which, Harding suggests, is why it is the least successful. In the judgment of the critic Roger Nichols these orchestral works, which combine striking melodies, strength of construction and memorable orchestration \"set new standards for French music and were an inspiration to such young composers as Ravel\".\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns wrote a one-act ballet, \"Javot\" (1896), the score for the film \"L'assassinat du duc de Guise\" (1908), and incidental music to a dozen plays between 1850 and 1916. Three of these scores were for revivals of classics by Moli\u00e8re and Racine, for which Saint-Sa\u00ebns's deep knowledge of French baroque scores was reflected in his scores, in which he incorporated music by Lully and Charpentier.\nConcertante works.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was the first major French composer to write piano concertos. His First, in D (1858), in conventional three-movement form, is not well known, but the Second, in G minor (1868) is one of his most popular works. The composer experimented with form in this piece, replacing the customary sonata form first movement with a more discursive structure, opening with a solemn cadenza. The scherzo second movement and \"presto\" finale are in such contrast with the opening that the pianist Zygmunt Stojowski commented that the work \"begins like Bach and ends like Offenbach\". The Third Piano Concerto, in E\u266d (1869) has another high-spirited finale, but the earlier movements are more classical, the texture clear, with graceful melodic lines. The Fourth, in C minor (1875) is probably the composer's best-known piano concerto after the Second. It is in two movements, each comprising two identifiable sub-sections, and maintains a thematic unity not found in the composer's other piano concertos. According to some sources it was this piece that so impressed Gounod that he dubbed Saint-Sa\u00ebns \"the Beethoven of France\" (other sources base that distinction on the Third Symphony). The Fifth and last piano concerto, in F major, was written in 1896, more than twenty years after its predecessor. The work is known as the \"Egyptian\" concerto; it was written while the composer was wintering in Luxor, and incorporates a tune he heard Nile boatmen singing.\nThe First Cello Concerto, in A minor (1872) is a serious although animated work, in a single continuous movement with an unusually turbulent first section. It is among the most popular concertos in the cello repertory, much favoured by Pablo Casals and later players. The Second, in D minor (1902), like the Fourth Piano Concerto, consists of two movements each subdivided into two distinct sections. It is more purely virtuosic than its predecessor: Saint-Sa\u00ebns commented to Faur\u00e9 that it would never be as popular as the First because it was too difficult. There are three violin concertos; the first to be composed dates from 1858 but was not published until 1879, as the composer's Second, in C major. The First, in A, was also completed in 1858. It is a short work, its single 314-bar movement lasting less than a quarter of an hour. The Second, in conventional three-movement concerto form, is twice as long as the First, and is the least popular of the three: the thematic catalogue of the composer's works lists only three performances in his lifetime. The Third, in B minor, written for Pablo de Sarasate, is technically challenging for the soloist, although the virtuoso passages are balanced by intervals of pastoral serenity. It is by some margin the most popular of the three violin concertos, but Saint-Sa\u00ebns's best-known concertante work for violin and orchestra is probably the Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso, in A minor, Op. 28, a single-movement piece, also written for Sarasate, dating from 1863. It changes from a wistful and tense opening to a swaggering main theme, described as faintly sinister by the critic Gerald Larner, who goes on, \"After a multi-stopped cadenza\u00a0... the solo violin makes a breathless sprint through the coda to the happy ending in A major\".\nOperas.\nDiscounting his collaboration with Dukas in the completion of Guiraud's unfinished \"Fr\u00e9d\u00e9gonde\", Saint-Sa\u00ebns wrote twelve operas, two of which are \"op\u00e9ras comiques\". During the composer's lifetime his \"Henry VIII\" became a repertory piece; since his death only \"Samson et Dalila\" has been regularly staged, although according to Schonberg, \"Ascanio\" (1890) is considered by experts to be a much finer work. The critic Ronald Crichton writes that for all his experience and musical skill, Saint-Sa\u00ebns \"lacked the 'nose' of the theatre animal granted, for example, to Massenet who in other forms of music was his inferior\". In a 2005 study, the musical scholar Steven Huebner contrasts the two composers: \"Saint-Sa\u00ebns obviously had no time for Massenet's histrionics\". Saint-Sa\u00ebns's biographer James Harding comments that it is regrettable that the composer did not attempt more works of a light-hearted nature, on the lines of \"La princesse jaune\", which Harding describes as like Sullivan \"with a light French touch\".\nAlthough most of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's operas have remained neglected, Crichton rates them as important in the history of French opera, as \"a bridge between Meyerbeer and the serious French operas of the early 1890s\". In his view, the operatic scores of Saint-Sa\u00ebns have, in general, the strengths and weaknesses of the rest of his music \u2013 \"lucid Mozartian transparency, greater care for form than for content... There is a certain emotional dryness; invention is sometimes thin, but the workmanship is impeccable.\" Stylistically, Saint-Sa\u00ebns drew on a range of models. From Meyerbeer he drew the effective use of the chorus in the action of a piece; for \"Henry VIII\" he included Tudor music he had researched in London; in \"La princesse jaune\" he used an oriental pentatonic scale; from Wagner he derived the use of leitmotifs, which, like Massenet, he used sparingly. Huebner observes that Saint-Sa\u00ebns was more conventional than Massenet so far as through composition is concerned, more often favouring discrete arias and ensembles, with less variety of tempo within individual numbers. In a survey of recorded opera Alan Blyth writes that Saint-Sa\u00ebns \"certainly learned much from Handel, Gluck, Berlioz, the Verdi of \"Aida\", and Wagner, but from these excellent models he forged his own style.\"\nOther vocal music.\nFrom the age of six and for the rest of his life Saint-Sa\u00ebns composed \"m\u00e9lodies\", writing more than 140. He regarded his songs as thoroughly and typically French, denying any influence from Schubert or other German composers of \"Lieder\". Unlike his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Faur\u00e9, or his rival Massenet, he was not drawn to the song cycle, writing only two during his long career \u2013 \"M\u00e9lodies persanes\" (\"Persian Songs\", 1870) and \"Le Cendre rouge\" (\"The Red Ash Tree\", 1914, dedicated to Faur\u00e9). The poet whose works he set most often was Victor Hugo; others included Alphonse de Lamartine, Pierre Corneille, Amable Tastu, and, in eight songs, Saint-Sa\u00ebns himself: among his many non-musical talents he was an amateur poet. He was highly sensitive to word setting, and told the young composer Lili Boulanger that to write songs effectively musical talent was not enough: \"you must study the French language in depth; it is indispensable.\" Most of the \"m\u00e9lodies\" are written for piano accompaniment, but a few, including \"Le lever du soleil sur le Nil\" (\"Sunrise over the Nile\", 1898) and \"Hymne \u00e0 la paix\" (\"Hymn to Peace\", 1919), are for voice and orchestra. His settings, and chosen verses, are generally traditional in form, contrasting with the free verse and less structured forms of a later generation of French composers, including Debussy.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns composed more than sixty sacred vocal works, ranging from motets to masses and oratorios. Among the larger-scale compositions are the Requiem (1878) and the oratorios \"Le d\u00e9luge\" (1875) and \"The Promised Land\" (1913) with an English text by Herman Klein. He was proud of his connection with British choirs, commenting, \"One likes to be appreciated in the home, \"par excellence\", of oratorio.\" He wrote a smaller number of secular choral works, some for unaccompanied choir, some with piano accompaniment and some with full orchestra. In his choral works, Saint-Sa\u00ebns drew heavily on tradition, feeling that his models should be Handel, Mendelssohn and other earlier masters of the genre. In Klein's view, this approach was old-fashioned, and the familiarity of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's treatment of the oratorio form impeded his success in it.\nSolo keyboard.\nNichols comments that, although as a famous pianist Saint-Sa\u00ebns wrote for the piano throughout his life, \"this part of his oeuvre has made curiously little mark\". Nichols excepts the \"\u00c9tude en forme de valse\" (1912), which he observes still attracts pianists eager to display their left-hand technique. Although Saint-Sa\u00ebns was dubbed \"the French Beethoven\", and his Variations on a Theme of Beethoven in E\u266d (1874) is his most extended work for unaccompanied piano, he did not emulate his predecessor in composing piano sonatas. He is not known even to have contemplated writing one. There are sets of bagatelles (1855), \u00e9tudes (two sets \u2013 1899 and 1912) and fugues (1920), but in general Saint-Sa\u00ebns's works for the piano are single short pieces. In addition to established forms such as the song without words (1871) and the mazurka (1862, 1871 and 1882) popularised by Mendelssohn and Chopin, respectively, he wrote descriptive pieces such as \"Souvenir d'Italie\" (1887), \"Les cloches du soir\" (\"Evening bells\", 1889) and \"Souvenir d'Isma\u00eflia\" (1895).\nUnlike his pupil, Faur\u00e9, whose long career as a reluctant organist left no legacy of works for the instrument, Saint-Sa\u00ebns published a modest number of pieces for organ solo. Some of them were written for use in church services \u2013 \"Offertoire\" (1853), \"B\u00e9n\u00e9diction nuptiale\" (1859), \"Communion\" (1859) and others. After he left the Madeleine in 1877 Saint-Sa\u00ebns wrote ten more pieces for organ, mostly for concert use, including two sets of preludes and fugues (1894 and 1898). Some of the earlier works were written to be played on either the harmonium or the organ, and a few were primarily intended for the former.\nChamber.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns wrote more than forty chamber works between the 1840s and his last years. One of the first of his major works in the genre was the Piano Quintet (1855). It is a straightforward, confident piece, in a conventional structure with lively outer movements and a central movement containing two slow themes, one chorale-like and the other \"cantabile\". The Septet (1880), for the unusual combination of trumpet, two violins, viola, cello, double bass and piano, is a neoclassical work that draws on 17th-century French dance forms. At the time of its composition Saint-Sa\u00ebns was preparing new editions of the works of baroque composers including Rameau and Lully. The \"Caprice sur des airs danois et russes\" (1887) for flute, oboe, clarinet and piano, and the Barcarolle in F major (1898) for violin, cello, harmonium and piano are further examples of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's sometimes unorthodox instrumentation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns's chamber works reveal the complete man: his sense of tradition coupled with imagination, his feeling for colour, his sense of humour, his desire for balance and symmetry, his love of clarity.\nSabina Teller Ratner, 2005\nIn Ratner's view, the most important of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's chamber works are the sonatas: two for violin, two for cello, and one each for oboe, clarinet and bassoon, all seven with piano accompaniment. The First Violin Sonata dates from 1885, and is rated by \"Grove's Dictionary\" as one of the composer's best and most characteristic compositions. The Second (1896) signals a stylistic change in Saint-Sa\u00ebns's work, with a lighter, clearer sound for the piano, characteristic of his music from then onwards. The First Cello Sonata (1872) was written after the death of the composer's great-aunt, who had taught him to play the piano more than thirty years earlier. It is a serious work, in which the main melodic material is sustained by the cello over a virtuoso piano accompaniment. Faur\u00e9 called it the only cello sonata from any country to be of any importance. The Second (1905) is in four movements, and has the unusual feature of a theme and variations as its scherzo.\nThe woodwind sonatas are among the composer's last works and part of his efforts to expand the repertoire for instruments for which hardly any solo parts were written, as he confided to his friend Jean Chantavoine in a letter dated to 15 April 1921: \"At the moment I am concentrating my last reserves on giving rarely considered instruments the chance to be heard.\" Ratner writes of them, \"The spare, evocative, classical lines, haunting melodies, and superb formal structures underline these beacons of the neoclassical movement.\" Gallois comments that the Oboe Sonata begins like a conventional classical sonata, with an andantino theme; the central section has rich and colourful harmonies, and the molto allegro finale is full of delicacy, humour and charm with a form of tarantella. For Gallois the Clarinet Sonata is the most important of the three: he calls it \"a masterpiece full of impishness, elegance and discreet lyricism\" amounting to \"a summary of the rest\". The work contrasts a \"doleful threnody\" in the slow movement with the finale, which \"pirouettes in 4/4 time\", in a style reminiscent of the 18th century. The same commentator calls the Bassoon Sonata \"a model of transparency, vitality and lightness\", containing humorous touches but also moments of peaceful contemplation. Saint-Sa\u00ebns also expressed an intention to write a sonata for the cor anglais, but did not do so.\nThe composer's most famous work, \"The Carnival of the Animals\" (1887), although far from a typical chamber piece, is written for eleven players, and is considered by \"Grove's Dictionary\" to be part of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's chamber output. \"Grove\" rates it as \"his most brilliant comic work, parodying Offenbach, Berlioz, Mendelssohn, Rossini, his own \"Danse macabre\" and several popular tunes\". He forbade performances of it during his lifetime, concerned that its frivolity would damage his reputation as a serious composer.\nRecordings.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was a pioneer in recorded music. In June 1904 The Gramophone Company of London sent its producer Fred Gaisberg to Paris to record Saint-Sa\u00ebns as accompanist to the mezzo-soprano Meyriane H\u00e9glon in arias from \"Ascanio\" and \"Samson et Dalila\", and as soloist in his own piano music, including an arrangement of sections of the Second Piano Concerto (without orchestra). Saint-Sa\u00ebns made more recordings for the company in 1919.\nIn the early days of the LP record, Saint-Sa\u00ebns's works were patchily represented on disc. \"The Record Guide\" (1955) lists one recording apiece of the Third Symphony, Second Piano Concerto and First Cello Concerto, alongside several versions of \"Danse Macabre\", \"The Carnival of the Animals\", the Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso and other short orchestral works. In the latter part of the 20th century and the early 21st, many more of the composer's works were released on LP and later CD and DVD. The 2008 \"Penguin Guide to Recorded Classical Music\" contains ten pages of listings of Saint-Sa\u00ebns works, including all the concertos, symphonies, symphonic poems, sonatas and quartets. Also listed are an early Mass, collections of organ music, and choral songs. A recording of twenty-seven of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's \"m\u00e9lodies\" was released in 1997.\nWith the exception of \"Samson et Dalila\" the operas have been sparsely represented on disc. A recording of \"Henry VIII\" was issued on CD and DVD in 1992. \"H\u00e9l\u00e8ne\" was released on CD in 2008. There are several recordings of \"Samson et Dalilah\", under conductors including Sir Colin Davis, Georges Pr\u00eatre, Daniel Barenboim and Myung-Whun Chung. In the early 2020s the Centre de musique romantique fran\u00e7aise's Bru Zane label issued new recordings of \"Le Timbre d'argent\" (conducted by Fran\u00e7ois-Xavier Roth, 2020), \"La Princesse jaune\" (Leo Hussain, 2021), and \"Phryn\u00e9\" (Herv\u00e9 Niquet, 2022).\nHonours and reputation.\nSaint-Sa\u00ebns was made a \"Chevalier\" of the Legion of Honour in 1867 and promoted to \"Officier\" in 1884, and \"Grand Croix\" in 1913. Foreign honours included the British Royal Victorian Order (CVO) in 1902, the Mon\u00e9gasque Order of Saint-Charles in 1904 and honorary doctorates from the universities of Cambridge (1893) and Oxford (1907).\nIn its obituary notice, \"The Times\" commented:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The death of M. Saint-Sa\u00ebns not only deprives France of one of her most distinguished composers; it removes from the world the last representative of the great movements in music which were typical of the 19th century. He had maintained so vigorous a vitality and kept in such close touch with present-day activities that, though it had become customary to speak of him as the \"doyen\" of French composers, it was easy to forget the place he actually took in musical chronology. He was only two years younger than Brahms, was five years older than Tchaikovsky, six years older than Dvo\u0159\u00e1k, and seven years older than Sullivan. He held a position in his own country's music certain aspects of which may be fitly compared with each of those masters in their own spheres.\nIn a short poem, \"Mea culpa\", published in 1890 Saint-Sa\u00ebns accused himself of lack of decadence, and commented approvingly on the excessive enthusiasms of youth, lamenting that such things were not for him. An English commentator quoted the poem in 1910, observing, \"His sympathies are with the young in their desire to push forward, because he has not forgotten his own youth when he championed the progressive ideals of the day.\" The composer sought a balance between innovation and traditional form. The critic Henry Colles, wrote, a few days after the composer's death:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In his desire to maintain \"the perfect equilibrium\" we find the limitation of Saint-Sa\u00ebns's appeal to the ordinary musical mind. Saint-Sa\u00ebns rarely, if ever, takes any risks; he never, to use the slang of the moment, \"goes off the deep end\". All his greatest contemporaries did. Brahms, Tchaikovsky, and even Franck, were ready to sacrifice everything for the end each wanted to reach, to drown in the attempt to get there if necessary. Saint-Sa\u00ebns, in preserving his equilibrium, allows his hearers to preserve theirs.\n\"Grove\" concludes its article on Saint-Sa\u00ebns with the observation that although his works are remarkably consistent, \"it cannot be said that he evolved a distinctive musical style. Rather, he defended the French tradition that threatened to be engulfed by Wagnerian influences and created the environment that nourished his successors\".\nSince the composer's death writers sympathetic to his music have expressed regret that he is known by the musical public for only a handful of his scores such as \"The Carnival of the Animals\", the Second Piano Concerto, the Third Violin Concerto, the Organ Symphony, \"Samson et Dalila\", \"Danse macabre\" and the Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso. Among his large output, Nicholas singles out the Requiem, the Christmas Oratorio, the ballet \"Javotte\", the Piano Quartet, the Septet for trumpet, piano and strings, and the First Violin Sonata as neglected masterpieces. In 2004, the cellist Steven Isserlis said, \"Saint-Saens is exactly the sort of composer who needs a festival to himself\u00a0... there are Masses, all of which are interesting. I've played all his cello music and there isn't one bad piece. His works are rewarding in every way. And he's an endlessly fascinating figure.\"\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "48929", "revid": "31192532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48929", "title": "Dressage", "text": "Equestrian sport and art\nDressage ( or ; , most commonly translated as \"training\") is a form of horse riding performed in exhibition and competition, as well as an art sometimes pursued solely for the sake of mastery. As an equestrian sport defined by the International Equestrian Federation, dressage is described as \"the highest expression of horse training\" where \"horse and rider are expected to perform from memory a series of predetermined movements\".\nCompetitions are held at all levels from amateur to the Olympic Games and World Equestrian Games. Its fundamental purpose is to develop, through standardized progressive training methods, a horse's natural athletic ability and willingness to perform, thereby maximizing its potential as a riding horse. At the peak of a dressage horse's gymnastic development, the horse responds smoothly to a skilled rider's minimal aids. The rider is relaxed and appears effort-free while the horse willingly performs the requested movement.\nThe discipline has a rich history with ancient roots in the writings of Xenophon. Modern dressage has evolved as an important equestrian pursuit since the Renaissance when Federico Grisone's \"The Rules of Riding\" was published in 1550, one of the first notable European treatises on equitation since Xenophon's \"On Horsemanship\". Much about training systems used today reflects practices of classical dressage.\nIn modern dressage competition, successful training at the various levels is demonstrated through the performance of \"tests\", prescribed series of movements ridden within a standard arena. Judges evaluate each movement on the basis of a standard appropriate to the level of the test and assign each movement a score from zero to ten\u00a0\u2013 zero being \"not executed\" and 10 being \"excellent\". A competitor achieving all 6s (or 60% overall) might typically then move up to the next level.\nDressage horses.\nThe most popular horse breeds seen at the Olympics and other international FEI competitions are warmblood horses bred for dressage.\nIn classical dressage training and performances that involve the \"airs above the ground\" (\"described below\"), the \"baroque\" breeds of horses are popular and purposely bred for these specialties.\nArena.\nThere are two sizes of arenas, small and standard. Each has letters assigned to positions around the arena for dressage tests to specify where movements are to be performed. Cones with letters on them are positioned on the sidelines of the arena for reference as to where a movement is to be performed.\nThe small arena is and is used for the lower levels of eventing in the dressage phase, as well as for some pure dressage competitions at lower levels. Its letters around the outside edge, starting from the point of entry and moving clockwise, are A-K-E-H-C-M-B-F. Letters also mark locations along the \"center line\" in the middle of the arena. Moving down the center line from A, they are D-X-G, with X being directly between E and B.\nThe standard arena is , and is used for tests in both pure dressage and eventing. The standard dressage arena letters are A-K-V-E-S-H-C-M-R-B-P-F. The letters on the long sides of the arena, nearest the corners, are in from the corners, and are apart from each other. The letters along the center line are D-L-X-I-G, with X again being halfway down the arena. There is speculation as to why these letters were chosen.\nIn addition to the center line, the arena also has two \"quarter lines\", which lie between the center line and the long side of the arena. However, these are infrequently, if ever, used for competition except in a freestyle.\nAt the start of the test, the horse enters the arena at an opening at A. Ideally this opening is then closed for the duration of the test. However, this is not always logistically possible, particularly at smaller competitions with few volunteers.\nJudges.\nJudges are registered through their national federation depending on the judge's experience and training, with the highest qualified being registered with the FEI for international competition. Judges are strictly regulated to ensure as consistent marking as possible within the limits of subjectivity, and in FEI competitions, it is expected that all judges' final percentage be within five percent of each other.\nThere is always a judge sitting at C, although for upper-level competition there can be up to seven judges at different places around the arena\u00a0\u2014 at C, E, B, K, F, M, and H\u00a0\u2014 which allows the horse to be seen in each movement from all angles. This helps prevent certain faults from going unnoticed, which may be difficult for a judge to see from only one area of the arena. For example, the horse's straightness going across the diagonal may be assessed by judges at M and H.\nAlthough the judge's positions are known by their closest letter, only C, B, &amp; E are actually directly behind their respective marker, with the other judges being on the short sides (on a plane with C, and two metres in from the edge of the arena for M &amp; H, and at the A end of the arena and five metres in from the long side of the arena for F &amp; K) rather than on the long side where the letter would seem to indicate.\nCompetition.\nDressage competitions consist of a series of individual tests with an increasing level of difficulty. The most accomplished horse and rider teams perform FEI tests, written by the international equestrian governing body called the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration \u00c9questre Internationale or FEI. The highest level of modern competition is at the Grand Prix level. This is the level test ridden in the prestigious international competitions (CDIs), such as the Olympic games, Dressage World Cup, and World Equestrian Games. Dressage governed by the rules of the FEI include the following levels: \"small tour\" (Prix St. Georges and Intermediate I) Intermediate A, Intermediate B and \"big tour\" (Intermediate II, Grand Prix and Grand Prix Special).\nIn addition, there are four to six lower levels, occasionally more, regulated in individual nations by their respective national federation (such as the USDF in America, British Dressage, Dressage Australia etc.). The lower levels ask horses for basic gaits, relatively large circles, and a lower level of collection than the international levels. Lateral movements are not required in the earliest levels, and movements such as the leg yield, shoulder-in, or haunches-in are gradually introduced as the horse progresses, until the point at which the horse can compete in the FEI levels.\nApart from competition, there is the tradition of classical dressage, in which the traditional training of dressage is pursued as an art form. The traditions of the masters who originated Dressage are kept alive by the Spanish Riding School in Vienna, Austria, Escola Portuguesa de Arte Equestre in Lisbon, Portugal, and the \"Cadre Noir\" in Saumur, France. This type of schooling is also a part of Portuguese and Spanish bullfighting exhibitions.\nTests.\nDressage tests are the formalized sequence of a number of dressage movements used in competition. Although horses and riders are competing against each other, tests are completed by one horse and rider combination at a time, and horses and riders are judged against a common standard, rather than having their performance scored relative to the other competitors.\nAt the upper levels, tests for international competitions, including the Olympics, are issued under the auspices of the FEI. At the lower levels, and as part of dressage training each country authorizes its own set of tests. For example, in the US it is the United States Equestrian Federation and the United States Dressage Federation. In Great Britain, dressage is overseen by British Dressage. Pony Clubs also produce their own tests, including basic walk/trot tests which cater for child riders.\nEach test is segmented into a number of sequential blocks which may contain one or more movements. Each block is generally scored between zero and ten on a scale such as the following:\nSince 2011, all international tests, and some national tests have also allowed half marks (0.5 \u2013 9.5) in all blocks.\nAlong with each mark a \"comment\" may be given, which can describe things a rider and horse lack during the movement, or what they have. Any of the definitions of each numeric mark can only be used in the comment if the mark corresponds with the definition.\nIn addition to marks for the dressage movements, marks are also awarded for more general attributes such as the horse's gaits, submission, impulsion and the rider's performance. Some segments are given increased weight by the use of a multiplier, or coefficient. Coefficients are typically given a value of 2, which then doubles the marks given for that segment. Movements that are given a coefficient are generally considered to be particularly important to the horse's progression in training, and should be competently executed prior to moving up to the next level of competition. The scores for the general attributes of gait, submission, impulsion, and rider performance mentioned above are scored using a coefficient.\nScribing.\nScribing (also known as pencilling or writing) is the writing down of the scores and comments of judges at dressage events so that the judge can concentrate on the performance. In addition to this, the scribe should check the identity of each competitor, and ensure that the test papers are complete and signed before handing them to the scorers. The scribe should have some knowledge of dressage terminology, be smartly dressed and have legible handwriting. The scribe should also be professional in manner, neutral and not engage in small talk or make comments. It is permissible to use abbreviations provided they are accepted and intelligible.\nAccording to the United States Dressage Federation, \"Anyone can volunteer at a schooling show to scribe. Schooling shows are not recognized as official shows but are a great way to practice riding tests or to learn to scribe for a judge. Once you have scribed at a schooling show and at the lower levels, you may ask to scribe at a recognized show and perhaps even the FEI levels of competition.\" Scribing or pencilling is also an integral part of a judge's training as they look to become accredited or upgrade to a higher level.\nInternational level.\nAt the international level, dressage tests governed by the FEI are the Prix St. Georges, Intermediare I, Intermediare II, and Grand Prix. The dressage tests performed at the Olympic Games dressage competition are Grand Prix. This level of testing demands the most skill and concentration from both horse and rider.\nMovements included in Grand Prix dressage tests are:\nTests ridden at the Olympic Games are scored by a panel of seven international judges. Each movement in each test receives a numeric score from 0 (lowest) to 10 (highest) and the resulting final score is then converted into a percentage, which is carried out to three decimal points. The higher the percentage, the higher the score. However, in eventing dressage the score is calculated by dividing the number of points achieved by the total possible points, then multiplied by 100 (rounded to 2 decimal points) and subtracted from 100. Thus, a lower score is better than a higher score.\nOlympic team medals are won by the teams with the highest combined percentages from their best three rides in the Grand Prix test.\nOnce the team medals are determined, horses and riders compete for individual medals. The team competition serves as the first individual qualifier, in that the top 25 horse/rider combinations from the Grand Prix test move on to the next round. The second individual qualifier is the Grand Prix Special test, which consists of Grand Prix movements arranged in a different pattern. For those 25 riders, the scores from the Grand Prix and the Grand Prix Special are then combined and the resulting top 15 horse/rider combinations move on to the individual medal competition\u2014the crowd-pleasing Grand Prix Freestyle to Music (K\u00fcr).\nFor their freestyles, riders and horses perform specially choreographed patterns to music. At this level, the freestyle tests may contain all the Grand Prix movements, as well as double canter pirouettes, pirouettes in piaffe, and half-pass in passage. For the freestyle, judges award technical marks for the various movements, as well as artistic marks. In the case of a tie, the ride with the higher artistic marks wins.\nTraining scale.\nCompetitive dressage training in the U.S. is based on a progression of six steps developed by the German National Equestrian Foundation. This system is arranged in a pyramid or sequential fashion, with \"rhythm and regularity\" at the start of the pyramid and \"collection\" at the end. The training scale is helpful and effective as a guide for the training of any horse, but has come to be most closely associated with dressage. Despite its appearance, the training scale is not meant to be a rigid format. Instead, each level is built on as the horse progresses in training: so a Grand Prix horse would work on the refinement of the first levels of the pyramid, instead of focusing on only the final level: \"collection.\" The levels are also interconnected. For example, a crooked horse cannot develop impulsion, and a horse that is not relaxed will be less likely to travel with a rhythmic gait. However, this training scale as presented below is a translation from the German to the English.\nRhythm and regularity (\"Takt\").\nRhythm, gait, tempo, and regularity should be the same on straight and bending lines, through lateral work, and through transitions. Rhythm refers to the sequence of the footfalls, which should only include the pure walk, pure trot, and pure canter. The regularity, or purity, of the gait includes the evenness and levelness of the stride. Once a rider can obtain pure gaits, or can avoid irregularity, the combination may be fit to do a more difficult exercise. Even in the very difficult piaffe there is still regularity: the horse \"trots on the spot\" in place, raising the front and hind legs in rhythm.\nRelaxation (\"Losgelassenheit\").\nThe second level of the pyramid is relaxation (looseness). Signs of looseness in the horse may be seen by an even stride that is swinging through the back and causing the tail to swing like a pendulum, looseness at the poll, a soft chewing of the bit, and a relaxed blowing through the nose. The horse makes smooth transitions, is easy to position from side to side, and willingly reaches down into the contact as the reins are lengthened.\nContact (\"Anlehnung\").\nContact\u2014the third level of the pyramid\u2014is the result of the horse's pushing power, and should never be achieved by the pulling of the rider's hands. The rider encourages the horse to stretch into soft hands that allow the horse to lift the base of the neck, coming up into the bridle, and should always follow the natural motion of the animal's head. The horse should have equal contact in both reins.\nImpulsion (\"Schwung\").\nThe pushing power (thrust) of the horse is called impulsion, and is the fourth level of the training pyramid. Impulsion is created by storing the energy of engagement (the forward reaching of the hind legs under the body).\nProper impulsion is achieved by means of:\nImpulsion can occur at the walk, trot and canter. It is highly important to establish good, forward movement and impulsion at the walk, as achieving desirable form in the trot and canter relies heavily on the transition from a good, supple, forward walk.\nImpulsion not only encourages correct muscle and joint use, but also engages the mind of the horse, focusing it on the rider and, particularly at the walk and trot, allowing for relaxation and dissipation of nervous energy.\nStraightness (\"Geraderichtung\").\nA horse is straight when the hind legs follow the path of the front legs, on both straight lines and on bending lines, and the body follows the line of travel. Straightness allows the horse to channel its impulsion directly toward its center of balance, and allows the rider's hand aids to have a connection to the hind end.\nWhen working on straightness in the horse, a common exercise is used called 'shoulder in'. The exercise is the beginning of straightness in the horse as well as collection and can increase impulsion in the horse.\nCollection (\"Versammlung\").\nAt the apex of the training scale stands collection. It may refer to collected gaits: they can be used occasionally to supplement less vigorous work. It involves difficult movements (such as flying changes) in more advanced horses. Collection requires greater muscular strength, so must be advanced upon slowly. When in a collected gait, the stride length should shorten, and the stride should increase in energy and activity.\nWhen a horse collects, more weight moves to the hindquarters. Collection is natural for horses and is often seen during pasture play. A collected horse can move more freely. The joints of the hind limbs have greater flexion, allowing the horse to lower the hindquarters, bringing the hind legs further under the body, and lighten and lift the forehand. In essence, collection is the horse's ability to move its centre of gravity to the rear while lifting the freespan of its back to better round under the rider.\n\"Airs\" above the ground.\nThe \"school jumps\", or \"airs above the ground\", are a series of higher-level classical dressage movements where the horse leaves the ground. These include the capriole, courbette, the mezair, the croupade, and levade. None are used in modern competitive dressage, but are performed by horses of various riding academies, including the Spanish Riding School in Vienna, Escola Portuguesa de Arte Equestre in Lisbon, Portugal, and the Cadre Noir in Saumur. Baroque horse breeds such as the Andalusian, Lusitano and Lipizzan are most often trained to perform the \"airs\" today, in part due to their powerfully conformed hindquarters, which allow them the strength to perform these difficult movements.\nThere is a popular belief that these moves were originally taught to horses for military purposes, and indeed both the Spanish Riding School and the Cadre Noir are military foundations. However, while agility was necessary on the battlefield, most of the airs as performed today would have actually exposed horses' vulnerable underbellies to the weapons of foot soldiers. It is therefore more likely that the airs were exercises to develop the agility, responsiveness and physiology of the military horse and rider, rather than to be employed in combat.\nDressage masters.\nThe earliest practitioner who wrote treatises that survive today that describe sympathetic and systematic training of the horse was the Greek general Xenophon (427\u2013355 BC). Despite living over 2000 years ago, his ideas are still widely praised. Beginning in the Renaissance a number of early modern trainers began to write on the topic of horse training, each expanding upon the work of their predecessors, including Federico Grisone (mid-16th century), Antoine de Pluvinel (1555\u20131620), William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Newcastle (1592\u20131676), Fran\u00e7ois Robichon de La Gu\u00e9rini\u00e8re (1688\u20131751), Fran\u00e7ois Baucher (1796\u20131873), and Gustav Steinbrecht (1808\u20131885). The 20th century saw an increase in writing and teaching about Dressage training and techniques as the discipline became an international sport with the influence of Olympic Equestrian competition.\nTack.\nThe rules on permitted cavessons (nosebands) saddles, saddle pads, etc., are subject to change and do change as more and more styles and stylish equipments are introduced into the marketplace. Dressage horses are shown in minimal tack. They are not permitted to wear leg protection including boots or wraps during the test, nor are they allowed to wear martingales or training devices such as draw or running reins or the gogue anywhere on the showgrounds during the competition. Due to the formality of dressage, tack is usually black leather, although dark brown is seen from time to time.\nAn English-style saddle is required for riding dressage, specifically a \"dressage saddle\" which is modeled exclusively for the discipline. It is designed with a long and straight saddle flap, mirroring the leg of the dressage rider, which is long with a slight bend in the knee, a deep seat and usually a pronounced knee block. Dressage saddles have longer billets and use shorter girth than other types of English saddles to minimize the straps and buckles underneath the rider's legs. The saddle is usually placed over a square, white saddle pad. Colored trim on the white saddle pad is permitted. A dressage saddle is required in FEI classes, although any simple English-type saddle may be used at the lower levels.\nAt the lower levels of dressage, a bridle includes a plain cavesson, drop noseband, or flash noseband. Currently, drop nosebands are relatively uncommon, with the flash more common. At the upper levels a plain cavesson is used on a double bridle. Figure-eight (also called Grackle) nosebands are not allowed in pure dressage, however they are allowed in the dressage phase of eventing. Riders are not allowed to use Kineton nosebands, due to their severity. Beads and colored trim are permitted along the brow band of the bridle.\nThe dressage horse at lower levels is only permitted to be shown at recognized competitions in a snaffle bit, though the detail regarding bitting varies slightly from organization to organization. The loose-ring snaffle with a single- or double-joint is most commonly seen. Harsher snaffle bits, such as twisted wire, corkscrews, slow-twists, and waterfords are not permitted, nor are pelhams, kimberwickes, or gag bits. Upper level and FEI dressage horses are shown in a double bridle, using both a bradoon and a curb bit with a smooth curb chain. Traditionally, the snaffle is used to open and lift the poll angle, while the curb is used to bring the nose of the horse towards the vertical.\nTurnout of the horse.\nDressage horses are turned out to a high standard. It is usual for horses to have their manes braided (also known as plaited). In eventing, the mane is preferred to be braided on the right; in competitive dressage, however, it is occasionally braided on the left, should it naturally fall there. Braids vary in size, but Europeans tend to put in fewer, larger braids, while Americans tend to have more smaller braids per horse. Braids are occasionally accented in white tape, which also helps them stay in throughout the day. The forelock may be left unbraided; this style is most common with stallions. Braids are held in place by either yarn or rubber bands. It is a common misconception that a dressage horse must be braided, however this is not the case, and some riders may choose for various reasons not to braid.\nHorses are not permitted to wear \"visual enhancements\" that might be considered distracting, or that might influence the judge's perception of the horse. Bangles, ribbons, or other decorations are not allowed in the horse's mane or tail. Competitors are not allowed to use black hoof polish on white hooves. Tail extensions are permitted in some countries, but not in FEI-sanctioned competitions.\nThe tail is usually not braided (although it is permitted), because it may cause the horse to carry the tail stiffly. Because the tail is an extension of the animal's spine, a supple tail is desirable as it shows that the horse is supple through its back. The tail should be \"banged\", or cut straight across (usually above the fetlocks but below the hocks when held at the point where the horse naturally carries it). The dock is pulled or trimmed to shape it and give the horse a cleaner appearance.\nThe bridle path is clipped or pulled, usually only 1\u20132\u00a0inches. The animal's coat may be trimmed. American stables almost always trim the muzzle, face, ears, and legs, while European stables do not have such a strict tradition and may leave different parts untrimmed.\nClear hoof polish may be applied before the horse enters the arena. The horse is thoroughly clean. The horse's saliva often forms \"foam\" about the horse's lips, which is generally considered to be a sign of the horse's submission and acceptance of the bit. Some riders believe that foam should not be cleaned off the horse's mouth before entering the arena due to it being a sign of submission. Conversely, some riders choose to wipe the foam from their horses' mouths prior to entering the arena, as foam can land on the horses' chests and legs. The presence of foam does not necessarily indicate the horse's acceptance of the bit, as certain metals such as German silver may cause the horse's salivation to increase without full acceptance of the bit.\nQuarter marks are sometimes seen, especially in the dressage phase of eventing. However, they are currently considered somewhat old-fashioned.\nThe turnout of a dressage horse is not taken into consideration in the marking of a test.\nRider / horse attire.\nDressage riders, like their horses, are dressed for formality. In competition, they wear white, cream or pale-coloured breeches, often full-seat leather to help them \"stick\" in the saddle, with a white shirt and stock tie with a small pin. Gloves are usually white, although less-experienced riders or those at the lower levels often opt for black, as white gloves tend to accentuate the movement of a less-experienced rider's unsteady hands. The coat worn is usually solid black with metal buttons, although solid navy is also seen. In upper-level classes, the riders wear a tailed jacket (shadbelly) with a yellow vest or vest points instead of a plain dressage coat.\nRiders usually wear tall dress boots, although field boots or paddock boots with half chaps may be worn by riders at the lower levels. Spurs are required at the upper levels, and riders must maintain a steady lower leg for proper use. A whip may be carried in any competition except in a CDI or a national championship, and the length is regulated. Whips are not permitted in eventing dressage when entering space around arena or during the test for FEI events. Whips (no longer than 120\u00a0cm) are permitted in eventing dressage at any time for USEA tests, except USEF/USEA Championships and USEA Championship divisions.\nIf the dressage rider has long hair, it is typically worn in a bun with a hair net or show bow. A hair net blends in with the rider's hair color, whereas a show bow combines a barrette or hair tie with a small bow and thick hair net, and is usually black. Lower-level riders may use a derby, hunting cap, or ASTM/SEI-approved Equestrian helmet. In the United States, junior riders and riders through Fourth Level at recognized competitions are required to wear an ASTM/SEI approved helmet to protect against head trauma in the event of a fall. At the upper levels, a top hat that matches the rider's coat is traditionally worn, though use of helmets is legal and increasing in popularity.\nAt FEI competitions, members of the military, police, national studs, national schools and national institutes retain the right to wear their service dress instead of the dress required of civilian riders.\nPara-dressage.\nPara-dressage is dressage for disabled people. It is a Paralympic sport since 1996.\nCruelty to animals.\nThe International Federation for Equestrian Sports (F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Equestre Internationale, FEI) Code of Conduct for the Welfare of the Horse states that \"Training methods: Horses... must not be subjected to methods which are abusive or cause fear.\"\n The FEI is sensitive to public perception of cruelty to animals. Their recently enacted Equine Ethics and Wellbeing Commission published https:// to promote ethical and evidence-based equestrianism. The FEI has banned hyperflexion of horse\u2019s neck, the Rollkur technique, but a July 2014 article in the Guardian notes that it was still in use. \nEquestrian journalist and horse welfare activist Julie Taylor has argued for equestrian dressage to be dropped from the Olympics. The ban on star UK rider Charlotte Dujardin before the Paris Olympics in July 2024 raised the public awareness on the welfare of dressage horses.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48930", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48930", "title": "Dutch Reformed church", "text": ""}
{"id": "48931", "revid": "50892377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48931", "title": "Eventing", "text": "Equestrian triathlon\nEventing (also known as three-day eventing or horse trials) is an equestrian event where the same horse and rider combination compete against other competitors across the three disciplines of dressage, cross-country, and show jumping. This event has its roots in a comprehensive cavalry test that required mastery of several types of riding. The competition may be run as a one-day event (ODE), where all three events are completed in one day (dressage, followed by show jumping and then the cross-country phase) or a three-day event (3DE), which is more commonly now run over four days, with dressage on the first two days, followed by cross-country the next day and then show jumping in reverse order on the final day. Eventing was previously known as Combined Training, and the name persists in many smaller organizations. The term \"Combined Training\" is sometimes confused with the term \"Combined Test\", which refers to a combination of just two of the phases, most commonly dressage and show jumping.\nPhases.\nEventing is an equestrian triathlon, in that it combines three different disciplines in one competition set out over one, two, or three days, depending on the length of courses and number of entries. Eventing contains a total of 3 phases.\nThis sport follows a similar format in Australia, Canada, Ireland, United Kingdom, and the United States. It is recognized internationally by the FEI.\nDressage.\nThe dressage phase (held first) consists of an exact sequence of movements ridden in an enclosed arena (20\u00d760\u00a0m for International 3DE but usually 20\u00d740\u00a0m for ODE). The test is judged by one or more judges, who are looking for balance, rhythm, suppleness, and most importantly, the cooperation between the horse and rider. The challenge is to demonstrate that a supremely fit horse, capable of completing the cross-country phase on time, also has the training to perform in a graceful, relaxed, and precise manner. Dressage work is the basis of all the other phases and disciplines within the sport of eventing because it develops the strength and balance that allow a horse to go cross-country and show jump competently.\nAt the highest level of competition, the dressage test is roughly equivalent to the United States Dressage Federation Third Level and may ask for half-pass at trot, shoulder-in, travers, collected, medium and extended gaits, single flying changes, and counter-canter. The tests may \"not\" ask for Grand Prix movements such as piaffe, canter pirouette, or passage.\nEach movement in the test is scored on a scale from 0 to 10, with a score of \"10\" being the highest possible mark and with the total maximum score for the test varying depending on the level of competition and the number of movements. A score of 10 is very rare. Therefore, if one movement is poorly executed, it is still possible for the rider to get a good overall score if the remaining movements are very well executed. The marks are added together and any errors of course deducted. To convert this score to penalty points, the average marks of all judges are converted to a percentage of the maximum possible score, subtracted from 100 and the multiplied by a co-efficient decided by the governing body. \nCross-country.\nThe next phase, cross-country, requires both horse and rider to be in excellent physical shape and to be brave and trusting of each other. This phase consists of approximately 12\u201320 fences (lower levels), or 30\u201340 at the higher levels, placed on a long outdoor circuit. These fences consist of very solidly built natural objects (logs, stone walls, etc.) as well as various obstacles such as ponds and streams, ditches, drops and banks, and combinations including several jumping efforts based on objects that would commonly occur in the countryside. Sometimes, particularly at higher levels, fences are designed that would not normally occur in nature. However, these are still designed to be as solid as more natural obstacles. Safety regulations mean that some obstacles are now being built with a \"frangible pin system\", allowing part or all of the jump to collapse if hit with enough impact. Speed is also a factor, with the rider required to cross the finish line within a certain time frame (optimum time). Crossing the finish line after the optimum time results in penalties for each second over. Riders are usually allowed to wear a stopwatch to enable them to monitor their progress against the optimum time. At lower levels, there is also a speed fault time, where penalties are incurred for horse and rider pairs completing the course too quickly (riders who are judged to be deliberately slowing down e.g. trotting between fences to avoid penalties for going too fast can be eliminated). For every \"disobedience\" (refusal or run-out of a jump) a horse and rider incur on course, penalties will be added to their dressage score. After four disobediences altogether or three disobediences at one fence the pair is eliminated, meaning they can no longer participate in the competition. A horse and rider pair can also be eliminated for going off course, for example missing a fence. If the horses shoulder and hind-quarter touch the ground, mandatory retirement is taken and they are not allowed to participate further in the competition. If the rider falls off the horse they are eliminated. However, in the US this rule is currently being revised for the Novice level and below. The penalties for disobediences on cross-country are weighted severely relative to the other phases of competition to emphasize the importance of courage, endurance, and athleticism. Fitness is required as the time allowed will require a strong canter at the lower levels, all the way to a strong gallop at the higher events.\nIn recent years, a controversy has developed between supporters of short and long format three-day events. Traditionally, three-day events had dressage, endurance, and show jumping. Endurance day consisted of 4 phases: A, B, C and D. Phases A and C were roads and tracks, with A being a medium-paced warm up to prepare the horse and rider for Phase B, a steeplechase format at an extremely fast pace over steeplechase-style fences. Phase C was a slow-paced cool down coming off of phase B, in preparation for the toughest and most demanding phase, D, or cross-country. Before embarking on phase D, in the \"ten-minute box\", horses had to be approved to continue by a vet, who monitored their temperature and heart rate, ensuring that the horse was sound and fit.\nThree day events are now offered in the classic format, with endurance day, or short-format, with no steeplechase (phase B) or roads and tracks (phases A and C). The 2004 Olympic Summer Games in Athens, Greece chose the short format, due to lack of facilities, time and financing, which sparked a large debate in the eventing community whether to keep the steeplechase phase or just offer cross-country. Today, most events are run short-format. In the United States the \"classic format\" remains a popular option for the Novice, and Training levels of competition at select events.\nIn 2008, the rules regarding safety in the sport were changed. One change stated that a fall anywhere during the cross-country phase resulted in elimination, even if the rider was galloping on course and not approaching a jump, or in the middle of a combination.\nTypes of obstacles.\nA combination is always considered one obstacle, and the various elements within the combination are lettered \"A\", \"B\", \"C\", and so on. In cross-country, the rider need only retake the element they refused rather than the whole complex. So a refusal at element B does not require them to jump A again. However, they have the option of retaking the previous elements if they wish. For example, in a bounce type obstacle it may be physically impossible to approach B without first clearing A. Yet for some in and outs, you can go to B and not have to rejump A.\nMany cross-country obstacles have several possible routes to take (for example, at obstacle 5 there may be 2 A, 2 B, and 2 C elements), with one route usually being faster but requiring a more skillful ride or more physical effort from the horse. A rider may take any of the possible routes as long as they pass over each letter once. Additionally, after a refusal, they may jump a different obstacle of the same letter in place of the original.\nA refusal at A is a first refusal, and would receive 20 penalties. Whether the rider retakes A or not, a subsequent refusal at B is a second refusal and so on. Three refusals at any one obstacle results in elimination, as does 4 refusals on the entire course.\nTen Minute Box.\nThe \"Ten Minute Box\" is a compulsory halt included during the cross-country section of a three-day event after the roads and tracks and steeplechase phases and before the \"pure\" cross-country jumping phase. It is a pause designed to allow the horse time to cool off, rest and stabilize its vitals and ensure that it is prepared for the \"pure\" cross-country phase. In the Ten Minute Box, riders and assistants will cool the horse down, walk the horse around and check tack and studs and a veterinarian will inspect the horse - including checking its heart and respiration rates - to determine if it is fit to compete in the final \"pure\" cross-country phase.\nShow jumping.\nStadium or show jumping is the final phase of eventing competition and tests the technical jumping skills of the horse and rider, including suppleness, obedience, fitness, and athleticism. In this phase, 12\u201320 fences are set up in a ring. These fences are typically brightly colored and consist of elements that can be knocked down, unlike cross-country obstacles. This phase is also timed, with penalties being given for every second over the required time. In addition to normal jumping skills, eventing show jumping tests the fitness and stamina of the horse and rider, generally being held after the cross-country phase in higher level and international events.\nScoring.\nAn obstacle is defined as having been knocked down if any part of its height is lowered. It is therefore possible to knock out a pole below the top pole and receive no penalties, as long as the highest pole stays in place, so that the jump retains the same height. It does count as a knockdown if the highest pole falls out of one jump cup but remains in the other; although part of the pole remains at the original height, the other part is lowered.\nThe winner is the horse and rider with the fewest penalties. Awards are usually presented while mounted, before the placed riders take a lap of honor around the arena.\nHistory.\nOlympic beginning.\nEventing competition that resembles the current three-day were first held in 1902, at the Championnat du Cheval d'Armes in France, and was introduced into the Olympic Games starting 1912 in Stockholm, Sweden. Dressage originally demonstrated the horse's ability to perform on the parade ground, where elegance and obedience were key. Cross-country began as a test of stamina, courage, and bravery over difficult terrain, important for a charger on long marches or if the horse was asked to carry a dispatch across country. The show jumping phase sought to prove the horse's continuing soundness and fitness after the difficult cross-country day.\nThe Olympic eventing competition was originally open only to male military officers in active duty, mounted only on military charges. In 1924, the event was open to male civilians, although non-commissioned Army officers could not participate in the Olympics until 1956. Women were first allowed to take part in 1964; equestrian sports are one of the few Olympic sports in which men and women compete against one another.\nFormat.\nThe original format, used in the 1912 Olympics, was spread over several days:\nThe Paris Games in 1924 introduced a format very similar to the one of today: with day 1 dressage, day 2 the endurance test, and day 3 the jumping test. The endurance test has changed the most since that time. Originally, bonus points could be earned for a fast ride cross-country (less than the optimum time). This helped competitors make up for a poor dressage ride, with a clean, fast cross-country ride. This system, however, was dropped in 1971. The format for the endurance test occurred as below:\nIn 1963, the 10-minute halt was introduced, to occur after the completion of phases A, B, and C. It took place in a marked out area (the 10-minute box), where the horse was checked by two judges and one veterinary official who would make sure the horse was fit to continue onto phase D. If the horse was unfit, the panel would pull it from the competition.\nThe format of the sport underwent major changes in 2004 and 2005, with the creation of the \"short\" or \"modified format\", which excluded phases A, B, and C from endurance day. The primary reason for excluding these phases was that the Olympic Committee was considering dropping the sport of eventing from the Olympics because of the cost and large area required for the speed and endurance phase with a steeplechase course and several miles of roads-and-tracks. To prevent the elimination of the sport from the Olympics program, the \"short format\" was developed by the FEI. The last Olympic Games that included the long, or \"classic\", three-day format was the 2000 Summer Games in Sydney, while Rolex Kentucky, the Badminton Horse Trials, and Burghley Horse Trials ran their last long format three-day in 2005. The short format is now the standard for international competition, such as the Olympics and World Equestrian Games.\nThe change in format has brought about controversy. Some riders support the continuation of the classic format, believing it is the \"true test of horse and rider\". Others believe the classic format is superior because it teaches horsemanship, due to the extra preparation needed to condition the horse and the care required after the several miles of endurance day. However, others prefer the short format, as they believe it saves wear-and-tear on their horses and allows the horse not only to compete in more three-day events each season, but decreases the chance of injury to the horse. However, this claim has not held true in several recent studies that compared injuries sustained in classic and in short format competitions over equivalent courses. Further, some research indicates that horses are more stressed by the short format than by the careful warm-up inherent in the classic format. Regardless, many upper-level riders prepare their horses for the short format using the same conditioning and training as for the long format. The short format has also been widely urged by breeders of heavier, warmblood-type horses. The long format has remained popular at the Novice and Training levels in the United States, and with riders who feel it maximizes horsemanship.\nVeterinary inspection, or \"trot up\"/\"horse inspection\".\nBefore the beginning of a three-day event, and also before the last phase, horses are inspected by a vet to ensure that they are fit to compete further. It is usually a formal affair, with well-groomed and braided horses, and nicely dressed riders. It is also a very nerve-wracking time, as the \"pass\" or \"fail\" determines whether the horse may continue with the competition. A vet can request that a horse be sent to the holding box, where it will then be re-assessed before being allowed to continue. In upper level FEI classes, a second veterinarian (often called the Associate FEI Veterinarian) may inspect horses sent to the hold box and make the decision to pass or fail a horse. This practice is in place so that no one veterinarian has complete power to eliminate a horse and allows for a large number of horses to be evaluated in a timely manner.\nIn lower levels of competition, the horse's movement may be analyzed as they finish the cross-country, where they will be asked to trot briefly after crossing the finishing line to satisfy the vet of their soundness.\nPenalty point system.\nIn 1971, the penalty point system was first introduced into eventing. This system converts the dressage score and all jump penalties on cross-country and show jumping into penalty points, with the horse and rider with the fewest points winning the event. Different weight is given for each phase, with the cross-country \u2014 the heart of eventing \u2014 being the most important, followed by the dressage and then the show jumping. The intended ratio of cross-country:dressage:show jumping is theoretically 12:3:1. Therefore, an error in cross-country counts heavily. This prevents horses that are simply good in dressage (for example) from winning the event with a poor cross-country test.\nIn 1971, the following penalty system was instituted:\nIn 1977, the dressage scoring was changed, with each movement marked out of ten rather than out of six. This increased the maximum number of dressage marks from 144 to 240. This number later increased to 250 marks in 1998, after additional movements were added. To keep the correct weight, a formula is used to convert good marks in dressage to penalty points. First, the marks of the judges (if there is more than one) are averaged. Then the raw mark is subtracted from the maximum points possible. This number is then multiplied by 0.6 to calculate the final penalty score.\nShow jumping rules were also changed in 1977, with a knock-down or a foot in the water awarded only 5 penalties rather than 10. This prevented the show jumping phase from carrying too much weight, again, to keep the ratio between the phases correct.\nCurrent scoring.\nThe dressage score is converted to a percentage and the penalty points calculated by subtracting the percentage from 100. This is rounded to 1 decimal digit.\nIn cross country, penalty points are awarded for jumping errors and for time. In the jumping, 20 penalty points are awarded for a first refusal at an obstacle and 40 penalty points for a second refusal (the rider is eliminated on their third refusal). Two refusals at different obstacles each attract 20 penalty points. If a horse jumps an obstacle, but the body of the horse does not pass completely between the flags, 15 penalty points are awarded, only if the horse would have cleared the obstacle's height had it been better positioned. If a horse activates an obstacle's frangible device, 11 penalty points are awarded.\nTime penalties are awarded for being too slow over the optimum time at a rate of 0.4 penalty points per second over this time up to the time limit (twice the optimum time) at which point the competitor is eliminated. Some national bodies implement a fastest time allowed for lower grades where more inexperienced riders compete. The fastest time allowed can range from 20 seconds to 45 seconds faster than the optimum time. Typically, penalty points are awarded at a rate of 1 per second faster than this time.\nIn the show jumping test, either knocking down of the obstacle or refusing to jump the obstacle attracts 4 penalty points. In the case of a knock, riders are permitted to continue to the next obstacle. However, if the obstacle was refused, it must be reattempted. A second refusal at the same obstacle results in elimination. Similarly to the cross country, time penalty points are awarded at a rate of 0.4 penalty points per second commenced over the optimum time.\nNon-Olympic competition.\nIn its early days, the sport was most popular in Britain, and the British gave the competition a new name, the \"Three-Day Event\", due to the three-day time span of the competition. In America, the sport was also called \"combined training\", due to the three different disciplines and types of training methods needed for the horse. In the United Kingdom, \"combined training\" competition includes only the dressage and show jumping phases.\nIn between a 'combined training' and a 'horse trial', there are also 'short courses'. Short courses consist of a dressage phase and a jumping phase. The jumping phase usually starts in the stadium ring with a fence leading out to a smaller field with some cross-country fences (not as many as in a horse trial's cross-country phase). The rider will then jump back into the stadium ring to finish his or her course.\nThe first annual, Olympic-level event developed was the Badminton Horse Trials, held each year in England. First held in 1949, the Badminton event was created after a poor performance by the British Eventing Team at the 1948 Olympic Games, with the purpose of being a high-class preparation event, and as extra exposure for the military horses, who very rarely had the chance to compete. Initially, only British riders were allowed to compete (although women were allowed, despite being banned from riding in the Olympics), but the competition is now an international open to all riders from around the world who have qualified for this level of competition. Along with Burghley and Kentucky, Badminton is one of the most prestigious events to win in the world. Currently, the Olympic event is considered a CCI****, a rank lower than Badminton which is a CCI*****.\nThe second three-day competition to be held at Olympic level each year was the Burghley Horse Trials, first held in 1961. Burghley is the longest running international event.\nThe first CCI held outside of Britain on an annual basis is the Rolex Kentucky Three Day, held each year in Lexington since 1978.\nImportance of dressage training.\nIn the early years, the dressage phase was fairly inconsequential in determining the final standings. It was quite possible for a horse to have a terrible dressage test, then run a clean cross-country and show jumping, and still finish near the top of the standings. Since then, correct dressage training has become increasingly important should a horse and rider wish to be placed (complete all sections and finish in the top 12). This can be traced back to Sheila Willcox, who took a particular interest in dressage, becoming abundantly clear when she won Badminton three years running in the 1950s. She had a strong influence on Mary King and Lucinda Green amongst others.\nAfter the 2000 Olympic Games, the FEI hired British eventer and dressage rider Christopher Bartle to write new dressage tests for the upper-level events, which would include a greater deal of collection. This has since raised the standard even further in the dressage phase.\nAdditionally, the cross-country phase has become more technical, asking the horse to be adjustable and supple through combinations. A horse can no longer just be brave and athletic but must have a good deal of dressage training should his rider wish to successfully negotiate odd distances or bending lines at a gallop. Also, in show jumping, a horse is asked to move with impulsion and engagement; this makes the jump more fluent, brings the horse to bascule more correctly, and is less jarring for both horse and rider.\nSafety.\nBetween 1997 and December 2008, at least 37 eventing riders died as a result of injuries incurred while competing in the cross-country phase of eventing at national or international level or at Pony Club. Of these, 18 riders died in the period 2006\u20132008. These 37 fatal falls have been at all levels of the sport, from domestic one-day events up to regional championships level, and they have occurred in most of the recognized eventing countries around the world, with concentrations in the United Kingdom (14) and the United States (8). At least 25 of these 37 deaths have resulted from a somersaulting (rotational) fall of the horse, with 11 of the 16 deaths in 2007 and 2008 being reported as having resulted from rotational falls.\u00a0 The FEI reports that horse falls happen at a rate of 1 per every 63 starters on cross country, with rotating falls happening once in every 572 starters.\nInformation about horse fatalities is difficult to locate, but at least 19 eventing horses, many of them top-level performers, died in 2007 and 2008.\u00a0\nOver time, course design has become increasingly more focused on the safety of the horse and rider. The layout of the course and the build of the obstacles encourage the horse to have a successful run. This includes greater use of precision fences, such as corners and \"skinny jumps\", that are very good tests of the rider's ability and the horse's training but allow the horse to simply run around the jump if the rider misjudges it. Safety measures such as filling in the area between corner-shaped jumps on cross-country or rails of a fence help prevent the entrapment of the legs of the horse decrease the number of serious falls or injuries.\nThe newest improvement in cross-country safety is the \"frangible\" fence, which uses a pin and other techniques which allow the fence to \"break or fall\" in a controlled manner to minimize the risk of injury to horse and rider. This can help to prevent the most dangerous situation on cross-country, when the horse hits a solid fence between the forearm and chest, and somersaults over (rotational fall), sometimes falling on the rider. This type of fall has caused the deaths of several riders and horses.\nRules protecting riders have improved as well. Riders are now required to wear a safety vest (body protector) during cross-country, as well as an ASTM/SEI or ISO approved equestrian helmet equipped with a retention harness, which must be fastened while on the horse. Eventing was one of the first sports to require the use of a helmet with harness when jumping. As of 2010, more riders were wearing air bag vests, which automatically inflate if a rider falls off the horse.\nWeight rule.\nFrom the beginning, event horses had to carry a minimum weight of (including rider and saddle) during the endurance test, since military horses were expected to be able to carry such weight. Lead weights were carried on the saddle, and the competitor had to be weighed-in with tack immediately following cross-country. The weight was reduced to for the 1996 Olympic Games, after a study demonstrated that both the horse's arc over a fence became shallower and the leading leg took a great deal of extra force on landing when the horse was carrying dead weight than when free from the burden. The rule was eventually abolished January 1, 1998. By removing this rule, the stress on the joints and soft-tissue, as well as the chance of a fall, were decreased.\nInternational competition.\nInternational events have specific categories and levels of competition and are conducted under the rules of the FEI. CCI (Concours Complet International, or International Complete Contest) is one such category and defines a three-day event that is open to competitors from any foreign nation as well as the host nation.\nThe levels of international events are identified by the number of stars next to the category; there are four levels in total. A CCI* is for horses that are just being introduced to international competition. A CCI** is geared for horses that have some experience of international competition. CCI*** is the advanced level of competition.\nThe very highest level of competition is the CCI****, and with only seven such competitions in the world (Badminton, Burghley, Kentucky, Adelaide, Luhmuhlen Horse Trials, Maryland 5 Star at Fair Hill and the Stars of Pau). The World Championships are also considered CCI****. Rolex offers a financial prize for any rider who can win three of the biggest competitions in succession. These are Badminton, Burghley and Kentucky. So far, Pippa Funnell (Great Britain) and Michael Jung (Germany) are the only riders to do this. Andrew Hoy did come close, however, and in 2010 Oliver Townend was competing for this coveted \"Grand Slam\" at Rolex Kentucky when he suffered a fall at obstacle #20 which eliminated him from competition.\nOne, two and three-star competitions are roughly comparable to the Novice, Intermediate and Advanced levels of British domestic competition, respectively, and to the Preliminary, Intermediate, and Advanced levels of American domestic competition, respectively.\nFollowing the 2016 Olympic Games in Rio, the IOC approached the FEI insisting on modifications to the existing format yet again for eventing to maintain its status as an Olympic discipline. \"There was a lot of pressure from the Olympic Committee to make it more spectator friendly, to make it cheaper, and we definitely had to have more [countries represented],\" said Marilyn Payne, a member of the FEI Eventing Committee.\nAt the 2016 FEI General Assembly, the FEI voted in favor of several proposed format changes for the Olympic Games that would make it both easier for more countries to participate and easier for spectators to understand. Those changes include limiting nations to teams of three with no drop score and changing the level of competition to (current) four-star dressage and show jumping with a 10-minute, 45-effort cross-country course at the (current) three-star level of difficulty.\nHence, with Olympic cross-country now designated at the (current) three-star level of difficulty, more riders from more nations will have the opportunity to qualify. Payne added, \"By having five stars, the one-star will now be below what the one-star was and very close to our Modified level. That's intended to create a pipeline to let developing countries in eventing hold competitions and get riders competent at that level so they can naturally progress to the higher levels. Plus, the more countries who participate, the more spectators who will watch.\"\n\"Ultimately it's all about risk management and trying to make the sport safer,\" Payne concluded.\nWhile the 2017 FEI General Assembly proposed the rule change that would implement the new five-star system, there were still plenty of details to iron out. The FEI elected to not put the new star system into place until 2019, giving them 2018 to refine the language of the new system. However, the new international Introductory level, which will become the new CCI* level and is roughly equivalent to the Modified level, was introduced in 2018.\nNational competition.\nEventing rules and the recognized levels in various nations are similar, but not always identical. While rules usually follow the FEI to some degree, history and tradition of various nations has also influenced competition rules within a given country.\nIn addition to recognized events that prepare the best riders for international competition, many nations also offer eventing for beginner, youth, and amateur riders through organizations such as Pony Club, 4-H or other riding clubs, where most riders begin their competitive careers. At the most elementary levels, fence heights begin at around 18\u00a0inches to .\nAustralia.\nIn Australia, where Equestrian Australia governs eventing competition, the levels are as follows:\nThe Sydney International Three Day Event is a main qualification event in New South Wales, Australia for eventing in Australia.\nCanada.\nThe Canadian levels, under the rules of Equine Canada, are as follows:\nIreland.\nThe Irish levels, governed by Eventing Ireland are as follows:\nSouth Africa.\nThe South African national levels, governed by Eventing South Africa, are as follows:\nUnited Kingdom.\nBritish Eventing (BE) levels of eventing are as follows:\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, eventing is broken down into the following levels, all of which are recognized by the United States Eventing Association (USEA) and are run in accordance with the rules of US Equestrian (USEF) the governing body for equestrian sports in the United States:\nIt is also common to see inter-levels (such as the Intermediate/Preliminary, or IP), which help riders transition between levels by using the dressage and show jumping tests of the higher level and the cross-country course of the lower, and starter levels, which use the dressage test and stadium course standards of the lower CT levels (e.g., Amoeba, Tadpole, Green as Grass) with a very simple cross-country course. However, the starter levels are considered \"test\" levels and thus do not have a consistent standard (or a national points system and leaderboard).\nThere are also unrecognized shows held in the United States. The following are the two unrecognized levels:\n-Elementary: X-C fences 2\u00a0ft 3 inches (0.61 m), 12-14 efforts, no ditches, no drops, not timed, Stadium fences 2\u00a0ft 3 inches, 8 efforts\n- Intro: X-C fences 18inches- 2\u00a0ft, 8-12 efforts, no ditches, not timed, Stadium fences 18inches- 2\u00a0ft, 7-9 efforts https://useventing.com/news-media/podcasts/unrecognized-events-an-eventing-pipeline\nHorse.\nThoroughbreds and part-Thoroughbreds currently dominate the sport at the top levels because of their stamina and athletic ability. In addition, many warmbloods and warmblood-thoroughbred crosses also do well. In the UK, Irish sport horses have been popular for many years.\nBecause larger horses are favored, animals with some draft horse breeding are also seen, notably the Irish Draught and Clydesdale crossbreds. However, smaller horses can also excel; for example, the third place competitor in the 2007 Rolex Kentucky Three Day CCI competition was Theodore O'Connor, a \u00a0hands gelding that was a cross of Thoroughbred, Arabian and Shetland pony breeding.\nAn event horse must be very responsive to succeed, as a horse that will not listen to a rider on the cross-country phase may end up taking a fall at a jump. The horse should be calm and submissive for the dressage phase, with good training on the flat. For cross-country, the horse must be brave, athletic, and (especially at the higher levels) fast with a good galloping stride and great stamina. The horse does not have to possess perfect jumping form, but should be safe over fences and have good scope. Scope is a broad term used to describe a horse's potential to jump big jumps. The best event horses are careful over jumps, as those who are not tend to have stadium rails knocked down on the last day. The horse also needs to have sound conformation and good feet.\nRiding attire.\nRiding attire is different in each of the three phases. Dressage and show jumping feature the traditional turnout for each of those disciplines, requiring conservative attire. However, as of 2017 lower level divisions in the United States allow for more flexibility in the rider's attire. Cross-country attire and equipment emphasizes and requires safety protocols be followed, but has less formal appearance, with many riders wearing clothing of personalized, often bright colors. Under FEI rules, civilian riders may opt to wear the uniform of their riding club, and members of the military and national studs are required to wear service dress in the dressage and show jumping phases.\nDressage.\nFor the intermediate and advanced levels, riders usually wear dressage attire similar to that of Grand Prix Dressage, including a top hat and white riding breeches. However, even at the most senior levels (e.g., the World Equestrian Games, the Olympics, and CCI****) FEI dress requirements are less strict, requiring only \"hunting dress\"; a white shirt and a tie of any kind; gloves of any colour; white, fawn, or cream breeches; and riding boots of any colour. The wearing of shadbelly or other tailcoat jackets is not compulsory in the dressage phase.\nRules at non-FEI competition vary. In the US, formal attire is not required if all phases run in one day or for the lower levels. Though navy and black coats are the preferred traditional style, riders may wear any conservatively colored dark or tweed hunting coat with a white shirt and choker or, preferably, a stock tie with pin. If a rider wishes to stay within traditional requirements for higher-level competition, breeches should be white, fawn, or cream. A black or navy hunt cap or derby hat may be worn, although many riders use an equestrian helmet, which are considered safer. Some organizations, such as the British Horse Society and USEF consider helmets to be compulsory.\nBoots may be field or dress style, black or brown in color. Gloves and spurs give a polished appearance but are not required at lower levels. Dressage gloves are traditionally white, although other colors are permitted. Spurs, when worn, are restricted to certain lengths and types. \nCross-country.\n The rider is required to wear a body protector vest, an approved equestrian helmet which must be properly fastened at all times when jumping, and a medical armband, containing the rider's medical history, allowing access to the information should the rider fall, be knocked unconscious, and require medical treatment.\nFEI rules allow riders to dress as they please in the cross-country phase. Light-weight rugby or polo shirts are the most commonly worn shirt style, usually without a stock or tie. Riding coats are generally not worn. Many riders wear a stop-watch to track their time so that they may adjust their speed to come in as close as possible to the optimum time.\nShow jumping.\nEventing riders tend to follow the dress practices of showjumpers in the show jumping phase. However, FEI rules only require \"hunting dress\"; white shirt and tie of any kind; white, fawn, or cream breeches; and boots of any kind.\nIn most nations' nationally sanctioned competitions, and often even at lower levels, a protective equestrian helmet with harness is required, and a short hunt coat is traditional, except when weather is unreasonably warm, when, at the discretion of the technical delegate, jackets may be considered optional. If helmet covers are used, they are required to be black or dark blue though some now include national colors where they are entitled to be worn.\nTurnout of the horse and tack.\nTurnout and grooming.\nEvent horses are turned out similarly to dressage horses, with the legs and face (muzzle, jaw, sides of ears, bridle path) neatly clipped. The tail is usually \"banged\" (cut straight across), usually to a length between the fetlock joint and lower hock. Additionally, most event riders clip the sides of their mount's tails, to give them a finer appearance. Braiding of tails is fairly uncommon, probably because the tail can not be braided if the hairs along the sides of the dock are clipped.\nThe mane is pulled to about in length and is usually braided for dressage as well as the show jumping phase. However, most riders prefer to leave it loose for cross-country in case they need to grab it for security. Some riders also place quarter marks (decorative stenciling) on the hindquarters.\nTack.\nMost event riders have a jumping saddle as well as a dressage saddle since each places them in a position better-suited for its purpose. At the lower levels, however, a rider can ride all three phases without difficulty in a well-fitted jumping saddle. At the upper levels, riders usually have a saddle specifically designed for cross-country, giving them more freedom for such fences as banks and drops.\nDressage tack is usually black in color, with a white square pad, giving a formal look. Except for the upper levels, where a double bridle is permitted, horses may only be ridden in snaffle bits. There are strict guidelines as to what type of snaffle may be used, and the more severe types (such as any twisted bit) are prohibited. If a double bridle is used, a plain cavesson or crank noseband must be worn. With a snaffle bridle, the rider is also free to use the drop, flash, or grackle noseband, with the flash and plain cavesson being the most common. Breastplates are also fairly common in dressage at an event, despite the fact that they are not seen at regular dressage shows. Other forms of equipment, such as martingales, protective boots, gadgets/training devices, bit guards, exercise bandages, or tail wraps, are not allowed during the test.\nIn show jumping, the rider uses a jumping saddle, usually with a square or fitted white pad. Rules on tack are less-stringent, and most forms of bridling and bitting are allowed, including the use of gag bits, hackamores, and any type of noseband. Breastplates and open front boots are usually worn. Running martingales are also allowed, but must be used with rein stops. Standing and Irish martingales are not allowed.\nFor the cross-country phase, the rider usually uses similar tack as for the show jumping. However, cross-country boots are used for extra protection, to help prevent injury if they were to hit the solid obstacles. Most horses that wear shoes are also fitted with horse shoe studs, to prevent slipping. At the upper levels, riders may also apply a grease or lard to the front of the horse's legs, to help the horse slide over fences if they hang a leg. Riders also tend to color-coordinate their cross-country tack to their colors. For example, using the same color saddle pad and tape for their boots, to match their shirt and protective vest.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48933", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48933", "title": "American Correctional Association", "text": "Private non-profit trade association\nThe American Correctional Association (ACA; called the National Prison Association before 1954) is a private, non-profit, non-governmental trade association and accrediting body for the corrections industry, the oldest and largest such association in the world. The organization was founded in 1870 and has a significant place in the history of prison reform in the U.S.\nACA accredits over 900 prisons, jails, community residential centers (halfway houses), and various other corrections facilities in the U.S. and internationally, using their independently published standards manuals. Approximately 80 percent of all U.S. state departments of corrections and youth services are active participants. Also included are programs and facilities operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons and the private sector.\nShane Bauer of \"Mother Jones\" wrote that the ACA functions as \"the closest thing [the United States has] to a national regulatory body for prisons\" in addition to being the American correctional industry's trade association. According to their website, the ACA has more than 5,000 members.\nHistory.\nThe ACA was founded under the name National Prison Association. The driving creative force was Enoch Cobb Wines, a minister and reformer who organized an 1870 congress in Cleveland, hoping to introduce the principles of the progressive New York Prison Association to a national stage. Former U.S. President Rutherford B. Hayes served as the organization's first president in 1883. Hayes \"missed no opportunity to speak with well-informed sincerity about more effective and more humane ways of dealing with offenders\". He remained president until his death ten years later.\nRoeliff Brinkerhoff, an Ohio publisher, political figure, and frequent Hayes ally, succeeded Hayes as the association president. For the next twenty years, Brinkerhoff used the NPA as a platform to pursue basic correctional reforms such as the separation of state and federal prison systems, and the idea of parole, then a relatively new concept. With Brinkerhoff's influence, the state of Ohio passed a state parole law in 1885, the nation's first.\nThe organization's name was officially changed in 1954 to more accurately reflect the organization's philosophy and scope.\nACA began exploring the feasibility of accrediting its members in the 1960s, funded in part by a sizable 1969 grant from the Ford Foundation. In May 1974, the ACA created its \"Commission on Accreditation for Corrections\" in a meeting chaired by Walter Dunbar, a New York corrections figure known for his spokesman role at the Attica Prison riot. (The ACA maintains an annual achievement award in his honor.) In 1979, the Vienna Correctional Center, operated by the Illinois Department of Corrections, became the first accredited adult correctional institution.\nIn 2011, ACA began to branch out, and it audited the first detention facilities outside of the U.S. or Canada. In January 2012 four Mexican facilities became accredited by ACA, using their Core International Standards manual.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021, ACA received a $99,540 grant from Pfizer to promote uptake of their COVID-19 vaccine.\nConferences.\nACA hosts bi-annual conferences in different cities around the U.S. The first conference is the \"ACA Winter Conference\" with the year included in the title before ACA. It holds its second annual conference, the Congress of Correction, during the summer. Notable speakers at ACA conferences have included Jelly Roll Misty Copeland General Richard Myers, Congressman Danny Davis, presidential campaign director Donna Brazile, presidential candidate and commentator Pat Buchanan, covert CIA agent Valerie Plame and her husband, Ambassador Joseph Wilson, TV anchor Laurie Dhue, political analyst Charlie Cook, and Rear Admiral Boris Lushniak.\nE.R. Cass Award.\nThe American Correctional Association bestows the E.R. Cass Correctional Achievement Award every year for \"service above self and above and beyond the call of duty.\"\nControversies.\nValue of accreditation.\nIn 1982, a 72-year-old senior judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, Judge David L. Bazelon, resigned from the governing panel of the ACA with a 21-page statement of criticism. Bazelon had three years remaining on his five-year term. He described its lack of transparency and accountability, its apparent willingness to bend to political influence, and its dual role as a trade group and accreditor. Bazelon pointed out the apparent conflict of interest, writing, \"How can the commission in good conscience represent itself as 'independent' and 'unbiased' while being financially dependent on the objects of its scrutiny?\"\nBazelon also pointed out that ACA inspection teams at the Menard Correctional Center in Illinois, for example, did not even contact U.S. District Court Judge James L. Foreman, who had found the medical care so poor as to violate the constitution, and did not contact Dr. Lambert King, the special master Judge Foreman had appointed in 1980 to oversee the mandated improvements before they filed their approving reports.\nLater critics have named several other institutions that retained their ACA accreditations while outside parties found grave violence and/or court-ordered reforms. These include:\nExecutives.\nChristopher B. Epps.\nOn November 5, 2014, Christopher B. Epps resigned from his position as ACA president, shortly before the announcement of his indictments on dozens of corruption charges. Epps had been identified by a federal investigation conducted by the United States District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi called Operation Mississippi Hustle. He'd taken $1.47million in kickbacks, from 16 corporations, for his role in awarding nearly $1billion worth of private prison contracts. Epps also resigned from his full-time job as Corrections Commissioner for the state of Mississippi on the same day.\nEpps pleaded guilty to money laundering and filing false tax returns. Many vendors were indicted, some pleaded guilty, one committed suicide, and eleven more suspects faced criminal bribery charges. The Assistant U.S. Attorney estimated the corruption's net benefit to prison contractors exceeded $65 million. Epps personally received at least the bribes for steering what Assistant U.S. Attorney Darren LaMarca had first estimated at $800million in contracts between 2006 and 2014. Presiding Federal judge, Henry Travillion Wingate heard the cases of the others who were charged with bribing Epps.\nIrb Benjamin was charged with bribery of Epps in connection with the contractual drug and alcohol treatment his company provided to MDOC prisons. Benjamin's indictment was announced on August 22, 2015. He was paid at least $862,000 to acquire and maintain ACA accreditation for jails in numerous counties. Passing ACA standards was required if they were to be awarded contracts to hold state prisoners.\nBenjamin had represented Alcorn County as a Democrat in the state House from 1976 to 1980 and state Senate from 1984 to 1992, later working for the Republican Lieutenant Governor. Alcorn County paid Benjamin, the president and lobbyist for Mississippi Correctional Management (MCM), $114,000 a year, although he lived more than 200 miles away. The Alcorn Board of Supervisors attorney said the supervisors had not been required to seek bids before giving Benjamin the contract as warden because it was a contract for services, which are exempt from bid laws.\nBenjamin had received $5,000 a month to handle accreditation by the American Correctional Association for Alcorn's Regional Correctional Facility, and he had received another $4,500 a month as the jail's warden. Benjamin had formed MCM in 1996, when the state Department of Corrections and counties started hiring private contractors to operate prisons and smaller regional jails. It operated the Grenada County jail for years. Benjamin said the company also has jail accreditation contracts worth $4,000 or $5,000 a month with other counties including Chickasaw, Hancock, Holmes, Marion, Pearl River, Washington, and Yazoo. Prior to that he worked as a $3,000-a-month jail consultant for DeSoto County.\nOn June 8, 2008, DeSoto County Board of Supervisors supervisors approved the contract saying, \"Mr. Benjamin was recommended by Commissioner Epps at the state level.\" On November 25, 2014, Benjamin said that he was not aware of the Epps recommendation.\nBenjamin pleaded guilty to federal charges on October 18, 2016. He faced 10 years in prison, plus a fine of up to $250,000. Federal presiding Judge Wingate sentenced Benjmain to 70 months in prison, fined Benjamin $100,000, and ordered him to forfeit $260,782.\nBenjamin, who said he was \"pressured\", estimated he had paid Epps between $180,000 and $225,000 in cash bribes to secure support for the regional jails. His plea covered bribes that had been paid for drug and alcohol rehabilitation programs that his company ran. LaMarca told Wingate, \"it's just a matter of time\" until others whom Benjamin informed upon are indicted.\nOn May 25, 2017, Epps received a federal prison sentence of almost 20 years. Judge Wingate, who had been appointed to the federal bench in 1985, said, \"This is the largest graft operation that certainly I have seen, and I have seen a lot.\" Wingate cited the burglary of his former Flowood home by Epps as the reason why he gave a sentence that was much longer than the 13-year sentence recommended by prosecutors.\nEpps is being held at the Federal Correctional Institution, Seagoville in Texas, near Dallas. He is due to be released on November 25, 2033.\nJames A. Gondles Jr..\nJames A. Gondles Jr. became the executive director of ACA in 1990, after serving as the sheriff of Arlington County, Virginia. Court records indicate a long history of suits and allegations of mistreating his staff. Gondles was accused of sexual harassment, \"acts of abuse of power\", fraternizing and having sex with female deputies, bullying top aides, and targeting Arlington County employees who supported his opponent during his 1987 campaign for sheriff. In 1988, while he was serving as Sheriff of Arlington County, the Citizens for Law and Constitution alleged that Gondles had performed \"acts of abuse and power\" as sheriff, such as bullying aides and bragging about having sex with female deputies. Also in 1988 Gondles settled a sexual harassment suit, brought by a female deputy, with a $25,000 payment and a public apology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48934", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48934", "title": "Lobbying", "text": "Efforts to affect public policy through direct government contact\nLobbying is a form of advocacy that legally attempts to influence legislators or government officials, such as members of regulatory agencies or the judiciary. Lobbying involves direct, face-to-face contact and is carried out by various entities, including individuals acting as voters, constituents, or private citizens, corporations pursuing their business interests, nonprofits and NGOs through advocacy groups to achieve their missions, and legislators or government officials influencing each other in legislative affairs.\nLobbying or certain practices that share commonalities with lobbying are sometimes referred to as government relations, or government affairs and sometimes legislative relations, or legislative affairs. It is also an industry known by many of the aforementioned names, and has a near-complete overlap with the public affairs industry. Lobbyists may fall into different categories: amateur lobbyists, such as individual voters or voter blocs within an electoral district; professional lobbyists who engage in lobbying as a business or profession; and government relations support staff who work on behalf of professional lobbyists but may not actively engage in direct influencing or face-to-face meetings with targeted individuals to the extent required for registration as lobbyists, operating within the same professional circles as registered lobbyists.\nProfessional lobbyists are people whose business is trying to influence legislation, regulation, or other government decisions, actions, or policies on behalf of a group or individual who hires them. Nonprofit organizations, advocacy groups, and volunteer coalitions may also engage in lobbying as part of their mission-related activities. Governments often define \"lobbying\" for legal purposes, and regulate organized group lobbying that has become influential. Requiring disclosure of financial expenditures, the identities of clients, and the specific issues being lobbied in order to promote transparency and limit potential conflicts of interest.\nHistory.\nIn pre-modern political systems, royal courts provided incidental opportunities for gaining the ear of monarchs and their councilors.\nEtymology.\nThat architectural sense of \"lobby\" is believed to originate from the medieval Latin \"lobia\" or \"lobium\", which refers to a gallery, hall, or portico. This architectural sense was later adopted to describe the practice of advocating or debating in such spaces.\nIn a report carried by the BBC, an OED lexicographer has shown that \"lobbying\" finds its roots in the gathering of Members of Parliament and peers in the hallways (\"lobbies\") of the United Kingdom Houses of Parliament before and after parliamentary debates where members of the public can meet their representatives.\nOne story held that the term originated at the Willard Hotel in Washington, D.C., where it was supposedly used by President Ulysses S. Grant to describe the political advocates who frequented the hotel's lobby to access Grant\u2014who was often there in the evenings to enjoy a cigar and brandy\u2014and then tried to buy the president drinks in an attempt to influence his political decisions. Although the term may have gained more widespread currency in Washington, D.C., by virtue of this practice during the Grant Administration, the OED cites numerous documented uses of the word well before Grant's presidency, including use in Pennsylvania as early as 1808.\nThe term \"lobbying\" also appeared in print as early as 1820:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Other letters from Washington affirm, that members of the Senate, when the compromise question was to be taken in the House, were not only \"lobbying about the Representatives' Chamber\" but also active in endeavoring to intimidate certain weak representatives by insulting threats to dissolve the Union.\u2014\u200a\nOverview.\nGovernments can define and regulate organized group lobbying as part of laws to prevent political corruption and by establishing transparency about possible influences by public lobby registers.\nLobby groups may concentrate their efforts on the legislatures, where laws are created, but may also use the judicial branch to advance their causes. The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, for example, filed suits in state and federal courts in the 1950s to challenge segregation laws. Their efforts resulted in the Supreme Court declaring such laws unconstitutional.\nLobbyists may use a legal device known as \"amicus curiae\" (lit.\u2009'friend of the court') briefs to try to influence court cases. Briefs are written documents filed with a court, typically by parties to a lawsuit. \"Amici curiae\" briefs are briefs filed by people or groups who are not parties to a suit. These briefs are entered into the court records and give additional background on the matter being decided upon. Advocacy groups use these briefs both to share their expertise and to promote their positions.\nThe lobbying industry is affected by the revolving door concept, a movement of personnel between roles as legislators and regulators and roles in the industries affected by legislation and regulation, as the main asset for a lobbyist is contacts with and influence on government officials. This climate is attractive for ex-government officials. It can also mean substantial monetary rewards for lobbying firms, and government projects and contracts worth in the hundreds of millions for those they represent.\nThe international standards for the regulation of lobbying were introduced at four international organizations and supranational associations: 1) the European Union; 2) the Council of Europe; 3) the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; 4) the Commonwealth of Independent States.\nMethods.\nIn 2013, the director general of the World Health Organization, Margaret Chan, illustrated the methods used in lobbying against public health:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Efforts to prevent noncommunicable diseases go against the business interests of powerful economic operators. In my view, this is one of the biggest challenges facing health promotion. [...] it is not just Big Tobacco anymore. Public health must also contend with Big Food, Big Soda, and Big Alcohol. All of these industries fear regulation, and protect themselves by using the same tactics. Research has documented these tactics well. They include front groups, lobbies, promises of self-regulation, lawsuits, and industry-funded research that confuses the evidence and keeps the public in doubt. Tactics also include gifts, grants, and contributions to worthy causes that cast these industries as respectable corporate citizens in the eyes of politicians and the public. They include arguments that place the responsibility for harm to health on individuals, and portray government actions as interference in personal liberties and free choice. This is formidable opposition. [...] When industry is involved in policy-making, rest assured that the most effective control measures will be downplayed or left out entirely. This, too, is well-documented, and dangerous. In the view of WHO, the formulation of health policies must be protected from distortion by commercial or vested interests.\nLobbying can be categorized as inside lobbying, which directly interacts with decision-makers, or outside lobbying, which pressures decision-makers through mobilization of public opinion.\nEffects.\nAccording to a 2025 review of research on lobbying, three effects of lobbying have been documented in the academic literature: First, in line with public suspicions, lobbyists have transactional relationships with public officials in which they exchange money for political access and influence. Second, lobbyists persuade public officials by providing information that changes the positions taken by policymakers. Third, successful mobilization of citizen support or lobbying coalitions helps lobbyists attain policy aims. \nCriticism.\nThe ethics and morals involved with legally lobbying or influence peddling are controversial. Lobbying can, at times, be spoken of with contempt, when the implication is that people with inordinate socioeconomic power are corrupting the law in order to serve their own interests. When people who have a duty to act on behalf of others, such as elected officials with a duty to serve their constituents' interests or more broadly the public good, can benefit by shaping the law to serve the interests of some private parties, a conflict of interest exists. Many critiques of lobbying point to the potential for conflicts of interest to lead to agent misdirection or the intentional failure of an agent with a duty to serve an employer, client, or constituent to perform those duties. The failure of government officials to serve the public interest as a consequence of lobbying by special interests who provide benefits to the official is an example of agent misdirection. That is why lobbying is seen as one of the causes of a democratic deficit. Politicians tend to vote against the preferred position of their constituency when there is more special interest money and less attention to politics.\nLobbying by country.\nAustralia.\nSince the 1980s, lobbying in Australia has grown from a small industry of a few hundred employees to a multi-billion dollar per year industry. What was once the preserve of big multinational companies and at a more local level (property developers, for example, Urban Taskforce Australia) has morphed into an industry that employs more than 10,000 people and represents every facet of human endeavour.\nAcademic John Warhurst from the Australian National University noted that over this time, retired politicians have increasingly turned political lobbyists to leverage their networks and experience for private gain. In 2018 he noted that two of the top three Howard government ministers had become lobbyists: Alexander Downer and Peter Costello, and that the trend could be traced back to the Hawke Government of 1983. Mick Young stated that by 1983 the lobbying profession was an established part of the democratic political process in Canberra. Warhurst attests that by 2018, \"political leader-lobbyists\" were an established part of the same process. During the 1980s, political leaders traded on their own names, like Bob Hawke, or joined the \"respectable\" end of the lobbying spectrum, working for law firms or banks, like former New South Wales premiers Nick Greiner and Bob Carr. In 2008, Alexander Downer formed the lobbying firm Bespoke Approach, along with former Labor minister Nick Bolkus and Ian Smith, who is married to former Australian Democrats leader, Natasha Stott-Despoja. Peter Costello carried two former staffers to work with him in his lobbying firm, ECG Consulting: Jonathan Epstein and David Gazard. Politicians can become exposed to allegations of conflicts of interest when they both lobby and advise governments. Examples include Peter Costello.\nPolitical party staff often form lobbying firms or dominate their ranks. Former Howard chief-of-staff Grahame Morris is the director of Barton Deakin Government Relations. His colleagues there include David Alexander (former Costello staffer), Sallyanne Atkinson (former Lord Mayor of Brisbane and former federal Liberal Party candidate), Howard staffer John Griffin and former New South Wales Liberal Party leader, Peter Collins. The Labor \"sister\" company is Hawker Britton, so named as both firms are owned by STW Group. In 2013, Hawker Britton had 113 client companies on its books.\nIn 2013, there were just under 280 firms on the Federal Australian Register of Lobbyists. Steve Carney of Carney Associated says that lobbyists \"try to leave no thumbprints on the glass, no footprints in the sand. The best lobbying is when nobody knows you were there.\" Mark Textor of campaign advisory group Crosby Textor describes political lobbying as a \"pathetic miserable industry\".\nSupermarket sector lobbying.\nSupermarket chains in Australia engage lobbying firms with political weight in their ranks. Australian Supermarket giant Coles is represented by both ECG Consulting and Bespoke Approach, while its own parent company, Wesfarmers, has former West Australian premier Alan Carpenter in charge of corporate affairs. Competitor Woolworths has a government relations team composed of former Labor and Liberal advisers, under the direction of a former leader of the National Party, Andrew Hall. Aldi engages GRA (Government Relations Australia), one of Australia's largest lobbying firms, whose staff includes former Federal Labor treasurer, John Dawkins.\nPublic lobbyist registers.\nA register of federal lobbyists is kept by the Australian Government and is accessible to the public via its website. Similar registers for State government lobbyists were introduced between 2007 and 2009 around Australia. Since April 2007 in Western Australia, only lobbyists listed on the state's register are allowed to contact a government representative for the purpose of lobbying. Similar rules have applied in Tasmania since 1 September 2009 and in South Australia and Victoria since 1 December 2009. A criticism of the lobbyist register is that it only captures professional third-party lobbyists, not employees of companies which directly lobby government. An example of this is BHP, which employs Geoff Walsh, a key advisor to Bob Hawke as an in-house lobbyist.\nIn 2022, The Mercury published a complete list of lobbyists registered at the Tasmanian Parliament. The field was dominated by former politicians, advisers and journalists in 2016.\nBahrain.\nIn December 2022, Bahrain's lobbying efforts were reflected in a report by \"The Guardian\", which involved the name of a senior Czech MEP Tom\u00e1\u0161 Zdechovsk\u00fd. The controversy concerned the European Parliament's \"friendship groups\", the unofficial bodies operating with no formal regulations and sometimes under sponsored lobbyists and foreign governments. The European Parliament was preparing to vote on a resolution to call for the release of a Bahraini political prisoner Abdulhadi al-Khawaja. However, the chair of the European Parliament's Bahrain friendship group, Zdechovsk\u00fd came under question for visiting Bahrain in April 2022, without declaring. In a separate resolution, Zdechovsk\u00fd's EPP failed to call for Khawaja's release and instead called him a \"political opponent\". Director of BIRD, Sayed Ahmed Alwadaei accused the Czech MEP of acting as a mouthpiece for Bahrain.\nCanada.\nCanada maintains a Registry of Lobbyists.\nAs of 2018, more than 5,000 people worked as registered lobbyists at Canada's federal level. Lobbying began as an unregulated profession, but since the late 20th century has been regulated by the government to increase transparency and establish a set of ethics for both lobbyists, and those who will be lobbied. Canada does not require disclosure of lobbyist spending on lobbying activities.\nEuropean Union.\nThe first step towards specialized regulation of lobbying in the European Union was a Written Question tabled by Alman Metten, in 1989. In 1991, Marc Galle, Chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure, the Verification of Credentials and Immunities, was appointed to submit proposals for a Code of conduct and a register of lobbyists. Today lobbying in the European Union is an integral and important part of decision-making in the EU. From year to year lobbying regulation in the EU is constantly improving and the number of lobbyists increases. This increase in lobbying activity is a result of the growing recognition of lobbying as a critical discipline at the intersection of politics, economics, and society.\nIn 2003 there were around 15,000 lobbyists (consultants, lawyers, associations, corporations, NGOs etc.) in Brussels seeking to influence the EU's legislation. Some 2,600 special interest groups had a permanent office in Brussels. Their distribution was roughly as follows: European trade federations (32%), consultants (20%), companies (13%), NGOs (11%), national associations (10%), regional representations (6%), international organizations (5%) and think tanks (1%), (Lehmann, 2003, pp iii).\nIn addition to this, lobby organisations sometimes hire former EU employees (a phenomenon known as the revolving door) who possess inside knowledge of the EU institutions and policy process. This practice of hiring former EU employees is part of what lobbyist Andreas Geiger describes as lobbying's vital role in shaping law and decision-making processes, given the unique insights and access these individuals provide. A report by Transparency International EU published in January 2017 analysed the career paths of former EU officials and found that 30% of Members of the European Parliament who left politics went to work for organisations on the EU lobby register after their mandate and approximately one-third of Commissioners serving under Barroso took jobs in the private sector after their mandate, including for Uber, ArcelorMittal, Goldman Sachs and Bank of America Merrill Lynch. These potential conflicts of interest could be avoided if a stronger ethics framework were established at the EU level, including an independent ethics body and longer cooling-off periods for MEPs.\nIn the wake of the Jack Abramoff Indian lobbying scandal in Washington, D.C., and the massive impact this had on the lobbying scene in the United States, the rules for lobbying in the EU\u2014which until now consisted of only a non-binding code of conduct\u2014may also be tightened.\nEventually, on 31 January 2019, the European Parliament adopted binding rules on lobby transparency. Amending its Rules of Procedure, the Parliament stipulated that MEPs involved in drafting and negotiating legislation must publish online their meetings with lobbyists. The amendment says that \"rapporteurs, shadow rapporteurs or committee chairs shall, for each report, publish online all scheduled meetings with interest representatives falling under the scope of the Transparency Register\"- the database of the EU.\nThe European allies were being lobbied by the UAE and Saudi Arabia to regain diplomatic ties with the Syrian government. The two Arab countries lobbied the European Union for months, pushing them to ease the sanctions on Syria for the revival of its collapsed economy. The UAE and its neighbour country argued that without the ease of sanctions, the diplomatic efforts to end the Syrian war would be ineffective. However, the EU nations, including France and Germany, turned down the idea of restoring ties with Syria, stating that it would legitimize the regime that is accused of massacring its own people.\nFrance.\nThere is currently no regulation at all for lobbying activities in France. There is no regulated access to the French institutions and no register specific to France, but there is one for the European Union where French lobbyists are able to register themselves. For example, the internal rule of the National Assembly (art. 23 and 79) forbids members of Parliament to be linked with a particular interest. Also, there is no rule at all for consultation of interest groups by the Parliament and the Government. Nevertheless, a recent parliamentary initiative (motion for a resolution) has been launched by several MPs so as to establish a register for representatives of interest groups and lobbyists who intend to lobby the MPs.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, lobbying has existed since 1956, when the Federal Constitutional Court issued a ruling legalizing it. A mandatory lobby register (German: Lobbyliste) was introduced in Germany effective 1 January 2022, along with a code of conduct. These rules were criticized as insufficient by several opposition party members and representatives from the Council of Europe, who argued that they did not adequately address issues of transparency and potential conflicts of interest. Stricter rules were initially scheduled to come into effect on January 1, 2024, however these legal alterations did not come into force until March 1, 2024.\nItaly.\nItaly does not have lobbying legislation at the national level nowadays, even though there have been proposals by lawmakers over the years. In 2016, the Chamber of Deputies added an addendum that introduced a Regulation of interest representation. The Regulation expired in late 2017, when the term of the sitting Parliament expired. With the rise of the new parliamentary term in 2018, the Regulation was not being readopted. At the subnational level, only six regions have legislations about lobbying: Tuscany (2002), Molise (2004), Abruzzo (2010), Calabria (2016), Lombardy (2016) and Puglia (2017). These regional legislations have similar structure, but only Tuscany took a step forward to implement this legislation and create a public register.\nIn Italy, over the years, lobbies and power groups have obstructed the liberalization of markets and favored the protection of existing privileges. Despite various attempts to promote competition, such as the Law for the Market and Competition passed a year ago, the process has been riddled with delays, amendments and compromises that have weakened the law.\nPressure from various lobbies led to the deletion of several important provisions. For example, due to pressure from pharmacists, the sale of Band C drugs in supermarkets and para pharmacies was skipped. Other provisions removed include the portability of pension funds, the sale of boxes or garages worth less than one hundred thousand euros without a notarized deed, the protected energy market, and the Postal Service monopoly. In addition, the rule on RCA tariffs was withdrawn after protests from insurance companies, while the diatribe between taxi drivers and Uber was postponed for a separate measure.\nProfessional associations, such as lawyers and dentists, opposed measures that undermined their interests, such as the requirement for lawyers to have a quote or the requirement that dental companies be at least two-thirds owned by registered members. Other categories, such as hoteliers, called for a ban on Airbnb in the country.\nThe lack of competitive markets is one of the main reasons Italy has not experienced economic growth in recent years. However, pressure groups continue to defend their privileges, hindering economic liberalization. The International Monetary Fund study indicates that true liberalization could grow Italy's GDP in a few years, but lobbies seem to be able to prevent such changes.\nA 2016 study found evidence of significant indirect lobbying of then-Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi through business proxies. The authors document a significant pro-Mediaset (the mass media company founded and controlled by Berlusconi) bias in the allocation of advertising spending during Berlusconi's political tenure, in particularly for companies operating in more regulated sectors.\nUsing advertising data from the Nielsen AdEx database, the behavior of companies buying advertising space on Mediaset television channels during Berlusconi's tenure as prime minister was analyzed. It is hypothesized that some companies are more likely to advertise on Mediaset channels when Berlusconi is in power, indicating a potential correlation between advertising behavior and political influence.\nA model of the Italian television advertising market was developed, distinguishing between regulated firms (interested in government actions) and unregulated firms (less interested in specific public policy changes). The model predicts that advertising prices on Mediaset increase when Berlusconi is in power and that the mix of advertisers on Mediaset channels shifts toward regulated firms during his tenure.\nTo assess the impact of Berlusconi's political influence, industries were ranked according to their regulatory score, obtained from a survey of Italian economists. Highly regulated industries, such as telecommunications, pharmaceuticals, and manufacturing, showed a greater tendency to allocate a portion of their advertising budgets to Mediaset during Berlusconi's tenure. \nDespite higher prices for advertising space on Mediaset channels during Berlusconi's tenure, companies continued to advertise, suggesting that they expect significant political benefits from supporting the network. Mediaset's advertising partners are estimated to have paid about 1.9 billion euros more during Berlusconi's three terms, indicating the expected political value of their indirect lobbying efforts.\nThis study provides evidence of market-based lobbying, in which companies strategically allocate their advertising budgets to gain political influence. It also highlights the additional conflict of interest that politicians with corporate holdings face and raises important questions about the role of money in politics beyond direct campaign contributions.\nAnother relevant case of lobbying that has been going on for at least 16 years concerns owners of beach establishments. Beaches are the Italian State's properties: since 2022, owners have had to pay a fee of 2698 euros to keep a public concession of a beach establishment. This is an amount of money that would be paid back just by renting for three months 2 beach umbrellas for 15 euros each (and in many cases, the renting prices are higher). The Court of Accounts has declared an imbalance between the fee and the gains from the beach establishment. Until 2009, according to a 1949 law, people who had public concessions had the right to keep them if there was no opposition from third parties. In 2009 this law was abolished under the menace of legal procedure from the EU for infraction of a 2006 directive, that established mandatory public procedures that were impartial and transparent. Anyhow, since then, governments continuously postponed any decision regarding modifying laws on public concessions for beach establishments. Under the government of Mario Draghi, the deadline for all concessions was established for 31 December 2023: anyhow, the new Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni assured in a letter of November 3, 2022, that \"their government would defend the families that work in that sector\", and delayed the deadline of the concessions. Some politicians claim that the families involved in the issue represent a significant and influential number of electors.\nFinally, lobbying from taxi drivers represents a growing issue. The current situation in Italy regarding taxi services is regulated by Law No. 21 of 1992. According to this law, the responsibility for determining the number of taxi licenses, shifts, and fares is given to the municipalities. Taxi licenses are held by artisan business owners who have passed a driver's exam and are registered with the Chamber of Commerce. After holding a license for five years, reaching the age of 60, or due to illness, license holders can transfer their license to someone else upon indicating their preference to the municipality. In case of death, the license can be passed to one of the heirs or their designated individuals.\nItaly has an average of one taxi for every 2,000 inhabitants, whereas countries like France and Spain have ratios of 1,160 and 1,028 taxis per 2,000 inhabitants, respectively. This suggests that Italy has a relatively lower number of taxis available compared to its population.\nIn August 2019, the then Transport Councillor Marco Granelli acknowledged the need to increase the number of taxi licenses by 450 to meet the demand. Data showed that a significant percentage of calls for taxis were going unanswered during peak hours and weekends. However, the issue was put on hold due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and it remains uncertain when it will be addressed.\nRomania.\nRomanian legislation does not include an express regulation on lobbying activity. The legislative proposals initiated by various parliamentarians have not been finalized.\nAttempts to regulate lobbying in Romania have appeared in the context of the fight against corruption. Anti-corruption strategies adopted in 2011 and 2004 mentions the purposes of the elaboration of a draft law on lobbying, as well as ensuring transparency in the decision-making activity.\nIn 2008 and 2011, the emphasis was mainly on transparency in the decision-making activity of the public authorities, regulation of lobbying activities no longer appeared as a distinct or expressly mentioned objective.\nThe Romanian Lobby Registry Association (ARRL) was founded in June 2010 to popularize and promote lobbying activity. ARRL is a non-profit legal entity that works under private law.\nThe majority of lobbying companies represent non-governmental organizations which activities include education, ecology, fundamental freedoms, health, consumer rights etc. Other entities that deal with lobby practice are multinational companies, Romanian companies, law firms and specialized lobby firms.\nIndia.\nIn India, where there is no law regulating the process, lobbying has traditionally been a tool for industry bodies like the National Association of Software and Service Companies, the Confederation of Indian Industry, the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, the Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India and other pressure groups to engage with the government ahead of the national budget and legislation in parliament. Lobbying activities have frequently been identified in the context of corruption cases, for example, the 2010 controversy surrounding leaked audio transcripts of conversations between the corporate lobbyist Niira Radia and senior journalists and politicians. Besides private companies, the Indian government has been paying for the services of a US firm since 2005 to lobby, for example, in relation to the India-US civilian nuclear deal. In India, there are no laws that defined the scope of lobbying, who could undertake it, or the extent of disclosure necessary. Companies are not mandated to disclose their activities and lobbyists are neither authorized nor encouraged to reveal the names of clients or public officials they have contacted. The distinction between lobbying and bribery still remains unclear.\nIn 2012, Walmart revealed it had spent $25 million since 2008 on lobbying to \"enhance market access for investment in India\". This disclosure came weeks after the Indian government made a controversial decision to permit foreign direct investment in the country's multi-brand retail sector.\nSuccessful grassroots lobbying campaigns include the Mazdoor Kisan Shakti Sangathan's campaign to pass the 2005 Right to Information Act and Anna Hazare's anti-corruption campaign to introduce the 2011 Lokpal Bill.\nNew Zealand.\nThere is no register for lobbying activity and no cooling off period for public officials before they can enter the lobbying industry in New Zealand, allowing politicians and Parliamentary staffers to immediately become lobbyists after leaving office. Kris Faafoi joined a lobbying firm just three months after leaving Parliament, where he had been justice and broadcasting minister. Lobbyists also move directly into staffer positions. Gordon-Jon Thompson took a leave of absence from his lobbying firm to work as chief of staff to Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern for four months before returning to his lobbying firm. Andrew Kirton resigned from his lobbying company on 31 January 2023 and the next day was announced as chief of staff for Prime Minister Chris Hipkins.\nSome \"ad hoc\" provisions against revolving door politics exist in relation to certain industries. The Immigration Advisers Licensing Act 2007, for example, prohibits Ministers of Immigration, Associate Ministers of Immigration and immigration officials from becoming a licensed immigration adviser for one year after leaving government employment.\nTransparency International (TI) criticized the lack of oversight in the New Zealand lobbying industry in a November 2022 report as lax.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the UK, lobbying plays a significant role in the formation of legislation. Various commercial organisations, lobby groups \"lobby\" for particular policies and decisions by Parliament and other political organs at national, regional and local levels.\nThe phrase \"lobbying\" comes from the gathering of Members of Parliament and peers in the hallways (or lobbies) of Houses of Parliament before and after parliamentary debates. The now-defunct UK Public Affairs Council (UKPAC) defined lobbying as:\nin a professional capacity, attempting to influence, or advising those who wish to influence, the UK Government, Parliament, the devolved legislatures or administrations, regional or local government or other public bodies on any matter within their competence. Formal procedures enable individual members of the public to lobby their Member of Parliament but most lobbying activity centres on corporate, charity and trade association lobbying, where organisations seek to amend government policy through advocacy.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, some special interests hire professional advocates to argue for specific legislation in decision-making bodies, such as Congress. Some lobbyists are now using social media to reduce the cost of traditional campaigns, and to more precisely target public officials with political messages.\nA 2011 study of the 50 firms that spent the most on lobbying relative to their assets compared their financial performance against that of the S&amp;P 500, and concluded that spending on lobbying was a \"spectacular investment\" yielding \"blistering\" returns comparable to a high-flying hedge fund, even despite the financial downturn. A 2011 meta-analysis of previous research findings found a positive correlation between corporate political activity and firm performance. A 2009 study found that lobbying brought a return on investment of as much as 22,000% in some cases. Major American corporations spent $345 million lobbying for just three pro-immigration bills between 2006 and 2008. A review of 30 food and beverage companies spent $38.2 million on lobbying in 2020 to strengthen and maintain their influence in Washington, D.C.\nA study from the Kellogg School of Management found that political donations by corporations do not increase shareholder value. The authors posit a few reasons that firms continue giving despite little returns, including signaling firm values to investors and consumption value for individual managers.\nWall Street spent a record $2 billion trying to influence the 2016 United States presidential election.\nForeign lobbying.\nForeign-funded lobbying efforts include those of Israel, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Egypt, Pakistan, and China lobbies. In 2010 alone, foreign governments spent approximately $460 million on lobbying members of Congress and government officials.\nIn the US, lobbying for foreign governments is not illegal, but it requires registering as a foreign agent with the Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA). Unofficially, according to \"Politico\", 'many lobbyists try to avoid representing countries that have tense relationships with Washington or troubled human rights records'. Between 2015 and 2017, around 145 registered lobbyists were paid $18 million by Saudi Arabia to influence the U.S. government.\nIn January 2017, an order by Donald Trump led to a lifetime ban on administration officials from lobbying for foreign governments and a five-year ban on other forms of lobbying. However, the rule was revoked by Trump right before the end of his presidency. A number of Trump allies were found guilty of lobbying on behalf of foreign governments during the 2016 US elections, including Paul Manafort; Elliott Broidy pleaded guilty in October 2020 to failing to register as a lobbyist for a foreign individual. On January 19, 2021, President Trump granted Mr. Broidy a full and unconditional pardon.\nUnited Arab Emirates.\nThe United Arab Emirates has a long history of lobbying government and politicians in the West for its conflict of interest concerning building influence and using it to impact the country's foreign policy. In November 2022 it was accused of hiring PR and lobbying firms in order to promote to the politicians in the United States about its selection to host the COP28 Climate Conference. The problem was that the promotion started even before Egypt hosted 2022's COP27 Climate event. Fleishmann Hillard were hired to compose letters that proposed the idea of Emirati ministers attending conferences and events and using the phrase \"the UAE is hosting COP28 next year\". Whereas, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp; Feld were hired to reach out to US politicians particularly pushing the environmental policies or favouring fossil fuels in addition to informing them about the UAE hosting COP28. The Gulf nation even declared its intentions of achieving net zero emissions by 2050, even though 30% of their GDP relies on oil and gas directly, while the remaining relies upon industry run on heavy energy consumption.\nIn February 2024, New Westminster Mayor Patrick Johnstone faced scrutiny after attending the COP28 conference. Johnstone's expenses, including the conference fees, travel and accommodation, were incurred by C40 Cities Climate Leadership Group, of which Dubai is a member of the sterling committee. Councillors Daniel Fontaine and Paul Minhas filed a complaint against Johnstone for breaking the state's code of conduct. The investigation was assigned to Commissioner Jennifer Devins, who, in her October 2024 report, stated that Johnstone's trip provided personal benefits, which councillors are restricted from accepting. While Devins did not impose sanctions, she recommended Johnstone to take training on the laws of country.\nA firm based in UAE, Alasriya Media Consultancy paid $10,000 a former CIA analyst Larry Johnson to run his podcast Counter Currents. The podcast discusses global politics, including a pro-Russian narrative of the Ukraine war and US foreign policy in the Middle East. The contract was signed in May 2024, but was not disclosed in FARA filing until November. The Emirati firm is represented by a Lebanese celebrity journalist, Ghina Amyouni, whose reason for funding the podcast was unclear.\nIn April 2025, a European Microscope for Middle East Affairs report uncovered the UAE\u2019s lobbying scandal in Europe, involving two human rights organizations\u2013 the African Meeting for the Defense of Human Rights (RADDHO) and TACUDU for Culture and Development. RADDHO, which claims to advocate for African human rights, accepted bribes from UAE-linked lobbyists to influence its activities. It was accused of aligning with the UAE\u2019s geopolitical agenda under the direction of Abu Dhabi, raising concerns over its neutrality. RADDHO received over half a million euros from the UAE-linked sources to promote negative campaigns against regional rivals, particularly Qatar, while neglecting human rights abuses in the UAE and its allies. TACUDU was also accused of exploiting its UN consultative status and receiving \u20ac350,000 from sources linked to the UAE embassy in Geneva to target Qatar through political campaigns. This led to calls for the United Nations Human Rights Council to suspend TACUDU\u2019s consultative status for violating norms expected of NGOs holding UN consultative status.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48935", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48935", "title": "American Legislative Exchange Council", "text": "American conservative lobbying group\nThe American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) is a nonprofit organization of conservative state legislators and private sector representatives who draft and share model legislation for distribution among state governments in the United States.\nALEC provides a forum for state legislators and private sector members to collaborate on model bills\u2014draft legislation that members may customize and introduce for debate in their own state legislatures. ALEC has produced model bills on a broad range of issues, such as reducing regulation and individual and corporate taxation, combating illegal immigration, loosening environmental regulations, tightening voter identification rules, weakening labor unions, and opposing gun control. Some of these bills dominate legislative agendas in states that include Arizona, Wisconsin, Colorado, Michigan, New Hampshire, and Maine. Approximately 200 model bills become law each year. ALEC also serves as a networking tool among certain state legislators, allowing them to research conservative policies implemented in other states. Many ALEC legislators say the organization converts campaign rhetoric and nascent policy ideas into legislative language.\nALEC's activities, while legal, received public scrutiny after news reports in 2012 from outlets such as \"The New York Times\" and \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" described ALEC as an organization that gave corporate interests outsized influence. Resulting public pressure led to a number of legislators and corporations withdrawing from the organization. However, at ALEC's July 2022 policy summit, \"Insider\" reported on a political commentator who stated that if the conservative constitutional convention movement\u2014which \"is gaining momentum\" largely out of public view\u2014is successful in its plan to rewrite the Constitution, the USA will become the \"conservative nation\" ALEC has been working toward.\nHistory.\n1973 to 2010.\nALEC was founded in 1973 in Chicago as the Conservative Caucus of State Legislators, a project initiated by Mark Rhoads, an Illinois state house staffer, to counter the Environmental Protection Agency, wage, and price controls, and to respond to the defeat of Barry Goldwater in the 1964 presidential election.\nConservative legislators felt the word \"conservative\" was unpopular with the public at the time, however, so the organization was renamed to the American Legislative Exchange Council. In 1975, with the support of the American Conservative Union, ALEC registered as a federal nonprofit agency. Bill Moyers and Greenpeace have attributed the establishment of ALEC to the influential Powell Memorandum, which led to the rise of a new business activist movement in the 1970s.\nALEC was co-founded by conservative activist Paul Weyrich, who also co-founded The Heritage Foundation. Henry Hyde, who later became a U.S. congressman, and Lou Barnett, who later became national political director of Ronald Reagan's Political Action Committee, also helped to found ALEC. Early members included a number of state and local politicians who went on to statewide office, such as Bob Kasten, Tommy Thompson, and Scott Walker of Wisconsin, John Engler of Michigan, Terry Branstad of Iowa, Mitch Daniels of Indiana, and John Boehner and John Kasich of Ohio. Several members of Congress also were involved in the organization during its early years, including Rep. Jack Kemp of New York, Sen. Jesse Helms of North Carolina, Sen. James L. Buckley of New York, Rep. Phil Crane of Illinois, and Rep Eric Cantor of Virginia.\nIn the 1980s, ALEC opposed U.S. disinvestment from South Africa, a movement to put pressure on the South African government to embark on negotiations with a goal of dismantling apartheid. In 1985, ALEC also published a memo that opposed \"the current homosexual movement\", portrayed homosexuality as a result of a conscious choice, and said that pedophilia was \"one of the more dominant practices within the homosexual world\". ALEC spokesman Bill Meierling discussed the document in 2013 and said that ALEC does not draft model bills on social issues, and added, \"I'm also sad that the critics would not acknowledge that organizations change over time.\"\nDuane Parde served as the executive director from December 1996 to January 2006. Lori Roman, who served in the same role from 2006 to 2008, had an imperious style that led to financial difficulties and the departure of two thirds of ALEC's staff. According to Dolores Mertz, then a Democratic Iowa state representative and chairwoman of the ALEC board, ALEC became increasingly partisan during that period, with Roman once telling Mertz \"she didn't like Democrats and she wasn't going to work with them.\" Ron Scheberle became executive director in 2010 after acting as a lobbyist for Verizon Communications (previously GTE) and as an ALEC board member.\nBy 2011, the number of ALEC legislative members had reached 2,000, including more than 25 percent of all state legislators nationwide. Approximately 1,000 bills based on ALEC language were being introduced in state legislatures every year, with approximately 20% of those bills being enacted.\nSince 2011.\nPrior to 2011, ALEC's practices and its ties to specific pieces of legislation were little known outside of political circles. In July 2011, \"The Nation\" published a series of articles produced in collaboration with the Center for Media and Democracy (CMD) that showcased some of the ALEC model bills and described ties to the Koch family, and CMD launched a website \"ALEC Exposed\" that documented more than 800 of ALEC model bills, the legislators and corporations that had helped to draft them, and the states that enacted them.\nThe joint effort, and particularly its coverage of ALEC's push for tough voter ID laws, prompted the advocacy group Color of Change to launch a public campaign to pressure corporations to withdraw their ALEC memberships.\nThe criticism among media outlets and political opponents was that ALEC was secretly subverting democratic institutions to further the aims of its corporate benefactors. Oregon state representative and ALEC member Gene Whisnant said in December 2011, \"We're getting a lot of attention saying we're trying to destroy the earth and everything on it.\" ALEC staff and members promoted the organization as promoting public-private partnerships for the advancement of free market principles. ALEC senior director of membership and development Chaz Cirame said, \"The hook about some conspiracy or some secret organization is a lot better story than one about bringing state legislators together to talk about best practices around the country.\"\nIn 2012, ALEC was the subject of an Occupy movement protest, an Internal Revenue Service complaint by Common Cause, and calls for attorney general investigations in several states.\nThe killing of Trayvon Martin on February 26, 2012, led to increased public attention on \"Stand-your-ground\" gun laws that ALEC had supported. Color of Change launched a new campaign in April to pressure ALEC corporate members to withdraw. More than sixty corporations and foundations, including Coca-Cola, Wendy's, Kraft Foods, McDonald's, Amazon.com, General Electric, Apple, Procter &amp; Gamble, Walmart, the Gates Foundation, and the medical insurance group Blue Cross and Blue Shield dropped support of ALEC in the ensuing weeks or let their memberships lapse. Thirty-four legislative members also left ALEC.\nALEC responded by releasing a statement describing efforts by its critics as a \"campaign launched by a coalition of extreme liberal activists committed to silencing anyone who disagrees with their agenda\". Doug Clopp of Common Cause credited ALEC Exposed for the successful campaign, saying that \"for 40 years you couldn't get the kind of accountability we're seeing now because ALEC, its members, its legislators, its bills were secret.\"\nFormer Visa Inc. lobbyist, Newt Gingrich aide, and GOPAC executive director, Lisa B. Nelson, succeeded Scheberle as CEO of ALEC in 2014.\nIn late 2014, a number of technology-oriented companies such as Google, Microsoft, Facebook, eBay, and Yahoo! announced that they were ending their ties to ALEC. Multiple companies cited environmental concerns as a point of contention with the organization. Google Executive Chairman Eric Schmidt remarked that ALEC was \"just literally lying\" about recent global climate change. Yahoo!, Uber, and Lyft also announced withdrawals later that same week. Occidental Petroleum and Northrop Grumman also cut ties with ALEC. In response to the departure of Northrop Grumman, an ALEC spokesperson said, \"Like any other membership group, membership in ALEC ebbs and flows, and in 2014 we gained far more private-sector members than we lost.\" T-Mobile and BP severed ties with ALEC in 2015.\nIn 2023, ALEC held its fiftieth anniversary celebrations in Washington, D.C. The celebrations included a gala event at the National Portrait Gallery.\nALEC is a member of the advisory board of Project 2025, a collection of conservative and right-wing policy proposals from The Heritage Foundation to reshape the United States federal government and consolidate executive power should the Republican nominee win the 2024 presidential election.\nOrganization.\nAs of December 2013, ALEC had more than 85 members of Congress and 14 sitting or former governors who were considered \"alumni\". The majority of the ALEC legislative members belong to the Republican Party. Membership statistics presented at an ALEC board meeting in 2013 indicated that the 1,810 members represented 24% of all state legislative seats across the U.S., and that ALEC members represented 100% of the legislative seats in Iowa and South Dakota. It also has approximately 300 corporate, foundation, and other private-sector members. The chairmanship of ALEC is a rotating position, with a new legislator appointed to the position each year. As of 2012[ [update]], 28 out of 33 of its chairs had been Republicans.\nALEC has nine task forces that generate model bills that members may customize and introduce for debate in their own state legislatures. Private sector members effectively have veto power over model bills drafted by the task forces.\nThe ALEC Public Safety and Elections Task Force, which promoted stand your ground gun laws and voter identification requirements, was disbanded in April 2012. Thereafter, the National Center for Public Policy Research announced the creation of a voter ID task force to replace the one discontinued by ALEC.\nBills drafted by the task forces must be approved by the ALEC board of directors, composed exclusively of legislators, before they are designated as model bills. ALEC also has a Private Enterprise Advisory Council, which meets whenever the board of directors meets. Council members include representatives from prominent corporations such as ExxonMobil, Pfizer, AT&amp;T, SAP, State Farm Insurance and Koch Industries. ALEC statements assert that the council provides advice to the board of directors. Former ALEC co-chairman Noble Ellington said in 2011, \"I really kind of think of us as one board,\" although he added, \"It's certainly not our goal to sit there and do everything that business wants to have done.\"\nDay-to-day operations are run from ALEC's Arlington County, Virginia, office by an executive director and a staff of approximately 30. ALEC's bylaws specify that \"... full membership shall be open to persons dedicated to the preservation of individual liberty, basic American values and institutions, productive free enterprise, and limited representative government, who support the purposes of ALEC, and who serve, or formerly serve, as members of a state or territorial legislature, the United States Congress, or similar bodies outside the United States.\"\nALEC also has a Board of Scholars that advises staff and members. The board is composed of Arthur Laffer, an economist who served on Ronald Reagan's Economic Policy Advisory Board; Victor Schwartz, chair of Public Policy at Shook, Hardy &amp; Bacon; Richard Vedder, economics professor emeritus at Ohio University and adjunct scholar at the American Enterprise Institute; and Rob Natelson, a constitutional scholar.\nALEC also has ties to the State Policy Network (SPN), a national association of conservative and libertarian think-tanks. SPN is a member of ALEC, and ALEC is an associate member of the SPN. SPN encourages its members to join ALEC, and many members of SPN are also members of ALEC. Some of the think tanks in the SPN write model legislation, which then is introduced at ALEC private meetings. ALEC is \"SPN's sister organisation\" according to \"The Guardian\". ALEC is also a member of the Atlas Network, a global organization of free-market think tanks.\nAs of 2012, ALEC is registered as a charity in 37 states.\nNotable policies and model bills.\nThe ALEC website states that its goal is to advance \"the fundamental principles of free-market enterprise, limited government, and federalism\". In 2003, Donald Ray Kennard, then a Louisiana state representative and ALEC national chairman, said, \"We are a very, very conservative organization... We're just espousing what we really believe in.\" Craig Horn, a North Carolina state representative and ALEC member, said of ALEC in 2013, \"It's a lightning rod organization because it has a decidedly conservative bent\u2014there\u2019s no doubt about it.\"\nAlthough ALEC originally focused on social issues such as abortion, which it opposed, in more recent years the group has focused more on business and regulatory matters. According to John Nichols of \"The Nation\", ALEC's agenda \"seems to be dictated at almost every turn by multinational corporations. It's to clear the way for lower taxes, less regulation, a lot of protection against lawsuits, [and] ALEC is very, very active in [the] opening up of areas via privatization for corporations to make more money, particularly in places you might not usually expect like public education.\"\nA Brookings Institution study of state legislation introduced in 2011\u20132012 found that ALEC model bills that became law were linked most often to controversial social and economic issues. The study concluded that this phenomenon has hurt ALEC because, \"Dirtying its hands with social issues undermines ALEC's ability to exercise influence over fiscal ones.\"\nAccording to research by Columbia University political scientist Alex Hertel-Fernandez, ALEC model legislation during the late 1970s focused primarily on social issues, such as abortion, drugs, gun laws, religious freedom and anti-busing. By the 1980s, the focus was primarily on criminal justice. By the 1990s, the focus was overwhelmingly on business deregulation.\n'Stand Your Ground' laws.\nStand-your-ground laws expanded to 30 states through the support of ALEC, after Florida passed its law in 2005. After the Florida law had been passed, ALEC adopted a model bill with the same wording. In the wake of the killing of Trayvon Martin in 2012, ALEC's support for Stand Your Ground laws ultimately led to the departure of high-profile corporate members such as Coca-Cola, Microsoft, Bank of America, and General Motors.\nVoter ID laws.\nAfter Obama's victory in the 2008 presidential election, ALEC's internal publication (which it provides to paying members) asserted, without evidence, that voter fraud contributed to his victory. ALEC said that groups like ACORN had engaged in voter-registration fraud whereby fake voter registrations were submitted.\nPrior to 2012, legislation based on ALEC model bills was introduced in many states to mandate or strengthen requirements that voters produce state-issued photographic identification. The bills were passed and signed into law in six states. Voter identification bills introduced in 34 states would have made voting more difficult for students, the elderly, and the poor. According to research by Columbia University political scientist Alex Hertel-Fernandez, \"Of the 62 ID laws states considered during the 2011 and 2012 legislative sessions, more than half were proposed by lawmakers who... were all participants in the American Legislative Exchange Council, or ALEC. In exchange for their payments of $50 per year in membership dues, those legislators had access to a draft proposal for strict voter ID requirements\".\nImmigration.\nThe \"Support Our Law Enforcement and Safe Neighborhoods Act\", an Arizona law commonly known as \"SB 1070\", was drafted during an ALEC meeting in December 2009 and became an ALEC model bill. Enacted in 2010, SB 1070 was described as the toughest illegal immigration law in the U.S. Portions of SB 1070 were held by the Supreme Court to be preempted by federal law in 2012.\nBills similar to SB 1070 were passed in Alabama, Georgia, Indiana, and Utah, and have been introduced in 17 other states.\nA 2018 study characterized ALEC as highly influential in the spread of policies intended to curb sanctuary cities (jurisdictions where immigration enforcement is not a law enforcement priority).\nLabor policy.\nThe organization publishes a \"Labor Reform Policy\" document which it says champions \"worker freedom\". The document advocates for right-to-work laws, endorses the Supreme Court's \"Janus v. AFSCME\" decision that allowed public sector workers to choose whether or not to pay union dues, and contains state-by-state fact sheets on the prevailing minimum wage, union landscape, and public and private sector union membership rates.\nIn 2011, longtime ALEC member and Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker helped pass Wisconsin Act 10, which implemented an ALEC policy of restricting the collective bargaining rights of state and local government employees.\nALEC's model bills include a Resolution to Align Pay and Benefits of Public Sector Workers with Private Sector Workers, which would mandate that \"retirement benefit obligations to all state and municipal workers shall be immediately adjusted to a level comparable to that of private-sector workers.\" Another ALEC model bill is a Paycheck Protection Act, which would require that unions establish separate segregated funds for political activities, and prohibit the collection of union dues for those activities without the express authorization of the employee. ALEC has also drafted a model law called the Living Wage Mandate Preemption Act. It prohibits a local municipality, city, county or township from enacting a living wage that is greater than the state's minimum wage.\nAnimal and Ecological Terrorism Act.\nOne of ALEC's model bills is the \"Animal and Ecological Terrorism Act\", which classifies certain property destruction, acts of intimidation, and civil disobedience by environmental and animal rights activists as terrorism. This model bill appeared across the U.S. in various forms since it was drafted in 2003. The federal \"Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act\" has notable similarities, and at points almost verbatim language, to ALEC's model \"Animal and Ecological Terrorism Act\". The Senate version of the \"Animal Enterprise Terrorism Act\" was sponsored by Senator James Inhofe, a long-time member of ALEC.\nMany ag-gag bills are also similar to ALEC's model \"Animal and Ecological Terrorism Act\", which would make it against the law to film, videotape, or take photographs on livestock farms in order to \"defame the facility or its owner\". People found to be in violation would be put in a \"terrorist registry\".\nCriminal sentencing and prison management.\nAccording to \"Governing\" magazine, \"ALEC has been a major force behind both privatizing state prison space and keeping prisons filled.\" ALEC has developed model bills advancing \"tough on crime\" initiatives, including \"truth in sentencing\" and \"three strikes\" laws. Critics argue that by funding and participating in ALEC's Criminal Justice Task Force, private prison companies directly influence legislation for tougher, longer sentences. Corrections Corporation of America and Wackenhut Corrections, two of the largest for-profit prison companies in the U.S. (as of 2004[ [update]]), have been contributors to ALEC. ALEC also has worked to pass state laws to allow the creation of private-sector for-profit prisons.\nMarie Gottschalk, professor of political science at the University of Pennsylvania, said that ALEC has played a major role in \"liberating the private sector to employ penal labor and expand the privatization of corrections.\" Economist Paul Krugman wrote in 2012 that ALEC had \"a special interest in privatization\u2014that is, on turning the provision of public services, from schools to prisons, over to for-profit corporations,\" and as such played a significant role in the \"penal\u2013industrial complex\". As an example, Krugman wrote that the American Bail Coalition had declared publicly that ALEC was its \"life preserver.\"\nBy 2013, ALEC disbanded the task force that favored harsh sentencing and supported reducing prison overcrowding and lowering the costs associated with the criminal justice system. At that time, ALEC promoted investing taxpayer money in alternatives to incarceration, such as electronic monitoring.\nEnergy and the environment.\nALEC pushed for deregulation of the electricity industry in the 1990s. Maneuvering between two private sector members, the former energy trader, Enron, and the utilities trade association, Edison Electric Institute (EEI), resulted in EEI withdrawing its ALEC membership. Enron's position on the matter was adopted by ALEC and subsequently, by many state legislatures.\nIn 2011, ALEC adopted model legislation having to do with public \"right to know\" laws regarding what fluids are used in hydraulic fracturing (also known as \"fracking\") that was promoted as a victory for the right of consumers to know about potential drinking water contaminants, in spite of the fact that the bill contained \"loopholes that would allow energy companies to withhold the names of certain fluid contents, for reasons including that they have been deemed trade secrets\".\nALEC has promoted a model bill that called plans in 2011 by the federal Environmental Protection Agency to regulate greenhouse gas emissions, a \"train wreck\" that would harm the economy, and it has supported efforts by various states to withdraw from regional climate change compacts. In 2013, their resolution stated \"Alec is very concerned about the potential economic impact of greenhouse gas regulation on electricity prices and the harm EPA regulations may have on the economic recovery\". ALEC also has promoted a model bill that would call on the federal government to approve the proposed Keystone XL project, which would extend a synthetic crude oil pipeline from oil sands in Alberta, Canada to Nebraska.\nIn 2013, ALEC planned legislation that would weaken state clean energy regulations and penalize homeowners who install their own solar panels and redistribute the electricity back into the grid, whom ALEC has described as \"freeriders\" because they do not pay for the infrastructure costs of recirculating their generated power.\nAlso in 2013, ALEC adopted a model bill saying that the role of human activity in causing climate change was uncertain, that man-made climate change could be \"deleterious, neutral or possibly beneficial,\" and that the cost of regulating greenhouse gas emissions could cause \"great economic dislocation.\" ALEC also has invited climate change deniers, such as Craig Idso, to speak at its national meetings. In 2015 Common Cause and the League of Conservation Voters pointed to such behavior to accuse ALEC of denying climate change. ALEC responded by threatening legal action, denying that ALEC supports climate change denial, and saying it has more recently welcomed debate on the subject and supported renewable energy and carbon tax policies to curb global warming.\nSeveral corporations have announced that their affiliations with ALEC will be allowed to lapse over disagreement with the group's opposition to action on climate change. These include Ford, BP, Microsoft, Google and Shell. A statement by Shell said \"its stance on climate change is clearly inconsistent with our own...We have long recognized both the importance of the climate challenge and the critical role energy has in determining quality of life for people across the world.\" An ALEC spokesperson responded \"Climate change activists have conflated our opposition to the government picking winners and losers as climate change denial.\"\nIn December 2016, Tesla Motors (not an ALEC member) hosted an ALEC event in Washington, D.C., where ALEC promoted its \"Energy Innovation Project\", that was partly funded by the ClearPath Foundation. The project guides states toward innovation and entrepreneurship surrounding U.S. energy resources.\nALEC has promoted draft bills for restrictions on single-use plastic drinking straws. The draft bill contains exemptions for fast food and fast casual restaurants, and preempts municipalities from imposing stricter regulations.\nTelecommunications and information technology.\nAT&amp;T and Verizon drafted ALEC model legislation prohibiting public broadband services and \"sunsetting\" the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN). Names of its 172-member task force, the agenda of a December 2010 meeting, and its minutes that included a resolution regarding traffic pumping were published by Common Cause. In February 2014, Senate Bill 304 in Kansas was introduced, \"prohibiting cities and counties from building public broadband networks and providing internet service to businesses and citizens\". The bill contains an \"underserved area\" exemption for public wi-fi, but the exemption criterion is not met anywhere in Kansas. The city of Chanute, Kansas, which has led broadband development since the 1980s, financed through its public electricity company, including free wi-fi in its college, hospital, and public spaces, and a 4g mobile data network, felt under attack by the bill. The bill failed.\nHealth care.\nALEC opposes the individual health insurance mandate enacted by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (commonly known as the \"ACA\" or \"Obamacare\"). ALEC filed an amicus brief in \"National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius\", urging the Supreme Court to strike down the individual mandate of the ACA. In 2011, ALEC published the \"State Legislators Guide to Repealing ObamaCare\", which has served as a road map for repeal efforts. ALEC also has drafted a variety of model bills designed to block implementation of the law.\nIn August 2013, ALEC approved the \"Health Care Freedom Act\" as a model bill that aims to strip health insurers of their licenses to do business at the federal health care exchanges of ACA if they accepted any subsidies under the system. Sean Riley, the head of the ALEC Health and Human Services task force, said the aim of the proposed legislation was to protect businesses from the ACA's employer mandate. \"Slate\" journalist David Weigel has called the bill a \"sneak attack\" on the ACA. Health insurance experts have predicted that if the bill were widely adopted by Republican-controlled states, it would seriously disrupt the exchange and threaten the ACA. Wendell Potter, former health insurance executive and CMD fellow, said, \"You cannot build the healthcare system based on the free market unless you have subsidies. If they are taken away the whole thing collapses.\"\nIn 1989, ALEC published the draft \"HIV Assault Act\", which made it a crime for someone who is knowingly infected with HIV (the virus that causes AIDS) to have sex with a person who is not infected, without disclosing the HIV infection. The bill made having such sex without disclosure a criminal offense, even when HIV was not transmitted. Alan Smith, who worked on the draft, said the proposed law was a response to worries that people with AIDS were deliberately infecting others, \"to make sure more people got it so more research money could be devoted to curing it\".\nLGBT rights.\nIn the 1980s, ALEC pushed anti-gay propaganda, and urged legislators to oppose attempts to \"homosexualize society.\" ALEC said that homosexual relations were \"probably some of the most destructive and degrading institutions in America today\". ALEC claimed homosexuality caused psychological harm, led to pedophilia, and that homosexuals sought to recruit the young.\nAn investigation by the Southern Poverty Law Center and The Center for Media and Democracy found that ALEC is part of a coalition of groups called Back to Neutral who oppose \"'woke' corporations that act to diversify their leadership or take a public stance on social and democracy issues.\" According to the SPLC, the Back to the Neutral coalition includes \"right-wing think tanks, advocacy groups, media organizations and two anti-LGBTQ hate groups.\"\nSmoking.\nIn 1986, while ALEC was funded by the tobacco industry, it disputed the science linking tobacco smoke to health harms.\nIn July 2012, \"The Guardian\" reported that ALEC had taken action to oppose plain cigarette packaging laws outside the United States, including the UK and Australia. Karla Jones, a task force director for ALEC, said that the brands were the corporations' most valuable assets. ALEC stated that generic cigarette packaging increased cigarette consumption, rather than reduced it. ALEC's advocacy against \"plain packaging\" of tobacco products was cited as partial motivation for an academic study on the effectiveness of plain packaging, which found that \"plain packaging can reduce positive perceptions of smoking and dissuade tobacco use.\"\nOther issues.\nALEC has worked to privatize public education, frequently promoting model bills that expand public-private partnerships in education.\nIt has provided model legislation that led to the enactment of aggressive personal and corporate income tax cuts in Kansas in 2012. Governor Sam Brownback, who promoted and signed the legislation, was advised by the supply-side economist and ALEC board member, Arthur Laffer, who said at the time that the cuts would pay for themselves and lead to increased growth. By fall 2014, however, the tax cuts had led to the depletion of a $700 million budget surplus, and although Kansas had experienced 6.6% job growth from 2010 to 2013, that figure lagged behind the nation's overall 8.8% job growth for the same period.\nIt also has promoted a model bill that limits liability for parent companies that acquire subsidiaries responsible for asbestos-related injuries.\nTraining and assistance.\nIn addition to providing a forum for the drafting of model legislation that may be adapted easily, ALEC also provides assistance and training to its legislative members. The Oregon co-chairman of ALEC, Gene Whisnant, described the organization in 2012 as a \"great resource\" for part-time legislators with limited staff resources. Mark Pocan, a Democratic congressman from Wisconsin and former member of the Wisconsin Assembly, said in 2012 that ALEC advises members, \"'Don't just introduce a single piece of legislation, introduce 14.' That way people can't oppose any one bill.\" At one ALEC meeting, media experts gave messaging advice and taught legislators how to use Twitter to move ALEC bills through their chambers. Attendants also offered to write op-ed articles in local newspapers for the legislators and to put lawmakers in touch with other subject matter experts.\nSecrecy and transparency.\nAlthough \"Governing Magazine\" reported in 2003 that ALEC meetings traditionally had been open to the public, news organizations have reported since then that many meetings are held in private. ALEC policy seminars are open to reporters and other nonmembers, but public conference agendas, unlike those distributed to members, do not include the names of presenters, the lists of legislative and private-sector board chairs, nor the corporate sponsors of the seminars. Task force meetings and bill-drafting sessions are held behind closed doors. Bloggers from ThinkProgress and AlterNet were removed from conferences for attempting to take photographs of such sessions and tweeting the names of ALEC members who participated. In 2013, \"The Washington Post\" columnist Dana Milbank was turned away from the ALEC annual policy summit and told by spokesperson Bill Meierling that subcommittee meetings and task force meetings were closed-door. Meierling said ALEC was introducing transparency gradually, but it \"can't just kick the doors open\". Shortly after the Milbank incident, the Brookings Institution reported that ALEC's activities during its closed-door meetings are \"still a mystery\", and that \"ALEC could have a tremendous influence over lawmaking in the American states, or it could have none at all\u2014we just don't know.\" In 2014, Nebraska legislator and former ALEC member Jeremy Nordquist described ALEC as a \"faceless organization\", saying, \"It's allowing these corporate interests to just duck and cover, and hide from really stepping into the public square and putting their ideas forward.\"\nALEC does not disclose its membership list nor the origins of its model bills. Lawmakers generally propose ALEC-drafted bills in their states without disclosing the ALEC authorship. For instance, in 2012 \"The Star-Ledger\" analyzed more than 100 bills and regulations previously proposed by the administration of New Jersey governor Chris Christie and found a pattern of similarities with ALEC model bills that was \"too strong to be accidental\". The connections were based \"not on similarity of broad ideas, but on specific numbers, time frames, benchmarks and language\". Legislative staffers in the Christie administration had \"mined ALEC for advice on budgetary matters, Medicaid changes and privatizing government services...beginning in the earliest days of Christie's governorship\". William Schluter, vice chairman of the New Jersey Ethics Commission and a former Republican state senator, said there was a \"clear connection between ALEC and the proposed New Jersey legislation\". A Christie spokesperson denied any connection between the two.\nOne exception to this pattern came in November 2011, when former Florida State Representative Rachel Burgin introduced legislation to call on the federal government to reduce its corporate tax rate. She mistakenly included the boilerplate \"WHEREAS, it is the mission of the American Legislative Exchange Council to advance Jeffersonian principles of free markets, limited government, federalism, and individual liberty...\" When the inclusion of the ALEC mission statement was discovered, the bill was withdrawn and resubmitted without the phrase. \"The American Prospect\" journalist Abby Rapoport wrote that the incident \"seems to confirm what many have assumed was occurring in state legislatures\u2014and while Burgin's bill was hardly a major piece of legislation, ALEC's reach in important policy areas seems hard to overestimate.\"\nCritics sometimes argue that by adopting ALEC model bills without disclosure, state officials are handing off the duty of doing their own work to a business-centered lobby. In early 2012, Democratic lawmakers in Arizona and Wisconsin introduced the \"ALEC Accountability Act of 2012\", which would have required corporations to disclose ALEC funding. Arizona House of Representatives Assistant Minority Leader Steve Farley, sponsor of the Arizona bill, argued that corporations have the right to present arguments, but not secretly.\nPrior to 2013, access to ALEC model bills was restricted, and its website required a password to access them. On July 13, 2011, the Center for Media and Democracy, in cooperation with \"The Nation\", posted 850 model bills created during a 30-year period, and created a web project, \"ALEC Exposed\", to host these model bills. The leak has been credited with triggering critical coverage about ALEC in both left-wing and mainstream media outlets. ALEC subsequently published its model bills on its website, although the Brookings Institution wrote in 2013 that there was \"reason to believe\" its list was incomplete.\nOn October 1, 2012, Common Cause, a liberal political advocacy group, along with the Center for Media and Democracy (CMD), filed a lawsuit under a Wisconsin open records law alleging five Republican lawmakers did not disclose whether they had used personal e-mail accounts for correspondence with ALEC. In one instance, a Wisconsin legislative representative had requested of ALEC in June 2012 that all correspondence be sent to his personal account. According to CMD, the legislators settled the suit in late October 2012, allowing their personal e-mails to be searched for such contacts and paying $2,500 in court costs as part of the settlement.\nIn 2013, ALEC's North Carolina state chairman Jason Saine described the organization as \"a resource for experts you can tap that follow a philosophy that you do from a less government viewpoint\", and said, \"It's not just some big secretive organization that it's been portrayed.\"\nCorporate influence and allegations of lobbying activity.\nCorporate influence.\nThe level of influence that the ALEC private-sector members hold over its public-sector members has been controversial. According to \"The New York Times\", special interests have effectively turned ALEC's lawmaker members into \"stealth lobbyists\" for conservative causes. \"The Guardian\" has described ALEC as \"a dating agency for Republican state legislators and big corporations,\" to set rightwing legislative agendas. The \"Free Lance-Star\" has reported that ALEC had become \"one of Big Business's most effective lobbying tools\". \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" described the organization as a \"bill laundry\" that \"offers companies substantial benefits that seem to have little to do with ideology.\" Chris Taylor, a Democratic Wisconsin state assemblyman who attended an ALEC conference in 2013, said, \"In my observation, it was the corporations and the right-wing think tanks driving the agendas. Corporations have as big a say as the legislators in the model legislation that is adopted.\"\nALEC legislative members generally deny being overly influenced by the organization or its model legislation, and argue that corporate input in the drafting process helps to promote business growth. \"ALEC is unique in the sense that it puts legislators and companies together and they create policy collectively,\" said Scott Pruitt, then an Oklahoma state representative and ALEC task force chair. Vance Wilkins, a former Republican speaker of the Virginia House of Delegates and ALEC member, said in 2002, \"Just because business writes a bill doesn't make it bad. We get bills from all angles. And we still have to debate the issue.\" Whisnant, ALEC's Oregon co-chair, acknowledged in 2012 that corporations sometimes write model bills to promote their own interests and added, \"But that doesn't mean I'll support them.\" Harvey Morgan, another former Virginia delegate and ALEC member, said of ALEC conferences, \"You know before you go that the big-business view will prevail, and that's not necessarily bad. I still would like them to be a little more objective.\"\nAlan Rosenthal, a former Rutgers University political science professor and expert on state legislatures and lobbying, said in 2012, \"Legislators don't sit down with a quill pen and draft legislation. I think legislators should have the right to turn to wherever they want to get the ideas they prefer... I have some confidence that they're not being flimflammed.\"\nExperts agree that, regardless of its propriety, the ALEC model has been very effective. \"Bloomberg Politics\" reported in 2014 that ALEC had \"no equal\" in accessing conservative policymakers. Rosenthal said of ALEC, \"You've had the interest groups having access and sitting on other task forces, but here you've really perfected it... You've not only got them gaining access and interacting with legislators but you have them shaping policy together. It seems to me that's a pretty major advance.\" Edwin Bender, executive director of the nonpartisan OpenSecrets has said, \"What makes ALEC different is its effectiveness in not just bringing the people together but selling a piece of legislation that was written by the industry and for the industry and selling it as a piece of mainstream legislation.\"\nAllegations of lobbying activity.\nIn April 2012, Common Cause filed a complaint with the Internal Revenue Service objecting to ALEC's tax status as a nonprofit organization and alleged that lobbying accounted for more than 60% of its expenditures. ALEC formally denied lobbying, although Delores Mertz, who had previously served as chairwoman of the ALEC board, said she was \"concerned about the lobbying that's going on, especially with [ALEC's] 501(c)3 status\". Reporting on the allegations, \"Bloomberg Businessweek\" compared ALEC's work to that of lobbyists, noting, \"part of ALEC's mission is to present industry-backed legislation as grass-roots work,\" and that being a nonprofit rather than a lobby group allows deductibility of membership dues and freedom from disclosing the names of legislators who attend its educational seminars or the executives who give presentations to those legislators. William Schluter, vice chairman of the New Jersey Ethics Commission and a former Republican state senator, said of ALEC's activities, \"When you get right down to it, this is not different from lobbying. It is lobbying. ...Any kind of large organization that adds to public policy or has initiatives involving public policy should be disclosed\u2014not only their name, but who is backing them.\" According to \"Governing\" magazine, ALEC legislators often have their travel expenses paid as \"scholarships\" and are \"wined and dined and golf-coursed\" by private sector members. In July 2013, Common Cause submitted a supplemental brief to the IRS complaining about these practices.\nALEC responded to the original Common Cause complaint by denying it engaged in lobbying, while saying that liberal groups were attacking ALEC because \"they don't have a comparable group that is as effective as ALEC in enacting policies into law.\" As of 2015[ [update]], the IRS investigation remained open.\nStatutes in Colorado, South Carolina, and Indiana exempt ALEC, specifically by name, from having to register as a lobbyist and report lobbying expenditures. In 2013, ALEC created a 501(c)(4) organization called the \"Jeffersonian Project\" that, according to \"The Guardian\", \"would allow Alec to be far more overt in its lobbying activities than its current charitable status as a 501(c)(3)\".\nFunding.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], corporation, think tank, and trade group members accounted for almost 99% of ALEC's $7 million budget. Legislators pay $100 in biennial membership dues, or $50 per year, while non-legislators pay $7,000 to $25,000 to join, and more to participate in the task forces. In 2010, NPR reported that tax records showed that corporations had collectively paid as much as $6 million a year to ALEC. ALEC's total revenue in 2011 was $9 million.\nIn 2010, ALEC received $100,000 each from AT&amp;T, Allergan, and RJ Reynolds Tobacco Company to be named as \"president level\" sponsors at its annual meeting. Eleven other members, including Pfizer (PFE) and the Institute for Legal Reform, paid $50,000 each to be named as \"chairman level\" sponsors. As of 2011[ [update]], Altria, the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, and BP America were also $50,000 chairman level sponsors.\nExxonMobil's foundation donated $30,000 to ALEC in both 2005 and 2006. Alan Jeffers, an ExxonMobil spokesman, said the company paid $39,000 in dues in 2010 and sponsored a reception at the annual meeting in San Diego for $25,000. In August 2011, Exxon spent $45,000 to sponsor a workshop on natural gas. According to the Center For Public Integrity, ALEC received $150,000 from Charles and David Koch in 2011. Greenpeace claims that ALEC has received $525,858 from Koch foundations between 2005 and 2011.\nCorporate members also pay $3,000 to $10,000 for seats on task forces.\nAccording to a December 2013 article in \"The Guardian\", ALEC faced a funding shortfall after \"losing more than a third of its projected income\" when some 400 state legislators left its membership, along with more than 60 corporate donors. The organization's 2013 tax return indicated a 13% drop in total revenue from $8.4 million to $7.3 million. On its 2016 tax return, ALEC reported an increase in total revenue from $9.0 million the prior year to $10.3 million.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "48937", "revid": "808022", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48937", "title": "Lockport", "text": "Lockport may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "48938", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48938", "title": "Statuary law", "text": ""}
{"id": "48940", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48940", "title": "State legislature (United States)", "text": "Legislature of a U.S. state\nIn the United States, the state legislature is the legislative branch in each of the 50 U.S. states. \nA legislature generally performs state duties for a state in the same way that the United States Congress performs national duties at the national level. Generally, the same system of checks and balances that exists at the federal level also exists between the state legislature, the state executive officer (governor) and the state judiciary. \nIn 27 states, the legislature is called the \"legislature\" or the \"state legislature\", while in 19 states the legislature is called the \"general assembly\". In Massachusetts and New Hampshire, the legislature is called the \"general court\", while North Dakota and Oregon designate the legislature the \"legislative assembly\".\nLegislature overview.\nResponsibilities.\nThe responsibilities of a state legislature vary from state to state, depending on state's constitution. \nThe primary function of any legislature is to create laws. State legislatures also approve budget for state government. They may establish government agencies, set their policies, and approve their budgets. For instance, a state legislature could establish an agency to manage environmental conservation efforts within that state. In some states, state legislators elect other officials.\nState legislatures often have power to regulate businesses operating within their jurisdiction. They also regulate courts within their jurisdiction. This includes determining types of cases that can be heard, setting court fees, and regulating attorney conduct.\nOther responsibilities\nUnder the terms of Article V of the U.S. Constitution, state lawmakers retain the power to ratify Constitutional amendments which have been proposed by both houses of Congress and they also retain the ability to call for a national convention to propose amendments to the U.S. Constitution.\nAfter the convention has concluded its business, 75% of the states will ratify what the convention has proposed. Under Article II, state legislatures choose the manner of appointing the state's presidential electors. Formerly, some state legislatures appointed the U.S. Senators from their respective states until the ratification of the 17th Amendment in 1913 required the direct election of senators by the state's voters.\nSometimes what the legislature wishes to accomplish cannot be done simply by the passage of a bill, but rather requires amending the state constitution. Each state has specified steps intended to make it difficult to alter the constitution without the sufficient support of either the legislature, or the people, or both.\nOrganization.\nAll states except Nebraska have a bicameral legislature. The smaller chamber is called the senate, usually referred to as the upper house. This chamber usually has the exclusive power to confirm appointments made by the governor and to try articles of impeachment. (In a few states, a separate executive council, composed of members elected from large districts, performs the confirmation function.)\nNebraska originally had a bicameral legislature like the other states, but the lower house was abolished following a referendum, effective with the 1936 elections. The remaining unicameral (one-chamber) legislature is called the Nebraska Legislature, but its members are called state senators.\nDuring the 20th century, state legislatures further emulated the activities and structures of the US Congress as institutions at both levels grew in size and complexity, often accompanied by increases in staffing and member pay. While most state legislatures remain part-time institutions, a handful of states have expanded theirs to meet year-round.\nHistory.\nThe first bicameral American legislature was formed in 1619 as the Virginia House of Burgesses. The early colonial assemblies were not rooted in English models of parliament. The early colonial assemblies also varied among each other in terms of structure and organization.\nThe legislatures of the initial Thirteen Colonies usually consisted of an elected lower house and an appointed upper house, the latter of which also functioned as an advisory council to the colonial governor. After the American Revolution and the establishment of the United States, most states wrote new constitutions which had direct elections for both chambers of the legislature. This model helped influence the U.S. Constitution and was then adopted by new states which later joined the union.\nRepresentation.\nMembers of the smaller chamber represent more citizens and usually serve for longer terms than members of the larger chamber, generally four years. In 41 states, the larger chamber is called the House of Representatives. Five states designate the larger chamber the assembly, three states call it the House of Delegates, and one has just one chamber. Members of the larger chamber usually serve for terms of two years. The larger chamber customarily has the exclusive power to initiate taxing legislation and articles of impeachment.\nPrior to the United States Supreme Court decisions \"Baker v. Carr\" (1962) and \"Reynolds v. Sims\" (1964), the basis of representation in most state legislatures was modeled on that of the U.S. Congress: the state senators represented geographical units, while members of the larger chamber represented population. In \"Reynolds v. Sims\" the Supreme Court decided upon the one man, one vote standard for state legislatures and invalidated representation based on geographical units regardless of population. (The ruling does not affect the U.S. Senate, because that chamber's makeup is prescribed by the U.S. Constitution.)\nSessions.\nDuring a legislative session, the legislature considers matters introduced by its members or submitted by the governor. Businesses and other special interest organizations often lobby the legislature to obtain beneficial legislation, defeat unfavorably perceived measures, or influence other legislative action. A legislature also approves the state's operating and capital budgets, which may begin as a legislative proposal or a submission by the governor.\nIn most states, a new state legislature convenes in January of the odd-numbered year after the election of members to the larger chamber. The period during which the legislature remains in session varies by state. In states where the legislature is considered part-time, a session may last several months; where the legislature is considered full-time, the session may last all year, with periodic breaks for district work.\nSome states have varying lengths for odd-numbered and even-numbered years, or allow for a fixed number of either legislative or calendar days. Georgia for example, allows only 40 legislative days per year, and Wyoming allows 60 legislative days per term and no more than 40 per one calendar year. Whereas in Michigan, New Jersey, New York (in odd-numbered years), Ohio, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin (in odd-numbered years), the sessions usually last all year.\nFour state legislatures \u2013 Montana, Nevada, North Dakota and Texas \u2013 meet only biennially. In the early 1960s, only 19 legislatures met annually, but by the mid-1970s, it had increased to 41. The latest legislature to switch to annual sessions was Oregon in 2011, following a voter-approved ballot measure.\nMany state legislators meet every year at the National Conference of The Council of State Governments (CSG), headquartered in Lexington, Kentucky, with offices in Washington, DC; New York City; Chicago; Atlanta; and Sacramento, and at the annual meetings of CSG's regions, The Southern Legislative Conference, The Midwestern Legislative Conference, the Eastern Regional Conference and CSG West, and at the Legislative Summit of the National Conference of State Legislatures, which is headquartered in Denver, Colorado and has a lobbying office in Washington, D.C. \nAdditionally, privately funded organizations with ideological leanings have annual meetings attracting many legislators. These include the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC), a conservative organization, and the State Innovation Exchange (SIX), its progressive counterpart.\nLegislative procedure.\nGenerally, the legislative bodies and their committees use either \"Mason's Manual of Legislative Procedure\" or an amended form thereof. During official meetings, a professional parliamentarian is available to ensure that legislation and accompanying discussion proceed as orderly as possible without bias.\nBill drafting and submission\nThe lawmaking process begins with the introduction of a bill in either the House of Representatives or the Senate. Bills may be introduced in either house, sometimes with the exception of bills increasing or decreasing revenue, which must originate in the House of Representatives. The order of business in each house provides a proper time for the introduction of bills.\nAs of 2017, 24 of 99 chambers have limits on the number of bills that a legislator can introduce per year according to NCSL. Most limits are set by internal legislative rules, while Louisiana's legislature is limited by constitutional amendment.\nBills are usually assigned consecutive numbers, given in the order of their introduction, to facilitate identification. Usually a bill cannot become enacted until it has been read on a certain number of days in each house. Upon introduction, a bill is usually read by its title only, constituting the first reading of the bill. Because a bill is usually read by title only, it is important that the title give the members notice of the subject matter contained in the bill.\nWhen a bill passes where most votes are from the minority party and \"moderate\" members of a majority party, this is known as the majority being \"rolled\". \nWhen there are bills which most of the majority oppose, roll rates are a measure of the majority party's avoidance of voting on those bills.\nA 2013 study of state legislatures found that of the 99 studied, about half, 53, had roll rates below 5%. And most, 83, had roll rates below 10%.\nCommittee review\nCommittees review bill, often holding hearings to gather information and opinions, and can propose amendments to bill similar to legislative bodies throughout the world. Most bills cannot be enacted into law until it has been referred to, acted upon by, and returned from, a standing committee in each house. Reference to committee usually follows the first reading of the bill. \nEach committee is set up to consider bills relating to a particular subject. Standing committees are charged with the important responsibility of examining bills and recommending action to the Senate or House. Often on days when a legislature is not in session, the committees of each house meet and consider the bills that have been referred to them to decide if the assigned bills should be reported for further action.\nFor most bills, the recommendations of the committee are followed, although either house is free to accept or reject the action of the committee. Bills reported favorably by a committee may be placed on a regular calendar (the agenda of the deliberative body).\nMost of the work of the legislature is done by committees. The legislature as a whole relies on its committees to report out only those bills deserving the consideration of the entire house.\nThrough standing committees, each bill is addressed by a group of members who have special knowledge of its subject. Some members of the legislature have expert knowledge of particular subjects of legislation, and these members are usually placed on committees to take full advantage of this specialized knowledge. For this reason, the legislature often accepts the final recommendations of its standing committees. As has been noted, however, the legislature does not completely abdicate its responsibility for the consideration of pending bills. If the need arises, the members of either house can force a committee to take action on a bill, or they can ignore the committee's recommendations.\nPocket veto and discharge petitions\nPocket veto powers are common, which allows a committee to \"kill\" a bill, sometimes without even a public vote; in Colorado, the power was notably repealed in a citizen initiative constitutional amendment in 1988 driven by various reform groups.\nWhen a committee refuses to vote a bill out of committee, a discharge petition can be passed by the broader membership. The specifics vary from state to state; for example, in 2004, a report found that New York State \"places more restrictions than any other state legislature on motions to discharge a bill from a committee\", which led to subsequent reforms.\nReports of Committee\nAfter a committee has completed work on a bill, it reports the bill to the appropriate house during the \"reports of committees\" in the daily order of business. Reported bills are immediately given a second reading. The houses do not vote on a bill at the time it is reported; however, reported bills are placed on the calendar for the next legislative day. This second reading is made by title only.\nThe regular calendar is a list of bills that have been favorably reported from committee and are ready for consideration by the membership of the entire house.\nThird reading\nRegardless of where a bill is placed on the calendar, once the bill is considered and adopted, this is called the third reading. At this third reading of the bill, the entire legislature gives consideration to its passage. At this time, the bill may be studied in detail, debated, amended, and read at length before final passage.\nIf the majority vote in favor of the bill, it is recorded as passed.\nTransmission to second house\nA bill that is passed in one house is transmitted, along with a formal message, to the other house. If the bill is not reported from committee or is not considered by the full house, the bill is defeated.\nThe house of origin, upon return of its amended bill, may take any one of several courses of action. It may concur in the amendment by the adoption of a motion to that effect; then the bill, having been passed by both houses in identical form, is ready for enrollment. Another possibility is that the house of origin may adopt a motion to non-concur in the amendment, at which point the bill dies. Finally, the house of origin may refuse to accept the amendment but request that a conference committee be appointed. The other house usually agrees to the request, and the presiding officer of each house appoints members to the conference committee.\nConference committees\nA conference committee is often empaneled to discuss the points of difference between the two houses' versions of the same bill, and tries to reach an agreement between them so that the identical bill can be passed by both houses. If an agreement is reached and if both houses adopt the conference committee's report, the bill is passed. If either house refuses to adopt the report of the conference committee, a motion may be made for further conference. If a conference committee is unable to reach an agreement, it may be discharged, and a new conference committee may be appointed. Some highly controversial bills may be referred to several different conference committees. If an agreement is never reached in conference prior to the end of the legislative session, the bill is lost.\nWhen a bill has passed both houses in identical form, it is then ready for transmittal to the governor.\nGovernor's Approval or Veto\nThe governor may sign bills presented by the legislature, which completes its enactment into law. From this point, the bill becomes an act, and remains the law of the state unless repealed by legislative action or overturned by a court decision. Governors who do not approve of the bill may veto it. In the event of a veto, the governor returns the bill to the house in which it originated with a message of objections and amendments (if applicable) which might remove those objections. The bill is then reconsidered, and if a simple majority of the members of both houses agrees to the proposed executive amendments, it is returned to the governor for signature.\nOn the other hand, a qualified majority (two-thirds) of the members of each house can choose to approve a vetoed bill precisely as the legislature originally passed it, in which case it becomes a law over the governor's veto. If the governor fails to return a bill to the legislative house in which it originated within a specified number of days after it was presented, it becomes a law without their signature.\nThe bills that reach the governor less than a specified number of days before the end of the session may be approved within ten days after adjournment. The bills not approved within that time do not become law. This is known as a \"pocket veto\". This is the most conclusive form of veto, for the legislature (having adjourned) has no chance to reconsider the vetoed measure.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
