{"id": "53739", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53739", "title": "Marcian", "text": "Eastern Roman emperor from 450 to 457 AD\nMarcian (; ; ; c. 392 \u2013 27 January 457) was Roman emperor of the East from 450 to 457. Very little is known of his life before becoming emperor, other than that he was a (personal assistant) who served under the commanders Ardabur and his son Aspar for fifteen years. After the death of Emperor Theodosius\u00a0II on 28 July 450, Marcian was made a candidate for the throne by Aspar, who held much influence because of his military power. After a month of negotiations Pulcheria, Theodosius' sister, agreed to marry Marcian. Zeno, a military leader whose influence was similar to Aspar's, may have been involved in these negotiations, as he was given the high-ranking court title of patrician upon Marcian's accession. Marcian was elected and inaugurated on 25 August 450.\nMarcian reversed many of the actions of TheodosiusII in the Eastern Roman Empire's relationship with the Huns under Attila and in religious matters. Marcian almost immediately revoked all treaties with Attila, ending all subsidy payments to him. In 452, while Attila was raiding Roman Italy, then a part of the Western Roman Empire, Marcian launched expeditions across the Danube into the Great Hungarian Plain, defeating the Huns in their own heartland. This action, accompanied by the famine and plague that broke out in northern Italy, allowed the Western Roman Empire to bribe Attila into retreating from the Italian peninsula.\nAfter Attila's death in 453, Marcian took advantage of the resulting fragmentation of the Hunnic confederation by settling Germanic tribes within Roman lands as (\"federates\" providing military service in exchange for benefits). Marcian also convened the Council of Chalcedon, which declared that Jesus had two \"natures\": divine and human. This led to the alienation of the population of the eastern provinces of Syria and Egypt, as many of them were miaphysites, rejecting the new official Christology. Marcian died on 27 January 457, leaving the Eastern Roman Empire with a treasury surplus of seven million solidi coins, an impressive achievement considering the economic ruin inflicted upon the Eastern Roman Empire by the Huns and Theodosius' tribute payments. After his death, Aspar passed over Marcian's son-in-law, Anthemius, and had a military commander, Leo\u00a0I, elected as emperor.\nEarly life.\nMarcian was born in c. 392, in either Thrace or Illyria. The ancient historian John Malalas describes him as being tall and having some sort of foot impediment. Little of Marcian's early life is known. His father had served in the military and at a young age Marcian enlisted at Philippopolis in Thrace. By the time of the Roman\u2013Sassanian War of 421\u2013422, Marcian had likely reached the military rank of tribune\u2014the historian Theophanes the Confessor mentions him commanding a military unit. He did not see action in the war, having become ill in Lycia. There he was cared for by Tatianus, who would be made (prefect of Constantinople) by Marcian, and Tatianus' brother Iulius. Marcian eventually rose to become the (personal assistant) of Aspar, the (commander-in-chief) of the Eastern Roman Empire. Despite being half-Alanic and half-Gothic, Aspar held much influence in the empire. In the early 430s, Marcian served under Aspar in Roman Africa, where he was captured by Vandals. Following the imperial propaganda written during Marcian's rule, Evagrius Scholasticus, Procopius and later authors give a likely false account in which Marcian, while in captivity, met the Vandal king Gaiseric, who predicted he would later become emperor. After his capture, Marcian is not mentioned again until the death of the eastern emperor, Theodosius\u00a0II.\nBackground.\nReign of Theodosius II.\nThe Eastern Roman Empire was plagued by external threats during the reign of Theodosius II. In 429, the Vandals, led by Gaiseric, began to conquer Roman Africa. Theodosius immediately organized a response, sending Aspar and three other commanders to attempt to repel them in the summer of 431. To the north, the Huns, who had customarily attacked the empire whenever its armies were preoccupied, withdrawing as those forces returned, sent ambassadors to Theodosius in 431, demanding tribute. He agreed to their demand to pay of gold each year. In 434, the Eastern Roman armies were still campaigning against the Vandals in Africa, having faced initial defeats and the withdrawal of many of the Western Roman soldiers. In the face of Eastern Roman weakness, the Huns doubled their demand, asking for of gold per year, which Theodosius agreed to. The threat the Huns posed to his weakly protected empire was enough that Theodosius recalled many of his forces from Africa. With large numbers of the Eastern Roman armies home, and Attila, who had just taken power in the Hunnic Confederation, busy campaigning to the north, Theodosius refused to pay the tribute and continued to refuse to until 439.\nOn 19 October 439, the Vandals defeated the weakened Eastern Roman armies and captured the major city of Carthage. Both the Western and Eastern Roman Empires began preparing a massive counter-offensive, stripping the Balkan provinces of protection. In the spring of 440, 1,100 ships set sail from Constantinople for Africa; sending away so many of the Eastern Roman forces was a huge gamble on Theodosius' part. He was betting the fortified cities along the Danube could delay the Huns long enough for the invasion force to gain a secure foothold in Africa, allowing troops to be withdrawn back to the northern frontier. This gamble worked until 442 when the bishop of Margus led a raiding party into the Huns' territory and desecrated their royal tombs. In response to this desecration, Attila demanded that the bishop be handed over. To ensure his own safety, the bishop struck a deal with Attila, surrendering the city of Margus to him in exchange for his own life. With control of Margus, Attila had a foothold across the Danube, which he aggressively exploited, capturing and destroying the cities of Viminacium, Singidunum, and Sirmium. Theodosius recalled Aspar to Constantinople and launched a counter-attack. After his force was decisively defeated, Theodosius undertook to pay tribute to the Huns every year, which he did until his death in 450.\nRise to the throne.\nAfter Theodosius\u00a0II died unexpectedly in a riding accident on 28 July 450, the Eastern Roman Empire faced its first succession crisis in 60 years. Theodosius had no sons, nor had he designated a successor. Some later sources state that he willed the throne to Marcian on his deathbed, but this is thought to be propaganda created by Marcian's supporters after his election. Marcian had served Aspar and his father Ardabur loyally for fifteen years. Aspar conspired to have Marcian elected and was able to negotiate with other powerful figures to have him made the emperor, despite his relative obscurity. There was a one-month interregnum where negotiations for the succession took place, one of which was with Pulcheria, Theodosius\u00a0II's sister, who agreed to marry Marcian; it is thought that Pulcheria agreed to marry Marcian on the condition that he would abandon Theodosius II's religious policies and convoke a Church council. Their marriage helped to legitimize Marcian's rule, as Pulcheria's family, the Theodosian dynasty, had direct ties to the throne. Despite being married to Marcian, Pulcheria kept the vow of virginity she had made in 413, at age 14, during her three years of marriage to him.\nHistorian Doug Lee proposes that negotiations were also needed between Aspar and Flavius Zeno, who was in a similar position of military power. Zeno was given the prestigious rank of patrician upon Marcian's ascension in 450, suggesting a deal whereby Zeno was rewarded for supporting Marcian instead of claiming the throne for himself; Zeno would ultimately die within a year of Marcian's accession. Aspar's son, Ardabur, was promoted to command the army of the Prefecture of the East as the new , soon after Marcian's accession.\nMarcian was elevated on 25 August 450, and Pulcheria's agreement to marry him likely boosted Marcian's legitimacy further. Like his successor Leo I, he was proclaimed emperor by the army at the Hebdomon. Marcian took the regnal name of Imperator Caesar Flavius Marcianus Augustus upon his coronation. The election of Marcian in 450 resulted in large changes to eastern imperial policy. Chrysaphius, the eunuch and (guard of the imperial chambers), who had exercised much influence over Theodosius, was either murdered or executed. Both Pulcheria and Zeno were opposed to Chrysaphius' influence, which may have motivated Marcian's actions. Marcian took a tougher stance against the Huns and a more direct role in ecclesiastical affairs. Byzantist Constance Head considers Marcian to be \"an independent-minded emperor.\" Lee states that Marcian \"can appear as a stronger figure than many other fifth-century incumbents of the imperial office\", but notes that \"Flavius Zeno and Pulcheria had both been opponents of Chrysaphius, so the changes may be more a reflection of their influence.\"\nReign.\nConflict with the Huns.\nAlmost immediately after becoming emperor, Marcian revoked Theodosius' treaties with Attila and proclaimed the end of subsidies. He stated that he might grant gifts if Attila was friendly, but Attila would be repelled if he attempted to raid the Eastern Roman Empire. At this time Attila was preparing to invade the Western Roman Empire, under the guise of helping Emperor Valentinian\u00a0III against the Visigoths. Attila reacted angrily to Marcian's proposal, demanding tribute, but did not alter his invasion plans. He led his horde from Pannonia in spring 451 into the Western Roman Empire. Flavius Aetius, who was the supreme commander of the Western Roman army as , organized a defense and called upon the Visigoths, Franks, Burgundians, Alans, Saxons, Celtic Armoricans, and other tribal groups numbering about 60,000 to aid him. Attila's forces were made up of Gepids, Alans, Sciri, Heruli, Rugians, along with some Franks, Burgundians, and Ostrogoths.\nAttila sacked Metz and attempted a siege of Orl\u00e9ans, before meeting Aetius' forces at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains, in northeast Gaul. This battle involved around 100,000 men and resulted in very large losses on both sides. After the battle, Attila retreated to the Great Hungarian Plain, and Aetius dismissed his coalition of tribes, sending them back to their own territories. In spring 452, Attila again launched a raid into Italy, which was almost entirely undefended. He was likely motivated by a desire for revenge, along with a need to raid to stabilize his tribal state, which was dependent upon raiding for loot and resources. Attila captured the city of Aquileia after a long and difficult siege, and sacked it. He then raided across northern Italy, taking Mediolanum (Milan) and other important cities. There was much fear that Attila would attack Rome itself, the walls of which were weaker than those of some cities he had already captured. During this period, other than cutting his lines of communication and harassing his rear forces, Aetius did not launch a direct attack on Attila.\nDespite the plunder he now had from capturing Aquileia, Milan, and other cities, Attila was quickly placed in a precarious situation, because of the actions of both Eastern and Western Rome. In Italy, he was seriously lacking in funds, having not received subsidies from either Eastern or Western Rome for two years. Constant warfare had depleted his forces. As well, Attila's homeland was threatened by the Eastern Empire which, despite the punitive raids he ordered, took the offensive against the Great Hungarian Plain in mid-452, attacking across the Danube and inflicting a defeat upon the Huns. The area attacked by the Eastern Romans was home to Ostrogoths and Gepids, two groups bitterly opposed to Hunnic rule, and was the breadbasket of the Hunnic Empire. The loss of food supply from Attila's own land coupled with a famine that Italy was suffering at the time, along with a plague that followed it, placed yet more strain upon Attila, allowing the Western Roman Empire to bribe him into retreating to his homeland. After returning to the Great Hungarian Plain, he threatened to invade the Eastern Empire the following spring and conquer it entirely. Marcian and Aspar ignored his threats. They reasoned, based upon the previous treaties that Attila had broken, that he could not be permanently deterred even by tons of gold. The pair believed the gold would be better spent building up armies, not appeasing threats. Also, the rich Asian and African provinces, which were protected behind Constantinople, were secure enough to allow the Eastern Empire to retake any European provinces it might lose. This campaign never came to fruition, as Attila died unexpectedly in 453, either from hemorrhaging or alcoholic suffocation, after celebrating a marriage to one of his many wives. After his death, his tribal confederation rapidly fell apart, starting first with rebellions of the Ostrogoths.\nThis fragmentation allowed the Eastern Empire to resume its policy of playing off barbarians against each other, to stop any one tribe from becoming too powerful. It is almost certain that the Gepid king Ardaric came to an agreement with Marcian. Ardaric had formed a coalition of the Rugians, Sciri, Heruli, and his own Gepids, which he led against the remaining Hunnic confederation. Ardaric, alongside the Ostrogoth leaders Theodemir, Valamir and Videmir, decisively defeated Attila's oldest son, Ellac, at the Battle of Nedao in 455, where he was slain. After this battle, the Hunnic confederation could no longer sustain the cohesion of its previous days, although they still remained prominent. In the wake of the reduced power of the Hunnic Empire, Marcian accepted the Ostrogoths, who had established themselves in Pannonia Prima and Valeria\u2014nominally two Western Roman provinces\u2014as . This marked the continuation of the tacit abandonment of a rigid Danube barrier, which had previously been manned by Roman , barbarians settled directly in Roman land in exchange for military service. For some time before Marcian, the had been replaced by , although the distinction between the two was increasingly breaking down. Marcian's successors would grant the status of to multiple peoples and ceding them lands in the recovered European provinces: the Rugians in eastern Thrace, Sciri in Lower Moesia and Scythia, Gepids in Dacia. This network of subject peoples, who were generally reliable and manageable, was beneficial to the Eastern Empire. The tribal peoples generally kept each other's power in check without Roman intervention. They could also be induced to serve the empire against its enemies by way of gifts, subsidies, and treaties. With the Hunnic empire's diminished might after the death of Attila, Marcian enjoyed a relatively peaceful reign, although he won some small campaigns against the Saracens in Syria and against the Blemmyes in Egypt.\nReligious policy.\nDuring the 5th century, a central religious issue was the debate concerning how the human and divine nature of Jesus Christ were associated, following the Arian controversy. The School of Alexandria, including theologians such as Athanasius, asserted the equality of Christ and God, and therefore focused upon the divinity of Christ. The School of Antioch, including theologians such as Theodore of Mopsuestia, determined not to lose the human aspect of Christ, focused upon his humanity.\nShortly before Marcian became emperor, the Second Council of Ephesus was held in 449. The council stated that Jesus had one divine united nature, a position called ; this was rejected by the Pope and the Patriarch of Constantinople because of disputes on the matter of Christology, as the Pope and Patriarch of Constantinople saw the belief in monophysitism as heretical.\nTo repudiate the Second Council of Ephesus, Marcian convened a new council of the imperial church, deemed to pass universally respected canons, in 451. Pulcheria may have influenced this decision or even made the convention of a council a requirement during her negotiations with Aspar to marry Marcian. The council was to take place near Constantinople so that the government could watch the proceedings closely. Initially, it was to be held at the city of Nicaea, which held enormous religious importance to the early church, as it was the site of its first council, the First Council of Nicaea in 325. However, Marcian successfully requested the transfer of the location to Chalcedon. This was closer to Constantinople and would allow him to respond quickly to any events along the Danube frontier. The Council of Chalcedon met in October 451. About 500 bishops attended it, most of them Eastern Roman, although two African bishops and two Papal legates sent by Pope Leo\u00a0I attended. This council condemned the Second Council of Ephesus and agreed that Jesus had a divine nature () and a human nature, united in one person (), \"without confusion, change, division, or separation.\"\nThe council also agreed to condemn the Coptic Pope Dioscorus\u00a0I of Alexandria, who had overseen the Second Council of Ephesus, and revoke the condemnations of Ibas of Edessa and Theodoret, which had taken place during this council. The council also repeated the importance of the See of Constantinople, placing it firmly in second place behind the See of Rome, and giving it the right to appoint bishops in the Eastern Roman Empire, over the objection of Pope Leo I; the Patriarchs of Alexandria also objected to the elevation of the See of Constantinople. The council ended in November 451, after which Marcian issued numerous edicts confirming the outcomes of the council; showing that the outcome of the council was not universally accepted. One such edict ordered the repression of Eutychianists, who did not believe in the hypostatic union of the two natures of Jesus, barring them from holding state offices, forbidding them from criticizing the Council of Chalcedon, and ordering their literature, along with that of the Nestorians, to be burned.\nThe anti-Miaphysite resolutions of the council led to a large increase in civil disruption in the eastern provinces of Syria and Egypt, where the majority of the population was Miaphysitic. Several violent revolts were put down with military force after significant bloodshed, in Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch; as well as sending the military to suppress monks in Palestine and placing troops in Alexandria to ensure the installation of Proterius of Alexandria, who was to replace the deposed Pope Dioscorus I. According to the Byzantist Alexander Vasiliev, even after these revolts were put down, the popular dissatisfaction with the state church among the Miaphysite and Nestorian population remained, as the eastern provinces became increasingly convinced of their need for independence from the Eastern Roman Empire. Vasiliev states that this would lead to long-lasting disloyalty toward the Eastern Roman government among the eastern provinces, ultimately facilitating the loss of these provinces to the Sassanians and later to the Arabs. Another result of the council and the subsequent edicts was that many Christians who disagreed with the council, including many Nestorians, migrated to the Sassanian Empire. The separation of the Miaphysites from the churches accepting Chalcedonian doctrine would be made final after the failed attempts of reconciliation under Emperor Justinian I (r.\u2009527\u00a0\u2013\u00a0565), the Miaphysites splitting the Oriental Orthodox Churches from the main body of Christians.\nMarcian also funded Pulcheria's extensive building projects until her death in July 453. All of them focused on the construction of religious buildings, including the Church of St. Mary of Blachernae and the Hodegon Monastery. Marcian was compared to both Paul the Apostle and the Biblical king David, by the legates at the Council of Chalcedon.\nEconomic and legal policy.\nAt the beginning of Marcian's reign, the Eastern Roman treasury was almost bankrupt, the result of the huge tributes paid to Attila by Theodosius. Marcian reversed this near bankruptcy, not by levying new taxes, but by cutting expenditure. Upon his accession, he declared a remission of all debts owed to the state. Marcian attempted to improve the efficiency of the state in multiple ways. He laid out legal reforms in his novels, or codes of law, containing 20 laws, many of which were targeted at reducing the corruption and abuses of office that had existed during the reign of Theodosius; five of which are preserved in full.\nMarcian mandated that the office of praetorship (officer in charge of public games and works) could only be given to senators who resided in Constantinople, attempted to curb the practice of selling administrative offices, and decreed that consuls should be responsible for the maintenance of Constantinople's aqueducts. He repealed the , a tax on senators' property that amounted to seven pounds of gold per annum. Marcian removed the financial responsibilities of the consuls and praetors, held since the time of the Roman Republic, to fund public sports and games or give wealth to the citizens of Constantinople, respectively. He further decreed that only a (a high-ranking man) could hold either office. He also partially repealed a marriage law enacted by Constantine I, which decreed that a man of senatorial status could not marry a slave, freedwoman, actress, or woman of no social status (), which had been created in an attempt to preserve the purity of the senatorial class. Marcian adjusted this law by declaring that the law should not exclude a woman of good character, regardless of her social status or wealth. By the time of his death, Marcian's shrewd cutting of expenditures and his avoidance of large-scale wars left the Eastern Roman treasury with a surplus of of gold.\nIn 451, Marcian decreed that anyone who performed pagan rites would lose their property and be condemned to death and that no pagan temples, which had previously been closed, could be reopened. To ensure this law was implemented, he set a penalty of of gold for any judge, governor or official who did not enforce the law.\nPolitics.\nWhen Marcian became emperor, he was influenced by Flavius Zeno, Pulcheria, and Aspar. Flavius Zeno died soon after Marcian ascended the throne, possibly as early as the end of 451, and Pulcheria died in July 453, leaving Aspar as the only major influence in the court of the Eastern Roman Empire. This influence was enhanced by the promotion of his son Ardabur to . It is unknown if Aspar and Ardabur influenced Marcian's policies directly, but if so, they were extremely careful to avoid upsetting the ruling elites of Constantinople. Despite Aspar's great influence, the Eastern Roman elites retained much of their anti-barbarian sentiment. Marcian's principal advisors were Pulcheria, Euphemius the (master of offices), Palladius the praetor, and Anatolius of Constantinople. In 453, Marcian had his daughter from a previous marriage, Marcia Euphemia, marry Anthemius, an aristocrat and talented general.\nMarcian patronized the Blues, who were one of the two main circus teams, the other being the Greens. The two teams had become more like political parties than sports teams by his time, wielding large influence in the empire; both vied for power. After the Greens responded angrily to his patronage, Marcian censured them, forbidding any of them to hold any public office for three years. Marcian's patronage of the Blues may have had personal motivations, as the once powerful Chrysaphius had been favorable to the Greens.\nForeign relations.\nThe Armenian king Vardan II Mamikonian, who was leading a revolt against the Sassanian Empire, sent an embassy to Theodosius in 450, composed of his brother Hmayeak Mamikonian, along with Atom Gnuni, Vardan Amatuni, and Meruzhan Artsruni, to ask for assistance. Theodosius received it favorably. Any plans were cut short by his death and the accession of Marcian. Marcian was counseled by the diplomat Anatolius and Florentius not to make war with the Sassanians, as it would engulf a large amount of the Eastern Roman military resources, and thus Marcian did not agree to help them.\nKing Gubazes I of Lazica\u2014a Caucasian state in theory under Eastern Roman suzerainty\u2014was attempting to form an alliance with the Sassanians to break free of Roman control in 456. Marcian's troops invaded Lazica and restored Roman rule. In 455, Marcian banned the export to barbarian tribes of weapons and the tools used to manufacture them.\nRelationship with the Western Roman Empire.\nMarcian was elected without any consultation with the Western Roman Emperor Valentinian III, a clear indication of further separation between the Eastern and Western Roman Empires than before his reign. Valentinian would later recognize Marcian as the Eastern Roman Emperor, although the date of this recognition is disputed; Lee states that Valentinian recognized Marcian in March 452, whereas historian Timothy E. Gregory states that Marcian was recognized by Valentinian on 30 March 451. Marcian's appointment marked a further stage of separation between the Eastern and Western Roman Empires. One source, John of Antioch's , even suggest that Valentinian would have attempted to depose Marcian, but for Aetius' opposition. Valentinian also did not recognize the Eastern Roman consuls for 451 or 452. The Western Roman chronicler Hydatius suggests that Marcian made Eastern Roman troops available to Valentinian to repel the Huns, confusingly led by a man named Aetius, which may simply be a muddling of Aetius' campaign against Attila and Marcian's campaign against the Huns on the Danube.\nWhen Marcian granted part of Pannonia to the Ostrogoths, and the Tisza region to the Gepids, he was accused of encroaching upon the border of Western Roman land. Marcian avoided involving himself with the affairs of the Western Roman Empire when possible. When the Vandals sacked Rome in 455, after Petronius Maximus assassinated Valentinian\u00a0III and broke an engagement treaty with the Vandals, Marcian did not respond violently, possibly because of the influence of Aspar. He merely sent an envoy demanding that the Vandals return the Dowager Empress, Licinia Eudoxia and her daughters by Valentinian III, Placidia and Eudocia. A likely false account is given that Marcian, while captured by the Vandals in his youth, was shaded by an eagle while the other prisoners suffered the hot sun. According to this account, the Vandal King Gaiseric recognized that Marcian would later be emperor. In exchange for being released, he made Marcian pledge not to attack the Vandals should he become emperor. This account originates from Priscus, who served as an advisor to Marcian's confidant, Euphemius. Because of Euphemius' influence over foreign policy, some historians, such as Edward Arthur Thompson, have suggested that this account was a part of official imperial propaganda, which was generated to excuse Marcian's lack of retribution towards the Vandals, and quell any discontent. Marcian made several diplomatic attempts to have the prisoners returned, before finally beginning to plan an invasion of the Vandal's territory shortly before his death. The historian Frank Clover has suggested that this sudden reversal of policy was caused by the marriage of Eudocia to Huneric, the son of Gaiseric, which led to such pressure from Eastern Roman elites that Marcian was forced to begin preparations for war to ensure the return of the hostages. Around this time, Marcian made peace with Lazica, which would allow him to direct his attention elsewhere. The East Roman historian Theodorus Lector speaks of Marcian's sudden reversal of policy, and Evagrius Scholasticus, a Roman historian writing a century after the event, states that the Vandals released Licinia Eudoxia, Placidia, and Eudocia to Marcian after he threatened them with war, in either late 456 or early 457.\nMarcian did not recognize any Western Emperor after Valentinian, denying Petronius Maximus, now Western Emperor, when he sent an embassy requesting it, and similarly refusing to recognize Avitus, who succeeded Maximus. Marcian's exact treatment of Avitus is debated. The Roman historian Hydatius states that in 455 Avitus sent ambassadors to Marcian \"for the sake of unanimity of power,\" and that, \"Marcian and Avitus make use of Roman power in concord\". The exact usage of concord ( in the original Latin) has led to debate among scholars. Some such as Thomas Hodgkin, J. B. Bury, and William Bayless consider it grounds for the belief that Marcian may have recognized Avitus. Most scholars take a more conservative stance on it; Ernst Stein suggests that it is merely a reflection of West Roman propaganda, whereas Norman Baynes believes it indicates that Marcian was cordial to Avitus, neither hostile nor friendly. Classicist Courtenay Edward Stevens interprets the phrase as meaning only that the meeting of the diplomats was amicable, rather than reflecting a relationship between the two states.\nThe historian Geoffrey Nathan suggests the fact that only two Western delegates attended the Council of Chalcedon points to a new level of Western Roman self-absorption in their own political and religious affairs. He mentions that the canon from this council delegating authority over the whole east to the See of Constantinople marks a religious separation. Authority over the Church in the Eastern Roman Empire would prove a point of contention between Rome and Constantinople, leading up to the East\u2013West Schism.\nDeath.\nMarcian's reign ended on 27 January 457, when he died, aged 65, possibly of gangrene. Theodorus Lector and Theophanes the Confessor say that Marcian died after a long religious procession from the Grand Palace to the Hebdomon, where he made the journey on foot, despite the fact that he could barely walk because of severe foot inflammation, possibly gout. He was buried in the Church of the Holy Apostles, in Constantinople, next to his wife Pulcheria, in a porphyry sarcophagus that was described in the 10th century by Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus in the . He left the Eastern Empire with seven million solidi in its treasury, an impressive achievement considering the economic ruin inflicted upon Eastern Rome by the Huns, both through warfare and the massive subsidies they received under Theodosius.\nAlthough Marcian had a son-in-law, Anthemius, he did not have any connection to the Theodosians, which Marcian himself had gained through his marriage to Pulcheria, and thus would not be considered a legitimate dynastic heir, so Aspar was once again left to play the role of emperor-maker. He selected Leo\u00a0I, a fifty-year-old officer commanding a unit in one of the praesental armies\u2014two field armies based near Constantinople. A later source claims that the Eastern Roman Senate offered to elect Aspar himself, but he declined, with the cryptic comment: \"I fear that a tradition in ruling might be initiated through me\". This comment has often been interpreted to be a reference to the fact that he was an Arian, or else to his Alanic heritage.\nAnthemius would later be sent by Leo to become the Western Roman emperor; Leo nominated him to be Western Emperor in the spring of 467, to fill the vacancy left by the death of Emperor Libius Severus since 465. Leo sent Anthemius to Rome with an army, headed by Marcellinus, the of Dalmatia; upon nearing Rome, Anthemius was installed as emperor on 12 April 467.\nLegacy.\nMarcian was regarded favorably by Eastern Roman and Byzantine sources, often compared to Emperors Constantine\u00a0I and Theodosius\u00a0I. Marcian's reign was seen by many later Byzantine writers, such as Theophanes the Confessor, as a golden age: Marcian secured the Eastern Empire both politically and financially, set an orthodox religious line that future emperors would follow, and stabilized the capital city politically. Some later scholars attribute his success not just to his skill, but also to a large degree of luck. Not only had he been fortunate enough to have Pulcheria to legitimize his rule, but for much of it the two greatest external threats to Rome, the Sassanian Empire and the Huns, were absorbed with their own internal problems. Further, no natural disasters or plagues occurred during his reign. He was remembered fondly by the people of Constantinople, who would shout \"Reign like Marcian!\" at the installation of future emperors.\nThe Prefect of Constantinople Tatianus built a column dedicated to Marcian, sometime between 450 and 452. It still stands in Istanbul, near the north branch of the Mese, though the statue of Marcian that originally topped it has been lost. Marcian also had a statue in the Forum of Arcadius, which contained the statues of several of the successors of Emperor Arcadius. Marcian may have been the sponsor of the Chrysotriklinos of the Great Palace of Constantinople. The states that Marcian constructed it, whereas the 10th century encyclopedia states that Emperor Justin\u00a0II built it, a view with which most historians agree. The Byzantine historian Joannes Zonaras states that Justin\u00a0II actually rebuilt an older construction, which some historians identify as the Heptaconch Hall of Emperor Justinian.\nIn popular culture.\nMarcian is played by the Hollywood star Jeff Chandler in the 1954 period adventure \"Sign of the Pagan\". Jack Palance co-stars as Attila and Ludmilla Tch\u00e9rina plays Pulcheria.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53740", "revid": "37982794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53740", "title": "Marcianus", "text": ""}
{"id": "53741", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53741", "title": "Symmetry", "text": "Mathematical invariance under transformations\nSymmetry (from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'agreement in dimensions, due proportion, arrangement') in everyday life refers to a sense of harmonious and beautiful proportion and balance. In mathematics, the term has a more precise definition and is usually used to refer to an object that is invariant under some transformations, such as translation, reflection, rotation, or scaling. Although these two meanings of the word can sometimes be told apart, they are intricately related, and hence are discussed together in this article.\nMathematical symmetry may be observed with respect to the passage of time; as a spatial relationship; through geometric transformations; through other kinds of functional transformations; and as an aspect of abstract objects, including theoretic models, language, and music.\nThis article describes symmetry from three perspectives: in mathematics, including geometry, the most familiar type of symmetry for many people; in science and nature; and in the arts, covering architecture, art, and music.\nThe opposite of symmetry is asymmetry, which refers to the absence of symmetry.\nIn mathematics.\nIn geometry.\nA geometric shape or object is symmetric if it can be divided into two or more identical pieces that are arranged in an organized fashion. This means that an object is symmetric if there is a transformation that moves individual pieces of the object, but doesn't change the overall shape. The type of symmetry is determined by the way the pieces are organized, or by the type of transformation:\nIn logic.\nA dyadic relation \"R\" = \"S\" \u00d7 \"S\" is symmetric if for all elements \"a\", \"b\" in \"S\", whenever it is true that \"Rab\", it is also true that \"Rba\". Thus, the relation \"is the same age as\" is symmetric, for if Paul is the same age as Mary, then Mary is the same age as Paul.\nIn propositional logic, symmetric binary logical connectives include \"and\" (\u2227, or &amp;), \"or\" (\u2228, or |) and \"if and only if\" (\u2194), while the connective \"if\" (\u2192) is not symmetric. Other symmetric logical connectives include \"nand\" (not-and, or \u22bc), \"xor\" (not-biconditional, or \u22bb), and \"nor\" (not-or, or \u22bd).\nOther areas of mathematics.\nGeneralizing from geometrical symmetry in the previous section, one can say that a mathematical object is \"symmetric\" with respect to a given mathematical operation, if, when applied to the object, this operation preserves some property of the object. The set of operations that preserve a given property of the object form a group.\nIn general, every kind of structure in mathematics will have its own kind of symmetry. Examples include even and odd functions in calculus, symmetric groups in abstract algebra, symmetric matrices in linear algebra, and Galois groups in Galois theory. In statistics, symmetry also manifests as symmetric probability distributions, and as skewness\u2014the asymmetry of distributions.\nIn science and nature.\nIn physics.\nSymmetry in physics has been generalized to mean invariance\u2014that is, lack of change\u2014under any kind of transformation, for example arbitrary coordinate transformations. This concept has become one of the most powerful tools of theoretical physics, as it has become evident that practically all laws of nature originate in symmetries. In fact, this role inspired the Nobel laureate PW Anderson to write in his widely read 1972 article \"More is Different\" that \"it is only slightly overstating the case to say that physics is the study of symmetry.\" See Noether's theorem (which, in greatly simplified form, states that for every continuous mathematical symmetry, there is a corresponding conserved quantity such as energy or momentum; a conserved current, in Noether's original language); and also, Wigner's classification, which says that the symmetries of the laws of physics determine the properties of the particles found in nature.\nImportant symmetries in physics include continuous symmetries and discrete symmetries of spacetime; internal symmetries of particles; and supersymmetry of physical theories.\nIn biology.\nIn biology, the notion of symmetry is mostly used explicitly to describe body shapes. Bilateral animals, including humans, are more or less symmetric with respect to the sagittal plane which divides the body into left and right halves. Animals that move in one direction necessarily have upper and lower sides, head and tail ends, and therefore a left and a right. The head becomes specialized with a mouth and sense organs, and the body becomes bilaterally symmetric for the purpose of movement, with symmetrical pairs of muscles and skeletal elements, though internal organs often remain asymmetric.\nPlants and sessile (attached) animals such as sea anemones often have radial or rotational symmetry, which suits them because food or threats may arrive from any direction. Fivefold symmetry is found in the echinoderms, the group that includes starfish, sea urchins, and sea lilies.\nIn biology, the notion of symmetry is also used as in physics, that is to say to describe the properties of the objects studied, including their interactions. A remarkable property of biological evolution is the changes of symmetry corresponding to the appearance of new parts and dynamics.\nIn chemistry.\nSymmetry is important to chemistry because it undergirds essentially all \"specific\" interactions between molecules in nature (i.e., via the interaction of natural and human-made chiral molecules with inherently chiral biological systems). The control of the symmetry of molecules produced in modern chemical synthesis contributes to the ability of scientists to offer therapeutic interventions with minimal side effects. A rigorous understanding of symmetry explains fundamental observations in quantum chemistry, and in the applied areas of spectroscopy and crystallography. The theory and application of symmetry to these areas of physical science draws heavily on the mathematical area of group theory.\nIn psychology and neuroscience.\nFor a human observer, some symmetry types are more salient than others, in particular the most salient is a reflection with a vertical axis, like that present in the human face. Ernst Mach made this observation in his book \"The analysis of sensations\" (1897), and this implies that perception of symmetry is not a general response to all types of regularities. Both behavioural and neurophysiological studies have confirmed the special sensitivity to reflection symmetry in humans and also in other animals. Early studies within the Gestalt tradition suggested that bilateral symmetry was one of the key factors in perceptual grouping. This is known as the Law of Symmetry. The role of symmetry in grouping and figure/ground organization has been confirmed in many studies. For instance, detection of reflectional symmetry is faster when this is a property of a single object. Studies of human perception and psychophysics have shown that detection of symmetry is fast, efficient and robust to perturbations. For example, symmetry can be detected with presentations between 100 and 150 milliseconds.\nMore recent neuroimaging studies have documented which brain regions are active during perception of symmetry. Sasaki et al. used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare responses for patterns with symmetrical or random dots. A strong activity was present in extrastriate regions of the occipital cortex but not in the primary visual cortex. The extrastriate regions included V3A, V4, V7, and the lateral occipital complex (LOC). Electrophysiological studies have found a late posterior negativity that originates from the same areas. In general, a large part of the visual system seems to be involved in processing visual symmetry, and these areas involve similar networks to those responsible for detecting and recognising objects.\nIn social interactions.\nPeople observe the symmetrical nature, often including asymmetrical balance, of social interactions in a variety of contexts. These include assessments of reciprocity, empathy, sympathy, apology, dialogue, respect, justice, and revenge.\nReflective equilibrium is the balance that may be attained through deliberative mutual adjustment among general principles and specific judgments.\nSymmetrical interactions send the moral message \"we are all the same\" while asymmetrical interactions may send the message \"I am special; better than you.\" Peer relationships, such as can be governed by the Golden Rule, are based on symmetry, whereas power relationships are based on asymmetry. Symmetrical relationships can to some degree be maintained by simple (game theory) strategies seen in symmetric games such as tit for tat.\nIn the arts.\nThere exists a list of journals and newsletters known to deal, at least in part, with symmetry and the arts.\nIn architecture.\nSymmetry finds its ways into architecture at every scale, from the overall external views of buildings such as Gothic cathedrals and The White House, through the layout of the individual floor plans, and down to the design of individual building elements such as tile mosaics. Islamic buildings such as the Taj Mahal and the Lotfollah mosque make elaborate use of symmetry both in their structure and in their ornamentation. Moorish buildings like the Alhambra are ornamented with complex patterns made using translational and reflection symmetries as well as rotations.\nIt has been said that only bad architects rely on a \"symmetrical layout of blocks, masses and structures\"; Modernist architecture, starting with International style, relies instead on \"wings and balance of masses\".\nIn pottery and metal vessels.\nSince the earliest uses of pottery wheels to help shape clay vessels, pottery has had a strong relationship to symmetry. Pottery created using a wheel acquires full rotational symmetry in its cross-section, while allowing substantial freedom of shape in the vertical direction. Upon this inherently symmetrical starting point, potters from ancient times onwards have added patterns that modify the rotational symmetry to achieve visual objectives.\nCast metal vessels lacked the inherent rotational symmetry of wheel-made pottery, but otherwise provided a similar opportunity to decorate their surfaces with patterns pleasing to those who used them. The ancient Chinese, for example, used symmetrical patterns in their bronze castings as early as the 17th century BC. Bronze vessels exhibited both a bilateral main motif and a repetitive translated border design.\nIn carpets and rugs.\nA long tradition of the use of symmetry in carpet and rug patterns spans a variety of cultures. American Navajo Indians used bold diagonals and rectangular motifs. Many Oriental rugs have intricate reflected centers and borders that translate a pattern. Not surprisingly, rectangular rugs have typically the symmetries of a rectangle\u2014that is, motifs that are reflected across both the horizontal and vertical axes (see ).\nIn quilts.\nAs quilts are made from square blocks (usually 9, 16, or 25 pieces to a block) with each smaller piece usually consisting of fabric triangles, the craft lends itself readily to the application of symmetry.\nIn other arts and crafts.\nSymmetries appear in the design of objects of all kinds. Examples include beadwork, furniture, sand paintings, knotwork, masks, and musical instruments. Symmetries are central to the art of M.C. Escher and the many applications of tessellation in art and craft forms such as wallpaper, ceramic tilework such as in Islamic geometric decoration, batik, ikat, carpet-making, and many kinds of textile and embroidery patterns.\nSymmetry is also used in designing logos. By creating a logo on a grid and using the theory of symmetry, designers can organize their work, create a symmetric or asymmetrical design, determine the space between letters, determine how much negative space is required in the design, and how to accentuate parts of the logo to make it stand out.\nIn music.\nSymmetry is not restricted to the visual arts. Its role in the history of music touches many aspects of the creation and perception of music.\nMusical form.\nSymmetry has been used as a formal constraint by many composers, such as the arch (swell) form (ABCBA) used by Steve Reich, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, and James Tenney. In classical music, Johann Sebastian Bach used the symmetry concepts of permutation and invariance.\nPitch structures.\nSymmetry is also an important consideration in the formation of scales and chords, traditional or tonal music being made up of non-symmetrical groups of pitches, such as the diatonic scale or the major chord. Symmetrical scales or chords, such as the whole tone scale, augmented chord, or diminished seventh chord (diminished-diminished seventh), are said to lack direction or a sense of forward motion, are ambiguous as to the key or tonal center, and have a less specific diatonic functionality. However, composers such as Alban Berg, B\u00e9la Bart\u00f3k, and George Perle have used axes of symmetry and/or interval cycles in an analogous way to keys or non-tonal tonal centers. George Perle explains that \"C\u2013E, D\u2013F\u266f, [and] Eb\u2013G, are different instances of the same interval \u2026 the other kind of identity. \u2026 has to do with axes of symmetry. C\u2013E belongs to a family of symmetrically related dyads as follows:\"\nThus in addition to being part of the interval-4 family, C\u2013E is also a part of the sum-4 family (with C equal to 0).\nInterval cycles are symmetrical and thus non-diatonic. However, a seven pitch segment of C5 (the cycle of fifths, which are enharmonic with the cycle of fourths) will produce the diatonic major scale. Cyclic tonal progressions in the works of Romantic composers such as Gustav Mahler and Richard Wagner form a link with the cyclic pitch successions in the atonal music of Modernists such as Bart\u00f3k, Alexander Scriabin, Edgard Var\u00e8se, and the Vienna school. At the same time, these progressions signal the end of tonality.\nThe first extended composition consistently based on symmetrical pitch relations was probably Alban Berg's \"Quartet\", Op. 3 (1910).\nEquivalency.\nTone rows or pitch class sets which are invariant under retrograde are horizontally symmetrical, under inversion vertically. See also Asymmetric rhythm.\nIn aesthetics.\nThe relationship of symmetry to aesthetics is complex. Humans find bilateral symmetry in faces physically attractive; it indicates health and genetic fitness. Opposed to this is the tendency for excessive symmetry to be perceived as boring or uninteresting. Rudolf Arnheim suggested that people prefer shapes that have some symmetry, and enough complexity to make them interesting.\nIn literature.\nSymmetry can be found in various forms in literature, a simple example being the palindrome where a brief text reads the same forwards or backwards. Stories may have a symmetrical structure, such as the rise and fall pattern of \"Beowulf\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53743", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53743", "title": "Alex Cox", "text": "English film director, screenwriter, and actor (born 1954)\nAlexander B. H. Cox (born 15 December 1954) is an English film director, screenwriter, actor, non-fiction author and broadcaster. Cox experienced success early in his career with \"Repo Man\" (1984) and \"Sid and Nancy\" (1986). Since the release and commercial failure of \"Walker\" (1987), his career has moved towards independent films, including \"Highway Patrolman\" (1991) and \"Three Businessmen\" (1998), and microbudget features such as \"Searchers 2.0\" (2007) and \"Repo Chick\" (2009).\nCox has taught screenwriting and film production at the University of Colorado, Boulder and has written numerous educational books on film and television.\nEarly life.\nCox was born in Bebington, Merseyside, England in 1954. He attended Worcester College, Oxford, and later transferred to the University of Bristol, where he majored in film studies. Cox secured a Fulbright Scholarship, allowing him to study at the University of California, Los Angeles, United States, where he graduated from the School of Theater, Film and Television with an MFA.\nFilm career.\nStudy and independent.\nCox began reading law as an undergraduate at Oxford University, but left to study radio, film and TV at Bristol University, graduating in 1977. Seeing difficulties in the British film scene at the time, he first went to Los Angeles to attend film school at UCLA in 1977. There he produced his first film, \"Edge City\" (also known as \"Sleep Is for Sissies\"), a 40-minute surreal short about an artist struggling against society. After graduation, Cox formed Edge City Productions with two friends with the intention of producing low-budget feature films. He wrote a screenplay for \"Repo Man\", which he hoped to produce for a budget of $70,000, and began seeking funding.\nHollywood and major studio period (1978\u20131987).\nMichael Nesmith agreed to produce \"Repo Man\", and convinced Universal Studios to back the project with a budget of over a million dollars. During the course of the film's production, the studio's management changed, and the new management had far less faith in the project. The initial cinema release was limited to Chicago, followed by Los Angeles, and was short-lived.\nAfter the success of the soundtrack album (notable for featuring many popular LA punk bands), there was enough interest in the film to earn a re-release in a single cinema in New York City, but only after becoming available on video and cable. Nevertheless, it ran for 18 months, and eventually earned $4,000,000.\nContinuing his fascination with punk music, Cox's next film was an independent feature shot in London and Los Angeles, following the career and death of bassist Sid Vicious and his girlfriend Nancy Spungen, initially titled \"Love Kills\" and later renamed \"Sid and Nancy\". It was met warmly by critics and fans, though heavily criticised by some, including Pistols' frontman John Lydon, for its inaccuracies. The production of this film also sparked a relationship with Joe Strummer of the Clash, who would continue to collaborate with the director on his next two films.\nCox had long been interested in Nicaragua and the Sandinistas (both \"Repo Man\" and \"Edge City\" made references to Nicaragua and/or Latin American revolution), and visited in 1984. The following year, he hoped to shoot a concert film there featuring the Clash, the Pogues and Elvis Costello. When he could not get backing, he decided instead to write a film that they would all act in. The film became \"Straight to Hell\". Collaborating with Dick Rude (who also co-starred beside Strummer, Sy Richardson and Courtney Love), he imagined the film as a spoof of the Spaghetti Western genre, filmed in Almer\u00eda, Spain, where many classic Italian westerns were shot. \"Straight to Hell\" was widely panned critically, but successful in Japan and retains a cult following. On 1 June 2012, Cox wrote an article in \"The New York Times\" about his long-standing interest in spaghetti westerns.\nContinuing his interest in Nicaragua, Cox took on a more overtly political project, with the intention of filming it there. He asked Rudy Wurlitzer to pen the screenplay, which followed the life of William Walker, set against a backdrop of anachronisms that drew parallels between the story and modern American intervention in the area. The $6,000,000 production was backed by Universal, but the completed film was too political and too violent for the studio's tastes, and the film went without promotion. When \"Walker\" failed to perform at the box office, it ended the director's involvement with Hollywood studios, and led to a period of several years in which Cox would not direct a single film. Despite this, Cox and some critics maintain that it is his best film.\nMexican period (1988\u20131996).\nIn 1988, The Writers Guild of America West barred Cox from any future membership because he had worked on scripts during the writers' strike. Effectively blacklisted, Alex Cox struggled to find feature work. He finally got financial backing for a feature from investors in Japan, where his films had been successful on video. Cox had scouted locations in Mexico during the pre-production of \"Walker\" and decided he wanted to shoot a film there, with a local cast and crew, in Spanish. Producer Lorenzo O'Brien penned the script. Inspired by the style of Mexican directors including Arturo Ripstein, he shot most of the film in \"plano secuencia\"; long, continuous takes shot with a hand-held camera. \"El Patrullero\" was completed and released in 1991, but struggled to find its way into cinemas.\nShortly after this, Cox was invited to adapt a Jorge Luis Borges story of his choice for the BBC. He chose \"Death and the Compass\". Despite being a British production and an English language film, he convinced his producers to let him shoot in Mexico City. This film, like his previous Mexican production, made extensive use of long-takes. The completed 55-minute film aired on the BBC in 1992.\nCox had hoped to expand this into a feature-length film, but the BBC was uninterested. Japanese investors gave him $100,000 to expand the film in 1993, but the production ran over-budget, allowing no funds for post-production. To secure funds, Cox directed a \"work for hire\" project called \"The Winner\". The film was edited extensively without Cox's knowledge, and he tried to have his name removed from the credits as a result but was denied, but the money was enough for Cox to fund the completion of \"Death and the Compass\". The finished, 82-minute feature received a limited cinema release in the US, where the TV version had not aired, in 1996.\nDami\u00e1n Alc\u00e1zar, who had a small role in \"El Patrullero,\" went on to collaborate on many occasions with Mexican director Luis Estrada, in two of whose films, \"Herod's Law\" (1999) and \"A Wonderful World\" (2006), Cox appears. However, in \"A Wonderful World\", Cox's role is reduced to a cameo at the end of the film.\nLiverpool period (1997\u20132006).\nIn 1996, producer Stephen Nemeth employed Alex Cox to write and direct an adaptation of Hunter S. Thompson's \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\". After creative disagreements with the producer and Thompson, he was sacked from the project, and his script rewritten when Terry Gilliam took over the film. (Cox later sued successfully for a writing credit, as it was ruled that there were enough similarities between the drafts to suggest that Gilliam's was derivative of Cox's. Gilliam countered that the screenplays were based on the source book and similarities between them were a consequence of this.)\nIn 1997, Alex Cox made a deal with Dutch producer Wim Kayzer to produce another dual TV/feature production, \"Three Businessmen\". Initially, Cox had hoped to shoot in Mexico but later decided to set his story in Liverpool, Rotterdam, Tokyo and Almer\u00eda. The story follows businessmen in Liverpool who leave their hotel in search of food and slowly drift further from their starting point, all the while believing they are still in Liverpool. The film was completed for a small budget of $250,000. Following this, Cox moved back to Liverpool and became interested in creating films there.\nCox had long been interested in the Jacobean play, \"The Revenger's Tragedy\", and upon moving back to Britain, decided to pursue adapting it to a film. Collaborating with fellow Liverpudlian screenwriter Frank Cottrell Boyce, the story was recast in the near future, following an unseen war. This adaptation, titled \"Revengers Tragedy\", consisted primarily of the original play's dialogue, with some additional bits written in a more modern tone. The film is also notable for its soundtrack, composed by Chumbawamba.\nFollowing this, Cox directed a short film set in Liverpool for the BBC titled \"I'm a Juvenile Delinquent \u2013 Jail Me!\" (2004). The 30-minute film satirised reality television as well as the high volume of petty crime in Liverpool which, according to Cox, is largely recreational.\nMicrofeature period (2007\u2013present).\nIn 2006, Alex Cox tried to get funding for a series of eight very low budget features set in Liverpool and produced by locals. The project was not completed, but the director grew interested in pursuing the idea of a film made for less than \u00a3100,000. He had originally hoped to shoot \"Repo Man\" on a comparable budget, and hoped that the lower overhead would mean greater creative freedom.\n\"Searchers 2.0\", named after but not based on \"The Searchers\", became Cox's first film for which he has sole writing credit since \"Repo Man\", and marked his return to the comedy genre. A road movie and a revenge story, it tells of two actors, loosely based on and played by Del Zamora and Ed Pansullo, who travel from Los Angeles to a desert film screening in Monument Valley in the hopes of avenging abuse inflicted on them by a cruel screenwriter, Fritz Frobisher (Sy Richardson). It was scored by longtime collaborator Dan Wool aka Pray for Rain (\"Sid &amp; Nancy\", \"Straight to Hell\", \"Death &amp; the Compass\", \"The Winner\", \"Three Businessmen\", \"Repo Chick\" among others). Although the film was unable to achieve a cinema release in America or Europe, Cox claimed the experience of making a film with a smaller crew and less restrictions was energising. It is available on DVD in Japan, and was released in October 2010 in North America.\nAlex Cox had attempted to get a \"Repo Man\" sequel, titled \"Waldo's Hawaiian Holiday\", produced in the mid-'90s, but the project fell apart, with the script adapted into a graphic novel of the same name. For his next micro-feature, he wrote a fresh attempt at a \"Repo\" follow-up, although it contained no recurring characters, so as to preserve Universal's rights to the original. \"Repo Chick\" was filmed entirely against a green screen, with backgrounds of digital composites, live action shots, and miniatures matted in afterwards, to produce an artificial look. It premiered at the Venice Film Festival on 9 September 2009.\nAs of July 2012[ [update]], Cox was teaching film production and screenwriting at the University of Colorado at Boulder.\nIn 2013 Cox directed \"Bill, the Galactic Hero\", developed from a science fiction book by Harry Harrison. It was funded by a successful Kickstarter funding campaign, raising $114,957 of the original $100,000 goal. The film was to be made, created and acted by his film students in monochrome with supervision from professional film makers who would be giving their time on the film for free.\nCox's 2013 book \"The President and the Provocateur\" examines events in the lives of John F. Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald leading up to Kennedy's assassination, with reference to the various conspiracy theories.\nIn 2017 Cox directed another crowdfunded film, \"Tombstone Rashomon\", which tells the tale of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral from multiple perspectives in the style of Akira Kurosawa's 1950 film \"Rashomon\".\nIn September 2019, Cox started the podcast \"Conversations with Cox and Kj\u00f8lseth\" with his friend and colleague Pablo Kj\u00f8lseth. In October 2022, Cox announced the end of the podcast, citing its small audience and the comparative success of podcasts by Joe Dante, Quentin Tarantino and Cox's one-time collaborator Roger Deakins.\nIn June 2024 Cox began crowdfunding a film adaptation of Nikolai Gogol's novel \"Dead Souls\", which he says will be his last film.\n\"Moviedrome\".\nIn May 1988 Cox began presenting the long-running and influential BBC series \"Moviedrome\". The weekly strand was a showcase for cult films. Though most of the films shown were chosen by series creator and producer Nick Jones, each film was introduced by Cox. By the time he left the show in September 1994, Cox had introduced 141 films. Various film directors have cited \"Moviedrome\" as an influence, including Ben Wheatley and Edgar Wright. The series was later presented by film director and critic Mark Cousins.\nInfluences and style.\nCox has cited Luis Bu\u00f1uel and Akira Kurosawa as influences, as well as the Western film directors Sergio Leone, Sergio Corbucci, Sam Peckinpah, John Ford and Giulio Questi. Cox also wrote a book on the history of the genre called \"10,000 Ways to Die\". While he once directed films for Universal Pictures, such as \"Repo Man\" and \"Walker\", since the late 1980s, he has found himself on a self-described blacklist, and turned to producing independent films. Cox is an atheist and is decidedly left-wing in his political views. Many of his films have an explicit anti-capitalist theme or message. He was originally set to direct \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" but was replaced by Terry Gilliam due to creative differences with Hunter S. Thompson. By August 2009, Cox had announced completion of \"Repo Chick\", which premiered at the Venice Film Festival the following month, but he remained ambivalent as to whether the film would ever be distributed to cinemas. His previous film, \"Searchers 2.0\", was not released theatrically, and only appears on DVD in Japan and North America after a televised screening in the UK on the BBC.\nCox is a fan of the Japanese \"Godzilla\" films and appeared in a 1998 BBC documentary highlighting the series. He also narrated the documentary \"Bringing Godzilla Down to Size\" and wrote the \"Godzilla in Time\" comics for Dark Horse. He tried to direct an American \"Godzilla\" film at one point, but unsuccessfully submitted his outline to TriStar Pictures.\nPersonal life.\nAs of 2011, Cox resided in Colestin, Oregon, United States, with his wife, writer Todelina Babish Davies.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53744", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53744", "title": "Atlantic ocean", "text": ""}
{"id": "53745", "revid": "48984234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53745", "title": "Indian ocean", "text": ""}
{"id": "53746", "revid": "45493731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53746", "title": "Diesel", "text": "Diesel may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists nickname associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53748", "revid": "35938", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53748", "title": "Puff-ball", "text": ""}
{"id": "53751", "revid": "33582079", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53751", "title": "Cash flow", "text": "Movement of money into or out of a business, project, or financial product\nCash flow, in general, refers to payments made into or out of a business, project, or financial product. It can also refer more specifically to a real or virtual movement of money.\nCash flows are narrowly interconnected with the concepts of value, interest rate, and liquidity. A cash flow that shall happen on a future day tN can be transformed into a cash flow of the same value in \"t\"0. This transformation process is known as discounting, and it takes into account the time value of money by adjusting the nominal amount of the cash flow on the basis of the prevailing interest rates at the time.\nCash flow analysis.\nCash flows are often transformed into measures that give information e.g. on a company's value and situation:\nCash flow notion is based loosely on cash flow statement accounting standards. The term is flexible and can refer to time intervals spanning over past-future. It can refer to the total of all flows involved or a subset of those flows.\nWithin cash flow analysis, 3 types of cash flow are present and used for the cash flow statement: \nIn public finance and development economics, effective cash flow planning is also central to fiscal control, liquidity risk mitigation, and debt management.\nBusiness' financials.\nCash flow is a critical indicator of a company's financial health, representing the net amount of cash and cash equivalents moving into and out of a business. The total net cash flow over a period (typically a quarter, half-year, or full year) equals the change in the cash balance during that period: positive if the cash balance increases, negative if it decreases. Net cash flow is calculated by subtracting total cash outflows from total cash inflows.\nThe total net cash flow for a project comprises three main components:\nDepreciation provides a tax shield, reducing taxable income and thus increasing cash flow.\nThe sum of these components determines the project's cash flow.\nSimilarly, a company's cash flow statement is divided into three sections:\nThe aggregate of these three sections provides the total cash flow of the company.\nExamples.\nThe net cash flow provides insight into a company's liquidity but may not fully represent its financial health. For instance, consider the cash flows over three years of two companies:\nWhile Company B shows higher net cash flow, Company A is generating more cash from its core operations and is investing significantly in long-term assets, which may yield returns in the future.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53752", "revid": "252195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53752", "title": "Optic", "text": ""}
{"id": "53753", "revid": "16861812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53753", "title": "Optical", "text": ""}
{"id": "53754", "revid": "407598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53754", "title": "Champagne", "text": "French sparkling wine\nChampagne (; ) is a sparkling wine originated and produced in the Champagne wine region of France under the rules of the appellation, which demand specific vineyard practices, sourcing of grapes exclusively from designated places within it, specific grape-pressing methods and secondary fermentation of the wine in the bottle to cause carbonation. \nThe grapes Pinot noir, Pinot meunier, and Chardonnay are used to produce almost all Champagne, but small amounts of Pinot blanc, Pinot gris (called Fromenteau in Champagne), Arbane, and Petit Meslier are vinified as well.\nChampagne became associated with royalty in the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries. The leading manufacturers made efforts to associate their Champagnes with nobility and royalty through advertising and packaging, which led to its popularity among the emerging middle class.\nOrigins.\nStill wines from the Champagne region were known before medieval times. The Romans were the first to plant vineyards in this area of northeast France, with the region being tentatively cultivated by the 5th century. Cultivation was initially slow due to the unpopular edict by Emperor Domitian that all colonial vines must be uprooted. When Emperor Probus, the son of a gardener, rescinded the edict, a temple to Bacchus was erected, and the region started to produce a light, fruity, red wine that contrasted with heavier Italian brews often fortified with resin and herbs. Later, the Catholic church owned vineyards, and monks produced wine for use in the sacrament of the Eucharist. French kings were traditionally anointed in Reims, and champagne was served as part of coronation festivities. The Champenois were envious of the reputation of the wines made by their Burgundian neighbours to the south and sought to produce wines of equal acclaim. However, the northern climate of the region gave the Champenois a unique set of challenges in making red wine. At the far extremes of sustainable viticulture, the grapes would struggle to ripen fully and often would have bracing levels of acidity and low sugar levels. The wines would be lighter bodied and thinner than the Burgundy wines they sought to outdo.\nContrary to legend and popular assumption, Dom P\u00e9rignon did not invent sparkling wine, though he did make important contributions to the production and quality of both still and sparkling Champagne wines. The oldest recorded sparkling wine is Blanquette de Limoux, which was invented by Benedictine monks in the Abbey of Saint-Hilaire, near Carcassonne, in 1531. They achieved this by bottling the wine before the initial fermentation had ended. Over a century later, the English scientist and physician Christopher Merret documented the addition of sugar to a finished wine to create a second fermentation six years before Dom P\u00e9rignon set foot in the Abbey of Hautvillers. Merret presented a paper at the Royal Society, in which he detailed what is now called \"\", in 1662. Merret's discoveries coincided also with English glass-makers' technical developments that allowed bottles to be produced that could withstand the required internal pressures during secondary fermentation. French glass-makers at this time could not produce bottles of the required quality or strength. As early as 1663, the poet Samuel Butler referred to \"brisk champagne\".\nIn France, the first sparkling champagne was created accidentally; the pressure in the bottle led it to be called \"the devil's wine\" ('), as bottles exploded or corks popped. At the time, bubbles were considered a fault. In 1844, Adolphe Jaquesson invented the muselet to prevent the corks from blowing out. Initial versions were difficult to apply and inconvenient to remove. Even when it was deliberately produced as a sparkling wine, champagne was for a very long time made by the ', where the wine was bottled before the initial fermentation had finished. Champagne did not use the \"\" until the 19th century, about 200 years after Merret documented the process. The 19th century saw a dramatic growth in champagne production, going from a regional production of 300,000 bottles a year in 1800 to 20 million bottles in 1850. In 2007, champagne sales hit a record of 338.7 million bottles.\nIn the 19th century, champagne was noticeably sweeter than today's champagnes. The trend towards drier champagne began when Perrier-Jou\u00ebt decided not to sweeten his 1846 vintage before exporting it to London. The designation \"Brut\" Champagne was created for the British in 1876.\nThe only wines that are legally allowed to be named \"Champagne\" must be bottled within 100 miles of the Champagne region in France. The name is legally protected by European law and an 1891 treaty that requires true champagne to be produced in the Champagne region and made from the Pinot Meunier, Pinot Noir, or Chardonnay grapes grown in this region.\nRights to the name.\nThe Champagne winemaking community, under the auspices of the (CIVC), has developed a comprehensive set of rules and regulations for all wine produced in the region to protect its economic interests. They include codification of the most suitable growing places, the most suitable grape types (most Champagne is a blend of up to three grape varieties, though other varieties are allowed), and a lengthy set of requirements specifying most aspects of viticulture. This includes pruning, vineyard yield, the degree of pressing, and the time that wine must remain on its lees before bottling. It can also limit the release of Champagne to market to maintain prices. Only when a wine meets these requirements may it be labelled Champagne. The rules agreed upon by the CIVC are submitted for the final approval of the (formerly the \"\", INAO).\nIn 2007, the INAO, the government organization that controls wine appellations in France, was preparing to make the largest revision of the region's legal boundaries since 1927 in response to economic pressures. With soaring demand and limited production of grapes, Champagne houses say the rising price could produce a consumer backlash that would harm the industry for years into the future. That and political pressure from villages that wanted to be included in the expanded boundaries led to the move. Changes are subject to significant scientific review and are said not to impact Champagne-produced grapes until 2020. A final decision is not expected until 2023 or 2024.\nUse of the word \"Champagne\".\nSparkling wines are produced worldwide, but many legal structures reserve the word \"Champagne\" exclusively for sparkling wines from the Champagne region, made in accordance with regulations. In the European Union and many other countries, the name \"Champagne\" is legally protected by the Madrid system under an 1891 treaty, which reserved it for the sparkling wine produced in the toponymous region and adhering to the standards defined for it as an \"\"; the protection was reaffirmed in the Treaty of Versailles after World War I. Over 70 countries have adopted similar legal protection. Most recently Australia, Chile, Brazil, Canada and China passed laws or signed agreements with Europe that limit the use of the term \"Champagne\" to only those products produced in the Champagne region. The United States bans the use on all new U.S.-produced wine brands. However, those that had approval to use the term on labels before 2006 may continue to use it, provided the term is accompanied by the wine's actual origin (e.g., \"California\"). The majority of US-produced sparkling wines do not use the term \"Champagne\" on their labels, and some states, such as Oregon, ban producers in their states from using the term.\nSeveral key U.S. wine regions, such as those in California (Napa, Sonoma Valley, Paso Robles), Oregon, and Walla Walla, Washington, came to consider the remaining semi-generic labels as harmful to their reputations (cf. Napa Declaration on Place).\nEven the terms ' and \"Champagne method\" were forbidden by an EU court decision in 1994. As of 2005[ [update]] the description most often used for sparkling wines using the second fermentation in the bottle process, but not from the Champagne region, is '. Sparkling wines are produced worldwide, and many producers use special terms to define them: Spain uses \"Cava\", Italy designates it ', and South Africa uses '. An Italian sparkling wine made from the Muscat grape uses the DOCG \"Asti\" and from the Glera grape the DOC \"Prosecco\". In Germany, Sekt is a common sparkling wine. Other French wine regions cannot use the name Champagne: e.g., Burgundy and Alsace produce \"\". In 2008, more than 3,000 bottles of sparkling wine produced in California labelled with the term \"Champagne\" were destroyed by Belgian government authorities.\nRegardless of the legal requirements for labeling, extensive efforts by the Champagne region, and the use of alternative names by non-Champagne sparkling wine producers, some consumers, and wine sellers, including \"Korbels California Champagne\", use \"Champagne\" as a generic term for white sparkling wines, regardless of origin.\nThe village of Champagne, Switzerland has traditionally made a still wine labelled as \"Champagne\": the earliest records of viticulture dated to 1657. In 1999, in an accord with the EU, the Swiss government conceded that, by 2004, the village would phase out the use of the name. Sales dropped from 110,000 bottles a year to 32,000 after the change. In April 2008, the villagers resolved to fight against the restriction following a Swiss open-air vote.\nIn the Soviet Union, all sparkling wines were called (', Russian for \"that, which is of Champagne\"). The name is still used today for some brands of sparkling wines produced in former Soviet republics, such as ' and \"\". In 2021, Russia banned the use of the designation for imported sparkling wine, including sparkling wine produced in the Champagne wine region, reserving the designation for domestically produced sparkling wine only.\nProduction.\nFormerly known as \"m\u00e9thode champenoise\" or \"m\u00e9thode classique\", champagne is produced by a traditional method. After primary fermentation and bottling, a second alcoholic fermentation occurs in the bottle. This second fermentation is induced by adding several grams of yeast \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\" and rock sugar to the bottle \u2013 although each brand has its own secret recipe. According to the ' a minimum of fifteen months is required to completely develop all the flavour. For years where the harvest is exceptional, a ' is declared and some champagne will be made from and labelled as the products of a single vintage (\"vintage champagne\") rather than a blend of multiple years' harvests. This means that the champagne will be very good and has to mature for at least three years. During this time the champagne bottle is sealed with a crown cap similar to that used on beer bottles.\nAfter aging, the bottle is manipulated, either manually or mechanically, in a process called \"\" (or \"riddling\" in English), so that the lees settle in the neck of the bottle. After chilling the bottles, the neck is frozen, and the cap removed. This process is called disgorgement. The pressure in the bottle forces out the ice containing the lees. \nSome wine from previous vintages and additional sugar (\"\") is added to maintain the level within the bottle and adjust the sweetness of the finished wine. The bottle is then quickly corked to maintain the carbon dioxide in solution.\nBubbles.\nAn initial burst of effervescence occurs when the champagne contacts the dry glass on pouring. These bubbles form on imperfections in the glass that facilitate nucleation or, to a minimal extent, on cellulose fibres left over from the wiping and drying process as shown with a high-speed video camera. However, after the initial rush, these naturally occurring imperfections are typically too small to consistently act as nucleation points as the surface tension of the liquid smooths out these minute irregularities. The nucleation sites that act as a source for the ongoing effervescence are not natural imperfections in the glass, but actually occur where the glass has been etched by the manufacturer or the customer. This etching is typically done with acid, a laser, or a glass etching tool from a craft shop to provide nucleation sites for continuous bubble formation (note that not all glasses are etched in this way). In 1662 this method was developed in England, as records from the Royal Society show.\nDom P\u00e9rignon was originally charged by his superiors at the Abbey of Hautvillers to get rid of the bubbles since the pressure in the bottles caused many of them to burst in the cellar. As sparkling wine production increased in the early 18th century, cellar workers had to wear a heavy iron mask to prevent injury from spontaneously bursting bottles. The disturbance caused by one bottle exploding could cause a chain reaction, with it being routine for cellars to lose 20\u201390% of their bottles this way. The mysterious circumstance surrounding the then unknown process of fermentation and carbonic gas caused some critics to call the sparkling creations \"The Devil's Wine\".\nChampagne producers.\nThere are more than one hundred champagne houses and 19,000 smaller \"\" (vine-growing producers) in Champagne. These companies manage some 32,000 hectares of vineyards in the region. The type of champagne producer can be identified from the abbreviations followed by the official number on the bottle:\nMarketing.\nIn the 19th century, champagne was produced and promoted to mark contemporary political events, such as the Franco-Russian Alliance of 1893, and the Tennis Court Oath to mark the centennial of French Revolution, linking champagne to French nationalist ideology. N\u00e9gociants also managed to market champagne by identifying it with leisure activities and sporting events. They also successfully appealed to a broader range of consumers by highlighting the different qualities of sparkling wine versus ordinary wine, associating champagne brands with royalty and nobility, and selling off-brands under the names of importers from France at a lower cost. However, selling off-brands at a lower price proved to be unsuccessful, since \"there was an assumption that cheap sparkling wine was not authentic.\" Since the beginning of the Belle \u00c9poque period, champagne has gone from a regional product serving a niche market to a national commodity which is distributed globally.\nThe popularity of champagne is particularly attributed to the success of champagne producers in marketing the wine's image as a royal and aristocratic drink. Laurent-Perrier's advertisements in late 1890 boasted their champagne was the favourite of Leopold II of Belgium, George I of Greece, Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Margaret Cambridge, Marchioness of Cambridge, and John Lambton, 3rd Earl of Durham, among other nobles, knights, and military officers. Despite this royal prestige, champagne houses also portrayed champagne as a luxury which could be enjoyed by anyone, and was fit for any occasion. This strategy worked, and, by the turn of the 20th century, the majority of champagne drinkers were middle class.\nIn the 19th century, champagne producers made a concentrated effort to market their wine to women. This is done by having the sweeter champagne associates with female, whereas the dry champagne with male and foreign markets. This was in stark contrast to the traditionally \"male aura\" that the wines of France had\u2014particularly Burgundy and Bordeaux. Laurent-Perrier again took the lead in this area with advertisements touting their wine's favour with the Countess of Dudley, the wife of the 9th Earl of Stamford, the wife of the Baron Tollemache, and the opera singer Adelina Patti. Champagne labels were designed with images of romantic love and marriage as well as other special occasions that were deemed important to women, such as the baptism of a child.\nIn some advertisements, the champagne houses catered to political interest such as the labels that appeared on different brands on bottles commemorating the centennial anniversary of the French Revolution of 1789. On some labels there were flattering images of Marie Antoinette that appealed to the conservative factions of French citizens that viewed the former queen as a martyr. On other labels there were stirring images of Revolutionary scenes that appealed to the liberal left sentiments of French citizens. As World War I loomed, champagne houses put images of soldiers and countries' flags on their bottles, customizing the image for each country to which the wine was imported. During the Dreyfus affair, one champagne house released a \"champagne antijuif\" with antisemitic advertisements to take advantage of the wave of Antisemitism that hit parts of France.\nChampagne is typically drunk during celebrations. For example, British Prime Minister Tony Blair held a champagne reception to celebrate London winning the right to host the 2012 Summer Olympics. It is also used to launch ships when a bottle is smashed over the hull during the ship's launch. If the bottle fails to break this is often thought to be bad luck.\nWine districts, grape varieties and styles.\nWine-producing districts of Champagne.\nChampagne is a single \"\" but the territory is divided into next sub-regions, known as wine-producing districts, and each of them has distinct characteristics. The main wine-producing districts of the Champagne wine region: Reims, Marne Valley, C\u00f4te des Blancs, C\u00f4tes des Bar, C\u00f4tes de Sezzane.\nAs a general rule, grapes used must be the white Chardonnay, or the dark-skinned \"red wine grapes\" Pinot noir or Pinot meunier, which, due to the gentle pressing of the grapes and absence of skin contact during fermentation, usually also yield a white base wine. Most Champagnes, including Ros\u00e9 wines, are made from a blend of all three grapes, although ' (\"white from whites\") Champagnes are made from 100% Chardonnay and ' (\"white from blacks\") Champagnes are made solely from Pinot noir, Pinot meunier or a mix of the two.\nFour other grape varieties are permitted, mostly for historical reasons, as they are rare in current usage. The 2010 version of the appellation regulations lists seven varieties as allowed, Arbane, Chardonnay, Petit Meslier, Pinot blanc, Pinot gris, Pinot meunier, and Pinot noir. The sparsely cultivated varieties (0.02% of the total vines planted in Champagne) of Arbanne, Petit Meslier, and Pinot blanc can still be found in modern cuv\u00e9es from a few producers. Previous directives of INAO make conditional allowances according to the complex laws of 1927 and 1929, and plantings made before 1938. Before the 2010 regulations, the complete list of the actual and theoretical varieties also included and Pinot Ros\u00e9. The Gamay vines of the region were scheduled to be uprooted by 1942, but due to World War II, this was postponed until 1962, and this variety is no longer allowed in Champagne.\nThe dark-skinned Pinot noir and Pinot meunier give the wine its length and backbone. They are predominantly grown in two areas \u2013 the Montagne de Reims and the Vall\u00e9e de la Marne. The Montagne de Reims run east\u2013west to the south of Reims, in northern Champagne. They are notable for north-facing chalky slopes that derive heat from the warm winds rising from the valleys below. The River Marne runs west\u2013east through Champagne, south of the Montagne de Reims. The Vall\u00e9e de la Marne contains south-facing chalky slopes. Chardonnay gives the wine its acidity and biscuit flavour. Most Chardonnay is grown in a north\u2013south-running strip to the south of \u00c9pernay, called the , including the villages of Avize, Oger and . These are east-facing vineyards, with ' similar to the . The various ' account for the differences in grape characteristics and explain the appropriateness of blending juice from different grape varieties and geographical areas within Champagne, to get the desired style for each Champagne house.\nTypes of Champagne.\nMost of the Champagne produced today is \"non-vintage\", meaning that it is a blended product of grapes from multiple vintages. Most of the base will be from a single year vintage with producers blending anywhere from 10 to 15% (even as high as 40%) of wine from older vintages. If the conditions of a particular vintage are favourable, some producers will make a \"vintage\" wine, which must be composed entirely of grapes from that vintage year. Under Champagne wine regulations, houses that make both vintage and non-vintage wines are allowed to use no more than 80% of the total vintage's harvest for the production of vintage Champagne. This allows at least 20% of the harvest from each vintage to be reserved for use in non-vintage Champagne. This ensures a consistent style that consumers can expect from non-vintage Champagne that does not alter too radically depending on the quality of the vintage. In less than ideal vintages, some producers will produce a wine from only that single vintage and still label it as non-vintage rather than as \"vintage\" since the wine will be of lesser quality and the producers have little desire to reserve the wine for future blending.\nPrestige \"\".\nA ' is a proprietary blended wine (usually a Champagne) that is considered to be the top of a producer's range. Famous examples include Louis Roederer's Cristal, Laurent-Perrier's ', Mo\u00ebt &amp; Chandon's Dom P\u00e9rignon, Duval-Leroy's ', Armand de Brignac \"Gold Brut\", and Pol Roger's '. Perhaps the first publicly available prestige ' was Mo\u00ebt &amp; Chandon's Dom P\u00e9rignon, launched in 1936 with the 1921 vintage. Until then, Champagne houses produced different ' of varying quality, but a top-of-the-range wine produced to the highest standards (and priced accordingly) was a new idea. In fact, Louis Roederer had been producing Cristal since 1876, but this was strictly for the private consumption of the Russian tsar. Cristal was made publicly available with the 1945 vintage. Then came Taittinger's ' (first vintage 1952), and 's ' in 1960, a blend of three vintages (1952, 1953, and 1955) and Perrier Jou\u00ebt's '. In the last three decades of the 20th century, most Champagne houses followed these with their own prestige ', often named after notable people with a link to that producer and presented in non-standard bottle shapes (following Dom P\u00e9rignon's lead with its 18th-century revival design).\nA French term (literally \"white from blacks\" or \"white of blacks\") for a white wine produced entirely from black grapes. The flesh of grapes described as black or red is white; grape juice obtained after minimal possible contact with the skins produces essentially white wine, with a slightly yellower colour than wine from white grapes. The colour, due to the small amount of red skin pigments present, is often described as white-yellow, white-grey, or silvery. \"Blanc de noirs\" is often encountered in Champagne, where a number of houses have followed the lead of Bollinger's \"prestige cuv\u00e9e\" Vieilles Vignes Fran\u00e7aises in introducing a \"cuv\u00e9e\" made from either pinot noir, pinot meunier or a blend of the two (these being the only two black grapes permitted within the Champagne AOC appellation).\nA French term that means \"white from whites\", and is used to designate Champagnes made exclusively from Chardonnay grapes or in rare occasions from Pinot blanc (such as \"\" from Cedric Bouchard). The term is occasionally used in other sparkling wine-producing regions, usually to denote Chardonnay-only wines rather than any sparkling wine made from other white grape varieties.\nRos\u00e9 Champagne.\nRos\u00e9 Champagnes are characterized by their distinctive blush color, fruity aroma, and earthy flavor. Ros\u00e9 Champagne has been produced since the late 18th century; storied French Champagne houses Rinault and Veuve Clicquot have each claimed to have shipped and sold the first bottles. The wine is produced by one of two methods. Using the \"saign\u00e9e\" method, winemakers will leave the clear juice of dark grapes to macerate with the skins for a brief time, resulting in wine lightly colored and flavored by the skins. In the more common \"d'assemblage\" method, producers will blend a small amount of still red wine to a sparkling wine \"cuv\u00e9e\". Champagne is light in color even when it is produced with red grapes, because the juice is extracted from the grapes using a gentle process that minimizes contact with the skins. By contrast, Ros\u00e9 Champagne, especially that created by \"d'assemblage\", results in the production of ros\u00e9 with a predictable and reproducible color, allowing winemakers to achieve a consistent ros\u00e9 appearance from year to year.\nThe character of ros\u00e9 Champagne has varied greatly since its production began. Thought to be a sign of extravagance when originally introduced, by the early 20th century these wines were colloquially known as \"Pink Champagne,\" and had gained a reputation of frivolousness or even dissipation. The 1939 Hollywood film \"Love Affair\" was reportedly approached to promote it by featuring the main characters bonding over enjoying the unpopular drink, and caused a sales boost after the film's release. It is also cited by the Eagles as a beverage of choice in the titular \"Hotel California.\" Ros\u00e9 Champagnes, particularly brut varieties, began regaining popularity in the late 20th century in many countries. Because of the complex variety of flavors it presents, ros\u00e9 Champagne is often served in fine dining restaurants, as a complementary element in food and wine pairing.\nSweetness.\nJust after disgorgement a \"liqueur de dosage\" or liqueur d'exp\u00e9dition\u00a0\u2013 a blend of, typically, cane sugar and wine (sugar amounts up to 750\u00a0g/litre)\u00a0\u2013 is added to adjust the levels of sugar in the Champagne when bottled for sale, and hence the sweetness of the finished wine. Today sweetness is generally not looked for per se, and dosage is used to fine tune the perception of acidity in the wine.\nFor Caroline Latrive, cellar master of Ayala, a Champagne house that pioneered drier champagnes at the end of the 19th century, dosage represents the final touch in champagne making and must be as subtle as possible to bring the right balance.\nAdditionally, dosage protects champagne from oxidation because it includes a small amount of , and sugar also acts as a preservative. Beno\u00eet Gouez, cellar master of Mo\u00ebt &amp; Chandon says that sugar helps champagne recover from the oxidative shock of disgorgement, and contributes to the wine's aging potential.\nWines labeled \"\", more common among smaller producers, have no added sugar and will usually be very dry, with less than three grams of residual sugar per litre in the finished wine. The following terms are used to describe the sweetness of the bottled wine:\nThe most common style today is \". However, throughout the 19th century and into the early 20th century Champagne was generally much sweeter than it is today. Moreover, except in Britain, Champagne was drunk as dessert wines (after the meal), rather than as table wines (with the meal). At this time, Champagne sweetness was instead referred to by destination country, roughly as:\nOf these, only the driest English is close to contemporary tastes.\nBottles.\nChampagne is mostly fermented in two sizes of bottles, standard bottles (750 millilitres) and magnums (1.5 litres). In general, magnums are thought to be higher quality, as there is less oxygen in the bottle, and the volume\u2013to\u2013surface-area ratio favours the creation of appropriately sized bubbles. However, there is no hard evidence for this view. Other bottle sizes, mostly named for Biblical figures, are generally filled with Champagne that has been fermented in standard bottles or magnums. Gosset still bottles its Grande R\u00e9serve in Jeroboam from the beginning of its second fermentation.\nSizes larger than Jeroboam (3\u00a0L) are rare. Primat bottles (27\u00a0L)\u2014and, as of 2002[ [update]], Melchizedek bottles (30\u00a0L)\u2014are exclusively offered by the House Drappier. (The same names are used for bottles containing regular wine and port; however, \"Jeroboam\", \"Rehoboam\", and \"Methuselah\" refer to different bottle volumes.)\nUnique sizes have been made for specific markets, special occasions and people. The most notable example is perhaps the imperial pint (56.8\u00a0cL) bottle made between 1874 and 1973 for the English market by Pol Roger, often associated with Sir Winston Churchill.\nIn 2009, a bottle of 1825 Champagne was opened at a ceremony attended by twelve of the world's top wine tasters. This bottle was officially recognised by \"Guinness World Records\" as the oldest bottle of Champagne in the world. The contents were found to be drinkable, with notes of truffles and caramel in the taste. There are now only two other bottles from the 1825 vintage extant.\nIn July 2010, 168 bottles were found on board a shipwreck near the \u00c5land Islands in the Baltic Sea by Finnish diver Christian Ekstr\u00f6m. Initial analyses indicated there were at least two types of bottle from two different houses: \"\" in Reims and the long-defunct Champagne house Juglar (absorbed into Jacquesson in 1829.) The shipwreck is dated between 1800 and 1830, and the bottles discovered may well predate the 1825 referenced above. When experts were replacing the old corks with new ones, they discovered there were also bottles from a third house, Heidsieck. The wreck, then, contained 95 bottles of Juglar, 46 bottles of , and four bottles of Heidsieck, in addition to 23 bottles whose manufacture is still to be identified. Champagne experts Richard Juhlin and Essi Avellan, MW described the bottles' contents as being in a very good condition. It is planned that the majority of the bottles will be sold at auction, the price of each estimated to be in the region of \u00a340,000\u201370,000.\nIn April 2015, nearly five years after the bottles were first found, researchers led by Philippe Jeandet, a professor of food biochemistry, released the findings of their chemical analyses of the Champagne, and particularly noted the fact that, although the chemical composition of the 170-year-old Champagne was very similar to the composition of modern-day Champagne, there was much more sugar in this Champagne than in modern-day Champagne, and it was also less alcoholic than modern-day Champagne. The high sugar level was characteristic of people's tastes at the time, and Jeandet explained that it was common for people in the 19th century, such as Russians, to add sugar to their wine at dinner. It also contained higher concentrations of minerals such as iron, copper, and table salt than modern-day Champagne does.\nChampagne corks.\nChampagne corks are mostly built from three sections and are referred to as agglomerated corks. The mushroom shape that occurs in the transition is a result of the bottom section's being composed of two stacked discs of pristine cork cemented to the upper portion, which is a conglomerate of ground cork and glue. The bottom section is in contact with the wine. Before insertion, a sparkling wine cork is almost 50% larger than the opening of the bottle. Originally, the cork starts as a cylinder and is compressed before insertion into the bottle. Over time, their compressed shape becomes more permanent and the distinctive \"mushroom\" shape becomes more apparent.\nThe aging of the Champagne post-disgorgement can to some degree be told by the cork, as, the longer it has been in the bottle, the less it returns to its original cylinder shape.\nServing.\nChampagne is usually served in a Champagne flute, whose characteristics include a long stem with a tall, narrow bowl, thin sides and an etched bottom. The intended purpose of the shape of the flute is to reduce surface area, therefore preserving carbonation, as well as maximizing nucleation (the visible bubbles and lines of bubbles). Legend has it that the Victorian \"'s shape was modelled on the breast of Madame de Pompadour, chief-mistress of Louis XV, or perhaps Marie Antoinette, but the glass was designed in England over a century earlier especially for sparkling wine and champagne in 1663. Champagne is always served cold; its ideal drinking temperature is . Often the bottle is chilled in a bucket of ice and water, half an hour before opening, which also ensures the Champagne is less gassy and can be opened without spillage. Champagne buckets are made specifically for this purpose and often have a larger volume than standard wine-cooling buckets to accommodate the larger bottle, and more water and ice.\nWhen it comes to the etiquette behind holding a glass of Champagne, it is important to consider the type of Champagne glass used and the four main parts of any wine glass: the rim, the bowl, the stem and the base. In the case of a flute glass or tulip glass, etiquette dictates holding by the long, narrow stem in order to avoid smudging the glass and warming up the contents with the heat of one's hand. Flute and tulip glasses can be temporarily held by the rim, although this glass hold blocks the area where the taster would take a sip. This hold can also smudge the top section of the glass. These two types of glass can also be held by the disk-shaped base without smudging or warming the liquid inside. When it comes to the coupe glass, with its short stem and shallow, wide-brimmed bowl, the only possible glass hold is by the bowl. The top-heavy nature of the glass makes holding by the base or stem impossible, while the large diameter of the top makes grabbing the glass by the rim difficult.\nOpening Champagne bottles.\nTo reduce the risk of spilling or spraying any Champagne, the bottle is opened by holding the cork and rotating the bottle at an angle in order to ease out the stopper. This method, as opposed to pulling the cork out, prevents the cork from flying out of the bottle at speed (the expanding gases are supersonic). Also, holding the bottle at an angle allows air in and helps prevent the champagne from geysering out of the bottle.\nA sabre can be used to open a Champagne bottle with great ceremony. This technique is called \" (the term is also used for simply breaking the head of the bottle).\nPouring Champagne.\nPouring sparkling wine while tilting the glass at an angle and gently sliding in the liquid along the side will preserve the most bubbles, as opposed to pouring directly down to create a head of \"mousse\", according to a study, \"On the Losses of Dissolved CO2 during Champagne serving\", by scientists from the University of Reims. Colder bottle temperatures also result in reduced loss of gas. Additionally, the industry is developing Champagne glasses designed specifically to reduce the amount of gas lost.\nSpraying Champagne.\nChampagne has been an integral part of sports celebration since started offering their Champagne to the winners of Formula 1 Grand Prix events. At the 1967 24 Hours of Le Mans, winner Dan Gurney started the tradition of drivers spraying the crowd and each other. The Muslim-majority nation Bahrain banned Champagne celebrations on F1 podiums in 2004, using a nonalcoholic pomegranate and rose water drink instead.\nIn 2015, some Australian athletes, most notably then-Formula 1 Red Bull Racing driver Daniel Ricciardo, began celebrating victories by drinking champagne from their shoe\u2014a practice known as \"doing a shoey.\"\nCulinary uses.\nThe (\"chicken with Champagne\"), a variant of coq au vin, is an essentially Marnese specialty. Other well-known recipes using Champagne are (\"oysters with Champagne\") and Champagne zabaione.\nPrice.\nThere are several general factors influencing the price of Champagne: the limited land of the region, the prestige that Champagne has developed worldwide, and the high cost of the production process, among possible others.\nProducers.\nA list of major Champagne producers and their respective cuv\u00e9es de prestige\nShipments.\nThe Champagne industry is expected to ship 314 million bottles in 2023, down 3.7% from the previous year, according to the Comit\u00e9 Champagne industry trade group. Nightclub markets remain strong, but consumption of Champagne in the home is losing ground.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53755", "revid": "45091103", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53755", "title": "Champagne wine region", "text": "Wine region of France\nThe wine region within the historical province of Champagne in the northeast of France is best known for the production of champagne, the sparkling white wine that bears the region's name. EU law and the laws of most countries reserve the term \"champagne\" exclusively for wines that come from this region located about 160 kilometres (100\u00a0miles) east of Paris. The viticultural boundaries of Champagne are legally defined and split into five wine-producing districts within the historical province: Aube, C\u00f4te des Blancs, C\u00f4te de S\u00e9zanne, Montagne de Reims, and Vall\u00e9e de la Marne. The city of Reims and the town of \u00c9pernay are the commercial centers of the area. Reims is famous for its cathedral, the venue of the coronation of the French kings and a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nLocated at the northern edges of France, the history of the Champagne wine region has had a significant role in the development of this unique \"terroir\". The area's proximity to Paris promoted the region's economic success in its wine trade but also put the villages and vineyards in the path of marching armies on their way to the French capital. Despite the frequency of these military conflicts, the region developed a reputation for quality wine production in the early Middle Ages and was able to continue that reputation as the region's producers began making sparkling wine with the advent of the great champagne houses in the 17th and 18th centuries. The principal grapes grown in the region include Chardonnay, Pinot noir, and Pinot Meunier. Pinot noir is the most widely planted grape in the Aube region and grows very well in Montagne de Reims. Pinot Meunier is the dominant grape in the Vall\u00e9e de la Marne region. The C\u00f4te des Blancs is dedicated almost exclusively to Chardonnay.\nThe unique, chalky landscape of the Champagne wine region and the resulting agro-industrial system led to the development of sparkling wines like champagne in the 17th century. As a result, many of the production sites and wine houses in the region were inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List in 2015 as part the Champagne hillsides, houses and cellars site. \nGeography and climate.\nThe Champagne province is located near the northern limits of the wine world along the 49th parallel. The high latitude and mean annual temperature of 10\u00a0\u00b0C (50\u00a0\u00b0F) creates a difficult environment for wine grapes to fully ripen. Ripening is aided by the presence of forests which helps to stabilize temperatures and maintain moisture in the soil. The cool temperatures serve to produce high levels of acidity in the resulting grape which is ideal for sparkling wine.\nDuring the growing season, the mean July temperature is 18\u00a0\u00b0C (66\u00a0\u00b0F). The average annual rainfall is 630\u00a0mm (25\u00a0inches), with 45\u00a0mm (1.8\u00a0inches) falling during the harvest month of September. Throughout the year, growers must be mindful of the hazards of fungal disease and early spring frost.\nAncient oceans left behind chalk subsoil deposits when they receded 70 million years ago. Earthquakes that rocked the region over 10 million years ago pushed the marine sediments of belemnite fossils up to the surface to create the belemnite chalk terrain. The belemnite in the soil allows it to absorb heat from the sun and gradually release it during the night as well as providing good drainage. This soil contributes to the lightness and finesse that is characteristic of Champagne wine. The Aube area is an exception with predominately clay based soil. The chalk is also used in the construction of underground cellars that can keep the wines cool through the bottle maturation process.\nHistory.\nThe Carolingian reign saw periods of prosperity for the Champagne region beginning with Charlemagne's encouragement for the area to start planting vines and continuing with the coronation of his son Louis the Pious at Reims. The tradition of crowning kings at Reims contributed to the reputation of the wines that came from this area. The Counts of Champagne ruled the area as an independent county from 950 to 1316. In 1314, the last Count of Champagne assumed the throne as King Louis X of France and the region became part of the Crown territories.\nMilitary conflicts.\nThe location of Champagne played a large role in its historical prominence as it served as a \"crossroads\" for both military and trade routes. This also made the area open to devastation and destruction during military conflicts that were frequently waged in the area. In 451 A.D. near Ch\u00e2lons-en-Champagne, Attila and the Huns were defeated by an alliance of Roman legions, Franks and Visigoths. This defeat was a turning point in the Huns' invasion of Europe.\nDuring the Hundred Years' War, the land was repeatedly ravaged and devastated by battles. The Abbey of Hautvillers, including its vineyards, was destroyed in 1560 during the War of Religion between the Huguenots and Catholics. This was followed by conflicts during the Thirty Year War and the \"Fronde\" Civil War where soldiers and mercenaries held the area in occupation. It was not until the 1660s, during the reign of Louis XIV, that the region saw enough peace to allow advances in sparkling wine production to take place.\nHistory of wine production.\nThe region's reputation for wine production dates back to the Middle Ages when Pope Urban II ( ruled 1088-1099 AD/CE ), a native Champenois, declared that the wine of A\u00ff in the Marne d\u00e9partement was the best wine produced in the world. For a time \"A\u00ff\" was used as a shorthand designation for wines from the entire Champagne region, similar to the use of Beaune for the wines of Burgundy. The poet Henry d'Andeli's work \"La Bataille des Vins\" rated wines from the towns of \u00c9pernay, Hautvillers and Reims as some of the best in Europe. As the region's reputation grew, popes and royalty sought to own pieces of the land with Pope Leo X, Francis I of France, Charles V of Spain, and Henry VIII of England all owning vineyard land in the region. A batch of wine from A\u00ff received in 1518 by Henry VIII's chancellor, Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, is the first recorded export of wine from the Champagne region to England.\nThe still wines of the area were highly prized in Paris under the designation of \"vins de la rivi\u00e8re\" and \"vins de la montagne\"- wines of the river and wines of the mountain in reference to the wooded terrain and the river Marne which carried the wines down to the Seine and into Paris. The region was in competition with Burgundy for the Flemish wine trade and tried to capitalize on Reims' location along the trade route from Beaune. In the 15th century, Pinot noir became heavily planted in the area. The resulting red wine had difficulty comparing well to the richness and coloring of Burgundy wines, despite the addition of elderberries to deepen the color. This led to a greater focus on white wines.\nThe Champagne house of Gosset was founded as a still wine producer in 1584 and is the oldest Champagne house still in operation today. Ruinart was founded in 1729 and was soon followed by Chanoine Fr\u00e8res (1730), Taittinger (1734), Mo\u00ebt et Chandon (1743) and Veuve Clicquot (1772).\nThe nineteenth century saw an explosive growth in Champagne production going from a regional production of 300,000 bottles a year in 1800 to 20 million bottles in 1850.\nRivalry with Burgundy.\nA strong influence on Champagne wine production was the centuries-old rivalry between the region and Burgundy. From the key market of Paris to the palace of Louis XIV of France at Versailles, proponents of Champagne and Burgundy would compete for dominance. For most of his life, Louis XIV would drink only Champagne wine with the support of his doctor Antoine d'Aquin who advocated the King drink Champagne with every meal for the benefit of his health. As the King aged and his ailments increased, competing doctors would propose alternative treatments with alternative wines, to soothe the King's ills. One of these doctors, Guy-Crescent Fagon conspired with the King's mistress to oust d'Aquin and have himself appointed as Royal Doctor. Fagon quickly attributed the King's continuing ailments to Champagne and ordered that only Burgundy wine must be served at the royal table.\nThis development had a ripple effect throughout both regions and in the Paris markets. Both Champagne and Burgundy were deeply concerned with the \"healthiness\" reputation of their wines, even to the extent of paying medical students to write theses touting the health benefit of their wines. These theses were then used as advertising pamphlets that were sent to merchants and customers. The Faculty of Medicine in Reims published several papers to refute Fagon's claim that Burgundy wine was healthier than Champagne. In response, Burgundian winemakers hired physician Jean-Baptiste de Salins, dean of the medical school in Beaune, to speak to a packed auditorium at the Paris Faculty of Medicine. Salins spoke favorably of Burgundy wine's deep color and robust nature and compared it to the pale red color of Champagne and the \"instability\" of the wine to travel long distances and the flaws of the bubbles from when secondary fermentation would take place. The text of his speech was published in newspapers and pamphlets throughout France and had a damaging effect on Champagne sales.\nThe war of words would continue for another 130 years with endless commentary from doctors, poets, playwrights and authors all arguing for their favorite region and their polemics being reproduced in advertisements for Burgundy and Champagne. On a few occasions, the two regions were on the brink of civil war. A turning point occurred when several Champagne wine makers abandoned efforts to produce red wine in favor of focusing on harnessing the effervescent nature of sparkling Champagne. As the bubbles became more popular, doctors throughout France and Europe commented on the health benefits of the sparkling bubbles which were said to cure malaria. As more Champenois winemakers embarked on this new and completely different wine style, the rivalry with Burgundy mellowed and eventually waned.\nClassifications and vineyard regulations.\nIn 1927, viticultural boundaries of Champagne were legally defined and split into five wine-producing districts: The Aube, C\u00f4te des Blancs, C\u00f4te de S\u00e9zanne, Montagne de Reims, and Vall\u00e9e de la Marne. This area covered in 2008 33,500 hectares (76,000 acres) of vineyards around 319 villages that were home to 5,000 growers who made their own wine and 14,000 growers who only sold grapes.\nThe different districts produce grapes of varying characteristics that are blended by the Champagne houses to create their distinct house styles. The Pinots of the Montagne de Reims that are planted on northern facing slopes are known for their high levels of acid and the delicacy they add to the blend. The grapes on the southern facing slope add more power and character. Grapes across the district contribute to the bouquet and headiness. The abundance of southern facing slopes in the Vall\u00e9e de la Marne produces the ripest wines with full aroma. The C\u00f4te des Blancs grapes are known for their finesse and the freshness they add to blends with the extension of the nearby C\u00f4te de S\u00e9zanne offering similar though slightly less distinguished traits.\nIn 1941, the \"Comit\u00e9 Interprofessionnel du Vin de Champagne\" (CIVC) was formed with the purpose of protecting Champagne's reputation and marketing forces as well as setting up and monitoring regulations for vineyard production and vinification methods. Champagne is the only region that is permitted to exclude AOC or \"Appellation d'Origine Contr\u00f4l\u00e9e\" from their labels.\nFor each vintage, the CIVC rated the villages of the area based on the quality of their grapes and vineyards. The rating was then used to determine the price and the percentage of the price that growers get. The \"Grand Cru\" rated vineyards received 100 percent rating which entitled the grower to 100% of the price. \"Premier Crus\" were vineyards with 90\u201399% ratings while \"Deuxi\u00e8me Crus\" received 80\u201389% ratings.\nUnder appellation rules, around 4,000 kilograms (8,800 pounds) of grapes can be pressed to create up to 673 gallons (either 2,550 L or 3,060 L) of juice. The first 541 gallons (either 2,050 L or 2,460 L) are the \"cuv\u00e9e\" and the next 132 gallons (either 500 L or 600 L) are the \"taille\". Prior to 1992, a second \"taille\" of 44 gallons (either 167 L or 200 L) was previously allowed. For vintage Champagne, 100% of the grapes must come from that vintage year while non-vintage wine is a blend of vintages. Vintage champagne must spend a minimum of three years of aging. There are no regulations about how long it must spend on its lees, but some of the premier Champagne houses keep their wines on lees for upwards of five to ten years. Non-vintage Champagne must spend a minimum of 15 months of aging but only a minimum of 12 months on the lees. Most of the Champagne houses keep their wines on the lees throughout the entire aging period because it is more expensive to bottle the wine before aging it, as opposed to bottling and shipping the product in a single step at the end of the fermentation-and-aging process.\nRevision of the Champagne region.\nThe worldwide demand for Champagne has been continuously increasing throughout the 1990s and early 2000s. A record in worldwide shipping of Champagne (including domestic French consumption) of 327 million bottles was set in 1999 in anticipation of end of millennium celebrations, and a new record was set in 2007 at 338.7 million bottles. Since the entire vineyard area authorized by the 1927 AOC regulations is now under cultivation, various ways of expanding the production have been considered. The allowed yield was increased (to a maximum of 15,500\u00a0kg per hectare during an experimental period from 2007 to 2011) and the possibility of revising the production region was examined.\nAfter an extensive review of vineyard conditions in and around the existing Champagne region, INAO presented a proposal to revise the region on March 14, 2008. The proposal was prepared by a group of five experts in the subjects of history, geography, geology, phytosociology and agronomy, working from 2005. The proposal means expanding the region to cover vineyards in 357 rather than 319 villages. This is to be achieved by adding vineyards in forty villages while simultaneously removing two villages in the Marne department that were included in the 1927 regulations, Germaine and Orbais-l'Abbaye.\nThe proposed 40 new Champagne villages are located in four \"d\u00e9partements\":\nThe INAO proposal was to be subject to review before being made into law and was immediately questioned in numerous public comments. The mayor of one of the villages to be delisted, Germaine, immediately appealed against INAO's proposal, with the possibility of additional appeals by vineyard owners. The initial review process is expected to be finished by early 2009. This will be followed by another review of the specific parcels that will be added or deleted from the appellation. The earliest vineyard plantings are expected around 2015, with their product being marketed from around 2021. However, the price of land that are allowed to be used for Champagne production is expected to immediately rise from 5,000 to one million euro per hectare.\nWhile some critics have feared the revision of the Champagne region is about expanding production irrespective of quality, British wine writer and Champagne expert Tom Stevenson has pointed out that the proposed additions constitute a consolidation rather than expansion. The villages under discussion are situated in gaps inside the perimeter of the existing Champagne regions rather than outside it.\nAs of 2019, the expansion had not happened, with a final decision expected in 2023 or 2024.\nProduction other than sparkling wine.\nWhile totally dominating the region's production, sparkling Champagne is not the only product that is made from the region's grapes. Non-sparkling still wines, like those made around the village Bouzy, are sold under the appellation label \"Coteaux Champenois\". There is also a ros\u00e9 appellation in the region, \"Ros\u00e9 des Riceys\". The regional vin de liqueur is called \"Ratafia de Champagne\". Since the profit of making sparkling Champagne from the region's grape is now much higher, production of these non-sparkling wines and fortified wines is very small.\nThe pomace from the grape pressing is used to make \"Marc de Champagne\", and in this case the production does not compete with that of Champagne, since the pomace is a by-product of wine production.\nTraditions.\nThe end of harvest in Champagne is marked by a celebration known as \"la F\u00eate du Cochelet\". At Reims, \"St Jean is the patron of the cellar staff and those engaged in work connected with Champagne.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53756", "revid": "1311684285", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53756", "title": "Aborigine", "text": "Aborigine, aborigine or aboriginal may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title .\nAboriginal descendants of indigenous Indians of South Asia."}
{"id": "53758", "revid": "87054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53758", "title": "Reconstruction archeology", "text": ""}
{"id": "53759", "revid": "50324240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53759", "title": "Category (mathematics)", "text": "Mathematical object that generalizes the standard notions of sets and functions\nIn mathematics, a category (sometimes called an abstract category to distinguish it from a concrete category) is a collection of \"objects\" that are linked by \"arrows\". A category has two basic properties: the ability to compose the arrows associatively and the existence of an identity arrow for each object. A simple example is the category of sets, whose objects are sets and whose arrows are functions.\nCategory theory is a branch of mathematics that seeks to generalize all of mathematics in terms of categories, independent of what their objects and arrows represent. Virtually every branch of modern mathematics can be described in terms of categories, and doing so often reveals deep insights and similarities between seemingly different areas of mathematics. As such, category theory provides an alternative foundation for mathematics to set theory and other proposed axiomatic foundations. In general, the objects and arrows may be abstract entities of any kind, and the notion of category provides a fundamental and abstract way to describe mathematical entities and their relationships.\nIn addition to formalizing mathematics, category theory is also used to formalize many other systems in computer science, such as the semantics of programming languages.\nTwo categories are the same if they have the same collection of objects, the same collection of arrows, and the same associative method of composing any pair of arrows. Two \"different\" categories may also be considered \"equivalent\" for purposes of category theory, even if they do not have precisely the same structure.\nWell-known categories are denoted by a short capitalized word or abbreviation in bold or italics: examples include Set, the category of sets and set functions; Ring, the category of rings and ring homomorphisms; and Top, the category of topological spaces and continuous maps. All of the preceding categories have the identity map as identity arrows and composition as the associative operation on arrows.\nThe classic and still much used text on category theory is \"Categories for the Working Mathematician\" by Saunders Mac Lane. Other references are given in the References below. The basic definitions in this article are contained within the first few chapters of any of these books.\nAny monoid can be understood as a special sort of category (with a single object whose self-morphisms are represented by the elements of the monoid), and so can any preorder.\nDefinition.\nThere are many equivalent definitions of a category. One commonly used definition is as follows. A category formula_1 consists of\nsuch that the following axioms hold:\nWe write formula_13, and we say \"formula_9 is a morphism from formula_32 to formula_33\". We write formula_8 (or formula_35 when there may be confusion about to which category formula_8 refers) to denote the hom-class of all morphisms from formula_32 to formula_33. \nSome authors write the composite of morphisms in \"diagrammatic order\", writing formula_39 (sometimes with \u2a1f ) or formula_40 instead of formula_16. \nFrom these axioms, one can prove that there is exactly one identity morphism for every object. Often the map assigning each object its identity morphism is treated as an extra part of the structure of a category, namely a class function formula_42. \nSome authors use a slight variant of the definition in which each object is identified with the corresponding identity morphism. This stems from the idea that the fundamental data of categories are morphisms and not objects. In fact, categories can be defined without reference to objects at all using a partial binary operation with additional properties.\nSmall and large categories.\nA category \"C\" is called small if both ob(\"C\") and mor(\"C\") are actually sets and not proper classes, and large otherwise. A locally small category is a category such that for all objects \"a\" and \"b\", the hom-class hom(\"a\", \"b\") is a set, called a homset. Many important categories in mathematics (such as the category of sets), although not small, are at least locally small. Since, in small categories, the objects form a set, a small category can be viewed as an algebraic structure similar to a monoid but without requiring closure properties. Large categories on the other hand can be used to create \"structures\" of algebraic structures.\nExamples.\nThe class of all sets (as objects) together with all functions between them (as morphisms), where the composition of morphisms is the usual function composition, forms a large category, Set. It is the most basic and the most commonly used category in mathematics. The category Rel consists of all sets (as objects) with binary relations between them (as morphisms). Abstracting from relations instead of functions yields allegories, a special class of categories.\nAny class can be viewed as a category whose only morphisms are the identity morphisms. Such categories are called discrete. For any given set \"I\", the \"discrete category on I\" is the small category that has the elements of \"I\" as objects and only the identity morphisms as morphisms. Discrete categories are the simplest kind of category.\nAny preordered set (\"P\", \u2264) forms a small category, where the objects are the members of \"P\", the morphisms are arrows pointing from \"x\" to \"y\" when \"x\" \u2264 \"y\". Furthermore, if \"\u2264\" is antisymmetric, there can be at most one morphism between any two objects. The existence of identity morphisms and the composability of the morphisms are guaranteed by the reflexivity and the transitivity of the preorder. By the same argument, any partially ordered set and any equivalence relation can be seen as a small category. Any ordinal number can be seen as a category when viewed as an ordered set.\nAny monoid (any algebraic structure with a single associative binary operation and an identity element) forms a small category with a single object \"x\". (Here, \"x\" is any fixed set.) The morphisms from \"x\" to \"x\" are precisely the elements of the monoid, the identity morphism of \"x\" is the identity of the monoid, and the categorical composition of morphisms is given by the monoid operation. Several definitions and theorems about monoids may be generalized for categories.\nSimilarly any group can be seen as a category with a single object in which every morphism is \"invertible\", that is, for every morphism \"f\" there is a morphism \"g\" that is both left and right inverse to \"f\" under composition. A morphism that is invertible in this sense is called an isomorphism.\nA groupoid is a category in which every morphism is an isomorphism. Groupoids are generalizations of groups, group actions and equivalence relations. Actually, in the view of category the only difference between groupoid and group is that a groupoid may have more than one object but the group must have only one. Consider a topological space \"X\" and fix a base point formula_43 of \"X\", then formula_44 is the fundamental group of the topological space \"X\" and the base point formula_43, and as a set it has the structure of group; if then let the base point formula_43 runs over all points of \"X\", and take the union of all formula_44, then the set we get has only the structure of groupoid (which is called as the fundamental groupoid of \"X\"): two loops (under equivalence relation of homotopy) may not have the same base point so they cannot multiply with each other. In the language of category, this means here two morphisms may not have the same source object (or target object, because in this case for any morphism the source object and the target object are same: the base point) so they can not compose with each other.\nAny directed graph generates a small category: the objects are the vertices of the graph, and the morphisms are the paths in the graph (augmented with loops as needed) where composition of morphisms is concatenation of paths. Such a category is called the \"free category\" generated by the graph.\nThe class of all preordered sets with order-preserving functions (i.e., monotone-increasing functions) as morphisms forms a category, Ord. It is a concrete category, i.e. a category obtained by adding some type of structure onto Set, and requiring that morphisms are functions that respect this added structure.\nThe class of all groups with group homomorphisms as morphisms and function composition as the composition operation forms a large category, Grp. Like Ord, Grp is a concrete category. The category Ab, consisting of all abelian groups and their group homomorphisms, is a full subcategory of Grp, and the prototype of an abelian category.\nThe class of all graphs forms another concrete category, where morphisms are graph homomorphisms (i.e., mappings between graphs which send vertices to vertices and edges to edges in a way that preserves all adjacency and incidence relations).\nOther examples of concrete categories are given by the following table.\nFiber bundles with bundle maps between them form a concrete category.\nThe category Cat consists of all small categories, with functors between them as morphisms.\nConstruction of new categories.\nDual category.\nAny category \"C\" can itself be considered as a new category in a different way: the objects are the same as those in the original category but the arrows are those of the original category reversed. This is called the \"dual\" or \"opposite category\" and is denoted \"C\"op.\nProduct categories.\nIf \"C\" and \"D\" are categories, one can form the \"product category\" \"C\" \u00d7 \"D\": the objects are pairs consisting of one object from \"C\" and one from \"D\", and the morphisms are also pairs, consisting of one morphism in \"C\" and one in \"D\". Such pairs can be composed componentwise.\nTypes of morphisms.\nA morphism \"f\" : \"a\" \u2192 \"b\" is called\nEvery retraction is an epimorphism. Every section is a monomorphism. The following three statements are equivalent:\nRelations among morphisms (such as \"fg\" = \"h\") can most conveniently be represented with commutative diagrams, where the objects are represented as points and the morphisms as arrows.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53761", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53761", "title": "Transformational-generative grammar", "text": ""}
{"id": "53762", "revid": "29042864", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53762", "title": "David Niven", "text": "English actor, memoirist and novelist (1910\u20131983)\nJames David Graham Niven (; 1 March 1910 \u2013 29 July 1983) was an English actor, soldier, raconteur, memoirist and novelist. Niven was known as a handsome and debonair leading man in Classic Hollywood films. His accolades include an Academy Award and two Golden Globe Awards in addition to nominations for a BAFTA Award and two Emmy Awards. \nBorn in central London to an upper-middle-class family, Niven attended Heatherdown Preparatory School and Stowe School before gaining a place at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. After Sandhurst, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Highland Light Infantry. Upon developing an interest in acting, he found a role as an extra in the British film \"There Goes the Bride\" (1932). Bored with the peacetime army, he resigned his commission in 1933, relocated to New York, then travelled to Hollywood. There, he hired an agent and had several small parts in films through 1935, including a non-speaking role in Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" (1935). This helped him gain a contract with Samuel Goldwyn.\nParts, initially small, in major motion pictures followed, including \"Dodsworth\" (1936), \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1936), and \"The Prisoner of Zenda\" (1937). By 1938, he was starring as a leading man in films such as \"Wuthering Heights\" (1939). Upon the outbreak of the Second World War, Niven returned to Britain and rejoined the army, being recommissioned as a lieutenant. In 1942, he co-starred in the morale-building film about the development of the renowned Supermarine Spitfire fighter plane, \"The First of the Few\" (1942).\nNiven went on to receive the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in \"Separate Tables\" (1958), for which he holds the record of shortest winning performance in that category (at 23 minutes and 39 seconds). His other notable films during this time period include \"A Matter of Life and Death\" (1946), \"The Bishop's Wife\" (1947), \"Enchantment\" (1948), \"The Elusive Pimpernel\" (1950), \"The Moon Is Blue\" (1953), \"Around the World in 80 Days\" (1956), \"My Man Godfrey\" (1957), \"The Guns of Navarone\" (1961), \"Murder by Death\" (1976), and \"Death on the Nile\" (1978). He also earned acclaim and notoriety playing Sir Charles Lytton in \"The Pink Panther\" (1963) and James Bond in \"Casino Royale\" (1967).\nEarly life and family.\nJames David Graham Niven was born on 1 March 1910 at Belgrave Mansions, Grosvenor Gardens, London, to William Edward Graham Niven (1878\u20131915) and his wife, Henrietta Julia (n\u00e9e Degacher) Niven (1878\u20131932). He was named David after his birth on St David's Day. Niven later claimed he was born in Kirriemuir, in the Scottish county of Angus in 1909, but his birth certificate disproves this. He had two older sisters and a brother: Margaret Joyce Niven (1900\u20131981), Henry Degacher Niven (1902\u20131953), and the sculptor Grizel Rosemary Graham Niven (1906\u20132007), who created the bronze sculpture \"Bessie\" that is presented to the annual winners of the Women's Prize for Fiction.\nNiven's father, William Niven, was of Scottish descent; he was killed in the First World War serving with the Berkshire Yeomanry during the Gallipoli campaign on 21 August 1915. He is buried in Green Hill Cemetery, Turkey, in the Special Memorial Section in Plot F. 10. Niven's paternal great-grandfather and namesake, David Graham Niven, (1811\u20131884) was from St Martins, a village in Perthshire. A physician, he married in Worcestershire, and lived in Pershore.\nNiven's mother, Henrietta, was born in Brecon, Wales. Her father was Captain (brevet Major) William Degacher (1841\u20131879) of the 1st Battalion, 24th Regiment of Foot, who was killed at the Battle of Isandlwana during the Anglo-Zulu War in 1879. Although born William Hitchcock, in 1874, he and his older brother Lieutenant Colonel Henry Degacher (1835\u20131902), both followed their father, Walter Henry Hitchcock, in taking their mother's maiden name of Degacher. Henriette's mother was Julia Caroline Smith, the daughter of Lieutenant General James Webber Smith CB.\nAfter her husband's death in Turkey in 1915, Henrietta Niven remarried in London in 1917 to Conservative politician and diplomat Sir Thomas Walter Comyn-Platt (1869\u20131961). David and his sister Grizel were close, and both loathed Comyn-Platt. The family moved to Rose Cottage in Bembridge on the Isle of Wight after selling their London home. In his 1971 memoir, \"The Moon's a Balloon\", Niven wrote fondly of his childhood home:\nIt became necessary for the house in London to be sold and our permanent address was now as advertised\u2014a cottage which had a reputation for unreliability. When the East wind blew, the front door got stuck and when the West wind blew, the back door could not be opened\u2014only the combined weight of the family seemed to keep it anchored to the ground. I adored it and was happier there than I had ever been, especially because, with a rare flash of genius, my mother decided that during the holidays she would be alone with her children. Uncle Tommy [Comyn-Platt] was barred\u2014I don't know where he went\u2014to the Carlton Club I suppose.\nLiterary editor and biographer, Graham Lord, wrote in \"Niv: The Authorised Biography of David Niven\", that Comyn-Platt and Niven's mother may have been in an affair well before her husband's death in 1915 and that Comyn-Platt was actually Niven's biological father, a supposition that had some support among Niven's siblings. In a review of Lord's book, Hugh Massingberd from \"The Spectator\" stated photographic evidence did show a strong physical resemblance between Niven and Comyn-Platt that \"would appear to confirm these theories, though photographs can often be misleading.\" Niven is said to have revealed that he knew Comyn-Platt was his real father a year before his own death in 1983.\nAfter his mother remarried, Niven's stepfather had him sent away to boarding school. In \"The Moon's a Balloon\", Niven described the bullying, isolation, and abuse he endured as a six-year-old. He said that older pupils would regularly assault younger boys, while the schoolmasters were not much better. Niven wrote of one sadistic teacher:\nMr Croome, when he tired of pulling ears halfway out of our heads (I still have one that sticks out almost at right-angles thanks to this son of a bitch) and delivering, for the smallest mistake in Latin declension, backhanded slaps that knocked one off one's bench, delighted in saying, 'Show me the hand that wrote this' \u2014 then bringing down the sharp edge of a heavy ruler across the offending wrist.\nYears later, after joining the British Army, a vengeful Niven decided to return to the boarding school to pay a call on Mr Croome but he found the place abandoned and empty.\nWhile attending school\u00a0\u2013 as was customary for the time\u00a0\u2013 Niven received many instances of corporal punishment owing to his inclination for pranks. It was this behaviour that finally led to his expulsion from his next school, Heatherdown Preparatory School, at the age of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;10+1\u20442. This ended his chances for Eton College, a significant blow to his family. After failing to pass the naval entrance exam because of his difficulty with maths, Niven attended Stowe School, a newly created public school led by headmaster J. F. Roxburgh, who was unlike any of Niven's previous headmasters. Thoughtful and kind, he addressed the boys by their first names, allowed them bicycles, and encouraged and nurtured their personal interests. Niven later wrote, \"How he did this, I shall never know, but he made every single boy at that school feel that what he said and what he did were of real importance to the headmaster.\"\nIn 1928, while she was on holiday in Bembridge, 15-year-old Margaret Whigham (the future socialite and Duchess of Argyll) had a sexual encounter with 18-year-old Niven, resulting in her pregnancy. Furious, her father rushed her to a London nursing home for a secret abortion. \"All hell broke loose,\" remembered Elizabeth Duckworth, the Whigham family cook. Margaret Whigham adored Niven until the day he died; she was among the VIP guests at his London memorial service in 1983.\nCareer.\nMilitary service.\nFrom 1928, Niven attended the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. He did well at Sandhurst, which gave him the \"officer and gentleman\" bearing that was his trademark. He requested assignment to the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders or the Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment), then jokingly wrote on the form, as his third choice, \"anything but the Highland Light Infantry\" (because that regiment wore tartan trews rather than the kilt). Having completed his training, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the British Army on 30 January 1930, and assigned to the Highland Light Infantry (HLI). He served with them for two years in Malta and then for a few months in Dover. In Malta, he became friends with the maverick Michael Trubshawe, and served under Roy Urquhart, future commander of the British 1st Airborne Division. On 21 October 1956, in an episode of the game show \"What's My Line?\", Niven, as a member of the celebrity panel, was reacquainted with one of his former enlisted men. Alexander McGeachin was a guest and when his turn in the questioning came up, Niven asked, \"Were you in a famous British regiment on Malta?\" After McGeachin affirmed that he was, Niven quipped, \"Did you have the misfortune to have me as your officer?\" At that point, Niven had a brief but pleasant reunion.\nNiven grew tired of the peacetime army. Though promoted to lieutenant on 1 January 1933, he saw no opportunity for further advancement. His ultimate decision to resign came after a lengthy lecture on machine guns, which was interfering with his plans for dinner with a particularly attractive young lady. At the end of the lecture, the speaker (a major general) asked if there were any questions. Showing the typical rebelliousness of his early years, Niven asked, \"Could you tell me the time, sir? I have to catch a train.\"\nLieutenant Niven resigned his commission on 6 September 1933.\nFilm career.\n1935\u20131938: Early roles.\nWhen Niven presented himself at Central Casting, he learned that he needed a work permit to reside and work in the United States. Since this required leaving the US, he went to Mexico, where he worked as a \"gun-man\", cleaning and polishing the rifles of visiting American hunters. He received his resident alien visa from the American consulate when his birth certificate arrived from Britain. He returned to the US and was accepted by Central Casting as \"Anglo-Saxon Type No. 2,008.\" Among the initial films in which he can be seen are \"Barbary Coast\" (1935) and \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" (1935). He secured a small role in \"A Feather in Her Hat\" (1935) at Columbia before returning to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for a bit role, billed as David Nivens, in \"Rose Marie\" (1936).\nNiven's role in \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" brought him to the attention of independent film producer Samuel Goldwyn, who signed him to a contract and established his career. For Goldwyn, Niven again had a small role in \"Splendor\" (1935). He was lent to MGM for a minor part in \"Rose Marie\" (1936), then a larger one in \"Palm Springs\" (1936) for Paramount Pictures. His first sizable role for Goldwyn came in \"Dodsworth\" (1936). In that same year he was again loaned out, to 20th Century Fox to play Bertie Wooster in \"Thank You, Jeeves!\" (1936), before landing a significant role as a soldier in \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\" (1936) at Warner Brothers, an Imperial adventure film starring his housemate at the time, Errol Flynn. Niven was fourth billed in \"Beloved Enemy\" (1936) for Goldwyn, supporting Merle Oberon with whom he was romantically involved. Universal Pictures used him in \"We Have Our Moments\" (1937) and he had a good supporting role in David O. Selznick's \"The Prisoner of Zenda\" (1937).\n1938\u20131939: Leading man.\nFox Studios gave him the lead in a B picture, \"Dinner at the Ritz\" (1938), and he again had a supporting role in \"Bluebeard's Eighth Wife\" (1938) directed by Ernst Lubitsch at Paramount. Niven was one of the four heroes in John Ford's \"Four Men and a Prayer\" (1938), also with Fox. He remained with Fox to play the part of a fake love interest in \"Three Blind Mice\" (1938). Niven joined what became known as the Hollywood Raj, a group of British actors in Hollywood which included Gladys Cooper, Cedric Hardwicke, Boris Karloff, Stan Laurel, Basil Rathbone, Ronald Colman, Leslie Howard, and C. Aubrey Smith. \nNiven graduated to star parts in \"A\" films with \"The Dawn Patrol\" (1938) remake at Warners; although he was billed below Flynn and Rathbone, it was a leading role and the film did excellent business. Niven was reluctant to take part in \"Wuthering Heights\" (1939) for Goldwyn, but eventually relented and the film was a big success. RKO borrowed him to play Ginger Rogers's leading man in the romantic comedy \"Bachelor Mother\" (1939), which was another big hit. Goldwyn used him to support Gary Cooper in the adventure tale \"The Real Glory\" (1939), and Walter Wanger cast him opposite Loretta Young in \"Eternally Yours\" (1939). Finally, Goldwyn granted Niven a lead part in a major film, the title role as the eponymous gentleman safecracker in \"Raffles\" (1939).\n1939\u20131945: Second World War.\nThe day after Britain declared war on Germany in 1939, Niven returned home and rejoined the British Army. He was alone among British stars in Hollywood in doing so; the British Embassy advised most actors to stay.\nNiven was recommissioned as a lieutenant in the Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort's Own) on 25 February 1940, and was assigned to a motor training battalion. He wanted something more exciting, however, and transferred to the Commandos. He was assigned to a training base at Inverailort House in the Western Highlands. Niven later claimed credit for bringing future Major General Sir Robert Laycock to the Commandos. Niven commanded \"A\" Squadron GHQ Liaison Regiment, better known as \"Phantom\". He was promoted to war-substantive captain on 18 August 1941.\nNiven also worked with the Army Film and Photographic Unit. His work included a small part in the deception operation that used minor actor M. E. Clifton James to impersonate General Sir Bernard Montgomery. During his work with the AFPU, Peter Ustinov, one of the scriptwriters, had to pose as Niven's batman. Niven explained in his autobiography that there was no military way that he, a lieutenant-colonel, and Ustinov, who was only a private, could associate, other than as an officer and his subordinate, hence their strange \"act\". In 1978, Niven and Ustinov would star together in a film adaptation of Agatha Christie's \"Death on the Nile\".\nHe acted in two wartime films not formally associated with the AFPU, but both made with a firm view to winning support for the British war effort, especially in the United States. These were \"The First of the Few\" (1942), directed by Leslie Howard, and \"The Way Ahead\" (1944), directed by Carol Reed, the latter of which included a large supporting role for Ustinov.\nNiven was also given a significant if largely unheralded role in the creation of SHAEF's military radio efforts conceived to provide entertainment to British, Canadian, and American forces in England and in Europe. In 1944 he worked extensively with the BBC and SHAEF to expand these broadcast efforts. He also worked extensively with Major Glenn Miller, whose Army Air Force big band, formed in the US, was performing and broadcasting for troops in England. Niven played a role in the operation to move the Miller band to France prior to Miller's December 1944 disappearance while flying over the English Channel.\nOn 14 March 1944, Niven was promoted war-substantive major (temporary lieutenant-colonel). He took part in the Allied invasion of Normandy in June 1944, although he was sent to France several days after D-Day. He served in \"Phantom\", a secret reconnaissance and signals unit which located and reported enemy positions, and kept rear commanders informed on changing battle lines. Niven was posted at one time to Chilham in Kent.\nNiven had particular scorn for those newspaper columnists covering the war who typed out self-glorifying and excessively florid prose about their meagre wartime experiences. Niven stated, \"Anyone who says a bullet sings past, hums past, flies, pings, or whines past, has never heard one\u00a0\u2013 they go \"crack\"!\" He gave a few details of his war experience in his autobiography, \"The Moon's a Balloon:\" his private conversations with Winston Churchill, the bombing of London, and what it was like entering Germany with the occupation forces. Niven first met Churchill at a dinner party in February 1940. Churchill singled him out from the crowd and stated, \"Young man, you did a fine thing to give up your film career to fight for your country. Mark you, had you not done so it would have been despicable.\"\nA few stories have surfaced. About to lead his men into action, Niven eased their nervousness by telling them, \"Look, you chaps only have to do this once. But I'll have to do it all over again in Hollywood with Errol Flynn!\" Asked by suspicious American sentries during the Battle of the Bulge who had won the World Series in 1943, he answered, \"Haven't the foggiest idea, but I did co-star with Ginger Rogers in \"Bachelor Mother\"!\"\nNiven ended the war as a lieutenant-colonel. On his return to Hollywood after the war, he received the Legion of Merit, an American military decoration in honour of Niven's work setting up the BBC Allied Expeditionary Forces Programme, a radio news and entertainment station for the Allied forces.\n1946\u20131950: Postwar career.\nNiven initially resumed his acting career in England, taking the lead in the classic, \"A Matter of Life and Death\" (1946), from the team of Powell and Pressburger. The film was critically acclaimed, popular in England, and selected as the first Royal Film Performance. Niven returned to Hollywood but soon encountered tragedy with the death of his wife after falling down a flight of stairs at a party, and it was around this time that his career began to suffer as well. Goldwyn lent him to Universal to play Aaron Burr in \"Magnificent Doll\" (1946) opposite Ginger Rogers, then lent him to Paramount for \"The Perfect Marriage\" (1947) with Loretta Young and loaned him out a third time for Enterprise Productions' \"The Other Love\" (1947) opposite Barbara Stanwyck. Finally he was cast in a top picture for Goldwyn when he joined Cary Grant and Loretta Young for \"The Bishop's Wife\" (1947).\nAny prospects for career advancement were quickly dashed when Goldwyn lent him to Alexander Korda to return to the UK for the title role in \"Bonnie Prince Charlie\" (1948), a notorious flop. Back in Hollywood, Niven was in Goldwyn's well-regarded \"Enchantment\" (1948) with Teresa Wright. At Warner Bros he was in the comedy \"A Kiss in the Dark\" (1948) with Jane Wyman, then he appeared opposite Shirley Temple in the comedy \"A Kiss for Corliss\" (1949). None of these films was successful at the box office. Niven's career was markedly in decline.\nHe returned to Britain for the title role in \"The Elusive Pimpernel\" (1950) from Powell and Pressberger, which was to have been financed by Korda and Goldwyn. Goldwyn pulled out and the film did not appear in the US for three years. Niven had a long, complex relationship with Goldwyn, who gave him his start, but Niven's demands for more money and better roles led to a long estrangement.\n1951\u20131964: Renewed acclaim.\nIn his post-Goldwyn years, it took Niven some time to return to the top of the Hollywood ladder. Foundering, he supported Mario Lanza in a musical at MGM, \"The Toast of New Orleans\" (1950). He then went to England to star in a musical with Vera-Ellen, \"Happy Go Lovely\" (1951); it was little seen in the US but a big hit in Britain. He was reduced to a support role in MGM's \"Soldiers Three\" (1951) not unlike some of the assignments early in his career. Niven had a far better part in the British war film \"Appointment with Venus\" (1952), which was popular in England. \"The Lady Says No\" (1952) was a poorly received American comedy. Niven tried Broadway, appearing opposite Gloria Swanson in \"Nina\" (1951\u201352). The play ran for only 45 performances but it was seen by Otto Preminger, who decided to cast Niven in the film version of \"The Moon Is Blue\" (1953). As preparation Preminger, who had directed the play in New York, insisted that Niven appear on stage in the West Coast run. \"The Moon Is Blue\", a sex comedy, became notorious when it was released without a Production Code Seal of Approval; it was a major hit, and Niven won a Golden Globe Award for his role.\nBack in demand, Niven's next few films were made in England: \"The Love Lottery\" (1954), an Ealing comedy; \"Carrington V.C.\" (1954), a drama that earned Niven a BAFTA nomination for Best Actor; and \"Happy Ever After\" (1954), a comedy with Yvonne de Carlo, which was hugely popular in Britain. In Hollywood, he was seen as the villain in an MGM swashbuckler, \"The King's Thief\" (1955), opposite a young Roger Moore. He had a better part in \"The Birds and the Bees\" (1956), portraying a conman in a remake of \"The Lady Eve\" (1941), in which Niven played a third-billed supporting role under American television comedian George Gobel and leading lady Mitzi Gaynor. Niven also appeared in the British romantic comedy \"The Silken Affair\" (1956) with Genevi\u00e8ve Page the same year.\nNiven's professional fortunes were fully restored when he starred as Phileas Fogg in \"Around the World in 80 Days\" (1956), a huge hit at the box office and his signature film; it won the Academy Award for Best Picture. He followed it with \"Oh, Men! Oh, Women!\" (1957); \"The Little Hut\" (1957), from the writer of \"The Moon is Blue\" and another success at the box office; \"My Man Godfrey\" (1957), a screwball comedy; and \"Bonjour Tristesse\" (1958), for Preminger. Niven also worked in television. He appeared several times on various short-drama shows and was one of the \"four stars\" of the dramatic anthology series \"Four Star Playhouse\", appearing in 33 episodes. The show was produced by Four Star Television, which was owned and founded by Niven, Ida Lupino, Dick Powell, and Charles Boyer. The show ended in 1955, but Four Star became a highly successful TV production company.\nNiven is the only person to win an Academy Award at the ceremony he was hosting. He won the 1959 Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Major David Angus Pollock in \"Separate Tables\", his only nomination for an Oscar. Appearing on-screen for only 23 minutes in the film, this is the briefest performance ever to win a Best Actor Oscar. He was also a co-host of the 30th, 31st, and 46th Academy Awards ceremonies. After Niven had won the Academy Award, Goldwyn called with an invitation to his home. In Goldwyn's drawing-room, Niven noticed a picture of himself in uniform which he had sent to Goldwyn from Britain during the Second World War. In happier times with Goldwyn, he had observed this same picture sitting on Goldwyn's piano. Now years later, the picture was still in exactly the same spot. As he was looking at the picture, Goldwyn's wife Frances said, \"Sam never took it down.\" \nWith an Oscar to his credit, Niven's career continued to thrive. In 1959, he became the host of his own TV drama series, \"The David Niven Show\", but he was still starring in major films. He led in \"Ask Any Girl\" (1959), with Shirley MacLaine; the Carl Reiner-scripted \"Happy Anniversary\" (1959) opposite Mitzi Gaynor; and \"Please Don't Eat the Daisies\" (1960) with Doris Day, a huge hit.\nEven more popular was the action film \"The Guns of Navarone\" (1961) with Gregory Peck and Anthony Quinn. This role led to the ex-soldier being cast in further war and/or action films: \"The Captive City\" (1962); \"The Best of Enemies\" (1962); \"Guns of Darkness\" (1962); and \"55 Days at Peking\" (1963) with Charlton Heston and Ava Gardner. Niven returned to comedy with \"The Pink Panther\" (1963), also starring Peter Sellers, another huge success at the box office. Less so was the comedy \"Bedtime Story\" (1964) with Marlon Brando, later remade with Michael Caine in a very Nivenish performance under the title \"Dirty Rotten Scoundrels\". In 1964, Charles Boyer, Gig Young, and top-billed Niven appeared in the Four Star series \"The Rogues\" for NBC. Niven played Alexander 'Alec' Fleming, one of a family of retired con-artists who now fleece villains in the interests of justice. This was his only recurring role on television, and the series was originally set up to more or less revolve between the three leads in various combinations (one-lead, two-lead and three-lead episodes), although in the event, Gig Young, being the least busy, carried most of the series, with an assist from Larry Hagman. \"The Rogues\" ran for one season and won a Golden Globe.\n1965\u20131983: Later films.\nIn 1965, Niven made two films for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer: the Peter Ustinov-directed \"Lady L\" with Paul Newman and Sophia Loren, and \"Where the Spies Are\", as a doctor-turned-secret agent. After the horror film \"Eye of the Devil\" (1966), Niven went the secret agent route again, appearing as James Bond in the hit \"Casino Royale\" in 1967. He remains, with the exception of Sean Connery in \"Never Say Never Again\", the only other man to portray Bond in a non-Eon Productions film. Niven had been Bond creator Ian Fleming's choice to play Bond in \"Dr. No\". \"Casino Royale\" co-producer Charles K. Feldman said later that Fleming had written the book with Niven in mind, and therefore had sent a copy to Niven. Niven is the only actor who played James Bond to be mentioned by name in the text of a Fleming novel. In chapter 14 of \"You Only Live Twice\", pearl diver Kissy Suzuki refers to Niven as \"the only man she liked in Hollywood\", and the only person who \"treated her honourably\" there.\nNiven made two popular comedies, \"Prudence and the Pill\" (1968) and \"The Impossible Years\" (1968). Less widely seen was the offbeat \"The Extraordinary Seaman\" for John Frankenheimer in 1969. \"The Brain\", a French comedy with Bourvil and Jean-Paul Belmondo, was the most popular film at the French box office in 1969. He did a war drama \"Before Winter Comes\" (1969) next, followed by a return to comedy in \"The Statue\" (1971). \nBuoyed by the massive success of his best-selling memoir, \"The Moon's a Balloon\", Niven was in demand throughout the last decade of his life. \"King, Queen, Knave\" (1972) and \"Vampira\" (1974) were followed by one of the most enduring images of Niven. While hosting the 46th Annual Oscars ceremony, a naked man (Robert Opel) appeared behind Niven, \"streaking\" across the stage. In what instantly became a live-TV classic moment, a bemused Niven responded, \"Isn't it fascinating to think that probably the only laugh that man will ever get in his life is by stripping off and showing his shortcomings?\" That same year, he hosted \"David Niven's World\" for LWT, which profiled contemporary adventurers such as hang gliders, motorcyclists, and mountain climbers: it ran for 21 episodes. In 1975, he narrated \"The Remarkable Rocket\", a short animation based on a story by Oscar Wilde. \nContinuing with his film career, he starred in the highly regarded drama \"Paper Tiger\" (1975) and a Disney comedy, \"No Deposit, No Return\" (1976), while at the same time appearing in lucrative TV commercials for cologne and coffee in Asia, setting a trend that carries on with major North American film stars today. The all-star mystery spoof \"Murder By Death\" (1976) followed, after which came a better Disney outing, \"Candleshoe\" (1977), alongside Jodie Foster and Helen Hayes, and then the first of the all-star Ustinov-as-Poirot films, \"Death on the Nile\" (1978). \"A Nightingale Sang in Berkeley Square\" (1979); \"Escape to Athena\" (1979), another all-star effort, this time with his son as producer; then the far-better-than-usual Burt Reynolds vehicle \"Rough Cut\" (1980), and finally \"The Sea Wolves\" (1980), a wartime adventure film, rounded out his peak years. By the last two, and his TV mini-series \"A Man Called Intrepid\" (1979), Niven's declining health was becoming evident.\nNiven's last leading role was in \"Better Late Than Never\" (1983). In July 1982, Blake Edwards brought an ailing Niven back for cameos in two \"Pink Panther\" films shot at the same time (\"Trail of the Pink Panther\" and \"Curse of the Pink Panther\"), reprising his role as Sir Charles Lytton. By the time of filming, Niven was fully in the throes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and his voice was no longer usable. His lines were dubbed, however inadequately, on short notice, by Rich Little. Niven only learned of it from a newspaper report.\nWriting.\nNiven wrote four books. The first, \"Round the Rugged Rocks\", was a novel that appeared in 1951, when his film career was at its nadir, and was forgotten immediately. The plot was plainly autobiographical (although not recognised as such at the time of publication), involving a young soldier, John Hamilton, who leaves the British Army, becomes a liquor salesman in New York, is involved in indoor horse racing, goes to Hollywood, becomes a deckhand on a fishing boat, and finally ends up as a highly successful film star.\nIn 1971, he published his autobiography, \"The Moon's a Balloon\", selling over five million copies. He followed this with \"Bring On the Empty Horses\" in 1975, a collection of entertaining reminiscences from the Golden Age of Hollywood in the 1930s and 1940s. As a raconteur rather than an accurate memoirist, Niven recounted some incidents from a first-person perspective that happened to other people, among them Cary Grant. This borrowing and embroidering of his personal history was also said to be the reason why he persistently refused to appear on \"This Is Your Life\". Niven's penchant for exaggeration is particularly apparent when comparing his written descriptions of his early film appearances (especially \"Barbary Coast\" and \"A Feather in her Hat\"), and his Oscar acceptance speech, to the filmed evidence. In all three examples, the reality differs from Niven's accounts as presented in \"The Moon's a Balloon\" and related in various chat show appearances.\nIn 1981 Niven published a second and much more successful novel, \"Go Slowly, Come Back Quickly\", which was set during and after the Second World War, and which drew on his experiences during the war and in Hollywood.\nPersonal life.\nWhile on leave in 1940, Niven met Primula \"Primmie\" Susan Rollo (18 February 1918 \u2013 21 May 1946), the daughter of London lawyer William H.C. Rollo. After a whirlwind romance, they married on 16 September 1940. A son, David Jr., was born in December 1942 and a second son, James Graham Niven, on 6 November 1945. Primmie died at the age of 28, six weeks after the family moved to the US. She fractured her skull in a fall in the Beverly Hills home of Tyrone Power and Annabella, while playing a game of sardines. She had walked through a door believing it to be a closet, but instead, it led to a stone staircase to the basement.\nIn 1948, Niven met and married Hj\u00f6rdis Paulina Tersmeden (n\u00e9e Genberg, 1919\u20131997), a divorced Swedish fashion model. He recounted their meeting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to friends, the relationship between Niven and Hj\u00f6rdis was turbulent.\nIn 1960, Niven bought a chalet in Ch\u00e2teau-d'\u0152x near Gstaad in Switzerland, living near expatriate friends including Deborah Kerr, Peter Ustinov, and No\u00ebl Coward. It is believed that Niven's choice to become a tax exile may have been one reason why he never received a British honour. However, Kerr, Ustinov, and Coward were honoured. A 2009 biography of Niven contained assertions that he had an affair with Princess Margaret, who was 20 years his junior. He also became close friends with William F. Buckley Jr. and his wife Pat; Buckley wrote a memorial tribute to him in \"Miles Gone By\" (2004).\nEventually Niven divided his time between his chalet in Ch\u00e2teau-d'\u0152x and his home at Cap Ferrat on the C\u00f4te d'Azur in the south of France.\nDeath and legacy.\nIn 1978, Niven began experiencing weight loss, and by 1980 general fatigue, muscle weakness, and slurred speech. His interviews on the talk shows of Michael Parkinson and Merv Griffin alarmed family and friends; viewers wondered if Niven had either been drinking or suffered a stroke. He blamed his slightly slurred voice on the shooting schedule of the film he had been making, \"Better Late Than Never\". He was diagnosed with ALS in 1980. His final appearance in Hollywood was hosting the 1981 American Film Institute tribute to his old friend Fred Astaire.\nIn February 1983, using a false name to avoid publicity, Niven was hospitalised for 10 days, ostensibly for a digestive problem. Afterwards, he returned to his chalet at Ch\u00e2teau-d'\u0152x. Though his condition continued to worsen, he refused to return to the hospital, a decision supported by his family. He died at his chalet on 29 July 1983, aged 73. Niven was buried on 2 August in the local cemetery of Ch\u00e2teau-d'\u0152x.\nA thanksgiving service for Niven was held at St Martin-in-the-Fields, London, on 27 October 1983. The congregation of 1,200 included Prince Michael of Kent, Margaret Campbell, Duchess of Argyll, John Mills, Richard Attenborough, Trevor Howard, David Frost, Joanna Lumley, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., and Laurence Olivier. Biographer Graham Lord wrote, \"the biggest wreath, worthy of a Mafia Godfather's funeral, was delivered from the porters at London's Heathrow Airport, along with a card that read: 'To the finest gentleman who ever walked through these halls. He made a porter feel like a king.'\"\nIn 1985, Niven was included in a series of British postage stamps, along with Alfred Hitchcock, Charles Chaplin, Peter Sellers, and Vivien Leigh, to commemorate \"British Film Year\". Niven's appearance was the inspiration for that of Commander Norman in the \"Thunderbirds\" franchise, as well as DC Comics villain Sinestro.\nNiven's \"Bonjour Tristesse\" co-star, Myl\u00e8ne Demongeot, declared about him in a 2015 filmed interview:\"He was like a Lord, he was part of those great actors who were extraordinary like Dirk Bogarde, individuals with lots of class, elegance and humour. I only saw David get angry once. Preminger had discharged him for the day but eventually asked to get him. I said, sir, you had discharged him, he left for Deauville to gamble at the casino. So we rented a helicopter so they immediately went and grabbed him. Two hours later, he was back, full of rage. There I saw David lose his British phlegm, his politeness and class. It was royal. [Laughs].\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53763", "revid": "62", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53763", "title": "Phrase structure rule", "text": ""}
{"id": "53764", "revid": "50633980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53764", "title": "The Rubettes", "text": "English pop band\nThe Rubettes are an English pop/glam rock band put together in 1974 after the release of \"Sugar Baby Love\", a recording assembled of studio session musicians in 1973 by the songwriting team of Wayne Bickerton, the then head of A&amp;R at Polydor Records, and his co-songwriter, Tony Waddington after their doo-wop and 1950s American pop-influenced songs had been rejected by a number of existing acts. Waddington paired the group with manager John Morris, the husband of singer Clodagh Rodgers, and under his guidance, the band emerged at the end of the glam rock movement, wearing trademark white suits and cloth caps on stage. Their first release, \"Sugar Baby Love\", was an instant hit remaining at number one in the United Kingdom for four weeks in May 1974, while reaching number 37 on the US chart that August, and remains their best-known record. Subsequent releases were less successful, but the band toured well into the 2000s with two line-ups in existence.\nHistory.\nClassic era (1974\u20131980).\nThe Rubettes' first and biggest hit was \"Sugar Baby Love\" (1974), which was a number one in the United Kingdom, selling around 500,000 copies in the UK and three million copies globally. With three other songs, \"Sugar Baby Love\" was recorded for Polydor in October 1973 at Lansdowne Studios in Holland Park, London, by a group of session musicians featuring the distinctive falsetto and lead vocals of Paul Da Vinci (born Paul Leonard Prewer). However, Da Vinci did not join the others to become a member of the band put together by John Richardson, and instead pursued solo work, having signed a contract with Penny Farthing Records. \"Sugar Baby Love\" was their only UK No. 1 and sole US Top 40 entry.\nFor public appearances to promote the song, initially on \"Top of the Pops\", Alan Williams took on the role of lead singer, being the only one of the original session singers able to duplicate Da Vinci's falsetto vocals. The Rubettes then comprised Williams, Richardson, and Pete Arnesen (all three of whom had participated in the original recording) together with Tony Thorpe, Mick Clarke, and Bill Hurd. In performance, the group wore distinctive white suits and white caps which, according to Williams, \"were a practical addition to the ensemble... [as] we all had long hair, which didn't suit the image we'd gone for... We compromised by having our hair pinned up inside the caps\".\nWilliams sang lead on later recordings, and the Rubettes went on to have a number of other top-ten hits across Europe during the mid-1970s, such as \"Tonight\", \"Juke Box Jive\" and \"I Can Do It\", mostly written by the Bickerton\u2013Waddington songwriting team. The Rubettes' success encouraged Bickerton and Waddington to set up State Records, so that ten months after the release of \"Sugar Baby Love\", the fourth Rubettes single, \"I Can Do It\", was on State (catalogue reference STAT 1). In November 1974, \"NME\" music magazine reported that The Rubettes, The Glitter Band and Mud were among the UK bands who had roles in a new film titled \"Never Too Young to Rock\".\nIn 1976 the band abandoned glam nostalgia to enter more serious territory. \"Under One Roof\" (1976) sung by John Richardson was a portrayal of a gay man disowned and later murdered by his father; along with Rod Stewart's \"The Killing of Georgie\" (1976), it was one of the few songs that tackled the topic of homophobia. Their most successful self-composed hit was the country rock-styled ballad \"Baby I Know\" (1977) sung by Tony Thorpe, which reached number 10 in the UK and Germany in 1977. During this period the band continued to cater to the much bigger European market by continuing to release more commercial pop singles all featuring lead vocals by Alan Williams, such as \"Julia\" (1976), \"Allez Oop\" (1976), and \"Ooh La La\" (1977). The band became a quintet in early 1975 with the departure of Arnesen, and later became a quartet in mid-1976 when Hurd departed the band; to this day the original band has never expanded its line-up beyond four members. Whilst the band continued as a four-piece, Hurd joined Suzi Quatro's band, touring and playing on a number of worldwide hits, which included the Top 20 success \"She's in Love with You\" in 1979, before re-joining the Rubettes in 1982.\nIn another attempt to get away from the 'doo-wop' glam image, Thorpe insisted that the trademark vocal harmonies be left off of his composition \"You're the Reason Why\". Gerry Shury and the band outvoted him. The version with no vocal backing has been available as a bootleg recording in certain parts of Europe. In 1979, Thorpe and the band separated over musical differences. Thorpe can be heard on lead vocals on the last \"Still Unwinding\" track, \"Does It Gotta Be Rock 'N' Roll\". His guitar parts and backing vocals remained. After Thorpe's departure, the group's success dwindled. The band replaced Thorpe with Bob Benham, but he departed shortly thereafter and the band dissolved in 1980.\nRe-formation (1982\u20131999).\nThe band re-formed in 1982, with a line-up consisting of Williams, Clarke, Hurd, and drummer Alex Bines to exploit the German market for 1970s nostalgia. This line-up remained relatively stable until 1999, with the only line-up changes being the departure of Clarke in 1987, to be replaced first by Steve Kinch and then by Trevor Holliday, before he returned to the fold in 1993.\nSeparate projects (2000\u2013present).\nJohn Richardson, under the name Jayadev, has recorded as a session percussionist, and played on Tight Fit's version of \"The Lion Sleeps Tonight\".\nIn 2000, Williams and Hurd both formed their own versions of the Rubettes, which at the time both also included two members of the Rubettes in each group (Clarke and Richardson in Williams', Da Vinci and Bines in Hurd's). Due to legal issues, both versions of the band have to specify that their version is only led by them, by having the phrase \"featuring __\" after \"The Rubettes\".\nIn March 2012, Thorpe digitally released the \"No Hits, No Jazz Collection\" and performed at Darwen Library Theatre with a live eight-piece band for his \"50th Anniversary 1-Gig-Tour\". It featured session musicians Iain Reddy, Liam Barber, Justin Randall and Greg Harper. \"You're the Reason Why\" was played.\nLegal issues.\nIn 2002, the group hit the headlines once more when, following an acrimonious split and legal action, the Rubettes became the latest in a long line of bands (including the Beach Boys and Spandau Ballet) to end up in the courts in a dispute over ownership of the band's name. The court ruled that both Williams and Hurd could tour as the Rubettes, as long as it was clear which member was fronting the band.\nIn 2005, Williams and Hurd were back in court following an appearance by Hurd's band on the German television station ZDF, with Williams claiming Hurd had breached the terms of the original agreement. On 2 February 2006, a High Court judge found that Hurd and Williams had both been guilty of breaching the 2002 agreement. Costs of the trial were, however, awarded to Williams in view of the severity of Hurd's breaches. Hurd appealed this decision, but on 3 November 2006, the Appeal Court in London ruled against him, awarding the costs of the appeal to Williams. Hurd has since gone bankrupt.\n2022 High Court ownership ruling.\nIn July 2022 Alan Williams and his company won a High Court trial for the ownership of The Rubettes name, against Clarke, Richardson and Etherington. Sitting in the High Court in London, Judge Pat Treacy ruled for Williams and said: \"The defendants' conduct amounts to a misrepresentation sufficient to engage the tort of passing off. The claimants have succeeded.\"\nOriginal personnel.\nThe Rubettes (1973\u20131980, 1982\u20131999).\nFormer\nTimeline\nDifferent versions of the Rubettes.\nThe Rubettes featuring Alan Williams (2000-present).\nIn 2000, Williams formed his version of the band along with Clarke, Richardson, and ex-Kinks keyboardist Mark Haley.\nOn 21 September 2014, as part of the Rubettes' 40th anniversary, it was announced that Alan Williams, John Richardson, and Mick Clarke would return to the Olympia in Paris, the same venue at which the Rubettes made their first appearance in France in 1974 when \"Sugar Baby Love\" topped the French and European charts.\nThe band broke up in February 2019. A new Rubettes was formed with the original members John Richardson, Mick Clarke, and Steve Etherington (producer/arranger since 1995).\nCurrent members\nFormer members\nMembers of the original Rubettes are in bold\nTimeline\nThe Rubettes featuring Bill Hurd (2000-present).\nFollowing the dissolution of the original band, Hurd formed his version of the group with longtime drummer Alex Bines, vocalist Paul Da Vinci (who had performed lead vocal on \"Sugar Baby Love\"), bassist Billy Hill, and guitarist Rufus Rufell. Da Vinci departed the band in 2006 and was replaced by George Bird, and guitarist Rufell leaving in 2009 and replaced by Ian Pearce.\nIn June 2009, Bill Hurd's Rubettes played at the East Kilbride ArtBurst Festival.\nIn 2010, Bill Hurd's Rubettes covered the 1997 Thorpe composition \"Where the Angels Fear to Tread\" on their album \"21st Century Rock 'n' Roll\" on Angel Air Records.\n2013 saw the beginning of the most turbulent period in the band's history, as line-up instability was common for the next two years. First Bines, Hill, and Pearce all left the band to be replaced by Paul Callaby (drums), Ray Frost (guitars), and John Sorrell (bass) respectively, leaving Hurd as the last remaining \"founding member\" of his version of the group. Late 2013 saw Bird depart the band to be replaced by Yvan Silva. By mid-2013 the band underwent a major personnel upheaval again, as everyone other than Hurd departed the band.\nThe line-up then solidified with the arrival of vocalist Ken Butler, drummer Martin Clapson, and guitarist Dave Harding, with Mike Steed joining them on bass (on loan from The Marmalade) for a few months. The band line-up has remained fairly settled since 2014 with the only changes following the death of Ken Butler in 2018 saw the appointment of John Summerton (ex Flintlock) on guitar and vocals, and the arrival of drummer Damian Fisher.\nCurrent\nFormer\nMembers of the original Rubettes are in bold\nTimeline\nThe Rubettes featuring John, Mick, &amp; Steve (2019-present).\nIn February 2019, founding members of \"The Rubettes featuring Alan Williams\" John Richardson, Mick Clarke, and Steve Etherington (who with the exception of Etherington are original members of the band) decided to break away from Alan Williams, and formed the Rubettes featuring John, Mick, and Steve. In 2020, the trio recorded, produced, and released their album \"Glamnezia\". They are currently the only version of the Rubettes to have released a full-length studio album.\nMembers of the original Rubettes are in bold\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53765", "revid": "39544904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53765", "title": "TV series", "text": ""}
{"id": "53767", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53767", "title": "Natural satelite", "text": ""}
{"id": "53771", "revid": "1256181004", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53771", "title": "Senufo languages", "text": "Language family of West Africa\nThe Senufo or Senufic languages () comprise around 15 languages spoken by the Senufo in the north of Ivory Coast, the south of Mali and the southwest of Burkina Faso. An isolated language, Nafaanra, is also spoken in the west of Ghana. The Senufo languages constitute their own branch of the Atlantic\u2013Congo sub-family of the Niger\u2013Congo languages. Anne Garber estimates the total number of Senufos at some 1.5 million; the Ethnologue, based on various population estimates, counts 2.7 million.\nThe Senufo languages are bounded to the west by Mande languages, to the south by Kwa languages, and to the north and east by Central Gur languages.\nThe Senufo languages are like the Gur languages in that they have a suffixal noun class system and that verbs are marked for aspect. Most Gur languages to the north of Senufo have a two tone downstep system, but the tonal system of the Senufo languages is mostly analysed as a three level tone system (High, Mid, Low).\nThe Senufo languages have been influenced by the neighbouring Mande languages in numerous ways. Many words have been borrowed from the Mande languages Bambara and Jula. Carlson notes that \"it is probable that several grammatical constructions are calques on the corresponding Bambara constructions\". Like Mande languages, the Senufo languages have a subject\u2013object\u2013verb (SOV) constituent order, rather than the subject\u2013verb\u2013object (SVO) order which is more common in Gur and in Niger\u2013Congo as a whole.\nClassification.\nDelafosse was the first linguist to write on the Senufo languages. He noted that the Senufo were often confused with the Mande, partly because use of Mande languages by the Senufo was widespread:\n\"[L]a langue mand\u00e9 s'est r\u00e9pandue parmi eux, des alliances nombreuses ont eu lieu... C'est l\u00e0 l'origine de la confusion que l'on a faite souvent entre Mand\u00e9 et S\u00e9noufo ... alors que, au triple point de vue ethnographique, antropologique et linguistique, la diff\u00e9rence est profonde entre ces deux familles.\"\nIn the influential classifications of Westermann and Bendor-Samuel, the Senufo languages were classified as Gur languages. In 1975, this classification was called into doubt by Gabriel Manessy. In 1989, John Naden, in his overview of the Gur family, stated that \u2018[t]he remaining languages, especially Senufo, may well be no more closely related to Central Gur than to Guang or Togo Remnant, or than these to Central Gur or Volta-Comoe\u2019.\nSubclassification.\nEarly Senufo classifications were mainly geographically motivated, dividing the Senufo languages into Northern, Central, and Southern Senufo. In subsequent years, this terminology was adopted by several linguists working on Senufo languages. Mensah (1983) and Mills (1984) avoided this geographical terms but used mainly the same grouping. SIL International in its Ethnologue subdivides the Senufo languages in six groups. Combining the two classifications results in the grouping below.\nNorthern Senufo\nCentral Senufo\nSouthern Senufo\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53772", "revid": "24170162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53772", "title": "Chiroptera", "text": ""}
{"id": "53773", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53773", "title": "Gur languages", "text": "Branch of the Niger\u2013Congo languages\nThe Gur languages, also known as Central Gur or Mabia, belong to the Niger\u2013Congo languages. They are spoken in the Sahelian and savanna regions of West Africa, namely: in most areas of Burkina Faso, and in south-central Mali, northeastern Ivory Coast, the northern halves of Ghana and Togo, northwestern Benin, and southwestern Niger. A few Gur languages are spoken in Nigeria. Additionally, a single Gur language, Baatonum, is spoken in Benin and in the extreme northwest of Nigeria. Three other single Gur languages, the Tusya, Vyemo and Tiefo languages, are spoken in Burkina Faso. Another unclassified Gur language, Miyobe, is spoken in Benin and Togo. In addition, Kulango, Loma and Lorhon, are spoken in Ghana, Ivory Coast and Burkina Faso. Additionally, a few Mossi speakers are in Senegal, and speakers of the Dagaare language are also found in Cameroon. The Samu languages of Burkina Faso are Gur languages.\nTypological features.\nLike most Niger\u2013Congo languages, the ancestor of Gur languages probably had a noun class system; many of today's languages have reduced this to a system of nominal genders or declensions or no longer have a class system. A common property of Gur languages is the verbal aspect marking. Almost all Gur languages are tonal, with Koromf\u00e9 being a notable exception. The tonal systems of Gur languages are rather divergent. Most Gur languages have been described as following the model of a two tone downstep system, but the languages of Oti-Volta branch and some others have three phonemic tones.\nHistory of study.\nSigismund Wilhelm Koelle first mentions twelve Gur languages in his 1854 \"Polyglotta Africana\", which represent ten languages in modern classification. Notably, he correctly identified these languages as being related to one another; his 'North-Eastern High Sudan' corresponds to Gur in modern classification.&lt;mapframe latitude=\"10.271681\" longitude=\"-1.351318\" zoom=\"7\" width=\"526\" height=\"460\" text=\"Map showing the Mabia Languages that are currently under study\" align=\"right\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"FeatureCollection\",\n \"features\": [\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#42BE00\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\": [ [ [ -2.0707213, 11.1331506 ], [ -2.0796477, 11.1419089 ], [ -2.1036803, 11.1493195 ], [ -2.1229063, 11.1486458 ], [ -2.1510588, 11.1466247 ], [ -2.1750914, 11.1284345 ], [ -2.2183501, 11.1088955 ], [ -2.2389494, 11.0900291 ], [ -2.2925078, 11.0772262 ], [ -2.3323332, 11.073183 ], [ -2.373532, 11.073183 ], [ -2.4167906, 11.0637488 ], [ -2.4380766, 11.0462273 ], [ -2.4737822, 11.0482491 ], [ -2.5211607, 11.0442055 ], [ -2.54382, 11.0462273 ], [ -2.5685393, 11.0421837 ], [ -2.5932585, 11.0401619 ], [ -2.6372038, 11.039488 ], [ -2.6729094, 11.0367922 ], [ -2.6880156, 11.038814 ], [ -2.6976286, 11.0408359 ], [ -2.7168547, 11.0448794 ], [ -2.739514, 11.0549882 ], [ -2.7738463, 11.0509447 ], [ -2.8013121, 11.0287047 ], [ -2.8335844, 11.0084851 ], [ -2.8377043, 10.986916 ], [ -2.838391, 10.9626489 ], [ -2.8274046, 10.9511887 ], [ -2.8184782, 10.9370314 ], [ -2.8232848, 10.9195023 ], [ -2.8246581, 10.9026465 ], [ -2.8040587, 10.8790468 ], [ -2.7971922, 10.8385857 ], [ -2.7697264, 10.8028406 ], [ -2.7388274, 10.779233 ], [ -2.6941954, 10.7616947 ], [ -2.6488768, 10.7650675 ], [ -2.5987517, 10.7772094 ], [ -2.5410735, 10.7826056 ], [ -2.5149809, 10.7873272 ], [ -2.4985014, 10.7886763 ], [ -2.4875151, 10.7947468 ], [ -2.4717223, 10.7960958 ], [ -2.4456297, 10.7933978 ], [ -2.4270903, 10.7880018 ], [ -2.392758, 10.7832801 ], [ -2.3700987, 10.7819311 ], [ -2.3391997, 10.7819311 ], [ -2.3041808, 10.7880018 ], [ -2.2828947, 10.7893508 ], [ -2.2595488, 10.8055385 ], [ -2.2423827, 10.8116087 ], [ -2.2217833, 10.8190276 ], [ -2.2066771, 10.8163298 ], [ -2.1943175, 10.8109342 ], [ -2.1689116, 10.8183532 ], [ -2.1510588, 10.8203765 ], [ -2.133206, 10.8197021 ], [ -2.1153532, 10.8190276 ], [ -2.0981871, 10.8197021 ], [ -2.0844542, 10.8271208 ], [ -2.0611082, 10.8304929 ], [ -2.0521819, 10.8345393 ], [ -2.0308958, 10.8426321 ], [ -2.0212828, 10.8433065 ], [ -2.0013701, 10.8264464 ], [ -1.9890105, 10.8170043 ], [ -1.9677245, 10.8170043 ], [ -1.9526183, 10.8149809 ], [ -1.9381987, 10.8210509 ], [ -1.9155394, 10.8365626 ], [ -1.9031798, 10.8487015 ], [ -1.8997466, 10.8581426 ], [ -1.897, 10.8750009 ], [ -1.9011198, 10.9026465 ], [ -1.9072997, 10.9181539 ], [ -1.9203459, 10.9390539 ], [ -1.927899, 10.9552335 ], [ -1.9340788, 10.9673676 ], [ -1.9292723, 10.977479 ], [ -1.9313322, 10.986916 ], [ -1.9457518, 11.0051151 ], [ -1.9505583, 11.022639 ], [ -1.951245, 11.0307266 ], [ -1.9629179, 11.0502708 ], [ -1.9835173, 11.0603794 ], [ -1.993817, 11.0718353 ], [ -1.9993102, 11.0718353 ], [ -2.0082365, 11.0839646 ], [ -2.0130431, 11.0913767 ], [ -2.0260893, 11.0981148 ], [ -2.0329558, 11.1021576 ], [ -2.0384489, 11.1142857 ], [ -2.0521819, 11.1257395 ], [ -2.0707213, 11.1331506 ] ] ]\n },\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#33FF55\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\":[-1.4310773,11.0211963,0],[-1.4477843,10.9640295,0],[-1.4571698,10.9065972,0],[-1.4505309,10.8615468,0],[-1.4956219,10.8175839,0],[-1.4832623,10.7852089,0],[-1.5203412,10.7825108,0],[-1.5368207,10.7474336,0],[-1.4695055,10.7597903,0],[-1.4337999,10.7773287,0],[-1.3788683,10.7719324,0],[-1.3266832,10.8056578,0],[-1.2896044,10.8299378,0],[-1.2374193,10.8299378,0],[-1.1824877,10.8569132,0],[-1.1522753,10.8609593,0],[-1.0934753,10.8480596,0],[-1.0643846,10.8474721,0],[-1.0605163,10.7860107,0],[-1.0410387,10.7287584,0],[-1.0440368,10.672671,0],[-1.0440368,10.6078864,0],[-1.0303039,10.5484885,0],[-0.9863586,10.5484885,0],[-0.9231872,10.5322871,0],[-0.9039611,10.5430881,0],[-0.9094543,10.5862885,0],[-0.917694,10.6132856,0],[-0.950653,10.6456791,0],[-0.983612,10.6996605,0],[-1.0189133,10.7532518,0],[-0.9976273,10.798783,0],[-0.9790879,10.8405982,0],[-0.9643859,10.8750334,0],[-0.9928208,10.9285934,0],[-1.016571,10.9316704,0],[-1.0385436,10.9559401,0],[-1.0401993,10.9909496,0],[-1.0065537,11.0317269,0],[-0.898407,11.05801,0],[-0.8043366,11.0674444,0],[-0.8133239,11.1392465,0],[-0.8407897,11.1796662,0],[-0.8984679,11.2200803,0],[-0.9451598,11.2470199,0],[-1.0110778,11.2981983,0],[-1.0742492,11.2874246,0],[-1.1374206,11.3008916,0],[-1.1731261,11.2901181,0],[-1.2308044,11.2551013,0],[-1.2362975,11.1958325,0],[-1.2774963,11.163499,0],[-1.2994689,11.1338567,0],[-1.3241881,11.1257719,0],[-1.3598937,11.1149919,0],[-1.3955993,11.0934306,0],[-1.4120788,11.0664767,0],[-1.4310773,11.0211963,0]\n }, \n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#CF33A7\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\":[-1.5368207,10.7474336,0],[-1.5628893,10.7449493,0],[-1.5683824,10.7152652,0],[-1.571129,10.6180968,0],[-1.5629132,10.5962853,0],[-1.5175946,10.5935856,0],[-1.5175707,10.5560008,0],[-1.4887555,10.5341849,0],[-1.4475567,10.5233835,0],[-1.4736493,10.4828751,0],[-1.4447862,10.4695855,0],[-1.4008648,10.4761232,0],[-1.3788683,10.4614828,0],[-1.3706285,10.4236675,0],[-1.387108,10.3953031,0],[-1.3652776,10.3698923,0],[-1.3453648,10.3577343,0],[-1.3378117,10.3408475,0],[-1.3185857,10.3185554,0],[-1.2767003,10.3219331,0],[-1.2561009,10.294235,0],[-1.2512944,10.2726153,0],[-1.2245152,10.3067332,0],[-1.2269482,10.401401,0],[-1.1665234,10.4230119,0],[-1.1582836,10.4608272,0],[-1.117943,10.4952425,0],[-1.0580334,10.490536,0],[-1.0099682,10.5364441,0],[-0.9742626,10.5296933,0],[-0.9557232,10.5377942,0],[-0.940617,10.5229424,0],[-0.8995897,10.5249481,0],[-0.9394152,10.4695855,0],[-0.9188158,10.4655342,0],[-0.8781322,10.5222673,0],[-0.8740311,10.5582333,0],[-0.89135,10.566801,0],[-0.9710008,10.5964996,0],[-1.0135729,10.6369931,0],[-1.0298996,10.6915207,0],[-1.0410387,10.7287584,0],[-1.0286791,10.7827249,0],[-1.0410387,10.8056578,0],[-1.0643846,10.8474721,0],[-1.1124498,10.8501696,0],[-1.1522753,10.8609593,0],[-1.1824877,10.8569132,0],[-1.2058336,10.8447745,0],[-1.2374193,10.8299378,0],[-1.2607652,10.8245424,0],[-1.2896044,10.8299378,0],[-1.3266832,10.8056578,0],[-1.344536,10.784074,0],[-1.3788683,10.7719324,0],[-1.3980944,10.7773287,0],[-1.4337999,10.7773287,0],[-1.4695055,10.7597903,0],[-1.5065843,10.757092,0],[-1.5368207,10.7474336,0] \n {\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#3341CF\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\":[-0.4750713,10.6194662,0],[-0.44199,10.4920626,0],[-0.5134011,10.4218375,0],[-0.5298806,10.3083636,0],[-0.507908,10.2164737,0],[-0.507908,10.1029261,0],[-0.5024148,9.9244132,0],[-0.3815652,9.8215888,0],[-0.3980447,9.7024891,0],[-0.44199,9.5995961,0],[-0.4584695,9.5291777,0],[-0.4969217,9.4045556,0],[-0.4529763,9.2473595,0],[-0.2607156,9.1714465,0],[-0.0629617,9.2419376,0],[0.1073264,9.2582028,0],[0.195217,9.3232561,0],[0.3600119,9.3774579,0],[0.4631138,9.5015969,0],[0.7335471,9.5291777,0],[0.8489035,9.6537542,0],[0.9422873,9.8053505,0],[0.9093283,9.9622878,0],[0.8159446,10.075885,0],[0.6950949,10.2218797,0],[0.6950949,10.3570003,0],[0.6401633,10.4758582,0],[0.5357932,10.6432624,0],[0.4918479,10.7188343,0],[0.4149436,10.8159703,0],[0.2446555,10.8483421,0],[0.1402854,10.8321566,0],[0.0798606,10.7458197,0],[-0.0080301,10.7404228,0],[-0.0912365,10.7132608,0],[-0.1262554,10.6815493,0],[-0.1722607,10.674127,0],[-0.2306255,10.6559078,0],[-0.2745708,10.6376876,0],[-0.3446087,10.6181164,0],[-0.4145242,10.6297655,0],[-0.4750713,10.6194662,0]}},{\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#9A3CF1\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\":[-1.374204,10.3793482,0],[-1.4200909,10.4261544,0],[-1.354173,10.4477635,0],[-1.4008648,10.4761232,0],[-1.4461835,10.4612684,0],[-1.4736493,10.4828751,0],[-1.4475567,10.5233835,0],[-1.4887555,10.5341849,0],[-1.5189679,10.5665867,0],[-1.5175946,10.5935856,0],[-1.5629132,10.5962853,0],[-1.5780194,10.7298934,0],[-1.5368207,10.7474336,0],[-1.5203412,10.7825108,0],[-1.4832623,10.7852089,0],[-1.4956219,10.8175839,0],[-1.4516766,10.8378165,0],[-1.4571698,10.9065972,0],[-1.4310773,11.0211963,0],[-1.6247113,11.0225442,0],[-1.6150982,10.9821028,0],[-1.6865094,10.9901915,0],[-1.6837628,10.9497456,0],[-1.7661603,10.9605317,0],[-1.7689068,11.0090644,0],[-2.2385724,11.0009761,0],[-2.6203473,11.0090644,0],[-2.6969339,11.0087999,0],[-2.683201,11.0384548,0],[-2.626896,11.0559768,0],[-2.6255227,11.0937128,0],[-2.6886941,11.1799484,0],[-2.7340127,11.1826428,0],[-2.7614785,11.1341389,0],[-2.8122903,11.2378735,0],[-2.8837014,11.2540365,0],[-2.8425027,11.3025203,0],[-2.9413797,11.3294522,0],[-3.0210305,11.3456101,0],[-3.1006814,11.3321452,0],[-3.1913186,11.3536887,0],[-3.2517434,11.2675051,0],[-3.2792093,11.1786011,0],[-3.3616067,11.1866844,0],[-3.3835794,11.1300966,0],[-3.4330178,11.1624338,0],[-3.5703469,11.0734977,0],[-3.6005594,11.0411506,0],[-3.537388,10.9980155,0],[-3.6115457,10.9845345,0],[-3.6829568,10.9252108,0],[-3.6390115,10.8901503,0],[-3.7296487,10.8820589,0],[-3.7186624,10.8308078,0],[-3.6774636,10.7714535,0],[-3.7159158,10.7174849,0],[-3.7049295,10.6662059,0],[-3.7021829,10.5393205,0],[-3.6802102,10.4826102,0],[-3.7049295,10.3853682,0],[-3.7790872,10.3286298,0],[-3.7378885,10.288096,0],[-3.7351419,10.1989035,0],[-3.8120462,10.1232054,0],[-3.8202859,10.0339669,0],[-3.8834573,10.1015741,0],[-3.9328958,10.0474894,0],[-3.9740945,10.0042152,0],[-3.9164163,9.9663455,0],[-3.8862039,9.9338823,0],[-3.8092996,9.8932987,0],[-3.773594,9.920355,0],[-3.7049295,9.9447037,0],[-3.6472512,9.9149439,0],[-3.6280252,9.9528196,0],[-3.5840799,9.9284714,0],[-3.4549905,9.9338823,0],[-3.3423806,9.8932987,0],[-3.3066751,9.9149439,0],[-3.2709695,9.850004,0],[-3.202305,9.925766,0],[-3.1611062,9.8554162,0],[-3.1006814,9.8175293,0],[-3.0594827,9.7336215,0],[-2.9990579,9.7390356,0],[-2.919407,9.5522007,0],[-2.8150369,9.4519715,0],[-2.7546121,9.4194584,0],[-2.6915334,9.505196,0],[-2.7636311,9.5620776,0],[-2.7629445,9.6196267,0],[-2.7553914,9.6541514,0],[-2.6187489,9.6717509,0],[-2.5789235,9.7137152,0],[-2.5452779,9.7258974,0],[-2.5404713,9.7522906,0],[-2.3975564,9.7742247,0],[-2.3214314,9.8098071,0],[-2.2190286,9.7931712,0],[-2.1854756,9.8118369,0],[-2.0570729,9.8043942,0],[-1.9086648,9.8418857,0],[-1.8454934,9.8175293,0],[-1.7528889,9.8301047,0],[-1.7460225,9.8571661,0],[-1.6916848,9.9095327,0],[-1.7151234,9.9586268,0],[-1.7237065,9.9907495,0],[-1.7246438,10.0285577,0],[-1.6686032,10.0428152,0],[-1.6402791,10.0372372,0],[-1.6112683,10.0678309,0],[-1.6083501,10.1286716,0],[-1.6584752,10.1584118,0],[-1.6449929,10.2178252,0],[-1.6296361,10.2773447,0],[-1.5506718,10.3435494,0],[-1.4991734,10.4164935,0],[-1.4552281,10.4185195,0],[-1.4057896,10.3847514,0],[-1.374204,10.3793482,0]}},{\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#F1EC3C\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\":[-1.7528889,9.8301047,0],[-1.6519967,9.4249633,0],[-1.478962,9.1647536,0],[-1.176838,9.0318643,0],[-0.7868233,8.9721838,0],[-0.3528634,8.9342002,0],[-0.1276436,8.9965998,0],[0.0838432,9.1322138,0],[0.2541313,9.3111453,0],[0.2678642,9.4330917,0],[0.2266654,9.4872763,0],[0.3227958,9.4981121,0],[0.2486381,9.5468694,0],[0.3859672,9.5902033,0],[0.3420219,9.709343,0],[0.3585014,9.8960901,0],[0.4106864,10.0205294,0],[0.3337821,10.1854729,0],[0.3859672,10.2962888,0],[0.3173026,10.3557349,0],[0.29533,10.4232737,0],[0.196453,10.4205724,0],[0.163494,10.5232041,0],[0.0536308,10.5691073,0],[0.0234184,10.6419982,0],[-0.0424996,10.6554946,0],[-0.0782052,10.760746,0],[-0.1303902,10.7040767,0],[-0.2306255,10.6559078,0],[-0.3446087,10.6181164,0],[-0.4050484,10.6527954,0],[-0.4764596,10.6365995,0],[-0.5149117,10.5853068,0],[-0.6110421,10.5583072,0],[-0.7016793,10.5286049,0],[-0.7157593,10.6135799,0],[-0.8335152,10.5934062,0],[-0.8829537,10.4988997,0],[-0.9394152,10.4695855,0],[-0.9742626,10.5296933,0],[-1.0862008,10.4718925,0],[-1.1582836,10.4608272,0],[-1.1665234,10.4230119,0],[-1.2125436,10.3719455,0],[-1.2245152,10.3067332,0],[-1.2921944,10.2368314,0],[-1.3965645,10.3503312,0],[-1.478962,10.4016628,0],[-1.6296361,10.2773447,0],[-1.6584752,10.1584118,0],[-1.5723458,10.0800269,0],[-1.662983,10.0124152,0],[-1.7151234,9.9586268,0],[-1.6916848,9.9095327,0],[-1.7528889,9.8301047,0] }},{\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#F13C3C\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"type\": \"Feature\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"fill\": \"#00ACA7\",\n \"fill-opacity\": 0.5,\n \"stroke\": \"#000000\",\n \"stroke-width\": 1,\n \"stroke-opacity\": 1\n , \"title\": \"\"},\n \"geometry\": {\n \"type\": \"Polygon\",\n \"coordinates\":[-0.5009216,10.9976351,0],[-0.4693359,10.8789811,0],[-0.3938049,10.7413913,0],[-0.1507324,10.6968634,0],[-0.0655883,10.7629781,0],[-0.0175232,10.8182875,0],[-0.0175232,10.9099975,0],[0.0319153,10.9814578,0],[0.0236756,11.0636832,0],[-0.021643,11.1148938,0],[-0.0628418,11.0825513,0],[-0.1424926,11.105461,0],[-0.1383728,11.155317,0],[-0.2551025,11.1809154,0],[-0.2688354,11.1270214,0],[-0.3320068,11.1108512,0],[-0.3594726,11.0744651,0],[-0.380072,11.1324112,0],[-0.4240173,11.1189364,0],[-0.4267639,11.0488573,0],[-0.4583496,11.0272912,0],[-0.5009216,10.9976351,0]\n } ]\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nThe Gur family was previously called Voltaic, following the French name \"(langues) Volta\u00efques\" (named after the Volta River). It was once considered to be more extensive than it is often regarded today, including the Senufo languages and a number of small language isolates. The inclusion of Senufo within Gur has been rejected by many linguists, including Tony Naden. Williamson and Blench place Senufo as a separate branch of Atlantic\u2013Congo, while other non-Central Gur languages are placed somewhat closer as separate branches within the Savannas continuum.\nKleinewillingh\u00f6fer (2014) notes that the closest relatives of Gur appear to be several branches of the obsolete Adamawa family, since many \"Adamawa\" languages in fact share more similarities with various (Central) Gur languages than with other Adamawa languages. He proposes that early Gur-Adamawa speakers had cultivated guinea corn and millet in a wooded savanna environment.\nClassification.\nThe regions on the map denote regional distribution of the Central Gur languages. The tree-diagram below denotes the relations between these languages and their closest relatives:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe position of Dogoso\u2013Khe in Southern Gur is not clear; it is not closely related to other members of the branch.\nBodomo (2017).\nBodomo (2017) refers to the entire Central Gur group as \"Mabia\". The term \"Mabia\" is a portmanteau of the two lexical innovations \"ma\"- 'mother' + \"bia\" 'child'.\nThe following is a classification of the Mabia (or Central Gur) languages from Bodomo (2017), as cited in Bodomo (2020). Bodomo divides Mabia into three primary branches, namely West, East, and Central.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Tree list/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe term \"Mabia\", instead of \"Gur\", is also used by Naden (2021).\nNaden (2021) lists the languages of the Southern/Eastern Mabia group as Dagbani, Hanga, Kantoosi, Kamara, Kusaal (Kusasi), Mampruli (Mamprusi), Nabit, Nanun/Nanuni (also considered a dialect of Dagbani), and Talni.\nComparative vocabulary.\nSample basic vocabulary of Gur languages:\n\"Note\": In table cells with slashes, the singular form is given before the slash, while the plural form follows the slash.\nNumerals.\nComparison of numerals in individual languages:\nWriting system.\nThe Goulsse alphabet was invented in 2022 as a native script for the Gur languages \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53775", "revid": "48508586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53775", "title": "USS Vincennes", "text": "USS \"Vincennes\" may refer to:\nCommemoration.\nThe City of Vincennes, Indiana has erected public art to commemorate the three 20th century ships named \"Vincennes\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "53776", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53776", "title": "Kruskal's algorithm", "text": "Minimum spanning forest algorithm that greedily adds edges\nKruskal's algorithm finds a minimum spanning forest of an undirected edge-weighted graph. If the graph is connected, it finds a minimum spanning tree. It is a greedy algorithm that in each step adds to the forest the lowest-weight edge that will not form a cycle. The key steps of the algorithm are sorting and the use of a disjoint-set data structure to detect cycles. Its running time is dominated by the time to sort all of the graph edges by their weight.\nA minimum spanning tree of a connected weighted graph is a connected subgraph, without cycles, for which the sum of the weights of all the edges in the subgraph is minimal. For a disconnected graph, a minimum spanning forest is composed of a minimum spanning tree for each connected component.\nThis algorithm was first published by Joseph Kruskal in 1956, and was rediscovered soon afterward by . Other algorithms for this problem include Prim's algorithm, Bor\u016fvka's algorithm, and the reverse-delete algorithm.\nAlgorithm.\nThe algorithm performs the following steps:\nAt the termination of the algorithm, the forest forms a minimum spanning forest of the graph. If the graph is connected, the forest has a single component and forms a minimum spanning tree.\nPseudocode.\nThe following code is implemented with a disjoint-set data structure. It represents the forest \"F\" as a set of undirected edges, and uses the disjoint-set data structure to efficiently determine whether two vertices are part of the same tree.\n function Kruskal(\"Graph G\") is\n F:= \u2205\n for each v in G.Vertices do\n MAKE-SET(v)\n for each {u, v} in G.Edges ordered by increasing weight({u, v}) do\n if FIND-SET(u) \u2260 FIND-SET(v) then\n UNION(FIND-SET(u), FIND-SET(v))\n return F\nComplexity.\nFor a graph with E edges and V vertices, Kruskal's algorithm can be shown to run in time \"O\"(\"E\" log \"E\") time, with simple data structures. This time bound is often written instead as \"O\"(\"E\" log \"V\"), which is equivalent for graphs with no isolated vertices, because for these graphs \"V\" / 2 \u2264 \"E\" &lt; \"V\"2 and the logarithms of V and V2 are again within a constant factor of each other.\nTo achieve this bound, first sort the edges by weight using a comparison sort in \"O\"(\"E\" log \"E\") time. Once sorted, it is possible to loop through the edges in sorted order in constant time per edge. Next, use a disjoint-set data structure, with a set of vertices for each component, to keep track of which vertices are in which components. Creating this structure, with a separate set for each vertex, takes V operations and \"O\"(\"V\") time. The final iteration through all edges performs two find operations and possibly one union operation per edge. These operations take amortized time \"O\"(\"\u03b1\"(\"V\")) time per operation, giving worst-case total time \"O\"(\"E\" \"\u03b1\"(\"V\")) for this loop, where \u03b1 is the extremely slowly growing inverse Ackermann function. This part of the time bound is much smaller than the time for the sorting step, so the total time for the algorithm can be simplified to the time for the sorting step.\nIn cases where the edges are already sorted, or where they have small enough integer weight to allow integer sorting algorithms such as counting sort or radix sort to sort them in linear time, the disjoint set operations are the slowest remaining part of the algorithm and the total time is \"O\"(\"E\" \"\u03b1\"(\"V\")).\nProof of correctness.\nThe proof consists of two parts. First, it is proved that the algorithm produces a spanning tree. Second, it is proved that the constructed spanning tree is of minimal weight.\nSpanning tree.\nLet formula_1 be a connected, weighted graph and let formula_2 be the subgraph of formula_1 produced by the algorithm. formula_2 cannot have a cycle, as by definition an edge is not added if it results in a cycle. formula_2 cannot be disconnected, since the first encountered edge that joins two components of formula_2 would have been added by the algorithm. Thus, formula_2 is a spanning tree of formula_1.\nMinimality.\nWe show that the following proposition P is true by induction: If \"F\" is the set of edges chosen at any stage of the algorithm, then there is some minimum spanning tree that contains \"F\" and none of the edges rejected by the algorithm.\nParallel algorithm.\nKruskal's algorithm is inherently sequential and hard to parallelize. It is, however, possible to perform the initial sorting of the edges in parallel or, alternatively, to use a parallel implementation of a binary heap to extract the minimum-weight edge in every iteration.\nAs parallel sorting is possible in time formula_9 on formula_10 processors, the runtime of Kruskal's algorithm can be reduced to \"O\"(\"E\" \u03b1(\"V\")), where \u03b1 again is the inverse of the single-valued Ackermann function.\nA variant of Kruskal's algorithm, named Filter-Kruskal, has been described by Osipov et al. and is better suited for parallelization. The basic idea behind Filter-Kruskal is to partition the edges in a similar way to quicksort and filter out edges that connect vertices of the same tree to reduce the cost of sorting. The following pseudocode demonstrates this.\n function filter_kruskal(G) is\n if |G.E| &lt; kruskal_threshold:\n return kruskal(G)\n pivot = choose_random(G.E)\n E\u2264, E&gt; = partition(G.E, pivot)\n A = filter_kruskal(E\u2264)\n E&gt; = filter(E&gt;)\n A = A \u222a filter_kruskal(E&gt;)\n return A\n function partition(E, pivot) is\n E\u2264 = \u2205, E&gt; = \u2205\n foreach (u, v) in E do\n if weight(u, v) \u2264 pivot then\n else\n return E\u2264, E&gt;\n function filter(E) is\n Ef = \u2205\n foreach (u, v) in E do\n if find_set(u) \u2260 find_set(v) then\n return Ef\nFilter-Kruskal lends itself better to parallelization as sorting, filtering, and partitioning can easily be performed in parallel by distributing the edges between the processors.\nFinally, other variants of a parallel implementation of Kruskal's algorithm have been explored. Examples include a scheme that uses helper threads to remove edges that are definitely not part of the MST in the background, and a variant which runs the sequential algorithm on \"p\" subgraphs, then merges those subgraphs until only one, the final MST, remains.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53777", "revid": "12883786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53777", "title": "Ford\u2013Fulkerson algorithm", "text": "Algorithm to compute the maximum flow in a network\nThe Ford\u2013Fulkerson method or Ford\u2013Fulkerson algorithm (FFA) is a greedy algorithm that computes the maximum flow in a flow network. It is sometimes called a \"method\" instead of an \"algorithm\" as the approach to finding augmenting paths in a residual graph is not fully specified or it is specified in several implementations with different running times. It was published in 1956 by L. R. Ford Jr. and D. R. Fulkerson. The name \"Ford\u2013Fulkerson\" is often also used for the Edmonds\u2013Karp algorithm, which is a fully defined implementation of the Ford\u2013Fulkerson method.\nThe idea behind the algorithm is as follows: as long as there is a path from the source (start node) to the sink (end node), with available capacity on all edges in the path, we send flow along one of the paths. Then we find another path, and so on. A path with available capacity is called an augmenting path.\nAlgorithm.\nLet formula_1 be a graph, and for each edge from u to v, let formula_2 be the capacity and formula_3 be the flow. We want to find the maximum flow from the source s to the sink t. After every step in the algorithm the following is maintained:\nThis means that the flow through the network is a \"legal flow\" after each round in the algorithm. We define the residual network formula_4 to be the network with capacity formula_5 and no flow. Notice that it can happen that a flow from v to u is allowed in the residual\nnetwork, though disallowed in the original network: if formula_6 and formula_7 then formula_8.\n Algorithm Ford\u2013Fulkerson\nInputs Given a Network formula_9 with flow capacity c, a source node s, and a sink node t\nOutput Compute a flow f from s to t of maximum value\n# formula_10 for all edges formula_11\n# While there is a path p from s to t in formula_12, such that formula_13 for all edges formula_14:\n## Find formula_15\n## For each edge formula_14\n### formula_17 (\"Send flow along the path\")\n### formula_18 (\"The flow might be \"returned\" later\")\nThe path in step 2 can be found with, for example, breadth-first search (BFS) or depth-first search in formula_4. The former is known as the Edmonds\u2013Karp algorithm.\nWhen no more paths in step 2 can be found, s will not be able to reach t in the residual\nnetwork. If S is the set of nodes reachable by s in the residual network, then the total\ncapacity in the original network of edges from S to the remainder of V is on the one hand\nequal to the total flow we found from s to t,\nand on the other hand serves as an upper bound for all such flows.\nThis proves that the flow we found is maximal. See also Max-flow Min-cut theorem.\nIf the graph formula_1 has multiple sources and sinks, we act as follows:\nSuppose that formula_21 and formula_22. Add a new source formula_23 with an edge formula_24 from formula_25 to every node formula_26, with capacity formula_27. And add a new sink formula_28 with an edge formula_29 from every node formula_30 to formula_31, with capacity formula_32. Then apply the Ford\u2013Fulkerson algorithm.\nAlso, if a node u has capacity constraint formula_33, we replace this node with two nodes formula_34, and an edge formula_35, with capacity formula_36. We can then apply the Ford\u2013Fulkerson algorithm.\nComplexity.\nBy adding the flow augmenting path to the flow already established in the graph, the maximum flow will be reached when no more flow augmenting paths can be found in the graph. However, there is no certainty that this situation will ever be reached, so the best that can be guaranteed is that the answer will be correct if the algorithm terminates. In the case that the algorithm does not terminate, the flow might not converge towards the maximum flow. However, this situation only occurs with irrational flow values. When the capacities are integers, the runtime of Ford\u2013Fulkerson is bounded by formula_37 (see big O notation), where formula_38 is the number of edges in the graph and formula_39 is the maximum flow in the graph. This is because each augmenting path can be found in formula_40 time and increases the flow by an integer amount of at least formula_41, with the upper bound formula_39.\nA variation of the Ford\u2013Fulkerson algorithm with guaranteed termination and a runtime independent of the maximum flow value is the Edmonds\u2013Karp algorithm, which runs in formula_43 time.\nInteger flow example.\nThe following example shows the first steps of Ford\u2013Fulkerson in a flow network with 4 nodes, source formula_44 and sink formula_45. This example shows the worst-case behaviour of the algorithm. In each step, only a flow of formula_41 is sent across the network. If breadth-first-search were used instead, only two steps would be needed.\nNon-terminating example.\nConsider the flow network shown on the right, with source formula_47, sink formula_48, capacities of edges formula_49, formula_50 and formula_51, and the capacity of all other edges some integer formula_52. The constant formula_53 was chosen so, that formula_54. We use augmenting paths according to the following table, where formula_55, formula_56 and formula_57.\nNote that after step 1 as well as after step 5, the residual capacities of edges formula_58, formula_59 and formula_60 are in the form formula_61, formula_62 and formula_63, respectively, for some formula_64. This means that we can use augmenting paths formula_65, formula_66, formula_65 and formula_68 infinitely many times and residual capacities of these edges will always be in the same form. Total flow in the network after step 5 is formula_69. If we continue to use augmenting paths as above, the total flow converges to formula_70. However, note that there is a flow of value formula_71, by sending formula_72 units of flow along formula_73, 1 unit of flow along formula_74, and formula_72 units of flow along formula_76. Therefore, the algorithm never terminates and the flow does not converge to the maximum flow.\nAnother non-terminating example based on the Euclidean algorithm is given by , where they also show that the worst case running-time of the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm on a network formula_1 in ordinal numbers is formula_78.\nPython implementation of the Edmonds\u2013Karp algorithm.\nimport collections\nclass Graph:\n This class represents a directed graph using\n adjacency matrix representation.\n def __init__(self, graph):\n self.graph = graph # residual graph\n self.row = len(graph)\n def bfs(self, s, t, parent):\n Returns true if there is a path from\n source 's' to sink 't' in residual graph.\n Also fills parent[] to store the path.\n # Mark all the vertices as not visited\n visited = [False] * self.row\n # Create a queue for BFS\n queue = collections.deque()\n # Mark the source node as visited and enqueue it\n queue.append(s)\n visited[s] = True\n # Standard BFS loop\n while queue:\n u = queue.popleft()\n # Get all adjacent vertices of the dequeued vertex u\n # If an adjacent has not been visited, then mark it\n # visited and enqueue it\n for ind, val in enumerate(self.graph[u]):\n if (visited[ind] == False) and (val &gt; 0):\n queue.append(ind)\n visited[ind] = True\n parent[ind] = u\n # If we reached sink in BFS starting from source, then return\n # true, else false\n return visited[t]\n # Returns the maximum flow from s to t in the given graph\n def edmonds_karp(self, source, sink):\n # This array is filled by BFS and to store path\n parent = [-1] * self.row\n max_flow = 0 # There is no flow initially\n # Augment the flow while there is path from source to sink\n while self.bfs(source, sink, parent):\n # Find minimum residual capacity of the edges along the\n # path filled by BFS. Or we can say find the maximum flow\n # through the path found.\n path_flow = float(\"Inf\")\n s = sink\n while s != source:\n path_flow = min(path_flow, self.graph[parent[s]][s])\n s = parent[s]\n # Add path flow to overall flow\n max_flow += path_flow\n # update residual capacities of the edges and reverse edges\n # along the path\n v = sink\n while v != source:\n u = parent[v]\n self.graph[u][v] -= path_flow\n self.graph[v][u] += path_flow\n v = parent[v]\n return max_flow\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "53779", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53779", "title": "Microtone", "text": ""}
{"id": "53781", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53781", "title": "Relative permittivity", "text": "Measure of the electric polarizability of a dielectric, compared with that of a vacuum\nThe relative permittivity (in older texts, dielectric constant) is the permittivity of a material expressed as a ratio with the electric permittivity of a vacuum. A dielectric is an insulating material, and the dielectric constant of an insulator measures the ability of the insulator to store electric energy in an electrical field.\nPermittivity is a material's property that affects the Coulomb force between two point charges in the material. Relative permittivity is the factor by which the electric field between the charges is decreased relative to vacuum.\nLikewise, relative permittivity is the ratio of the capacitance of a capacitor using that material as a dielectric, compared with a similar capacitor that has vacuum as its dielectric. Relative permittivity is also commonly known as the dielectric constant, a term still used but deprecated by standards organizations in engineering as well as in chemistry.\nDefinition.\nRelative permittivity is typically denoted as \"\u03b5\"r(\"\u03c9\") (sometimes \"\u03ba\", lowercase kappa) and is defined as\n formula_1\nwhere \"\u03b5\"(\"\u03c9\") is the complex frequency-dependent permittivity of the material, and \"\u03b5\"0 is the vacuum permittivity.\nRelative permittivity is a dimensionless number that is in general complex-valued; its real and imaginary parts are denoted as:\nformula_2\nThe relative permittivity of a medium is related to its electric susceptibility, \"\u03c7\"e, as \"\u03b5\"r(\"\u03c9\") = 1 + \"\u03c7\"e.\nIn anisotropic media (such as non cubic crystals) the relative permittivity is a second rank tensor.\nThe relative permittivity of a material for a frequency of zero is known as its static relative permittivity.\nTerminology.\nThe historical term for the relative permittivity is \"dielectric constant\". It is still commonly used, but has been deprecated by standards organizations, because of its ambiguity, as some older reports used it for the absolute permittivity \"\u03b5\". The permittivity may be quoted either as a static property or as a frequency-dependent variant, in which case it is also known as the \"dielectric function\". It has also been used to refer to only the real component \"\u03b5\"\u2032r of the complex-valued relative permittivity.\nPhysics.\nIn the causal theory of waves, permittivity is a complex quantity. The imaginary part corresponds to a phase shift of the polarization P relative to E and leads to the attenuation of electromagnetic waves passing through the medium. By definition, the linear relative permittivity of vacuum is equal to 1, that is \"\u03b5\" = \"\u03b5\"0, although there are theoretical nonlinear quantum effects in vacuum that become non-negligible at high field strengths.\nThe following table gives some typical values.\nThe relative low frequency permittivity of ice is ~96 at \u221210.8\u00a0\u00b0C, falling to 3.15 at high frequency, which is independent of temperature. It remains in the range 3.12\u20133.19 for frequencies between about 1\u00a0MHz and the far infrared region.\nDetermination.\nThe relative static permittivity, \"\u03b5\"r, can be determined for static electric fields as follows: first the capacitance of a test capacitor, \"C\"0, is measured with vacuum between its plates. Then, using the same capacitor and distance between its plates, the capacitance \"C\" with a dielectric between the plates is measured. The relative permittivity can be then calculated as\n formula_3\nFor time-variant electromagnetic fields, this quantity becomes frequency-dependent. An indirect technique to calculate \"\u03b5\"r is conversion of radio frequency S-parameter measurement results. A description of frequently used S-parameter conversions for determination of the frequency-dependent \"\u03b5\"r of dielectrics can be found in this bibliographic source. Alternatively, resonance based effects may be employed at fixed frequencies.\nApplications.\nEnergy.\nThe relative permittivity is an essential piece of information when designing capacitors, and in other circumstances where a material might be expected to introduce capacitance into a circuit. If a material with a high relative permittivity is placed in an electric field, the magnitude of that field will be measurably reduced within the volume of the dielectric. This fact is commonly used to increase the capacitance of a particular capacitor design. The layers beneath etched conductors in printed circuit boards (PCBs) also act as dielectrics.\nCommunication.\nDielectrics are used in radio frequency (RF) transmission lines. In a coaxial cable, polyethylene can be used between the center conductor and outside shield. It can also be placed inside waveguides to form filters. Optical fibers are examples of \"dielectric waveguides\". They consist of dielectric materials that are purposely doped with impurities so as to control the precise value of \"\u03b5\"r within the cross-section. This controls the refractive index of the material and therefore also the optical modes of transmission. However, in these cases it is technically the relative permittivity that matters, as they are not operated in the electrostatic limit.\nEnvironment.\nThe relative permittivity of air changes with temperature, humidity, and barometric pressure. Sensors can be constructed to detect changes in capacitance caused by changes in the relative permittivity. Most of this change is due to effects of temperature and humidity as the barometric pressure is fairly stable. Using the capacitance change, along with the measured temperature, the relative humidity can be obtained using engineering formulas.\nChemistry.\nThe relative static permittivity of a solvent is a relative measure of its chemical polarity. For example, water is very polar, and has a relative static permittivity of 80.10 at 20\u00a0\u00b0C while \"n\"-hexane is non-polar, and has a relative static permittivity of 1.89 at 20\u00a0\u00b0C. This information is important when designing separation, sample preparation and chromatography techniques in analytical chemistry.\nThe correlation should, however, be treated with caution. For instance, dichloromethane has a value of \"\u03b5\"r of 9.08 (20\u00a0\u00b0C) and is rather poorly soluble in water (13g/L or 9.8mL/L at 20\u00a0\u00b0C); at the same time, tetrahydrofuran has its \"\u03b5\"r = 7.52 at 22\u00a0\u00b0C, but it is completely miscible with water. In the case of tetrahydrofuran, the oxygen atom can act as a hydrogen bond acceptor; whereas dichloromethane cannot form hydrogen bonds with water.\nThis is even more remarkable when comparing the \"\u03b5\"r values of acetic acid (6.2528) and that of iodoethane (7.6177). The large numerical value of \"\u03b5\"r is not surprising in the second case, as the iodine atom is easily polarizable; nevertheless, this does not imply that it is polar, too (electronic polarizability prevails over the orientational one in this case).\nLossy medium.\nAgain, similar as for absolute permittivity, relative permittivity for lossy materials can be formulated as:\n formula_4\nin terms of a \"dielectric conductivity\" \"\u03c3\" (units S/m, siemens per meter), which \"sums over all the dissipative effects of the material; it may represent an actual [electrical] conductivity caused by migrating charge carriers and it may also refer to an energy loss associated with the dispersion of \"\u03b5\"\u2032 [the real-valued permittivity]\".8 Expanding the angular frequency \"\u03c9\" = 2\u03c0\"c\"\u202f/\u202f\"\u03bb\" and the electric constant \"\u03b5\"0 = 1\u202f/\u202f\"\u03bc\"0\"c\"2, which reduces to:\n formula_5\nwhere \"\u03bb\" is the wavelength, \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum and \"\u03ba\" = \"\u03bc\"0\"c\"\u202f/\u202f2\u03c0 = 59.95849\u00a0\u03a9 \u2248 60.0\u00a0\u03a9 is a newly introduced constant (units ohms, or reciprocal siemens, such that \"\u03c3\u03bb\u03ba\" = \"\u03b5\"r remains unitless).\nMetals.\nPermittivity is typically associated with dielectric materials, however metals are described as having an effective permittivity, with real relative permittivity equal to one. In the high-frequency region, which extends from radio frequencies to the far infrared and terahertz region, the plasma frequency of the electron gas is much greater than the electromagnetic propagation frequency, so the refractive index \"n\" of a metal is very nearly a purely imaginary number. In the low frequency regime, the effective relative permittivity is also almost purely imaginary: It has a very large imaginary value related to the conductivity and a comparatively insignificant real-value.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53782", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53782", "title": "Lake trout", "text": "Species of fish in northern North America\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) is a freshwater char living mainly in lakes in Northern North America. Other names for it include mackinaw, namaycush, lake char (or charr), touladi, togue, laker, and grey trout. In Lake Superior, it can also be variously known as siscowet, paperbelly and lean. The lake trout is prized both as a game fish and as a food fish. Those caught with dark coloration may be called \"mud hens\".\nTaxonomy and etymology.\nIt is the only member of the subgenus Cristovomer, which is more derived than the subgenus \"Baione\" (the most basal clade of \"Salvelinus\", containing the brook trout (\"S. fontinalis\") and silver trout (\"S. agasizii\")) but still basal to the other members of \"Salvelinus\".\nThe specific epithet \"namaycush\" derives from \"namekush\", a form of the word used in some inland Southern East Cree communities in referring to this species of fish. Other variations found in East Cree are \"k\u00fbkam\u00e2s[h]\", \"k\u00fbkam\u00e2w\" and \"k\u00fbkamesh\". Similar cognate words are found in Ojibwe: \"namegos\" = \"lake trout\"; \"namegoshens\" = \"rainbow trout,\" literally meaning \"little lake trout.\"\nRange.\nFrom a zoogeographical perspective, lake trout have a relatively narrow distribution. They are native only to the northern parts of North America, principally Canada, but also Alaska and, to some extent, the Northeastern United States. Lake trout have been widely introduced into non-native waters in North America and into many other parts of the world, mainly Europe, but also into South America and certain parts of Asia. Although lake trout were introduced into Yellowstone National Park's Shoshone, Lewis and Heart lakes legally in the 1890s, they were illegally or accidentally introduced into Yellowstone Lake in the 1980s where they are now considered invasive. They have also notably been introduced into the Tahoe region, such as in Lake Tahoe and Donner Lake.\nDescription.\nLake trout have a common Salmonidae body, with an elongated figure, a single dorsal and adipose fin, and lack spines on any of their fins. The pattern of lake trout is a uniform olive-grey, darker near the back, and white on the belly. They are covered in light beige or white spots along the body. The fins are yellow-ish, and may have white tips. During spawning, the belly becomes more yellow-orange, and the fins develop a red hue with more developed white edges. They have small but sharp teeth, which are more visible compared to other species of trout during non-spawning periods.\nLake trout are the largest of the chars; the record weighed almost with a length of , and was caught with a gillnet. fish are not uncommon, and the average length is . The largest caught on a rod and reel according to the IGFA was , caught in Great Bear Lake in 1995 with a length of . In the Tahoe region, the fish do not exceeded , but are on average over .\nLife history.\nLake trout inhabit cold, oxygen-rich waters. They are pelagic during the period of summer stratification in dimictic lakes, often living at depths of .\nThe lake trout is a slow-growing fish, typical of oligotrophic waters. It is also very late to mature. Populations are extremely susceptible to overfishing. Many native lake trout populations have been severely damaged through the combined effects of hatchery stocking (planting) and over harvest. Another threat to lake trout is acidification, which can have longterm effects on their populations through both direct harm and reduced prey populations (e.g. \"Mysis relicta\").\nThere are three subspecies of lake trout. There is the common lake trout (\"Salvelinus namaycush namaycush\"), the siscowet lake trout (\"Salvelinus namaycush siscowet\"), and the less common rush lake trout (\"Salvelinus namaycush huronicus\"). Some lakes do not have pelagic forage fish during the period of summer stratification. In these lakes, lake trout act as planktivores. Lake trout in planktivorous populations are highly abundant, grow very slowly and mature at relatively small sizes. In those lakes that do contain deep-water forage, lake trout become piscivorous. Piscivorous lake trout grow much more quickly, mature at a larger size and are less abundant. Notwithstanding differences in abundance, the density of biomass of lake trout is fairly consistent in similar lakes, regardless of whether the lake trout populations they contain are planktivorous or piscivorous.\nIn Lake Superior, common lake trout (\"S. n. namaycush\") and siscowet lake trout (\"S. n. siscowet\") live together. Common lake trout tend to stay in shallower waters, while siscowet lake trout stay in deeper water. Common lake trout (also called \"lean\" lake trout) are slimmer than the relatively fat siscowet. Siscowet numbers have become greatly depressed over the years due to a combination of the extirpation of some of the fish's deep water coregonine prey and to overexploitation. Siscowet tend to grow extremely large and fat and attracted great commercial interest in the last century. Their populations have rebounded since 1970, with one estimate putting the number in Lake Superior at 100 million. Professor of Zoology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison James Kitchell credits effective constraint of commercial fisheries and persistent sea lamprey (\"Petromyzon marinus\") control for the successful recovery of Lake Superior's lake trout. \"Looking at what has happened in the lake and the results of computer simulations, it is clear that lamprey control needs to continue if Lake Superior is to keep its lake trout.\"\nHybrids.\nLake trout are known to hybridize in nature with the brook trout (\"S. fontinalis\"); such hybrids, known as \"splakes\" (between a male brook and female lake trout) or the less common \"brookinaw\" (between a male lake and female brook trout,) are normally sterile but self-sustaining populations exist in some lakes. Splake are also artificially propagated in hatcheries, and then stocked into lakes in an effort to provide sport-fishing opportunities. \nCommercial fishing.\nLake trout were fished commercially in the Great Lakes until lampreys, overharvest and pollution extirpated or severely reduced the stocks. Commercial fisheries still exist in some areas of the Great Lakes and smaller lakes in northern Canada. Commercial fishing by Ottawa (Odawa) and Chippewa (Ojibwe) Indians for Lake Trout in Lake Michigan, Lake Huron and Lake Superior is permitted under various treaties and co-managed and regulated by many tribes and Great Lakes Indian Fish &amp; Wildlife Commission (GLIFWC).\nRecreational angling.\nWhen lake trout are caught and released, the experience can cause short-term physiological and behavioural stress. Blood stress markers such as cortisol, lactate, and glucose increase after capture, particularly when fish fight for long periods, are exposed to air, or are angled from deep water . Deep-water captures can also cause barotrauma (i.e., injuries caused by rapid changes in pressure), resulting in bloating or disorientation due to rapid pressure changes. These effects are more common in larger fish and in warm-water conditions . \nResponses differ between ice-angling and open-water angling. During ice-angling, fish often show higher lactate and glucose levels, lower blood pH, and loss of reflexes such as orientation and equilibrium, with some mortality observed after release . In open-water, stress responses are generally brief and mild with minor mortality; gill tissues show temporary activation of \"hsp70\" stress genes, while other metabolic processes return to normal within two days . Differences are also influenced by factors such as sex, depth, and season . Careful handling, limiting fight time, reducing air exposure, and avoiding deep-water captures can improve survival and recovery following release . \nPopular culture.\nGeneva, New York claims the title \"Lake Trout Capital of the World,\" and holds an annual lake trout fishing derby. Baraga county in Michigan also hosts an annual \"lake trout festival\" in June.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53783", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53783", "title": "Prim's algorithm", "text": "Method for finding minimum spanning trees\nIn computer science, Prim's algorithm is a greedy algorithm that finds a minimum spanning tree for a weighted undirected graph. This means it finds a subset of the edges that forms a tree that includes every vertex, where the total weight of all the edges in the tree is minimized. The algorithm operates by building this tree one vertex at a time, from an arbitrary starting vertex, at each step adding the cheapest possible connection from the tree to another vertex.\nThe algorithm was developed in 1930 by Czech mathematician Vojt\u011bch Jarn\u00edk and later rediscovered and republished by computer scientists Robert C. Prim in 1957 and Edsger W. Dijkstra in 1959. Therefore, it is also sometimes called the Jarn\u00edk's algorithm, Prim\u2013Jarn\u00edk algorithm, Prim\u2013Dijkstra algorithm\nor the DJP algorithm.\nOther well-known algorithms for this problem include Kruskal's algorithm and Bor\u016fvka's algorithm. These algorithms find the minimum spanning forest in a possibly disconnected graph; in contrast, the most basic form of Prim's algorithm only finds minimum spanning trees in connected graphs. However, running Prim's algorithm separately for each connected component of the graph, it can also be used to find the minimum spanning forest. In terms of their asymptotic time complexity, these three algorithms are equally fast for sparse graphs, but slower than other more sophisticated algorithms.\nHowever, for graphs that are sufficiently dense, Prim's algorithm can be made to run in linear time, meeting or improving the time bounds for other algorithms.\nDescription.\nThe algorithm may informally be described as performing the following steps:\nIn more detail, it may be implemented following the pseudocode below.\n function Prim(vertices, edges) is\n for each vertex in vertices do\n cheapestCost[vertex] \u2190 \u221e\n cheapestEdge[vertex] \u2190 null\n explored \u2190 empty set\n unexplored \u2190 set containing all vertices\n startVertex \u2190 any element of vertices\n cheapestCost[startVertex] \u2190 0\n while unexplored is not empty do\n // Select vertex in unexplored with minimum cost\n currentVertex \u2190 vertex in unexplored with minimum cheapestCost[vertex]\n unexplored.remove(currentVertex)\n explored.add(currentVertex)\n for each edge (currentVertex, neighbor) in edges do\n if neighbor in unexplored and weight(currentVertex, neighbor) &lt; cheapestCost[neighbor] THEN\n cheapestCost[neighbor] \u2190 weight(currentVertex, neighbor)\n cheapestEdge[neighbor] \u2190 (currentVertex, neighbor)\n resultEdges \u2190 empty list\n for each vertex in vertices do\n if cheapestEdge[vertex] \u2260 null THEN\n resultEdges.append(cheapestEdge[vertex])\n return resultEdges\nAs described above, the starting vertex for the algorithm will be chosen arbitrarily, because the first iteration of the main loop of the algorithm will have a set of vertices in \"Q\" that all have equal weights, and the algorithm will automatically start a new tree in \"F\" when it completes a spanning tree of each connected component of the input graph. The algorithm may be modified to start with any particular vertex \"s\" by setting \"C\"[\"s\"] to be a number smaller than the other values of \"C\" (for instance, zero), and it may be modified to only find a single spanning tree rather than an entire spanning forest (matching more closely the informal description) by stopping whenever it encounters another vertex flagged as having no associated edge.\nDifferent variations of the algorithm differ from each other in how the set \"Q\" is implemented: as a simple linked list or array of vertices, or as a more complicated priority queue data structure. This choice leads to differences in the time complexity of the algorithm. In general, a priority queue will be quicker at finding the vertex \"v\" with minimum cost, but will entail more expensive updates when the value of \"C\"[\"w\"] changes.\nTime complexity.\nThe time complexity of Prim's algorithm depends on the data structures used for the graph and for ordering the edges by weight, which can be done using a priority queue. The following table shows the typical choices:\nA simple implementation of Prim's, using an adjacency matrix or an adjacency list graph representation and linearly searching an array of weights to find the minimum weight edge to add, requires O(|V|2) running time. However, this running time can be greatly improved by using heaps to implement finding minimum weight edges in the algorithm's inner loop.\nA first improved version uses a heap to store all edges of the input graph, ordered by their weight. This leads to an O(|E| log |E|) worst-case running time. But storing vertices instead of edges can improve it still further. The heap should order the vertices by the smallest edge-weight that connects them to any vertex in the partially constructed minimum spanning tree (MST) (or infinity if no such edge exists). Every time a vertex \"v\" is chosen and added to the MST, a decrease-key operation is performed on all vertices \"w\" outside the partial MST such that \"v\" is connected to \"w\", setting the key to the minimum of its previous value and the edge cost of (\"v\",\"w\").\nUsing a simple binary heap data structure, Prim's algorithm can now be shown to run in time O(|E| log |V|) where |E| is the number of edges and |V| is the number of vertices. Using a more sophisticated Fibonacci heap, this can be brought down to O(|E| + |V| log |V|), which is asymptotically faster when the graph is dense enough that |E| is \u03c9(|V|), and linear time when |E| is at least |V|\u00a0log\u00a0|V|. For graphs of even greater density (having at least |V|\"c\" edges for some \"c\"\u00a0&gt;\u00a01), Prim's algorithm can be made to run in linear time even more simply, by using a \"d\"-ary heap in place of a Fibonacci heap.\nProof of correctness.\nLet \"P\" be a connected, weighted graph. At every iteration of Prim's algorithm, an edge must be found that connects a vertex in a subgraph to a vertex outside the subgraph. Since \"P\" is connected, there will always be a path to every vertex. The output \"Y\" of Prim's algorithm is a tree, because the edge and vertex added to tree \"Y\" are connected. \nLet \"Y1\" be a minimum spanning tree of graph P. If \"Y1\"=\"Y\" then \"Y\" is a minimum spanning tree. Otherwise, let \"e\" be the first edge added during the construction of tree \"Y\" that is not in tree \"Y1\", and \"V\" be the set of vertices connected by the edges added before edge \"e\". Then one endpoint of edge \"e\" is in set \"V\" and the other is not. Since tree \"Y1\" is a spanning tree of graph \"P\", there is a path in tree \"Y1\" joining the two endpoints. As one travels along the path, one must encounter an edge \"f\" joining a vertex in set \"V\" to one that is not in set \"V\". Now, at the iteration when edge \"e\" was added to tree \"Y\", edge \"f\" could also have been added and it would be added instead of edge \"e\" if its weight was less than \"e\", and since edge \"f\" was not added, we conclude that\nformula_1\nLet tree \"Y2\" be the graph obtained by removing edge \"f\" from and adding edge \"e\" to tree \"Y1\". It is easy to show that tree \"Y2\" is connected, has the same number of edges as tree \"Y1\", and the total weights of its edges is not larger than that of tree \"Y1\", therefore it is also a minimum spanning tree of graph \"P\" and it contains edge \"e\" and all the edges added before it during the construction of set \"V\". Repeat the steps above and we will eventually obtain a minimum spanning tree of graph \"P\" that is identical to tree \"Y\". This shows \"Y\" is a minimum spanning tree. The minimum spanning tree allows for the first subset of the sub-region to be expanded into a larger subset \"X\", which we assume to be the minimum.\nParallel algorithm.\nThe main loop of Prim's algorithm is inherently sequential and thus not parallelizable. However, the inner loop, which determines the next edge of minimum weight that does not form a cycle, can be parallelized by dividing the vertices and edges between the available processors. The following pseudocode demonstrates this.\nThis algorithm can generally be implemented on distributed machines as well as on shared memory machines. The running time is formula_2, assuming that the \"reduce\" and \"broadcast\" operations can be performed in formula_3. A variant of Prim's algorithm for shared memory machines, in which Prim's sequential algorithm is being run in parallel, starting from different vertices, has also been explored. It should, however, be noted that more sophisticated algorithms exist to solve the distributed minimum spanning tree problem in a more efficient manner.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53784", "revid": "32452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53784", "title": "Brute-force attack", "text": "Cryptanalytic method for unauthorized users to access data\nIn cryptography, a brute-force attack or exhaustive key search is a cryptanalytic attack that consists of an attacker submitting many possible keys or passwords with the hope of eventually guessing correctly. This strategy can theoretically be used to break any form of encryption that is not information-theoretically secure. However, in a properly designed cryptosystem the chance of successfully guessing the key is negligible.\nWhen cracking passwords, this method is very fast when used to check all short passwords, but for longer passwords other methods such as the dictionary attack are used because a brute-force search takes too long. Longer passwords, passphrases and keys have more possible values, making them exponentially more difficult to crack than shorter ones due to diversity of characters.\nBrute-force attacks can be made less effective by obfuscating the data to be encoded making it more difficult for an attacker to recognize when the code has been cracked or by making the attacker do more work to test each guess. One of the measures of the strength of an encryption system is how long it would theoretically take an attacker to mount a successful brute-force attack against it.\nBrute-force attacks are an application of brute-force search, the general problem-solving technique of enumerating all candidates and checking each one. The word 'hammering' is sometimes used to describe a brute-force attack, with 'anti-hammering' for countermeasures.\nBasic concept.\nBrute-force attacks work by calculating every possible combination that could make up a password and testing it to see if it is the correct password. As the password's length increases, the amount of time, on average, to find the correct password increases exponentially.\nTheoretical limits.\nThe resources required for a brute-force attack grow exponentially with increasing key size, not linearly. Although U.S. export regulations historically restricted key lengths to 56-bit symmetric keys (e.g. Data Encryption Standard), these restrictions are no longer in place, so modern symmetric algorithms typically use computationally stronger 128- to 256-bit keys.\nThere is a physical argument that a 128-bit symmetric key is computationally secure against brute-force attack. The Landauer limit implied by the laws of physics sets a lower limit on the energy required to perform a computation of \"kT\" \u00a0\u00b7 ln 2 per bit erased in a computation, where \"T\" is the temperature of the computing device in kelvins, \"k\" is the Boltzmann constant, and the natural logarithm of 2 is about 0.693 (0.6931471805599453). No irreversible computing device can use less energy than this, even in principle. Thus, in order to simply flip through the possible values for a 128-bit symmetric key (ignoring doing the actual computing to check it) would, theoretically, require 2128\u00a0\u2212\u00a01 bit flips on a conventional processor. If it is assumed that the calculation occurs near room temperature (\u2248300 K), the Von Neumann-Landauer Limit can be applied to estimate the energy required as \u22481018 joules, which is equivalent to consuming 30 gigawatts of power for one year. This is equal to 30\u00d7109 W\u00d7365\u00d724\u00d73600 s = 9.46\u00d71017 J or 262.7 TWh (about 0.1% of the yearly world energy production). The full actual computation \u2013 checking each key to see if a solution has been found \u2013 would consume many times this amount. Furthermore, this is simply the energy requirement for cycling through the key space; the actual time it takes to flip each bit is not considered, which is certainly greater than 0 (see Bremermann's limit).\nHowever, this argument assumes that the register values are changed using conventional set and clear operations, which inevitably generate entropy. It has been shown that computational hardware can be designed not to encounter this theoretical obstruction (see reversible computing), though no such computers are known to have been constructed.\nAs commercial successors of governmental ASIC solutions have become available, also known as custom hardware attacks, two emerging technologies have proven their capability in the brute-force attack of certain ciphers. One is modern graphics processing unit (GPU) technology, the other is the field-programmable gate array (FPGA) technology. GPUs benefit from their wide availability and price-performance benefit, FPGAs from their energy efficiency per cryptographic operation. Both technologies try to transport the benefits of parallel processing to brute-force attacks. In case of GPUs some hundreds, in the case of FPGA some thousand processing units making them much better suited to cracking passwords than conventional processors. For instance in 2022, 8 Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU were linked together to test password strength by using the software Hashcat with results that showed 200 billion eight-character NTLM password combinations could be cycled through in 48 minutes.\nVarious publications in the fields of cryptographic analysis have proved the energy efficiency of today's FPGA technology, for example, the COPACOBANA FPGA Cluster computer consumes the same energy as a single PC (600\u00a0W), but performs like 2,500 PCs for certain algorithms. A number of firms provide hardware-based FPGA cryptographic analysis solutions from a single FPGA PCI Express card up to dedicated FPGA computers. WPA and WPA2 encryption have successfully been brute-force attacked by reducing the workload by a factor of 50 in comparison to conventional CPUs and some hundred in case of FPGAs.\nAdvanced Encryption Standard (AES) permits the use of 256-bit keys. Breaking a symmetric 256-bit key by brute-force requires 2128 times more computational power than a 128-bit key. One of the fastest supercomputers in 2019 has a speed of 100 petaFLOPS which could theoretically check 100 trillion (1014) AES keys per second (assuming 1000 operations per check), but would still require 3.67\u00d71055 years to exhaust the 256-bit key space. \nAn underlying assumption of a brute-force attack is that the complete key space was used to generate keys, something that relies on an effective random number generator, and that there are no defects in the algorithm or its implementation. For example, a number of systems that were originally thought to be impossible to crack by brute-force have nevertheless been cracked because the key space to search through was found to be much smaller than originally thought, because of a lack of entropy in their pseudorandom number generators. These include Netscape's implementation of Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) (cracked by Ian Goldberg and David Wagner in 1995) and a Debian/Ubuntu edition of OpenSSL discovered in 2008 to be flawed. A similar lack of implemented entropy led to the breaking of Enigma's code.\nCredential recycling.\nCredential recycling is the hacking practice of re-using username and password combinations gathered in previous brute-force attacks. A special form of credential recycling is pass the hash, where unsalted hashed credentials are stolen and re-used without first being brute-forced.\nUnbreakable codes.\nCertain types of encryption, by their mathematical properties, cannot be defeated by brute-force. An example of this is one-time pad cryptography, where every cleartext bit has a corresponding key from a truly random sequence of key bits. A 140 character one-time-pad-encoded string subjected to a brute-force attack would eventually reveal every 140 character string possible, including the correct answer \u2013 but of all the answers given, there would be no way of knowing which was the correct one. Defeating such a system, as was done by the Venona project, generally relies not on pure cryptography, but upon mistakes in its implementation, such as the key pads not being truly random, intercepted keypads, or operators making mistakes.\nCountermeasures.\nIn case of an \"offline\" attack where the attacker has gained access to the encrypted material, one can try key combinations without the risk of discovery or interference. In case of \"online\" attacks, database and directory administrators can deploy countermeasures such as limiting the number of attempts that a password can be tried, introducing time delays between successive attempts, increasing the answer's complexity (e.g., requiring a CAPTCHA answer or employing multi-factor authentication), and/or locking accounts out after unsuccessful login attempts. Website administrators may prevent a particular IP address from trying more than a predetermined number of password attempts against any account on the site. Additionally, the MITRE D3FEND framework provides structured recommendations for defending against brute-force attacks by implementing strategies such as network traffic filtering, deploying decoy credentials, and invalidating authentication caches.\nReverse brute-force attack.\nIn a reverse brute-force attack (also called password spraying), a single (usually common) password is tested against multiple usernames or encrypted files. The process may be repeated for a select few passwords. In such a strategy, the attacker is not targeting a specific user.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53785", "revid": "43351275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53785", "title": "Dictionary attack", "text": "Technique for defeating password protection using lists of likely possibilities\nIn cryptanalysis and computer security, a dictionary attack is an attack using a restricted subset of a keyspace to defeat a cipher or authentication mechanism by trying to determine its decryption key or passphrase, sometimes trying thousands or millions of likely possibilities often obtained from lists of past security breaches.\nTechnique.\nA dictionary attack is based on trying all the strings in a pre-arranged listing. Such attacks originally used words found in a dictionary (hence the phrase \"dictionary attack\"); however, now there are much larger lists available on the open Internet containing hundreds of millions of passwords recovered from past data breaches. There is also cracking software that can use such lists and produce common variations, such as substituting numbers for similar-looking letters. A dictionary attack tries only those possibilities which are deemed most likely to succeed. Dictionary attacks often succeed because many people have a tendency to choose short passwords that are ordinary words or common passwords; or variants obtained, for example, by appending a digit or punctuation character. Dictionary attacks are often successful, since many commonly used password creation techniques are covered by the available lists, combined with cracking software pattern generation. A safer approach is to randomly generate a long password (15 letters or more) or a multiword passphrase, using a password manager program or manually typing a password.\nDictionary attacks can be deterred by the server administrator by using a more computationally expensive hashing algorithm. Bcrypt, scrypt, and Argon2 are examples of such resource intensive functions that require significant computational power to process, allowing for large improvements in security against dictionary attacks. While other hashing functions, such as SHA and MD5, are much faster and less expensive to compute, they can still be strengthened by being applied multiple times to an input string through a process called key stretching. An attacker would have to know approximately how many times the function was applied for a dictionary attack to be feasible.\nPre-computed dictionary attack/Rainbow table attack.\nIt is possible to achieve a time\u2013space tradeoff by pre-computing a list of hashes of dictionary words and storing these in a database using the hash as the key. This requires a considerable amount of preparation time, but this allows the actual attack to be executed faster. The storage requirements for the pre-computed tables were once a major cost, but now they are less of an issue because of the low cost of disk storage. Pre-computed dictionary attacks are particularly effective when a large number of passwords are to be cracked. The pre-computed dictionary needs be generated only once, and when it is completed, password hashes can be looked up almost instantly at any time to find the corresponding password. A more refined approach involves the use of rainbow tables, which reduce storage requirements at the cost of slightly longer lookup-times. \"See\" LM hash for an example of an authentication system compromised by such an attack.\nPre-computed dictionary attacks, or \"rainbow table attacks\", can be thwarted by the use of salt, a technique that forces the hash dictionary to be recomputed for each password sought, making precomputation infeasible, provided that the number of possible salt values is large enough.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53787", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53787", "title": "Taiwanese indigenous peoples", "text": "Taiwanese indigenous peoples, formerly called Taiwanese aborigines, are the indigenous peoples of Taiwan, with the nationally recognized subgroups numbering about 600,303 or 3% of the island's population. This total is increased to more than 800,000 if the indigenous peoples of the plains in Taiwan are included, pending future official recognition. When including those of mixed ancestry, such a number is possibly more than a million. Academic research suggests that their ancestors have been living on Taiwan for approximately 15,000 years. A wide body of evidence suggests that the Taiwanese indigenous peoples had maintained regular trade networks with numerous regional cultures of Southeast Asia before Han Chinese settled on the island from the 17th century, at the behest of the Dutch colonial administration and later by successive governments towards the 20th century.\nTaiwanese indigenous peoples are Austronesians, with linguistic, genetic and cultural ties to other Austronesian peoples. Taiwan is the origin and linguistic homeland of the oceanic Austronesian expansion, whose descendant groups today include the majority of the ethnic groups throughout many parts of East and Southeast Asia as well as Oceania and even Africa which includes Brunei, East Timor, Indonesia, Malaysia, Madagascar, Philippines, Micronesia, Island Melanesia and Polynesia.\nFor centuries, Taiwan's indigenous inhabitants experienced economic competition and military conflict with a series of colonizing newcomers. Centralized government policies designed to foster language shift and cultural assimilation, as well as continued contact with the colonizers through trade, inter-marriage and other intercultural processes, have resulted in varying degrees of language death and loss of original cultural identity. For example, of the approximately 26 known languages of the Taiwanese indigenous peoples \u2013 collectively referred to as the Formosan languages \u2013 at least ten are now extinct, five are moribund and several are to some degree endangered. These languages are of unique historical significance since most historical linguists consider Taiwan to be the original homeland of the Austronesian languages and all of its primary branches except for Malayo-Polynesian exist only on Taiwan.\nDue to discrimination or repression throughout the centuries, the indigenous peoples of Taiwan have experienced economic and social inequality, including a high unemployment rate and substandard education. Some indigenous groups today continue to be unrecognized by the government. Since the early 1980s, many indigenous groups have been actively seeking a higher degree of political self-determination and economic development. The revival of ethnic pride is expressed in many ways by the indigenous peoples, including the incorporation of elements of their culture into cultural commodities such as cultural tourism, pop music and sports. Taiwan's Austronesian speakers were formerly distributed over much of the Taiwan archipelago, including the Central Mountain Range villages along the alluvial plains, as well as Orchid Island, Green Island, and Liuqiu Island.\nThe bulk of contemporary Taiwanese indigenous peoples mostly reside both in their traditional mountain villages as well as increasingly in Taiwan's urban areas. There are also the plains indigenous peoples, which have always lived in the lowland areas of the island. Ever since the end of the White Terror, some efforts have been under way in indigenous communities to revive traditional cultural practices and preserve their distinct traditional languages on the now Han Chinese majority island and for the latter to better understand more about them.\nTerminology.\nCollective.\nThe Ming Dynasty sailor Chen Di, in his \"Record of the Eastern Seas\" (1603), identifies the indigenous people of Taiwan as simply \"Eastern Savages\" (), while the Dutch referred to Taiwan's original inhabitants as \"Indians\" or \"blacks\", based on their prior colonial experience in what is currently Indonesia.\nBeginning nearly a century later, as the rule of the Qing Empire expanded over wider groups of people, writers and gazetteers recast their descriptions away from reflecting degree of acculturation, and toward a system that defined the indigenous relative to their submission or hostility to Qing rule. Qing used the term \"raw/wild/uncivilized\" () to define those people who had not submitted to Qing rule, and \"cooked/tamed/civilized\" () for those who had pledged their allegiance through their payment of a head tax. According to the standards of the Qianlong Emperor and successive regimes, the epithet \"cooked\" was synonymous with having assimilated to Han cultural norms, and living as a subject of the Empire, but it retained a pejorative designation to signify the perceived cultural lacking of the non-Han people. This designation reflected the prevailing idea that anyone could be civilized/tamed by adopting Confucian social norms.\nIn English, these peoples have also been called Formosans, Native Taiwanese, and Austronesian Taiwanese. The name Gaoshan is also the official label for all indigenous Taiwanese in the People's Republic of China, though indigenous Taiwanese people dislike this label as Gaoshan means high mountain and it disregards plains indigenous.\nTribes.\nAs the Qing consolidated their power over the plains and struggled to enter the mountains in the late 19th century, the terms \"Pingpu\" () and \"Gaoshan\" () were used interchangeably with the epithets \"civilized\" and \"uncivilized\". During Japanese rule (1895\u20131945), anthropologists from Japan maintained the binary classification. In 1900 they incorporated it into their own colonial project by employing the term for the \"civilized tribes\", and creating a category of \"recognized tribes\" for the indigenous who had formerly been called \"uncivilized\". The Musha Incident of 1930 led to many changes in indigenous policy, and the Japanese government began referring to them as .\n\"Gaoshan\" peoples included the Atayal, Bunun, Tsou, Saisiat, Paiwan, Puyuma, and Amis peoples. The Tao (Yami) and Rukai were added later, for a total of nine recognized peoples. During the early period of Chinese Nationalist Kuomintang (KMT) rule the terms \"Shandi Tongbao\" () \"mountain compatriots\" and \"Pingdi Tongbao\" () \"plains compatriots\" were invented, to remove the presumed taint of Japanese influence and reflect the place of Taiwan's indigenous people in the Chinese Nationalist state. The KMT later adopted the use of all the earlier Japanese groupings except \"Peipo\".\nDespite recent changes in the field of anthropology and a shift in government objectives, the \"Pingpu\" and \"Gaoshan\" labels in use today maintain the form given by the Qing to reflect indigenous' acculturation to Han culture. The current recognized indigenous are all regarded as \"Gaoshan\", though the divisions are not and have never been based strictly on geographical location. The Amis, Saisiat, Tao and Kavalan are all traditionally Eastern Plains cultures. The distinction between \"Pingpu\" and \"Gaoshan\" people continues to affect Taiwan's policies regarding indigenous peoples, and their ability to participate effectively in government.\nAlthough the ROC's Government Information Office officially lists 16 major groupings as \"tribes\", the consensus among scholars maintains that these 16 groupings do not reflect any social entities, political collectives, or self-identified alliances dating from pre-modern Taiwan. These divisions did not always correspond to distinctions drawn by the indigenous themselves. The earliest detailed records, dating from the Dutch arrival in 1624, describe the indigenous as living in independent villages of varying size. Between these villages there was frequent trade, intermarriage, warfare and alliances against common enemies. Using contemporary ethnographic and linguistic criteria, these villages have been classed by anthropologists into more than 20 broad (and widely debated) ethnic groupings, which were never united under a common polity, kingdom or \"tribe\". However, the categories have become so firmly established in government and popular discourse over time that they have become de facto distinctions, serving to shape in part today's political discourse within the Republic of China (ROC), and affecting Taiwan's policies regarding indigenous peoples.\nSince 2005, some local governments, including Tainan City in 2005, Fuli, Hualien in 2013, and Pingtung County in 2016, have begun to recognize Taiwanese Plain Indigenous peoples. The numbers of people who have successfully registered, including Kaohsiung City Government that has opened to register but not yet recognized, as of 2017 are:\nRecognized peoples.\nIndigenous ethnic groups recognized by Taiwan.\nTaiwan officially recognizes distinct people groups among the indigenous community based upon the qualifications drawn up by the Council of Indigenous Peoples (CIP). To gain this recognition, communities must gather a number of signatures and a body of supporting evidence with which to successfully petition the CIP. Formal recognition confers certain legal benefits and rights upon a group, as well as providing them with the satisfaction of recovering their separate identity as an ethnic group. As of June 2014, 16 people groups have been recognized.\nThe Council of Indigenous Peoples consider several limited factors in a successful formal petition. The determining factors include collecting member genealogies, group histories and evidence of a continued linguistic and cultural identity. The lack of documentation and the extinction of many indigenous languages as the result of colonial cultural and language policies have made the prospect of official recognition of many ethnicities a remote possibility. Current trends in ethno-tourism have led many former Plains Indigenous peoples to continue to seek cultural revival.\nAmong the Plains groups that have petitioned for official status, only the Kavalan and Sakizaya have been officially recognized. The remaining twelve recognized groups are traditionally regarded as mountain indigenous people.\nOther indigenous groups or subgroups that have pressed for recovery of legal indigenous status include Chimo (who have not formally petitioned the government, see ), Kakabu, Makatao, Pazeh, Siraya, and Taivoan. The act of petitioning for recognized status, however, does not always reflect any consensus view among scholars that the relevant group should in fact be categorized as a separate ethnic group. The Siraya will become the 17th ethnic group to be recognized once their status, already recognized by the courts in May 2018, is officially announced by the central government.\nThere is discussion among both scholars and political groups regarding the best or most appropriate name to use for many of the people groups and their languages, as well as the proper romanization of that name. Commonly cited examples of this ambiguity include (Seediq/Sediq/Truku/Taroko) and (Tao/Yami).\nNine people groups were originally recognized before 1945 by the Japanese government. The Thao, Kavalan and Truku were recognized by Taiwan's government in 2001, 2002 and 2004 respectively. The Sakizaya were recognized as a 13th on 17 January 2007, and on 23 April 2008 the Sediq were recognized as Taiwan's 14th official ethnic group. Previously the Sakizaya had been listed as Amis and the Sediq as Atayal. Hla'alua and Kanakanavu were recognized as the 15th and 16th ethnic group on 26 June 2014. A full list of the recognized ethnic groups of Taiwan, as well as some of the more commonly cited unrecognized peoples, is as follows:\nRecognized: Amis, Atayal, Bunun, Hla'alua, Kanakanavu, Kavalan, Paiwan, Puyuma, Rukai, Saisiyat, Tao, Thao, Tsou, Truku, Sakizaya and Sediq.\nLocally recognized: Makatao (in Pingtung and Fuli), Siraya (in Tainan and Fuli), Taivoan (in Fuli)\nUnrecognized: Babuza, Basay, Hoanya, Ketagalan, Luilang, Pazeh/Kaxabu, Papora, Qauqaut, Taokas, Trobiawan.\nIndigenous Taiwanese in the PRC.\nThe People's Republic of China (PRC) officially recognizes indigenous Taiwanese as one of its ethnic groups under the name \"G\u0101osh\u0101n\" (\u9ad8\u5c71, lit.\u2009'high mountain') The 2000 census identified 600 thousand \"G\u0101osh\u0101n\" living in Taiwan Island; other surveys suggest this accounted for 21 thousand Amis, 51 thousand Bunun, 10.5 thousand Paiwan, with the remainder belonging to other peoples. They are descendants of Taiwanese indigenous living on this island before the 1949 evacuation of the PRC and tracking back further to the Dutch colony in the 17th century. In Zhengzhou, Henan, there exists a \"Taiwan Village\" (\u53f0\u7063\u6751) whose inhabitants' ancestors migrated from Taiwan during the Kangxi era of the Qing dynasty. In 2005, 2,674 people of the village identified themselves as Gaoshan.\nAssimilation and acculturation.\nArcheological, linguistic and anecdotal evidence suggests that Taiwan's indigenous peoples have undergone a series of cultural shifts to meet the pressures of contact with other societies and new technologies. Beginning in the early 17th century, indigenous Taiwanese faced broad cultural change as the island became incorporated into the wider global economy by a succession of competing colonial regimes from Europe and Asia. In some cases groups of indigenous resisted colonial influence, but other groups and individuals readily aligned with the colonial powers. This alignment could be leveraged to achieve personal or collective economic gain, collective power over neighboring villages or freedom from unfavorable societal customs and taboos involving marriage, age-grade and child birth.\nParticularly among the Plains indigenous people, as the degree of the \"civilizing projects\" increased during each successive regime, the indigenous found themselves in greater contact with outside cultures. The process of acculturation and assimilation sometimes followed gradually in the wake of broad social currents, particularly the removal of ethnic markers (such as bound feet, dietary customs and clothing), which had formerly distinguished ethnic groups on Taiwan. The removal or replacement of these brought about an incremental transformation from \"Fan\" (\u756a, barbarian) to the dominant Confucian \"Han\" culture. During the Japanese and KMT periods centralized modernist government policies, rooted in ideas of Social Darwinism and culturalism, directed education, genealogical customs and other traditions toward ethnic assimilation.\nWithin the Taiwanese Han Hoklo community itself, differences in culture indicate the degree to which mixture with indigenous took place, with most pure Hoklo Han in Northern Taiwan having almost no indigenous admixture, which is limited to Hoklo Han in Southern Taiwan. Plains indigenous who were mixed and assimilated into the Hoklo Han population at different stages were differentiated by the historian Melissa J. Brown between \"short-route\" and \"long-route\" The ethnic identity of assimilated Plains indigenous in the immediate vicinity of Tainan was still known since a pure Hoklo Taiwanese girl was warned by her mother to stay away from them. The insulting name \"fan\" was used against Plains indigenous by the Taiwanese, and the Hoklo Taiwanese speech was forced upon indigenous like the Pazeh. Hoklo Taiwanese has replaced Pazeh and driven it to near extinction. Indigenous status has been requested by Plains indigenous peoples.\nCurrent forms of assimilation.\nMany of these forms of assimilation are still at work today. For example, when a central authority nationalizes one language, that attaches economic and social advantages to the prestige language. As generations pass, use of the indigenous language often fades or disappears, and linguistic and cultural identity recede as well. However, some groups are seeking to revive their indigenous identities. One important political aspect of this pursuit is petitioning the government for official recognition as a separate and distinct ethnic group.\nThe complexity and scope of indigenous assimilation and acculturation on Taiwan has led to three general narratives of Taiwanese ethnic change. The oldest holds that Han migration from Fujian and Guangdong in the 17th century pushed the Plains indigenous peoples into the mountains, where they became the Highland peoples of today. A more recent view asserts that through widespread intermarriage between Han and indigenous between the 17th and 19th centuries, the indigenous were completely Sinicized. Finally, modern ethnographical and anthropological studies have shown a pattern of cultural shift mutually experienced by both Han and Plains indigenous, resulting in a hybrid culture. Today people who comprise Taiwan's ethnic Han demonstrate major cultural differences from Han elsewhere.\nSurnames and identity.\nSeveral factors encouraged the assimilation of the Plains indigenous. Taking a Han name was a necessary step in instilling Confucian values in the indigenous. Confucian values were necessary to be recognized as a full person and to operate within the Confucian Qing state. A surname in Han society was viewed as the most prominent legitimizing marker of a patrilineal ancestral link to the Yellow Emperor (Huang Di) and the Five Emperors of Han mythology. Possession of a Han surname, then, could confer a broad range of significant economic and social benefits upon indigenous, despite a prior non-Han identity or mixed parentage. In some cases, members of Plains indigenous adopted the Han surname Pan (\u6f58) as a modification of their designated status as Fan (\u756a: \"barbarian\"). One family of Pazeh became members of the local gentry. complete with a lineage to Fujian province. In other cases, families of Plains indigenous adopted common Han surnames, but traced their earliest ancestor to their locality in Taiwan.\nIn many cases, large groups of immigrant Han would unite under a common surname to form a brotherhood. Brotherhoods were used as a form of defense, as each sworn brother was bound by an oath of blood to assist a brother in need. The brotherhood groups would link their names to a family tree, in essence manufacturing a genealogy based on names rather than blood, and taking the place of the kinship organizations commonly found in China. The practice was so widespread that today's family books are largely unreliable. Many Plains indigenous joined the brotherhoods to gain protection of the collective as a type of insurance policy against regional strife, and through these groups they took on a Han identity with a Han lineage.\nThe degree to which any one of these forces held sway over others is unclear. Preference for one explanation over another is sometimes predicated upon a given political viewpoint. The cumulative effect of these dynamics is that by the beginning of the 20th century the Plains indigenous were almost completely acculturated into the larger ethnic Han group, and had experienced nearly total language shift from their respective Formosan languages to Chinese. In addition, legal barriers to the use of traditional surnames persisted until the 1990s, and cultural barriers remain. Indigenous peoples were not permitted to use their indigenous traditional names on official identification cards until 1995 when a ban on using indigenous names dating from 1946 was finally lifted. One obstacle is that household registration forms allow a maximum of 15 characters for personal names. However, indigenous names are still phonetically translated into Chinese characters, and many names require more than the allotted space. In April 2022, the Constitutional Court ruled that Article 4, Paragraph 2 of the Status Act for Indigenous Peoples was unconstitutional. The paragraph, which reads \"Children of intermarriages between Indigenous Peoples and non-Indigenous Peoples taking the surname of the indigenous father or mother, or using a traditional Indigenous Peoples name, shall acquire Indigenous Peoples status,\" was ruled unconstitutional after a non-indigenous father had taken his daughter to a household registration office to register her Truku descent. Though the applicant was of Truku descent through her mother, her application used her father's Chinese surname and was denied. The Constitutional Court ruled that the law, as written, was a violation of gender equality guaranteed by Article 7 of the Constitution, since children in Taiwan usually take their father's surname, which in practice, meant that indigenous status could be acquired via paternal descent, but not maternal descent.\nHistory.\nIndigenous Taiwanese are Austronesian peoples, with linguistic and genetic ties to other Austronesian ethnic groups, such as peoples of the Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Madagascar, and Oceania. Chipped-pebble tools dating from perhaps as early as 15,000 years ago suggest that the initial human inhabitants of Taiwan were Paleolithic cultures of the Pleistocene era. These people survived by eating marine life. Archeological evidence points to an abrupt change to the Neolithic era around 6,000\u00a0years ago, with the advent of agriculture, domestic animals, polished stone adzes and pottery. The stone adzes were mass-produced on Penghu and nearby islands, from the volcanic rock found there. This suggests heavy sea traffic took place between these islands and Taiwan at this time.\nFrom around 5000 to 1500 BC, Taiwanese indigenous peoples started a seaborne migration to the island of Luzon in the Philippines, intermingling with the older Negrito populations of the islands. This was the beginning of the Austronesian expansion. They spread throughout the rest of the Philippines and eventually migrated further to the other islands of Southeast Asia, Micronesia, Island Melanesia, Polynesia, and Madagascar. Taiwan is the homeland of the Austronesian languages.\nThere is evidence that indigenous Taiwanese continued trading with the Philippines in the Sa Huynh-Kalanay Interaction Sphere. Eastern Taiwan was the source of jade for the \"lingling-o\" jade industry in the Philippines and the Sa Hu\u1ef3nh culture of Vietnam. This trading network began between the animist communities of Taiwan and the Philippines which later became the Maritime Jade Road, one of the most extensive sea-based trade networks of a single geological material in the prehistoric world. It was in existence for 3,000 years from 2000 BCE to 1000 CE.\nFour centuries of non-indigenous rule can be viewed through several changing periods of governing power and shifting official policy toward indigenous. From the 17th century until the early 20th, the impact of the foreign settlers\u2014the Dutch, Spanish, and Han\u2014was more extensive on the Plains peoples. They were far more geographically accessible than the Mountain peoples, and thus had more dealings with the foreign powers. The reactions of indigenous people to imperial power show not only acceptance, but also incorporation or resistance through their cultural practices.\nBy the beginning of the 20th century, the Plains peoples had largely been assimilated into contemporary Taiwanese culture as a result of European and Han colonial rule. Until the latter half of the Japanese colonial era the Mountain peoples were not entirely governed by any non-indigenous polity. However, the mid-1930s marked a shift in the intercultural dynamic, as the Japanese began to play a far more dominant role in the culture of the Highland groups. This increased degree of control over the Mountain peoples continued during Kuomintang rule. Within these two broad eras, there were many differences in the individual and regional impact of the colonizers and their \"civilizing projects\". At times the foreign powers were accepted readily, as some communities adopted foreign clothing styles and cultural practices , and engaged in cooperative trade in goods such as camphor, deer hides, sugar, tea, and rice. At numerous other times changes from the outside world were forcibly imposed.\nPlains indigenous peoples.\nThe plains indigenous peoples mainly lived in stationary village sites surrounded by defensive walls of bamboo. The village sites in southern Taiwan were more populated than other locations. Some villages supported a population of more than 1,500 people, surrounded by smaller satellite villages. Siraya villages were constructed of dwellings made of thatch and bamboo, raised from the ground on stilts, with each household having a barn for livestock. A watchtower was located in the village to look out for headhunting parties from the Highland peoples. The concept of property was often communal, with a series of conceptualized concentric rings around each village. The innermost ring was used for gardens and orchards that followed a fallowing cycle around the ring. The second ring was used to cultivate plants and natural fibers for the exclusive use of the community. The third ring was for exclusive hunting and deer fields for community use. The plains indigenous peoples hunted herds of spotted Formosan sika deer, Formosan sambar deer and Reeves's muntjac as well as conducting light millet farming. Sugar and rice were grown as well, but mostly for use in preparing wine.\nMany of the plains indigenous peoples were matrilineal/matrifocal societies. A man married into a woman's family after a courtship period during which the woman was free to reject as many men as she wished. In the age-grade communities, couples entered into marriage in their mid-30s when a man would no longer be required to perform military service or hunt heads on the battle-field. In the matriarchal system of the Siraya, it was also necessary for couples to abstain from marriage until their mid-30s, when the bride's father would be in his declining years and would not pose a challenge to the new male member of the household. It was not until the arrival of the Dutch Reformed Church in the 17th century that the marriage and child-birth taboos were abolished. There is some indication that many of the younger members of Sirayan society embraced the Dutch marriage customs as a means to circumvent the age-grade system in a push for greater village power. Almost all indigenous peoples in Taiwan have traditionally had a custom of sexual division of labor. Women did the sewing, cooking and farming, while the men hunted and prepared for military activity and securing enemy heads in headhunting raids, which was a common practice in early Taiwan. Women were also often found in the office of priestesses or mediums to the gods.\nFor centuries, Taiwan's indigenous peoples experienced economic competition and military conflict with a series of colonizing peoples. Centralized government policies designed to foster language shift and cultural assimilation, as well as continued contact with the colonizers through trade, intermarriage and other dispassionate intercultural processes, have resulted in varying degrees of language death and loss of original cultural identity. For example, of the approximately 26 known languages of the Taiwanese indigenous (collectively referred to as the Formosan languages), at least ten are extinct, five are moribund and several are to some degree endangered. These languages are of unique historical significance, since most historical linguists consider Taiwan to be the original homeland of the Austronesian language family.\nContact with Chinese.\nEarly Chinese histories refer to visits to eastern islands that some historians identify with Taiwan. Troops of the Three Kingdoms state of Eastern Wu are recorded visiting an island known as Yizhou in the spring of 230. They brought back several thousand natives but 80 to 90 percent of the soldiers died to unknown diseases. Some scholars have identified this island as Taiwan while others do not. The \"Book of Sui\" relates that Emperor Yang of the Sui dynasty sent three expeditions to a place called \"Liuqiu\" early in the 7th century. They brought back captives, cloth, and armour. The Liuqiu described by the \"Book of Sui\" had pigs and chicken but no cows, sheep, donkeys, or horses. It produced little iron, had no writing system, taxation, or penal code, and was ruled by a king with four or five commanders. The natives used stone blades and practiced slash-and-burn agriculture to grow rice, millet, sorghum, and beans. Later the name Liuqiu (whose characters are read in Japanese as \"Ryukyu\") referred to the island chain to the northeast of Taiwan, but some scholars believe it may have referred to Taiwan in the Sui period.\nDuring the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), Han Chinese people started visiting Taiwan. The Yuan emperor Kublai Khan sent officials to the Ryukyu Kingdom in 1292 to demand its loyalty to the Yuan dynasty, but the officials ended up in Taiwan and mistook it for Ryukyu. After three soldiers were killed, the delegation immediately retreated to Quanzhou in China. Another expedition was sent in 1297. Wang Dayuan visited Taiwan in 1349 and noted that the customs of its inhabitants were different from those of Penghu's population, but did not mention the presence of other Chinese. He mentioned the presence of Chuhou pottery from present day Lishui, Zhejiang, suggesting that Chinese merchants had already visited the island by the 1340s.\nBy the early 16th century, increasing numbers of Chinese fishermen, traders and pirates were visiting the southwestern part of the island. Some merchants from Fujian were familiar enough with the indigenous peoples of Taiwan to speak Formosan languages. The people of Fujian sailed closer to Taiwan and the Ryukyus in the mid-16th century to trade with Japan while evading Ming authorities. Chinese who traded in Southeast Asia also began taking an East Sea Compass Course (\"dongyang zhenlu\") that passed southwestern and southern Taiwan. Some of them traded with the Taiwanese indigenous. During this period, Taiwan was referred to as \"Xiaodong dao\" (\"little eastern island\") and \"Dahui guo\" (\"the country of Dahui\"), a corruption of Tayouan, a tribe that lived on an islet near modern Tainan from which the name \"Taiwan\" is derived. By the late 16th century, Chinese from Fujian were settling in southwestern Taiwan. The Chinese pirates Lin Daoqian and Lin Feng visited Taiwan in 1563 and 1574 respectively. Lin Daoqian was a pirate from Chaozhou who fled to Beigang in southwestern Taiwan and left shortly after. Lin Feng moved his pirate forces to Wankan (in modern Chiayi County) in Taiwan on 3 November 1574 and used it as a base to launch raids. They left for Penghu after being attacked by natives and the Ming navy dislodged them from their bases. He later returned to Wankan on 27 December 1575 but left for Southeast Asia after losing a naval encounter with Ming forces on 15 January 1576. The pirate Yan Siqi also used Taiwan as a base. In 1593, Ming officials started issuing ten licenses each year for Chinese junks to trade in northern Taiwan. Chinese records show that after 1593, each year five licenses were granted for trade in Keelung and five licenses for Tamsui. However these licenses merely acknowledged already existing illegal trade at these locations.\nInitially Chinese merchants arrived in northern Taiwan and sold iron and textiles to the Taiwanese indigenous peoples in return for coal, sulfur, gold, and venison. Later the southwestern part of Taiwan surpassed northern Taiwan as the destination for Chinese traders. The southwest had mullet fish, which drew more than a hundred fishing junks from Fujian each year during winter. The fishing season lasted six to eight weeks. Some of them camped on Taiwan's shores and many began trading with the indigenous people for deer products. The southwestern Taiwanese trade was of minor importance until after 1567 when it was used as a way to circumvent the ban on Sino-Japanese trade. The Chinese bought deerskins from the indigenous and sold them to the Japanese for a large profit.\nWhen a Portuguese ship sailed past southwestern Taiwan in 1596, several of its crew members who had been shipwrecked there in 1582 noticed that the land had become cultivated and now had people working it, presumably by settlers from Fujian. When the Dutch arrived in 1623, they found about 1,500 Chinese visitors and residents. Most of them were engaged in seasonal fishing, hunting, and trading. The population fluctuated throughout the year peaking during winter. A small minority brought Chinese plants with them and grew crops such as apples, oranges, bananas, watermelons. Some estimates of the Chinese population put it at 2,000. There were two Chinese villages. The larger one was located on an island that formed the Bay of Tayouan. It was inhabited year-round. The smaller village was located on the mainland and would eventually become the city of Tainan. In the early 17th century, a Chinese man described it as being inhabited by pirates and fishermen. One Dutch visitor noted that an indigenous village near the Sino-Japanese trade center had a large number of Chinese and there was \"scarcely a house in this village... that does not have one or two or three, or even five or six Chinese living there.\" The villagers' speech contained many Chinese words and sounded like \"a mixed and broken language\".\nChen Di visited Taiwan in 1603 on an expedition against the Wokou pirates. General Shen of Wuyu defeated the pirates and met a native chieftain named Damila who presented them with gifts. Chen witnessed these events and wrote an account of Taiwan known as \"Dongfanji\" (An Account of the Eastern Barbarians). According to Chen, Zheng He visited the natives but they remained hidden. Afterwards they came into contact with Chinese people from the harbors of Huimin, Chonglong, and Lieyu in Zhangzhou and Quanzhou. They learned their languages to trade with them. Chinese items such as agate beads, porcelain, cloth, salt, and brass were traded in return for deer meat, skins, and horns.\nEuropean period (1623\u20131662).\nDuring the European period (1623\u20131662) soldiers and traders representing the Dutch East India Company maintained a colony in southwestern Taiwan (1624\u20131662) near present-day Tainan. This established an Asian base for triangular trade between the company, the Qing dynasty and Japan, with the hope of interrupting Portuguese and Spanish trading alliances with China. The Spanish also established a small colony in northern Taiwan (1626\u20131642) in present-day Keelung. However, Spanish influence wavered almost from the beginning, so that by the late 1630s they had already withdrawn most of their troops. After they were driven out of Taiwan by a combined Dutch and indigenous force in 1642, the Spanish \"had little effect on Taiwan's history\". Dutch influence was far more significant: expanding to the southwest and north of the island, they set up a tax system and established schools and churches in many villages.\nWhen the Dutch arrived in 1624 at Tayouan (Anping) Harbor, Siraya-speaking representatives from nearby Saccam village soon appeared at the Dutch stockade to barter and trade; an overture which was readily welcomed by the Dutch. The Sirayan villages were, however, divided into warring factions: the village of Sinckan (Sinshih) was at war with Mattau (Madou) and its ally Baccluan, while the village of Soulang maintained uneasy neutrality. In 1629 a Dutch expeditionary force searching for Han pirates was massacred by warriors from Mattau, and the victory inspired other villages to rebel. In 1635, with reinforcements having arrived from Batavia (now Jakarta, Indonesia), the Dutch subjugated and burned Mattau. Since Mattau was the most powerful village in the area, the victory brought a spate of peace offerings from other nearby villages, many of which were outside the Siraya area. This was the beginning of Dutch consolidation over large parts of Taiwan, which brought an end to centuries of inter-village warfare. The new period of peace allowed the Dutch to construct schools and churches aimed to acculturate and convert the indigenous population. Dutch schools taught a romanized script (Sinckan writing), which transcribed the Siraya language. This script maintained occasional use through the 18th century. Today only fragments survive, in documents and stone stele markers. The schools also served to maintain alliances and open indigenous areas for Dutch enterprise and commerce.\nThe Dutch soon found trade in deerskins and venison in the East Asian market to be a lucrative endeavor and recruited plains indigenous peoples to procure the hides. The deer trade attracted the first Han traders to indigenous villages, but as early as 1642 the demand for deer greatly diminished the deer stocks. This drop significantly reduced the prosperity of indigenous peoples, forcing many indigenous to take up farming to counter the economic impact of losing their most vital food source.\nAs the Dutch began subjugating indigenous villages in the south and west of Taiwan, increasing numbers of Han immigrants looked to exploit areas that were fertile and rich in game. The Dutch initially encouraged this, since the Han were skilled in agriculture and large-scale hunting. Several Han took up residence in Siraya villages. The Dutch used Han agents to collect taxes, hunting license fees and other income. This set up a society in which \"many of the colonists were Han Chinese but the military and the administrative structures were Dutch\". Despite this, local alliances transcended ethnicity during the Dutch period. For example, the Guo Huaiyi Rebellion in 1652, a Han farmers' uprising, was defeated by an alliance of 120 Dutch musketeers with the aid of Han loyalists and 600 indigenous warriors.\nMultiple indigenous villages in frontier areas rebelled against the Dutch in the 1650s due to oppression such as when the Dutch ordered indigenous women for sex, deer pelts, and rice be given to them from indigenous in the Taipei Basin in Wu-lao-wan village which sparked a rebellion in December 1652 at the same time as the Chinese rebellion. Two Dutch translators were beheaded by the Wu-lao-wan indigenous people and in a subsequent fight, 30 indigenous and another two Dutch people died. After an embargo of salt and iron on Wu-lao-wan, the indigenous people were forced to sue for peace in February 1653.\nThe Dutch period ended in 1662 when Ming loyalist forces of Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga) drove out the Dutch and established the short-lived Zheng family kingdom on Taiwan. Dutch colonialism left different impressions on different indigenous groups in Taiwan. The Koaluts (Guizaijiao) tribe of the Paiwan people attacked American survivors of a shipwreck during the Rover incident in 1867. The chief, Tanketok, explained that this was because in ages past, the white men came and almost exterminated their tribe, and their ancestors passed down their desire for revenge. According to William A. Pickering in his \"Pioneering in Formosa\" (1898), the old people of Kong-a-na, about 15 miles from Sin-kang, loved white men and the old women there said they were their kindred.\nKingdom of Tungning (1661\u20131683).\nThe Kingdom of Tungning was established by Zheng Chenggong (Koxinga) after arriving in Taiwan in 1661 and ousting the Dutch in 1662. The Taiwanese indigenous tribes who were previously allied with the Dutch against the Chinese during the Guo Huaiyi rebellion in 1652 turned against the Dutch during the Siege of Fort Zeelandia and defected to Koxinga's Chinese forces. The indigenous of Sincan defected to Koxinga after he offered them amnesty. The Sincan indigenous people then proceeded to work for the Chinese and behead Dutch people in executions. The frontier indigenous in the mountains and plains also surrendered and defected to the Chinese on 17 May 1661, celebrating their freedom from compulsory education under the Dutch rule by hunting down Dutch people and beheading them and trashing their Christian school textbooks.\nKoxinga's son and successor, Zheng Jing, dispatched teachers to indigenous tribes to provide them with supplies and teach them more advanced farming techniques. He also gave them Ming gowns and caps while eating with their chiefs and gifting tobacco to indigenous people who were gathered in crowds to meet and welcome him as he visited their villages after he defeated the Dutch. Schools were set up to teach the indigenous people the Chinese language, writing, and the Confucian Classics. Those who refused were punished.\nZhengs brought 70,000 soldiers to Taiwan and immediately began clearing large tracts of land to support its forces. The expansion of Chinese settlements often came at the expense of indigenous tribes, causing rebellions flared up over the course of Zheng rule. In one campaign, several hundred Shalu tribes people in modern Taichung were killed. By the start of 1684, a year after the end of Zheng rule, areas under cultivation in Taiwan had tripled in size since the end of the Dutch era in 1660.\nQing dynasty rule (1683\u20131895).\nQuarantine policies.\nAfter the Qing dynasty government defeated the Ming loyalist forces maintained by the Zheng family in 1683, Taiwan became increasingly integrated into the Qing dynasty. Qing forces ruled areas of Taiwan's highly populated western plain for over two centuries, until 1895. This era was characterized by a marked increase in the number of Han Chinese on Taiwan, continued social unrest, the piecemeal transfer (by various means) of large amounts of land from the indigenous to the Han, and the nearly complete acculturation of the Western Plains indigenous people to Chinese Han customs.\nDuring the Qing dynasty's two-century rule over Taiwan, the population of Han on the island increased dramatically. However, it is not clear to what extent this was due to an influx of Han settlers, who were predominantly displaced young men from Zhangzhou and Quanzhou in Fujian province. The Qing government officially sanctioned controlled Han settlement, but sought to manage tensions between the various regional and ethnic groups. Therefore, it often recognized the plains peoples' claims to deer fields and traditional territory. The Qing authorities hoped to turn the Plains peoples into loyal subjects, and adopted the head and corv\u00e9e taxes on the indigenous, which made the plains indigenous people directly responsible for payment to the government yamen. The attention paid by the Qing authorities to indigenous land rights was part of a larger administrative goal to maintain a level of peace on the turbulent Taiwan frontier, which was often marred by ethnic and regional conflict. The frequency of rebellions, riots, and civil strife in Qing dynasty Taiwan is often encapsulated in the saying \"every three years an uprising; every five years a rebellion\".\nIn 1723, indigenous living in Dajiaxi village along the central coastal plain rebelled. Government troops from southern Taiwan were sent to put down this revolt, but in their absence, Han settlers in Fengshan County rose up in revolt under the leadership of Wu Fusheng, a settler from Zhangzhou. Indigenous participation in major revolts during the Qing era, including the Taokas-led Ta-Chia-hsi revolt of 1731\u20131732, ensured the Plains peoples would remain an important factor in crafting Qing frontier policy until the end of Qing rule in 1895. By 1732, five different ethnic groups were in revolt but the rebellion was defeated by the end of the year.\nThe struggle over land resources was one source of conflict. Large areas of the western plain were subject to large land rents called \"Huan Da Zu\" (\u756a\u5927\u79df\u2014literally, \"Barbarian Big Rent\"), a category which remained until the period of Japanese colonization. The large tracts of deer field, guaranteed by the Qing, were owned by the communities and their individual members. The communities would commonly offer Han farmers a permanent patent for use, while maintaining ownership (skeleton) of the subsoil (\u7530\u9aa8), which was called \"two lords to a field\" (\u4e00\u7530\u5169\u4e3b). The Plains peoples were often cheated out of land or pressured to sell at unfavorable rates. Some disaffected subgroups moved to central or eastern Taiwan, but most remained in their ancestral locations and acculturated or assimilated into Han society. Despite this, the vast majority of rebellions did not originate from indigenous peoples but the Han settlers, and the mountain indigenous were left to their own devices until the last 20 years of Qing rule. During the Qianlong period (1735\u20131796), the 93 \"shufan\" acculturated indigenous villages never rebelled and over 200 non-acculturated indigenous villages submitted.\nDuring the reigns of the Kangxi (r. 1661\u20131722), Yongzheng (r. 1722\u20131735), and Qianlong (r. 1735\u20131796) emperors, the Qing court deliberately restricted the expansion of territory and government administration in Taiwan. A government permit was required for settlers to go beyond the Dajia River at the mid-point of the western plains. In 1715, the governor-general of Fujian-Zhejiang recommended land reclamation in Taiwan but Kangxi was worried that this would cause instability and conflicts. By the time of Yongzheng's reign, the Qing extended control over the entire western plains, but this was to better control the settlers and maintain security. The quarantine policies were maintained. After the Zhu Yigui uprising which occurred in 1721, Lan Dingyuan, an advisor to Lan Tingzhen, who led forces against the rebellion, advocated for expansion and land reclamation to strengthen government control over the Chinese settlers. He wanted to convert the indigenous to Han culture and turn them into subjects of the Qing. However, the Qianlong Emperor kept the administrative structure of Taiwan largely unchanged and in 1744, he dismissed recommendations by officials to allow settlers to claim land.\nQing classification of indigenous peoples.\nThe Qing did little to administer the indigenous and rarely tried to subjugate or impose cultural change upon them. Indigenous peoples were classified into two general categories: acculturated indigenous (\"shufan\") and non-acculturated indigenous (\"shengfan\"). \"Sheng\" is a word used to describe uncooked food, unworked land, unripened-fruit, unskilled labor or strangers, while \"shu\" bears the opposite meaning. To the Qing, \"shufan\" were indigenous who paid taxes, performed corv\u00e9e, and had adopted Han Chinese culture to some degree. When the Qing annexed Taiwan, there were 46 indigenous villages under government control: 12 in Fengshan and 34 in Zhuluo. These were likely inherited from the Zheng regime. In the Yongzheng period, 108 indigenous villages submitted as a result of encouragement and enticement from the Taiwan regional commander, Lin Liang. \"Shengfan\" who paid taxes but did not perform corv\u00e9e and did not practice Han Chinese culture were called \"guihua shengfan\" (submitted non-acculturated indigenous).\nThe Qianlong administration forbade enticing indigenous to submit due to fear of conflict. In the early Qianlong period, there were 299 named indigenous villages. Records show 93 \"shufan\" villages and 61 \"guihua shengfan\" villages. The number of \"shufan\" villages remained stable throughout the Qianlong period. Two indigenous affairs sub-prefects were appointed to manage indigenous affairs in 1766. One was in charge of the north and the other in charge of the south, both focused on the plains indigenous. Boundaries were built to keep the mountain indigenous people out of settlement areas. The policy of marking settler boundaries and segregating them from indigenous territories became official policy in 1722 in response to the Zhu Yigui uprising. Fifty-four stelae were used to mark crucial points along the settler-indigenous boundary. Han settlers were forbidden from crossing into indigenous territory but settler encroachment continued, and the boundaries were rebuilt in 1750, 1760, 1784, and 1790. Settlers were forbidden from marrying indigenous as marriage was one way settlers obtained land. While the settlers drove colonization and acculturation, the Qing policy of quarantine dented the impact on indigenous, especially mountain indigenous people.\nSettler expansion.\nAlthough Qing quarantine policies were maintained in the early 19th century, attitudes towards indigenous territories started to shift. Local officials repeatedly advocated for the colonization of indigenous territories, especially in the cases of Gamalan and Shuishalian. The Gamalan or Kavalan people were situated in modern Yilan County in northeastern Taiwan. It was separated from the western plains and Tamsui (Danshui) by mountains. There were 36 indigenous villages in the area and the Kavalan people had started paying taxes as early as the Kangxi period (r. 1661\u20131722), but they were non-acculturated \"guihua shengfan\" indigenous.\nIn 1787, a Chinese settler named Wu Sha tried to reclaim land in Gamalan but was defeated by indigenous people. The next year, the Tamsui sub-prefect convinced the Taiwan prefect, Yang Tingli, to support Wu Sha. Yang recommended subjugating the natives and opening Gamalan for settlement to the Fujian governor but the governor refused to act due to fear of conflict. In 1797, a new Tamsui sub-prefect issued permit and financial support for Wu to recruit settlers for land reclamation, which was illegal. Wu's successors were unable to register the reclaimed land on government registers. Local officials supported land reclamation but could not officially recognize it.\nIn 1806 it was reported that a pirate, Cai Qian, was within the vicinity of Gamalan. Taiwan Prefect Yang once again recommended opening up Gamalan, arguing that to abandon it would cause trouble on the frontier. Later another pirate band tried to occupy Gamalan. Yang recommended to the Fuzhou General Saichong'a the establishment of administration and land surveys in Gamalan. Saichong'a initially refused but then changed his mind and sent a memorial to the emperor in 1808 recommending the incorporation of Gamalan. The issue was discussed by the central government officials and for the first time, one official went on record saying that if indigenous territory was incorporated, not only would it end the pirate threat but the government would stand to profit from the land itself. In 1809, the emperor ordered for Gamalan to be incorporated. The next year an imperial decree for the formal incorporation of Gamalan was issued and a Gamalan sub-prefect was appointed.\nUnlike Gamalan, debates on Shuishalian resulted in its continued status as a closed-off area. Shuishalian refers to the upstream areas of the Zhuoshui River and Wu River in central Taiwan. The inner mountain area of Shuishalian was inhabited by 24 indigenous villages and six of them occupied the flat and fertile basin area. The indigenous had submitted as early as 1693 but they remained non-acculturated. In 1814, some settlers were able to obtain reclamation permits through fabricating indigenous land lease requests. In 1816, the government sent troops to evict the settlers and destroy their strongholds. Stelae were erected demarcating the land forbidden to Chinese settlers.\nLocal officials advocated for supporting colonization efforts into the mid-1800s but their recommendations were ignored.\nMigration to highlands.\nOne popular narrative holds that all of the Gaoshan peoples were originally Plains peoples, which fled to the mountains under pressure from Han encroachment. This strong version of the \"migration\" theory has been largely discounted by contemporary research as the Gaoshan people demonstrate a physiology, material cultures and customs that have been adapted for life at higher elevations. Linguistic, archeological, and recorded anecdotal evidence also suggests there has been island-wide migration of indigenous peoples for over 3,000 years.\nSmall sub-groups of Plains Indigenous Peoples may have occasionally fled to the mountains, foothills or eastern plain to escape hostile groups of Han or other indigenous.\nThe \"displacement scenario\" is more likely rooted in the older customs of many Plains groups to withdraw into the foothills during headhunting season or when threatened by a neighboring village, as observed by the Dutch during their punitive campaign of Mattou in 1636 when the bulk of the village retreated to Tevorangh.\nThe \"displacement scenario\" may also stem from the inland migrations of Plains indigenous subgroups, who were displaced by either Han or other Plains indigenous and chose to move to the Iilan plain in 1804, the Puli basin in 1823 and another Puli migration in 1875. Each migration consisted of a number of families and totaled hundreds of people, not entire communities. There are also recorded oral histories that recall some Plains indigenous people were sometimes captured and killed by Highlands peoples while relocating through the mountains. However, as explained in detail, documented evidence shows that the majority of Plains people remained on the plains, intermarried Hakka and Hoklo immigrants from Fujian and Guangdong, and adopted a Han identity.\nColonization in reaction to crises.\nIn 1874, Japan invaded indigenous territory in southern Taiwan in what is known as the Mudan Incident (Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)). For six months Japanese soldiers occupied southern Taiwan and Japan argued that it was not part of the Qing dynasty. The result was the payment of an indemnity by the Qing in return for the Japanese army's withdrawal.\nThe imperial commissioner for Taiwan, Shen Baozhen, argued that \"the reason that Taiwan is being coveted by [Japan] is that the land is too empty.\" He recommended subjugating the indigenous and populating their territory with Chinese settlers. As a result, the administration of Taiwan was expanded and campaigns against the indigenous were launched. The two sub-prefects responsible for indigenous affairs were moved to inner Shushalian (Puli) and eastern Taiwan (Beinan), the focal points for colonization. Starting in 1874, mountain roads were built to make the region more accessible and indigenous people were brought into formal submission to the Qing. In 1875, the ban on entering Taiwan was lifted. In 1877, 21 guidelines on subjugating indigenous peoples and opening the mountains were issued. Agencies for recruiting settlers were established on the coastal mainland and in Hong Kong. However efforts to promote settlement in Taiwan petered out soon after.\nEfforts to settle in indigenous territories were renewed under the governance of Liu Mingchuan after the Sino-French War ended in 1885. However few settlers went to Taiwan and those that did were accosted by indigenous and the harsh climate. Governor Liu was criticized for the high cost and little gain from the colonization activities. Liu resigned in 1891 and the colonization efforts ceased.\nA Taiwan Pacification and Reclamation Head Office was established with eight pacification and reclamation bureaus. Four bureaus were located in eastern Taiwan, two in Puli (inner Shuishalian), one in the north, and one on the western border of the mountains. By 1887, about 500 indigenous villages, or roughly 90,000 indigenous had formally submitted to Qing rule. This number increased to 800 villages with 148,479 indigenous over the following years. However the cost of getting them to submit was exorbitant. The Qing offered them materials and paid village chiefs monthly allowances. Not all the indigenous were under effective control and land reclamation in eastern Taiwan occurred at a slow pace. From 1884 to 1891, Liu launched more than 40 military campaigns against the indigenous with 17,500 soldiers. A third of the invasion force was killed or disabled in the conflict, amounting to a costly failure.\nBy the end of the Qing period, the western plains were fully developed as farmland with about 2.5 million Chinese settlers. The mountainous areas were still largely autonomous under the control of indigenous. Indigenous land loss under the Qing occurred at a relatively slow pace compared to the following Japanese colonial period due to the absence of state sponsored land deprivation for the majority of Qing rule. In the 50-year period of Japanese rule that followed, the Taiwanese indigenous lost their right to legal ownership of land and were confined to small reserves one-eighth the size of their ancestral lands. However even had Japan not taken over Taiwan, the plains indigenous were on the way to losing their residual rights to land. By the last years of Qing rule, most of the plains indigenous had been acculturated to Han culture, around 20\u201330% could speak their mother tongues, and gradually lost their land ownership and rent collection rights.\nHighland peoples.\nImperial Chinese and European societies had little contact with the Highland indigenous until expeditions to the region by European and American explorers and missionaries commenced in the 19th and early 20th centuries. The lack of data before this was primarily the result of a Qing quarantine on the region to the east of the \"earth oxen\" (\u571f\u725b) border, which ran along the eastern edge of the western plain. Han contact with the mountain peoples was usually associated with the enterprise of gathering and extracting camphor from Camphor Laurel trees (\"Cinnamomum camphora\"), native to the island and in particular the mountainous areas. The production and shipment of camphor (used in herbal medicines and mothballs) was then a significant industry on the island, lasting up to and including the period of Japanese rule. These early encounters often involved headhunting parties from the Highland peoples, who sought out and raided unprotected Han forest workers. Together with traditional Han concepts of Taiwanese behavior, these raiding incidents helped to promote the Qing-era popular image of the \"violent\" indigenous.\nTaiwanese Plains indigenous were often employed and dispatched as interpreters to assist in the trade of goods between Han merchants and Highlands indigenous. The indigenous people traded cloth, pelts and meat for iron and matchlock rifles. Iron was a necessary material for the fabrication of hunting knives\u2014long, curved sabers that were generally used as a forest tool. These blades became notorious among Han settlers, given their alternative use to decapitate Highland indigenous enemies in customary headhunting expeditions.\nHeadhunting.\nEvery tribe except the Tao people of Orchid Island practiced headhunting, which was a symbol of bravery and valor. Men who did not take heads could not cross the rainbow bridge into the spirit world upon death as per the religion of Gaya. Each tribe has its own origin story for the tradition of headhunting but the theme is similar across tribes. After the great flood, headhunting originated due to boredom (South Tsou Sa'arua, Paiwan), to improve tribal singing (Ali Mountain Tsou), as a form of population control (Atayal, Taroko, Bunun), simply for amusement and fun (Rukai, Tsou, Puyuma) or particularly for the fun and excitement of killing intellectually disabled individuals (Amis). Once the victims had been decapitated and displayed the heads were boiled and left to dry, often hanging from trees or displayed on slate shelves referred to as \"skull racks\". A party returning with a head was cause for celebration, as it was believed to bring good luck and the spiritual power of the slaughtered individual was believed to transfer into the headhunter. If the head was that of a woman it was even better because it meant she could not bear children. The Bunun people would often take prisoners and inscribe prayers or messages to their dead on arrows, then shoot their prisoner with the hope their prayers would be carried to the dead. Taiwanese Hoklo Han settlers and Japanese were often the victims of headhunting raids as they were considered by the indigenous to be liars and enemies. A headhunting raid would often strike at workers in the fields, or set a dwelling alight and then decapitate the inhabitants as they fled the burning structure. It was also customary to later raise the victim's surviving children as full members of the community. Often the heads themselves were ceremonially 'invited' to join the community as members, where they were supposed to watch over the community and keep them safe. The indigenous inhabitants of Taiwan accepted the convention and practice of headhunting as one of the calculated risks of community life. The last groups to practice headhunting were the Paiwan, Bunun, and Atayal groups. Japanese rule ended the practice by 1930, (though Japanese were not subject to this regulation and continued to headhunt their enemies throughout World War II) and as late as 2003 there are elder Taiwanese that could recall the practice firsthand.\nJapanese rule (1895\u20131945).\nWhen the Treaty of Shimonoseki was finalized on 17 April 1895, Taiwan was ceded by the Qing Empire to Japan. Taiwan's incorporation into the Japanese political orbit brought Taiwanese indigenous into contact with a new colonial structure, determined to define and locate indigenous people within the framework of a new, multi-ethnic empire. The means of accomplishing this goal took three main forms: anthropological study of the natives of Taiwan, attempts to reshape the indigenous in the mold of the Japanese, and military suppression. The indigenous and Han joined to violently revolt against Japanese rule in the 1907 Beipu uprising and 1915 Tapani incident.\nJapan's sentiment regarding indigenous peoples was crafted around the memory of the Mudan incident, when, in 1871, a group of 54 shipwrecked Ry\u016bky\u016ban sailors was massacred by a Paiwan group from the village of Mudan in southern Taiwan. The resulting Japanese policy, published twenty years before the onset of their rule on Taiwan, cast Taiwanese indigenous as \"vicious, violent and cruel\" and concluded \"this is a pitfall of the world; we must get rid of them all\". Japanese campaigns to gain indigenous submission were often brutal, as evidenced in the desire of Japan's first Governor General, Kabayama Sukenori, to \"conquer the barbarians\" . The Seediq indigenous fought against the Japanese in multiple battles such as the Xincheng incident (\u65b0\u57ce\u4e8b\u4ef6), Truku battle (\u592a\u9b6f\u95a3\u4e4b\u5f79) (Taroko), 1902 Renzhiguan incident (\u4eba\u6b62\u95dc\u4e8b\u4ef6), and the 1903 Zimeiyuan incident (\u59ca\u59b9\u539f\u4e8b\u4ef6). In the Musha Incident of 1930, for example, a Seediq group was decimated by artillery and supplanted by the Taroko (Truku), which had sustained periods of bombardment from naval ships and airplanes dropping mustard gas. A quarantine was placed around the mountain areas enforced by armed guard stations and electrified fences until the most remote high mountain villages could be relocated closer to administrative control.\nA divide and rule policy was formulated with Japan trying to play indigenous and Han against each other to their own benefit when Japan alternated between fighting the two with Japan first fighting Han and then fighting indigenous. Nationalist Japanese claim indigenous were treated well by Kabayama. \"unenlightened and stubbornly stupid\" were the words used to describe indigenous by Kabayama Sukenori. A hardline anti indigenous position aimed at the destruction of their civilization was implemented by Fukuzawa Yukichi. The most tenacioius opposition was mounted by the Bunan and Atayal against the Japanese during the brutal mountain war in 1913\u201314 under Sakuma. Indigenous continued to fight against the Japanese after 1915. Indigenous were subjected to military takeover and assimilation. In order to exploit camphor resources, the Japanese fought against the Bngciq Atayal in 1906 and expelled them. The war is called the \"Camphor War\" (\u6a1f\u8166\u6230\u722d).\nThe Bunun people under Chief Raho Ari (or Dahu Ali, \u62c9\u8377\u00b7\u963f\u96f7, l\u0101h\u00e8 \u0101l\u00e9i) engaged in guerrilla warfare against the Japanese for twenty years. Raho Ari's revolt was sparked when the Japanese implemented a gun control policy in 1914 against the indigenous people in which their rifles were impounded in police stations when hunting expeditions were over. The Dafen incident w:zh:\u5927\u5206\u4e8b\u4ef6 began at Dafen when a police platoon was slaughtered by Raho Ari's clan in 1915. A settlement holding 266 people called Tamaho was created by Raho Ari and his followers near the source of the Laonong River and attracted more Bunun rebels to their cause. Raho Ari and his followers captured bullets and guns and slew Japanese in repeated hit and run raids against Japanese police stations by infiltrating over the Japanese \"guardline\" of electrified fences and police stations as they pleased.\nThe 1930 \"New Flora and Silva, Volume 2\" said of the mountain indigenous that the \"majority of them live in a state of war against Japanese authority\". The Bunun and Atayal were described as the \"most ferocious\" indigenous people, and police stations were targeted by indigenous in intermittent assaults. By January 1915, all indigenous peoples in northern Taiwan were forced to hand over their guns to the Japanese, however head hunting and assaults on police stations by indigenous still continued after that year. Between 1921 and 1929 indigenous raids died down, but a major revival and surge in indigenous armed resistance erupted from 1930 to 1933 for four years during which the Musha Incident occurred and Bunun carried out raids, after which armed conflict again died down. According to a 1933-year book, wounded people in the Japanese war against the indigenouss numbered around 4,160, with 4,422 civilians dead and 2,660 military personnel killed. According to a 1935 report, 7,081 Japanese were killed in the armed struggle from 1896 to 1933 while the Japanese confiscated 29,772 indigenous people's guns by 1933.\nBeginning in the first year of Japanese rule, the colonial government embarked on a mission to study the indigenous so they could be classified, located and \"civilized\". The Japanese \"civilizing project\", partially fueled by public demand in Japan to know more about the empire, would be used to benefit the Imperial government by consolidating administrative control over the entire island, opening up vast tracts of land for exploitation. To satisfy these needs, \"the Japanese portrayed and catalogued Taiwan's indigenous peoples in a welter of statistical tables, magazine and newspaper articles, photograph albums for popular consumption\". The Japanese based much of their information and terminology on prior Qing era narratives concerning degrees of \"civilization\".\nJapanese ethnographer Ino Kanori was charged with the task of surveying the entire population of Taiwanese indigenous, applying the first systematic study of indigenous on Taiwan. Ino's research is best known for his formalization of eight peoples of Taiwanese indigenous: Atayal, Bunun, Saisiat, Tsou, Paiwan, Puyuma, Ami and \"Pepo\" (Pingpu). This is the direct antecedent of the taxonomy used today to distinguish people groups that are officially recognized by the government.\nLife under the Japanese changed rapidly as many of the traditional structures were replaced by a military power. Indigenous people who wished to improve their status looked to education rather than headhunting as the new form of power. Those who learned to work with the Japanese and follow their customs would be better suited to lead villages. The Japanese encouraged indigenous to maintain traditional costumes and selected customs that were not considered detrimental to society, but invested much time and money in efforts to eliminate traditions deemed unsavory by Japanese culture, including tattooing. By the mid-1930s as Japan's empire was reaching its zenith, the colonial government began a political socialization program designed to enforce Japanese customs, rituals and a loyal Japanese identity upon the indigenous. By the end of World War II, indigenous whose fathers had been killed in pacification campaigns were volunteering to serve in Special Units and if need be die for the Emperor of Japan. The Japanese colonial experience left an indelible mark on many older indigenous who maintained an admiration for the Japanese long after their departure in 1945.\nThe Japanese troops used indigenous women as sex slaves, so called \"comfort women\".\nKuomintang single-party rule (1945\u20131987).\nJapanese rule of Taiwan ended in 1945, following the armistice with the allies on 2 September and the subsequent appropriation of the island by the Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang, or KMT) on 25 October. In 1949, on losing the Chinese Civil War to the Chinese Communist Party, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek led the Kuomintang in a retreat from mainland China, withdrawing its government and 1.3 million refugees to Taiwan. The KMT installed an authoritarian form of government and shortly thereafter inaugurated a number of political socialization programs aimed at nationalizing Taiwanese people as citizens of a Chinese nation and eradicating Japanese influence.\nThe KMT pursued highly centralized political and cultural policies rooted in the party's decades-long history of fighting warlordism in China and opposing competing concepts of a loose federation following the demise of the imperial Qing. The project was designed to create a strong national Chinese cultural identity (as defined by the state) at the expense of local cultures. Following the February 28 Incident in 1947, the Kuomintang placed Taiwan under martial law, which was to last for nearly four decades.\nTaiwanese indigenous peoples first encountered the Nationalist government in 1946, when the Japanese village schools were replaced by schools of the KMT. Documents from the Education Office show an emphasis on Chinese language, history and citizenship\u2014with a curriculum steeped in pro-KMT ideology. Some elements of the curriculum, such as the Wu Feng Legend, are currently considered offensive to the Taiwanese indigenous peoples. Much of the burden of educating the indigenous was undertaken by unqualified teachers, who could, at best, speak Mandarin and teach basic ideology. In 1951 a major political socialization campaign was launched to change the lifestyle of many indigenous, to adopt Han customs. A 1953 government report on mountain areas stated that its aims were chiefly to promote Mandarin to strengthen a national outlook and create good customs. This was included in the Shandi Pingdi Hua (\u5c71\u5730\u5e73\u5730\u5316) policy to \"make the mountains like the plains\".\nCritics of the KMT's program for a centralized national culture regard it as institutionalized ethnic discrimination, point to the loss of several indigenous languages and a perpetuation of shame for being an indigenous. Hsiau noted that Taiwan's first democratically elected president, Li Teng-Hui, said in a famous interview: \"In the period of Japanese colonialism a Taiwanese would be punished by being forced to kneel out in the sun for speaking Tai-y\u00fc.\" [a dialect of Min Nan, which is not a Formosan language].\nThe pattern of intermarriage continued, as many KMT soldiers married indigenous women who were from poorer areas and could be easily bought as wives. Modern studies show a high degree of genetic intermixing. Despite this, many contemporary Taiwanese are unwilling to entertain the idea of having an indigenous heritage. In a 1994 study, it was found that 71% of the families surveyed would object to their daughter marrying an indigenous man. For much of the KMT era the government definition of indigenous identity had been 100% indigenous parentage, leaving any intermarriage resulting in a non-indigenous child. Later the policy was adjusted to the ethnic status of the father determining the status of the child.\nTransition to democracy.\nAuthoritarian rule under the Kuomintang ended gradually through a transition to democracy, which was marked by the lifting of martial law in 1987. Soon after, the KMT transitioned to being merely one party within a democratic system, though maintaining a high degree of power in indigenous districts through an established system of patronage networks. The KMT continued to hold the reins of power for another decade under President Lee Teng-hui. However, they did so as an elected government rather than a dictatorial power. The elected KMT government supported many of the bills that had been promoted by indigenous groups. The tenth amendment to the Constitution of the Republic of China also stipulates that the government would protect and preserve indigenous culture and languages and also encourage them to participate in politics.\nDuring the period of political liberalization, which preceded the end of martial law, academic interest in the Plains indigenous surged as amateur and professional historians sought to rediscover Taiwan's past. The opposition \"tang wai\" activists seized upon the new image of the Plains indigenous as a means to directly challenge the KMT's official narrative of Taiwan as a historical part of China, and the government's assertion that Taiwanese were \"pure\" Han Chinese. Many \"tang wai\" activists framed the Plains indigenous experience in the existing anti-colonialism/victimization Taiwanese nationalist narrative, which positioned the Hoklo-speaking Taiwanese in the role of indigenous people and the victims of successive foreign rulers.\nBy the late 1980s many Hoklo- and Hakka-speaking people began identifying themselves as Plains indigenous, though any initial shift in ethnic consciousness from Hakka or Hoklo people was minor.\nDespite the politicized dramatization of the Plains indigenous, their \"rediscovery\" as a matter of public discourse has had a lasting effect on the increased socio-political reconceptualization of Taiwan\u2014emerging from a Han Chinese-dominant perspective into a wider acceptance of Taiwan as a multi-cultural and multi-ethnic community.\nIn many districts Taiwanese indigenous tend to vote for the Kuomintang, to the point that the legislative seats allocated to the indigenous are popularly described as \"iron votes\" for the pan-blue coalition. This may seem surprising in light of the focus of the pan-green coalition on promoting indigenous culture as part of the Taiwanese nationalist discourse against the KMT. However, this voting pattern can be explained on economic grounds, and as part of an inter-ethnic power struggle waged in the electorate. Some indigenous see the rhetoric of Taiwan nationalism as favoring the majority Hoklo speakers rather than themselves. Indigenous areas also tend to be poor and their economic vitality tied to the entrenched patronage networks established by the Kuomintang over the course of its fifty-five year reign.\nDemocratic era.\nThe democratic era has been a time of great change, both constructive and destructive, for the indigenous of Taiwan. Since the 1980s, increased political and public attention has been paid to the rights and social issues of the indigenous communities of Taiwan. Indigenous peoples have realized gains in both the political and economic spheres. Though progress is ongoing, there remain a number of still unrealized goals within the framework of the ROC: \"although certainly more 'equal' than they were 20, or even 10, years ago, the indigenous inhabitants in Taiwan still remain on the lowest rungs of the legal and socioeconomic ladders\". On the other hand, bright spots are not hard to find. A resurgence in ethnic pride has accompanied the indigenous cultural renaissance, which is exemplified by the increased popularity of indigenous music and greater public interest in indigenous culture.\nIndigenous political movement.\nThe movement for indigenous cultural and political resurgence in Taiwan traces its roots to the ideals outlined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948). Although the Republic of China was a UN member and signatory to the original UN Charter, four decades of martial law controlled the discourse of culture and politics on Taiwan. The political liberalization Taiwan experienced leading up to the official end of martial law on 15 July 1987, opened a new public arena for dissenting voices and political movements against the centralized policy of the KMT.\nIn December 1984, the Taiwan indigenous People's Movement was launched when a group of indigenous political activists, aided by the progressive Presbyterian Church in Taiwan (PCT), established the Alliance of Taiwan indigenous (ATA, or \"yuan chuan hui\") to highlight the problems experienced by indigenous communities all over Taiwan, including: prostitution, economic disparity, land rights and official discrimination in the form of naming rights.\nIn 1988, amid the ATA's Return Our Land Movement, in which indigenous demanded the return of lands to the original inhabitants, the ATA sent its first representative to the United Nations Working Group on Indigenous Populations. Following the success in addressing the UN, the \"Return Our Land\" movement evolved into the indigenous Constitution Movement, in which the indigenous representatives demanded appropriate wording in the ROC Constitution to ensure indigenous Taiwanese \"dignity and justice\" in the form of enhanced legal protection, government assistance to improve living standards in indigenous communities, and the right to identify themselves as \"\"yuan chu min\" (\u539f\u4f4f\u6c11), literally, \"the people who lived here first,\" but more commonly, \"indigenous\"\". The KMT government initially opposed the term, due to its implication that other people on Taiwan, including the KMT government, were newcomers and not entitled to the island. The KMT preferred \"hsien chu min\" (\u5148\u4f4f\u6c11, \"First people\"), or \"tsao chu min\" (\u65e9\u4f4f\u6c11, \"Early People\") to evoke a sense of general historical immigration to Taiwan.\nTo some degree the movement has been successful. Beginning in 1998, the official curriculum in Taiwan schools has been changed to contain more frequent and favorable mention of indigenous. In 1996 the Council of Indigenous Peoples was promoted to a ministry-level rank within the Executive Yuan. The central government has taken steps to allow romanized spellings of indigenous names on official documents, offsetting the long-held policy of forcing a Han name on an indigenous. A relaxed policy on identification now allows a child to choose their official designation if they are born to mixed indigenous/Han parents.\nThe present political leaders in the indigenous community, led mostly by indigenous elites born after 1949, have been effective in leveraging their ethnic identity and socio-linguistic acculturation into contemporary Taiwanese society against the political backdrop of a changing Taiwan. This has allowed indigenous people a means to push for greater political space, including the still unrealized prospect of Indigenous People's Autonomous Areas within Taiwan.\nIn February 2017, the Indigenous Ketagalan Boulevard Protest started in a bid for more official recognition of land as traditional territories.\nPolitical representation.\nIndigenous peoples were represented by eight members out of 225 seats in the Legislative Yuan. In 2008, the number of legislative seats was cut in half to 113, of which Taiwanese indigenous are represented by six members, three each for lowland and highland peoples. The tendency of Taiwanese indigenous to vote for members of the pan-blue coalition has been cited as having the potential to change the balance of the legislature. Citing these six seats in addition with five seats from smaller counties that also tend to vote pan-blue has been seen as giving the pan-blue coalition 11 seats before the first vote is counted.\nThe deep-rooted hostility between indigenous and (Taiwanese) Hoklo, and the indigenous communities' effective KMT networks, contribute to indigenous skepticism against the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and the indigenous tendency to vote for the KMT.\nIndigenous peoples have criticized politicians for abusing the \"indigenization\" movement for political gains, such as indigenous opposition to the DPP's \"rectification\" by recognizing the Taroko for political reasons, with the majority of mountain townships voting for Ma Ying-jeou. The Atayal and Seediq slammed the Truku for their name rectification.\nIn 2005 the Kuomintang displayed a massive photo of the anti-Japanese indigenous leader Mona Rudao at its headquarters in honor of the 60th anniversary of Taiwan's handover from Japan to the Republic of China.\nKao Chin Su-mei led indigenous legislators to protest against the Japanese at Yasukuni shrine.\nThe Taipei Times ran an editorial in 2008 that rejected the idea of an apology to the indigenous, and rejected the idea of comparing Australian indigenous' centuries of 'genocidal' suffering at the hands of White Australians to the suffering of indigenous in Taiwan.\nIn 2016, indigenous protestors criticized Tsai for not returning to Chen Shui-bian's New Partnership quasi-state relationship which she did not mention in her apology to the indigenous. The location of the apology, the Japanese colonial administration's governor-general, as well as the indigenous invited to the apology, who only counted officials rather than traditional leaders, were was also criticized. indigenous Transitional Justice Alliance president Kumu Hacyo described the apology as \"a political show that was put on in an extremely bureaucratic fashion\" lacking in sincerity and evasive in nature. In response to the \"apology\" ceremony held by Tsai, KMT indigenous lawmakers refused to attend. Indigenous peoples demanded that recompense from Tsai to accompany the apology.\nThe derogatory term \"fan\" (Chinese: ) was often used against the Plains indigenous by the Taiwanese. The Hoklo Taiwanese term was forced upon indigenous like the Pazeh. In November 2016, a racist anti-indigenous slur was also used by Chiu Yi-ying, a DPP Taiwanese legislator, who said that the term meant \"'unreasonable people\" and was meant to describe the actions of KMT lawmakers. KMT caucus whip Sufin Siluko accused Chiu of directing the term at himself and another indigenous KMT legislator.\nAccording to Mr. Lupiliyan, a Paiwan man who has participated in exchange activities sponsored by the government, the current government is still a colonial establishment and is \"using the colonized to protect its international position\". However he believes that the main beneficiaries are still the Taiwanese indigenous people. Lupiliyan says that Austronesian diplomacy and international exchanges provide them with templates on how to revitalize their own culture.\nDue to these reasons, the anthropologist Scott Simon argues that the current political climate amongst indigenous people highlights a \"paradox of indigeneity\". Simon explains that despite the DPP's strong support of indigenous discourse and apologies to indigenous communities, Taiwanese Indigenous peoples despite being indigenous people themselves, tend to remain quite skeptical and continue to be more inclined to vote for the KMT, a political party that has largely rejected and resisted the popularization of indigenous discourse.\nRight to hunt.\nHunting is a traditional way of life with cultural and religious significance to the indigenous Taiwanese, but the practice has been strictly regulated by the ROC government in the name of gun control and wildlife conservation. A Bunun hunter was arrested in 2013 for hunting protected animals with an illegally modified shotgun, and convicted in 2015, prompting political discourse over the indigenous right to hunt, conservation, and gun control. In 2021 the constitutional court ruled that the government has the right to regulate guns and the hunting of wildlife even in the context of indigenous hunting, but the regulations should be updated to accommodate the need of indigenous hunting. The indigenous community mostly disagreed with the ruling made only by Han Chinese judges. The Bunun hunter eventually received a presidential pardon, but the law is still not updated.\nEconomic issues.\nMany indigenous communities did not evenly share in the benefits of the economic boom Taiwan experienced during the last quarter of the 20th century. They often lacked satisfactory educational resources on their reservations, undermining their pursuit of marketable skills. The economic disparity between the village and urban schools resulted in imposing many social barriers on indigenous, which prevent many from moving beyond vocational training. Students transplanted into urban schools face adversity, including isolation, culture shock, and discrimination from their peers. The cultural impact of poverty and economic marginalization has led to an increase in alcoholism and prostitution among indigenous.\nThe economic boom resulted in drawing large numbers of indigenous peoples out of their villages and into the unskilled or low-skilled sector of the urban workforce. Manufacturing and construction jobs were generally available for low wages. The indigenous quickly formed bonds with other communities as they all had similar political motives to protect their collective needs as part of the labor force. The indigenous became the most skilled iron-workers and construction teams on the island often selected to work on the most difficult projects. The result was a mass exodus of indigenous members from their traditional lands and the cultural alienation of young people in the villages, who could not learn their languages or customs while employed. Often, young indigenous in the cities fall into gangs aligned with the construction trade. Recent laws governing the employment of laborers from Indonesia, Vietnam and the Philippines have also led to an increased atmosphere of xenophobia among urban indigenous, and encouraged the formulation of a pan-indigenous consciousness in the pursuit of political representation and protection.\nEcological issues.\nThe indigenous communities of Taiwan are closely linked with ecological awareness and conservation issues on the island, as many of the environmental issues are spearheaded by indigenous. Political activism and sizable public protests regarding the logging of the Chilan Formosan Cypress, as well as efforts by an Atayal member of the Legislative Yuan, \"focused debate on natural resource management and specifically on the involvement of indigenous people therein\". Another high-profile case is the nuclear waste storage facility on Orchid Island, a small tropical island off the southeast coast of Taiwan. The inhabitants are the 4,000 members of the Tao (or Yami). In the 1970s the island was designated as a possible site to store low and medium grade nuclear waste. The island was selected on the grounds that it would be cheaper to build the necessary infrastructure for storage and it was thought that the population would not cause trouble.\nLarge-scale construction began in 1978 on a site from the Immorod fishing fields. The Tao alleges that government sources at the time described the site as a \"factory\" or a \"fish cannery\", intended to bring \"jobs [to the] home of the Tao/Yami, one of the least economically integrated areas in Taiwan\". When the facility was completed in 1982, however, it was in fact a storage facility for \"97,000 barrels of low-radiation nuclear waste from Taiwan's three nuclear power plants\". The Tao have since stood at the forefront of the anti-nuclear movement and launched several exorcisms and protests to remove the waste they claim has resulted in deaths and sickness. The lease on the land has expired, and an alternative site has yet to be selected.\nThe competition between different ways of representing and interpreting indigenous culture among local tourism operators does exist and creates tensions between indigenous tour guides and the NGOs which help to design and promote ethno/ecotourism. E.g., in a Sioulin Township, the government sponsored a project \"Follow the Footsteps of Indigenous Hunters\". Academics and members from environmental NGOs have suggested a new way of hunting: to replace shotgun with camera. Hunters benefit from the satisfaction of ecotourists who may spot wild animals under the instructions of accompanied indigenous hunters [Chen, 2012]. The rarer the animals are witnessed by tourists, the higher the pay will be to the hunters.\nMilitary.\nTaiwanese indigenous people make up a greater percentage of the Republic of China Armed Forces than their percentage of the overall Taiwanese population, making up 8.7 percent of military personnel as of 2024. Taiwanese indigenous people are especially critical to elite military units where they constitute over half of the personnel in some units.\nCulture.\nReligion.\nOf the current population of Taiwanese indigenous, about 70% identify themselves as Christian. Many of the Plains groups have mobilized their members around Christian organizations; most notably the Catholic Church and the Presbyterian Church in Taiwan.\nBefore contact with Christian missionaries during both the Dutch and Qing periods, Taiwanese indigenous peoples held a variety of beliefs in spirits, gods, sacred symbols and myths that helped their societies find meaning and order. Although there is no evidence of a unified belief system shared among the various indigenous groups, there is evidence that several groups held supernatural beliefs in certain birds and bird behavior. The Siraya were reported by Dutch sources to incorporate bird imagery into their material culture. Other reports describe animal skulls and the use of human heads in societal beliefs. The Paiwan and other southern groups worship the Formosan hundred pacer snake and use the diamond patterns on its back in many designs. In many Plains indigenous societies, the power to communicate with the supernatural world was exclusively held by women called \"Inibs\". During the period of Dutch colonization, the \"Inibs\" were removed from the villages to eliminate their influence and pave the way for Dutch missionary work.\nDuring the Zheng and Qing eras, Han immigrants brought Confucianized beliefs of Taoism and Buddhism to Taiwan's indigenous people. Many Plains indigenous adopted Han religious practices, though there is evidence that many indigenous customs were transformed into local Taiwanese Han beliefs. In some parts of Taiwan the Siraya spirit of fertility, Ali-zu (A-li-tsu) has become assimilated into the Han pantheon. The use of female spirit mediums (\"tongji\") can also be traced to the earlier matrilineal \"Inibs\".\nAlthough many indigenous assumed Han religious practices, several sub-groups sought protection from the European missionaries, who had started arriving in the 1860s. Many of the early Christian converts were displaced groups of Plains indigenous that sought protection from the oppressive Han. The missionaries, under the articles of extraterritoriality, offered a form of power against the Qing establishment and could thus make demands on the government to provide redress for the complaints of Plains indigenous. Many of these early congregations have served to maintain indigenous identity, language and cultures.\nThe influence of 19th- and 20th-century missionaries has both transformed and maintained indigenous integration. Many of the churches have replaced earlier community functions, but continue to retain a sense of continuity and community that unites members of indigenous societies against the pressures of modernity. Several church leaders have emerged from within the communities to take on leadership positions in petitioning the government in the interest of indigenous peoples and seeking a balance between the interests of the communities and economic vitality.\nMusic.\nA full-time indigenous radio station, \"Ho-hi-yan\", was launched in 2005 with the help of the Executive Yuan, to focus on issues of interest to the indigenous community. This came on the heels of a \"New wave of Indigenous Pop\", as indigenous artists, such as A-mei, Pur-dur and Samingad (Puyuma), Difang, A-Lin (Amis), (Paiwan), and Landy Wen (Atayal) became international pop-stars. The rock musician Chang Chen-yue is a member of the Ami. Music has given indigenous both a sense of pride and a sense of cultural ownership.\nThe issue of ownership was exemplified when the musical project Enigma used an Ami chant in their song \"Return to Innocence\", which was selected as the official theme of the 1996 Atlanta Olympics. The main chorus was sung by Difang and his wife, Igay. The Amis couple successfully sued Enigma's record label, which then paid royalties to the French museum that held the master recordings of the traditional songs, but the original artists, who had been unaware of the Enigma project, remained uncompensated.\nParks, tourism, and commercialization.\nIndigenous groups are seeking to preserve their folkways and languages as well as to return to, or remain on, their traditional lands. Eco-tourism, sewing and selling carvings, jewellery and music have become viable areas of economic opportunity. However, tourism-based commercial development, such as the creation of Taiwan indigenous Culture Park, is not a panacea. Although these create new jobs, indigenous are seldom given management positions. Moreover, some national parks have been built on indigenous lands against the wishes of the local communities, prompting one Taroko activist to label the Taroko National Park as a form of environmental colonialism. At times, the creation of national parks has resulted in forced resettlement of the indigenous.\nDue to the close proximity of indigenous land to the mountains, many communities have hoped to cash in on hot spring ventures and hotels, where they offer singing and dancing to add to the ambience. The Wulai Atayal in particular have been active in this area. Considerable government funding has been allocated to museums and culture centers focusing on Taiwan's indigenous heritage. Critics often call the ventures exploitative and \"superficial portrayals\" of indigenous culture, which distract attention from the real problems of substandard education. Proponents of ethno-tourism suggest that such projects can positively impact the public image and economic prospects of the indigenous community.\nThe attractive tourist destination includes natural resources, infrastructure, customs and culture, as well as the characteristics of the local industry. Thus, the role of the local community in influencing the tourism development activities is clear. The essence of tourism in today's world is the development and delivery of travel and visitation experiences to a range of individuals and groups who wish to see, understand, and experience the nature of different destinations and the way people live, work, and enjoy life in those destinations. The attitude of local people towards tourists constitutes one of the elements of a destination's tourism value chain.\nThe attraction is a tourist area's experience theme, however the main appeal is the formation of the fundamentals of the tourism image in the region [Kao, 1995]. Attraction sources can be diverse, including the area's natural resources, economic activities, customs, development history, religion, outdoor recreation activities, events and other related resources. This way, the awareness of indigenous resources constitutes an attraction to tourists. The indigenous culture is an important indicator of tourism products' attractiveness and a new type of economic sources.\nWhile there is an important need to link the economic, cultural, and ecological imperatives of development in the context of tourism enterprises, there is the key question of implementation and how the idea of sustainable tourism enterprises can be translated into reality: formulation of strategies and how they may be expected to interact with important aspects of indigenous culture. In addition to being locally directed and relevant, the planning process for the establishment of an ethno/ecotourism enterprise in an indigenous community should be strategic in nature. The use of a strategic planning process enables indigenous culture to be regarded as an important characteristic requiring careful consideration, rather than a feature to be exploited, or an incidental characteristic that is overshadowed by the natural features of the environment.\nPulima Art Festival.\nThe Pulima Art Festival (\u85dd\u8853\u7bc0; also known as Pulima Arts Festival) is a biennial event held since 2012 which showcases indigenous art and culture and is the biggest indigenous contemporary art event in Taiwan. \"Pulima\" is a Paiwan word meaning \"creative or highly skilled people\". Inspired by the Edinburgh Art Festival and the Festival d'Avignon in France, Pulima is supported by the Indigenous Peoples Cultural Foundation. Dancers and musicians from Taiwan as well as abroad feature in the festival, which takes place between November and February every second year, and awards a prize called the Pulima Art Prize.\nThe festival was held in Taipei in 2012 and 2014, and in Kaohsiung in 2016. In 2016, the Atamira Dance Company and Black Grace came from New Zealand, and B2M (Bathurst to Melville), a band from the Tiwi Islands, Australia also performed at the festival.\nThe 2018 festival took place in the Museum of Contemporary Art Taipei Under the theme \"MICAWOR \u2013 Turning Over\", it displayed the talents of 26 groups of Taiwanese and international artists, and included a series of international forums, artist lectures, workshops and many other events. It collaborated with Melbourne's YIRRAMBOI Festival, with a \"Festival in Festival\" program.\nThe Pulima Arts Festival took place from 2020 to 2021 and several videos of participants are available on YouTube.\nIndigenous Peoples' Day.\nIn 2016, the administration under President Tsai Ing-wen approved a proposal that designated 1 August as Indigenous Peoples' Day in Taiwan. In celebration of the special day, President Tsai issued an official apology to the country's indigenous people and outlined steps to further promote legislation and involve organizations related to indigenous causes, such as the Presidential Office's Indigenous Historical Justice and Transitional Justice Committee. The government hopes the day will remind the public of the diverse ethnic groups in Taiwan by bringing greater respect for indigenous peoples' cultures and history and promoting their rights.\nGenetics.\nPresent Austronesian-speaking groups, which include Taiwanese indigenous peoples, are strongly related to 11 kya to 8 kya Qihe individuals from Fujian. There is also evidence of excess allele sharing between Ami and Atayal and a 2,500 year old individual from mainland Japan, which was characterized by 'typical J\u014dmon culture'. However, these affinities more likely reflect shared ancestry or genetic input from the J\u014dmon into Taiwanese indigenous people themselves.Other studies show no significant gene flow from Taiwanese indigenous people to the J\u014dmon, including Ryukyuan J\u014dmon. The Ami and Atayal also received significant contribution from Late Neolithic Fujianese-related sources (66.9\u201374.3%), which was additionally introduced into Han Chinese from Fujian and Guangdong (35.0\u201340.3%) and Kra-Dai speakers (40.7\u201353.9%). The Hlai, who are described as unadmixed proto-Tai-Kadai speakers, also form a 'clean clade' with Atayal and Ami.\nA 2021 study shows strong genetic affinities between Ami and Yami and the Igorots of Philippines. The Ami and Yami also share IBD segments with the East Polynesians of Society Archipelago, which are relatively long on average. The latter can be explained as a result of these groups settling uninhabited islands instead of previously populated regions. Another study detected 77% Austronesian-related ancestral components in the Ami and Atayal, with 21% and 18% Sino-Tibetan-related ancestral components being found in both groups respectively. Taiwanese Han also have 15% Islander Southeast Asian ancestry, which can be attributed to admixture with Austronesian populations although it is more likely that this admixture occurred before Taiwanese Han migrated to Taiwan. Han Chinese from other southern provinces like Guangdong and Sichuan also exhibit ancient admixture with Ami and Atayal.\nAccording to a 2023 study, Rukai excessively share alleles with Into-Taiwan groups and Out-of-Taiwan groups and cluster with ~7.7\u2005kya Liangdao and ~4.5\u2005kya Suogang individuals, who are considered to be 'proto-Austronesians'. This suggests less genetic drift in the ancestral Rukai population, compared to other ancestral Taiwanese populations. Alternatively, they suggest close affinities between Rukai and Into-Taiwan groups, who later became Out-of-Taiwan groups. After the settlement of Taiwan, the Into-Taiwan groups diverged, with Atayal experiencing the strongest bottleneck/isolation. Atayal were also more related to ~1.5\u2005kya Hanben individuals and ancient and modern populations from mainland southern East Asia. Central Taiwanese populations like Bunun were likewise more related to Atayal. Meanwhile, there were closer genetic affinities between Ami and Out-of-Taiwan groups. However, this can be explained by recent back migration and contact. Nonetheless, there is also evidence of southern Taiwanese groups mixing with Pazeh and Siraya, increasing their affinities with Mainland Southeast Asian populations. Early Out-of-Taiwan (i.e. Lapita) groups have increased Northern East Asian ancestry compared to Into-Taiwan groups (~21\u201329% vs. ~0\u20138%), with Northern East Asian ancestry further increasing in present Taiwan Highland/Taiwan Orchid Island groups (~28\u201337%) and Kankanaey (~33%) groups. This suggests more Northern East Asian influence prior to the Out-of-Taiwan expansion or the presence of unsampled Into-Taiwan groups with more Northern East Asian ancestry.\nDespite being a founding paternal lineage for Austronesian populations, haplogroup O1a-M119 is more common among Taiwanese indigenous than Austronesian populations from Southeast Asian islands. This haplogroup also peaks in Tai-Kadai populations, especially those living in southeast China.\nThere is evidence of non-Austronesian-speaking populations settling in Taiwan about 1.6 kya, along with trade with South Asians since 400 BCE.\nClaimed admixture with Taiwanese Han.\nA study by Marie Lin in 2007 reported that the human leukocyte antigen typing study and mitochondrial DNA analysis demonstrated that 85% of the Taiwanese Han population had some degree of indigenous origin. Other studies by Chen Shun-Shen state that 20% to 60%, and then more than 88% of Taiwanese Han have indigenous blood. These studies were criticized by other researchers and refuted by subsequent genetic studies. However the idea that Taiwanese Han are a hybrid population genetically different from Chinese Han has been used as a basis for Taiwanese independence from China. This belief has been called the \"myth of indigenous genes\" by some researchers such as Shu-juo Chen and Hong-kuan Duan, who say that \"genetic studies have never supported the idea that Taiwanese Han are genetically different with Chinese Han.\"\nThe idea that \"We are all indigenous people\" was initially welcomed by indigenous leaders but has faced increasing opposition as it became viewed as a tool for Taiwanese independence. On 9 August 2005, a celebration for the constitutional reforms protecting indigenous rights was held, during which Premier Frank Hsieh announced that he had an indigenous great-grandmother and that \"Now you shouldn't say: 'you are indigenous, I am not.' Everyone is indigenous.\" Descendants of plains indigenous have opposed the usage of their ancestors in the call for Taiwanese independence. Genetic studies show genetic differences between Taiwanese Han and mountain indigenous. According to Chen and Duan, the genetic ancestry of individuals cannot be traced with certainty and attempts to construct identity through genetics are \"theoretically meaningless\".\nThe Plains \"Pingpu\" indigenous of Taiwan criticized Lin's studies, which follows the \"blood line theory\" of Taiwanese nationalism. Alak Akatuang, secretary of the Pingpu Indigenous Peoples Cultural Association, said that the pan-green camp used the indigenous peoples to create a national identity for Taiwan, but the idea that Taiwanese people are not overwhelmingly descended from Han settlers is false. According to Akatuang, Taiwan's independence should not be founded on the idea of genetic lineages and these people who believe in the blood line theory \"ignore scientific evidence because they want to believe they are different from China.\" This harmed the legitimacy of the Pingpu movement for recognition and reparations and was deeply insulting: \"The Pingpu were the first of Taiwan's Indigenous peoples to face colonization. After the Han people came, they stole our land. They murdered our ancestors. Then after a few hundred years, they said we were the same people. Do you think a Pingpu person can accept this?\"\nIn the highest self reports, 5.3 percent of Taiwan's population claimed indigenous heritage. Estimates of genetic indigenous ancestry reported by Lin range from 13%, 26%, and as high as 85%, the latter number being published in an editorial that was not peer-reviewed. These numbers have taken hold in popular Taiwanese imagination and sometimes treated as facts in Taiwanese politics and identity. Many Taiwanese claim to be part indigenous. Chen suggests that the estimates resulted from manipulation of sample sizes. The lack of methodological rigor suggests the numbers were meant for local consumption. In all other scientific studies, genetic markers for indigenous ancestry make up a minute portion of the genome. In 2021, Marie Lin, who was the source of the larger indigenous ancestry numbers, co-authored an article stating that there are \"distinct patterns of genetic structure between the Taiwanese Han and indigenous populations.\" The paper also suggest East Asian ancestry may have mixed with indigenous peoples in their southward expansion 4,000 years ago, which can lead to data that may be misinterpreted as recent Taiwanese Han-indigenous admixtures.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53788", "revid": "91689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53788", "title": "Feed horn", "text": "Type of antenna\n \nA feed horn (or feedhorn) is a small horn antenna used to couple a waveguide to e.g. a parabolic dish antenna or offset dish antenna for reception or transmission of microwaves. A typical application is the use for satellite television reception with a satellite dish. In that case the feed horn can either be a separate part used together with e.g. a \"low-noise block downconverter\" (LNB), or more typically today is integrated into a \"low-noise block feedhorn\" (LNBF).\nPrinciple of operation.\nThe feed horn minimizes the mismatch loss between the antenna and the waveguide. If a simple open-ended waveguide would be used, without the horn, the sudden end of the conductive walls causes an abrupt impedance change at the aperture, between the wave impedance in the waveguide and the impedance of free space (see horn antenna for more details).\nWhen used with a offset, parabolic or lens antenna, the phase center of the horn is placed at the focal point of the reflector. The characteristic of the feed horn is usually selected with the 3 dB points of the horn's radiation pattern falling on the edge of the reflector (the beamwidth of the horn matching the F/D ratio of the dish). When the shape of the antenna deviates from a circular dish, the feedhorn needs to be shaped accordingly to illuminate the antenna properly.\nApplications.\nFor satellite TV reception the feedhorn is mounted at the feed arm of the satellite dish. The feedhorn then connects via a short waveguide to the \"low-noise block downconverter\" (LNB), a small housing containing a part of the reception electronics (also called the \"RF front end\"). This LNB converts the high satellite microwave downlink frequencies to lower frequencies, so the TV signals can be more easily transmitted through coaxial cables to receivers located anywhere inside a building. For DTH TV typically the LNB and the feedhorn are integrated into one unit called \"low-noise block feedhorn\" (LNBF), but separate feedhorns and LNBs are used for more specialized applications.\nFor satellite uplink (e.g. for transmission of \"Direct-To-Home\" DTH TV programs, satellite news gathering SNG, satellite internet access or VSAT applications) a block upconverter (BUC) connects via a waveguide to the feedhorn, in order to transmit via the satellite dish to the communications satellite.\nFeedhorns are also used in applications like radar, line-of-sight microwave transmission or radio astronomy.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53794", "revid": "3206409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53794", "title": "James Murray", "text": "James, Jim, or Jimmy Murray may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "53800", "revid": "50115515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53800", "title": "TacTix", "text": "Two-player strategy game invented by Danish polymath Piet Hein\nTacTix is a two-player strategy game invented by Piet Hein, a poet well known for dabbling in math and science, best known for his game Hex.\nTacTix is essentially a two-dimension version of Nim; players alternate moves, removing one or more tokens in a single row or column until the last one is removed. At the time of its founding, TacTix was played on a 6x6 board, but is now usually played on a 4x4 board. \nThe game can be played in both its misere and non-misere forms. The strategies outlined here make the non-misere variant of the game straightforward. The game is often used as a programming exercise, and many versions are available on the web as Java applets.\nGame play.\nTacTix is played on a NxN grid of squares, where N was initially 6, but has more commonly been played as 4.\nPlayers alternate removing pieces a selected row or column, as many contiguous pieces as desired. For instance, in a 6x6 game, a player might remove pieces one through four on the first row. They cannot remove only the first and third pieces, these are not contiguous.\nPlayers alternate doing this until the last piece is removed. The player who takes the last piece \"loses\" in the mis\u00e8re play convention, or wins in the non-mis\u00e8re version.\nStrategy.\nFirst Player If N Is Odd (non-misere): The player takes the center piece and symmetrically imitates every one of the opponent's moves.\nSecond Player If N Is Even (non-misere): Player copies opponent's moves symmetrically. You will eventually take the last piece and win.\nVariations.\nThe hexagonal variation of the game, played on a six by six by six board, is called TacTex. TacTix can also be played on any size NxN board. A Non Misere version of TacTix, where the player who makes the last move is the winner, is also playable.\nAnalysis.\nOn the 4\u00d74 grid originally proposed by Hein, the second player will always win with correct play (HAKMEM item #74).\nIf the game is instead played with the normal play convention (player who takes the last piece wins), the second player can always win by symmetrically mirroring the first player's moves. (Or on an \"odd\" \u00d7 \"odd\" size grid, the first player can win by choosing the center piece and subsequently mirroring.)\nTac Tix has 65,536 reachable positions. Out of the reachable positions, 57,156 are winning, and 8,380 are losing "}
{"id": "53813", "revid": "50550439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53813", "title": "Ub Iwerks", "text": "American animator and special effects pioneer (1901\u20131971)\nUbbe Ert \"Ub\" Iwerks ( ; March 24, 1901\u00a0\u2013 July 7, 1971), was an American animator, cartoonist, character designer, inventor, and special effects technician. He was known for his early work with Walt Disney, especially for having worked on the creation of Mickey Mouse and Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, among other characters.\nIwerks and Disney met in 1919 while working at an art studio in Kansas City. After briefly working as illustrators for a local newspaper company, they ventured into animation together. Iwerks joined Disney as chief animator on the Laugh-O-Gram shorts series beginning in 1922, but a studio bankruptcy would cause Disney to relocate to Los Angeles in 1923. In the new studio, Iwerks continued to work with Disney on the \"Alice Comedies\" as well as the creation of Oswald the Lucky Rabbit. Following the first \"Oswald\" short, both Universal Pictures and the Winkler Pictures production company insisted that the Oswald character be redesigned. At the insistence of Disney, Iwerks designed a number of new characters for the studio, including designs that would be used for Clarabelle Cow and Horace Horsecollar.\nOne of Iwerks's most long-lasting contributions to animation was a refined version of a sketch drawn by Disney that would later go on to become Mickey Mouse. Iwerks was responsible for much of the animation for the early Mickey Mouse and \"Silly Symphony\" cartoons, including \"Steamboat Willie\", \"The Skeleton Dance\" and \"The Haunted House\", before a falling out with Disney led to Iwerks's resignation from the studio in January 1930. Iwerks's final \"Mickey Mouse\" cartoon was 1930's \"The Cactus Kid\". Following his separation with Disney, Iwerks, operating under Iwerks Studio, created the characters Flip the Frog and Willie Whopper along with the \"ComiColor Cartoons\" series as part of a contract with Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, but the new studio failed to rival its competitors. Iwerks later directed two \"Looney Tunes\" cartoon shorts for Leon Schlesinger Productions and several \"Color Rhapsody\" cartoons for Screen Gems from his studio as contract work before joining Disney again in 1940, after which he worked with special visual effects on productions such as 1946's \"Song of the South\".\nIwerks had two children, Donald Warren Iwerks and David Lee Iwerks, with his wife Mildred Sarah Henderson. Iwerks died of a heart attack in Burbank, California, in 1971 at age 70. Iwerks was posthumously named a Disney Legend in 1989. His likeness has been featured in his granddaughter Leslie Iwerks's 1999 documentary \"The Hand Behind the Mouse: The Ub Iwerks Story\" as well as the 2014 feature film \"Walt Before Mickey\", in which he is portrayed by Armando Gutierrez. Iwerks received three nominations at the Academy Awards, for which he won two. He also posthumously received the Winsor McCay Award at the 1978 Annie Awards and the Hall of Fame award at the 2017 Visual Effects Society Awards. Iwerks is considered one of the greatest animators of all time.\nEarly life.\nIwerks was born in Kansas City, Missouri. His father was born in the village of Uttum in East Frisia (northwest Germany, today part of the municipality of Krummh\u00f6rn) and emigrated to the United States in 1869 around the age of 14. The elder Iwerks, who worked as a barber, had abandoned several previous wives and children. When Ub was a teenager, his father abandoned him as well, forcing the boy to drop out of school and work to support his mother. Iwerks despised his father and never spoke of or saw him again; upon learning that he had died, he reportedly said, \"Throw him in a ditch.\" Years later, when Iwerks's son Don asked about his grandfather, Ub stopped Don, telling him \"We don't talk about that.\" He attended Ashland Grammar School, graduating in 1914. Ub's full name, Ubbe Ert Iwerks, can be seen on early \"Alice Comedies\" that he signed. Several years later, he simplified his name to \"Ub Iwerks\", sometimes written as \"U.B. Iwerks\".\nCareer.\nDisney work (1919\u20131929).\nIwerks spent most of his career with Disney. The two met in 1919 while working for the Pesmen-Rubin Art Studio in Kansas City, and eventually started their own commercial art business together. Disney and Iwerks then found work as illustrators for the Kansas City Slide Newspaper Company (which was later named The Kansas City Film Ad Company). While working for the Kansas City Film Ad Company, Disney decided to take up work in animation, and Iwerks soon joined him. There he attached a motor drive to the camera with a switch that resembled a telegraph key, reducing the number of people needed to animate from two to just one.\nIwerks was responsible for the distinctive style of the earliest Disney animated cartoons, and was also responsible for designing Mickey Mouse. In 1922, when Disney began his Laugh-O-Gram cartoon series, Iwerks joined him as chief animator. The studio went bankrupt, however, and in 1923 Iwerks followed Disney's move to Los Angeles to work on a new series of cartoons known as \"the Alice Comedies\" which had live-action mixed with animation. After the end of this series, Disney asked Iwerks to design a character that became Oswald the Lucky Rabbit. The first cartoon Oswald starred in was animated entirely by Iwerks. Following the first cartoon, Oswald was redesigned on the insistence of Oswald's owner and the distributor of the cartoons, Universal Pictures. The production company at the time, Winkler Pictures, gave additional input on the character's design.\nIn spring 1928, Disney was removed from the Oswald series, and much of his staff was hired away to Winkler Pictures. He promised to never again work with a character he did not own. Disney asked Iwerks, who stayed on, to start drawing up new character ideas. Iwerks tried sketches of frogs, dogs, and cats, but none of these appealed to Disney. A female cow and male horse were created at this time by Iwerks, but were also rejected. They later turned up as Clarabelle Cow and Horace Horsecollar. Ub Iwerks eventually got inspiration from an old drawing. In 1925, Hugh Harman drew some sketches of mice around a photograph of Walt Disney. Then, on a train ride back from a failed business meeting, Walt Disney came up with the original sketch for the character that was eventually called Mickey Mouse. Afterward, Disney took the sketch to Iwerks. In turn, he drew a more clean-cut and refined version of Mickey, but one that still followed the original sketch.\nThe first few Mickey Mouse and \"Silly Symphony\" cartoons were animated almost entirely by Iwerks, including \"Steamboat Willie\", \"The Skeleton Dance\" and \"The Haunted House\". However, as Iwerks began to animate more and more cartoons on a daily basis, he grew increasingly resentful of Disney's leadership and felt his contributions were underappreciated. Iwerks and Disney's partnership ultimately splintered in January 1930. At a party, a child requested that Disney draw Mickey Mouse on a napkin, and Disney handed the pen to Iwerks, saying, \"Why don't you draw Mickey and I'll sign it.\" Iwerks was enraged and stormed off.\nIwerks accepted a contract with Disney's former distributor, Pat Powers, to leave Disney and start an animation studio under his own name. His last Mickey Mouse cartoon was \"Wild Waves\" (1929) and final Disney film was the Silly Symphony \"Autumn\" (1930). (Powers and Disney had an earlier falling-out over Disney's use of the Powers Cinephone sound-on-film system\u2014actually copied by Powers from DeForest Phonofilm without credit\u2014in early Disney cartoons.) He also penciled the first strips of the Mickey Mouse comic strip.\nAfter Disney (1930\u20131940).\nIwerks Studio.\nThe Iwerks Studio opened in 1930. Financial backers led by Pat Powers suspected that Iwerks was responsible for much of Disney's early success. However, while animation for a time suffered at Disney from Iwerks's departure, it soon rebounded as Disney brought in talented new young animators.\nDespite a contract with MGM to distribute his cartoons, and the introduction of a new character named Flip the Frog and later Willie Whopper, the Iwerks Studio was never a major commercial success and failed to rival either Disney or Fleischer Studios. Newly hired animator Fred Kopietz recommended that Iwerks employ a friend from Chouinard Art School, Chuck Jones, who was hired and put to work as a cel washer. The Flip and Willie cartoons were later distributed on the home-movie market by Official Films in the 1940s.\nFrom 1933 to 1936, he produced a series of shorts (independently distributed, not part of the MGM deal) in Cinecolor, named \"ComiColor Cartoons\". The ComiColor series mostly focused on fairy tales with no continuing character or star. Later in the 1940s, this series received home-movie distribution by Castle Films. Cinecolor produced the 16\u00a0mm prints for Castle Films with red emulsion on one side and blue emulsion on the other. Later in the 1970s Blackhawk Films released these for home use, but this time using conventional Eastmancolor film stock. They are now in the public domain and are available on VHS and DVD. He also experimented with stop-motion animation in combination with the multiplane camera, and made a short called \"The Toy Parade\", which was never released in public. In 1936, backers withdrew financial support from the Iwerks Studio, and it folded soon after.\nContract work.\nIn 1937, Leon Schlesinger Productions contracted Iwerks to produce four \"Looney Tunes\" shorts starring Porky Pig and Gabby Goat. Iwerks directed the first two shorts, while former Schlesinger animator Robert Clampett was promoted to director and helmed the other two shorts before he and his unit returned to the main Schlesinger lot. Iwerks also did contract work for Screen Gems (then Columbia Pictures' cartoon division) where he was the director of several of the \"Color Rhapsody\" shorts from 1936-1940 returning to work for Disney in 1940.\nReturn to Disney (1940\u20131964).\nAfter his return to the Disney studio, Iwerks mainly worked on developing special visual effects. He is credited as developing the processes for combining live-action and animation used in \"Song of the South\" (1946), as well as the xerographic process adapted for cel animation, which was used in \"101 Dalmatians\" (1961). He also worked at WED Enterprises, now Walt Disney Imagineering, helping to develop many Disney theme park attractions during the 1960s. Iwerks did special effects work outside the studio as well, including the birds for his Academy Award nominated achievement for Alfred Hitchcock's \"The Birds\" (1963). Iwerks's last credit for Disney was for perfecting the travel matte system for the \"Mary Poppins\" sequence \"Feed the Birds\". Iwerks's most famous work, outside animating Mickey Mouse, was Flip the Frog from his own studio. While he was at Disney, he developed a variety of patents for applying Xerography for use in animation.\nPersonal life and death.\nIwerks had two children with his wife, Mildred (n\u00e9e Henderson): Donald and David. Donald went on to work for the Walt Disney company and to found Iwerks Entertainment. His granddaughter is documentary film producer Leslie Iwerks. David Iwerks became a portrait photographer.\nIwerks died in 1971 from a heart attack in Burbank, California, aged 70, and his ashes are interred in a niche in the Columbarium of Remembrance at Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Hollywood Hills Cemetery. The last project he worked on was the Hall of Presidents.\nInfluence and tributes.\nThe \"Ub Iwerks Award for Technical Achievement\", as part of the Annie Awards, is named in his honour.\nA rare self-portrait of Iwerks was found in a garbage bin at an animation studio in Burbank. The portrait was saved and is now part of the Animation Archives in Burbank, California.\nAfter World War II, much of Iwerks's early animation style was imitated by legendary manga artists Osamu Tezuka and Shotaro Ishinomori.\nIn 1989, Iwerks was named a Disney legend.\nIn the 1996 \"The Simpsons\" episode \"The Day the Violence Died\", a relationship similar to Iwerks's early relationship with Walt Disney is used as the main plot.\nA documentary film, \"The Hand Behind the Mouse: The Ub Iwerks Story\", was released in 1999, followed by a book written by Iwerks's granddaughter Leslie Iwerks and John Kenworthy in 2001. The documentary, created by Leslie Iwerks, was released as part of (disc two of The Adventures of Oswald the Lucky Rabbit collection).\nA feature film released in 2014, \"Walt Before Mickey\", showed how Ub Iwerks, portrayed by Armando Gutierrez, and Walt Disney, portrayed by Thomas Ian Nicholas, co-created Mickey Mouse.\nThe sixth episode from the second season of \"Drunk History\" (\"Hollywood\") tells about Ub's work relationship with Disney, with stress on the creation of Mickey Mouse. Iwerks was portrayed in the episode by Tony Hale.\nFilmography.\n1935.\nAll Comicolor shorts\n1936.\nAll Comicolor shorts\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53819", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53819", "title": "A Dictionary of the English Language", "text": "1755 dictionary by Samuel Johnson\nA Dictionary of the English Language, sometimes published as Johnson's Dictionary, was published on 15 April 1755 and written by Samuel Johnson. It is among the most influential dictionaries in the history of the English language.\nThere was dissatisfaction with the dictionaries of the period, so in June 1746 a group of London booksellers contracted Johnson to write a dictionary for the sum of 1,500 guineas (\u00a31,575), equivalent to about \u00a3 in 2023. Johnson took seven years to complete the work, although he had claimed he could finish it in three. He did so single-handedly, with only clerical assistance to copy the illustrative quotations that he had marked in books. Johnson produced several revised editions during his life.\nUntil the completion of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" 173\u00a0years later, Johnson's was viewed as the pre-eminent English dictionary. According to Walter Jackson Bate, the Dictionary \"easily ranks as one of the greatest single achievements of scholarship, and probably the greatest ever performed by one individual who laboured under anything like the disadvantages in a comparable length of time\".\nBackground.\nIn earlier times, books had been regarded with something approaching veneration, but by the mid-eighteenth century this was no longer the case. The rise of literacy among the general public, combined with the technical advances in the mechanics of printing and bookbinding, meant that for the first time, books, texts, maps, pamphlets and newspapers were widely available to the general public at a reasonable cost. Such an explosion of the printed word demanded a set pattern of grammar, definition, and spelling for those words. This could be achieved by means of an authoritative dictionary of the English language. In 1746, a consortium of London's most successful printers, including Robert Dodsley and Thomas Longman \u2013 none could afford to undertake it alone \u2013 set out to satisfy and capitalise on this need by the ever-increasing reading and writing public.\nJohnson's dictionary was not the first English dictionary, nor even among the first dozen. Over the previous 150\u00a0years more than twenty dictionaries had been published in England, the oldest of these being a Latin-English \"wordbook\" by Sir Thomas Elyot published in 1538.\nThe next to appear was by Richard Mulcaster, a headmaster, in 1583. Mulcaster compiled what he termed \"a generall table [of eight thousand words] we commonlie use...[yet] It were a thing verie praise worthy...if som well learned...would gather all words which we use in the English tung...into one dictionary...\" In 1598, an Italian\u2013English dictionary by John Florio was published. It was the first English dictionary to use quotations (\"illustrations\") to give meaning to the word; in none of these dictionaries so far were there any actual definitions of words. This was to change, to a small extent, in schoolmaster Robert Cawdrey's \"Table Alphabeticall\", published in 1604. Though it contained only 2,449 words, and no word beginning with the letters \"W\", \"X\", or \"Y\", this was the first monolingual English dictionary. Several more dictionaries followed: in Latin, English, French and Italian. Benjamin Martin's \"Lingua Britannica Reformata\" (1749) and Ainsworth's \"Thesaurus Linguae Latinae\" (1737) are both significant, in that they define entries in separate senses, or aspects, of the word. In English (among others), John Cowell's \"Interpreter\", a law dictionary, was published in 1607, Edward Phillips' \"The new world of English words\" came out in 1658 and a dictionary of 40,000 words had been prepared in 1721 by Nathan Bailey, though none was as comprehensive in breadth or style as Johnson's.\nThe problem with these dictionaries was that they tended to be little more than poorly organised and poorly researched glossaries of \"hard words\": words that were technical, foreign, obscure or antiquated. But perhaps the greatest single fault of these early lexicographers was, as historian Henry Hitchings put it, that they \"failed to give sufficient sense of [the English] language as it appeared \"in use\".\" In that sense Dr. Johnson's dictionary was the first to comprehensively document the English lexicon.\nJohnson's preparation.\nJohnson's dictionary was prepared at 17 Gough Square, London, an eclectic household, between the years of 1746 and 1755. By 1747 Johnson had written his \"Plan of a Dictionary of the English Language\", which spelled out his intentions and proposed methodology for preparing his document. He clearly saw benefit in drawing from previous efforts, and saw the process as a parallel to legal precedent (possibly influenced by Cowell):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I shall therefore, since the rules of stile, like those of law, arise from precedents often repeated, collect the testimonies of both sides, and endeavour to discover and promulgate the decrees of custom, who has so long possessed whether by right or by usurpation, the sovereignty of words.\nJohnson's \"Plan\" received the patronage of Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield but not to Johnson's pleasure. Chesterfield did not care about praise, but was instead interested by Johnson's abilities. Seven years after first meeting Johnson to discuss the work, Chesterfield wrote two anonymous essays in \"The World\" that recommended the \"Dictionary\". He complained that the English language was lacking structure and argued:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHowever, Johnson did not appreciate the tone of the essay, and he felt that Chesterfield had not made good on his promise to be the work's patron. In a letter, Johnson explained his feelings about the matter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Seven years, my lord, have now past since I waited in your outward rooms or was repulsed from your door, during which time I have been pushing on my work through difficulties of which it is useless to complain, and have brought it at last to the verge of publication without one act of assistance, one word of encouragement, or one smile of favour. Such treatment I did not expect, for I never had a patron before\u00a0... Is not a patron, my lord, one who looks with unconcern on a man struggling for life in the water, and when he has reached ground, encumbers him with help? The notice which you have been pleased to take of my labours, had it been early, had been kind: but it has been delayed till I am indifferent and cannot enjoy it; till I am solitary and cannot impart it; till I am known and do not want it.\nThe text.\n\"A Dictionary of the English Language\" was somewhat large and very expensive. It was printed in-folio, meaning that the pages were tall and nearly wide. The paper was of the finest quality available, the cost of which ran to nearly \u00a31,600; more than Johnson had been paid to write the book. Johnson himself pronounced the book \"Vasta mole superbus\" (\"Proud in its great bulk\"). No bookseller could possibly hope to print this book without help; outside a few special editions of the Bible no book of this heft and size had ever been set to type.\nThe title page reads:\nA\nDICTIONARY\nof the\nENGLISH LANGUAGE:\nin which\nThe WORDS are deduced from their ORIGINALS,\nand\nILLUSTRATED in their DIFFERENT SIGNIFICATIONS\nby\nEXAMPLES from the best WRITERS.\nTo which are prefixed,\nA HISTORY of the LANGUAGE,\nand AN ENGLISH GRAMMAR.\nBy SAMUEL JOHNSON, A.M.\nIn TWO Volumes\nVOL. I\nThe words \"Samuel Johnson\" and \"English Language\" were printed in red; the rest was printed in black. The preface and headings were set in 4.6\u00a0mm \"English\" type, the text\u2014double columned\u2014was set in 3.5\u00a0mm pica. This first edition of the dictionary contained a 42,773-word list, to which only a few more were added in subsequent editions. One of Johnson's important innovations was to illustrate the meanings of his words by literary quotation, of which there are around 114,000. The authors most frequently cited by Johnson include Shakespeare, Milton and Dryden. For example:\nOPULENCE\nWealth; riches; affluence\n\"There in full \"opulence\" a banker dwelt,\nWho all the joys and pangs of riches felt;\nHis sideboard glitter'd with imagin'd plate,\nAnd his proud fancy held a vast estate.\"\n-- Jonathan Swift\nFurthermore, Johnson, unlike Bailey, added notes on a word's usage, rather than being merely descriptive.\nUnlike most modern lexicographers, Johnson introduced humour or prejudice into quite a number of his definitions. Among the best-known are:\nA couple of less well-known examples are:\nHe included whimsical little-known words, such as:\nOn a more serious level, Johnson's work showed a heretofore unseen meticulousness. Unlike all the proto-dictionaries that had come before, painstaking care went into the completeness when it came not only to \"illustrations\" but also to definitions as well:\nThe original goal was to publish the dictionary in two folio volumes: A\u2013K and L\u2013Z. But that soon proved unwieldy, unprofitable, and unrealistic. Subsequent printings ran to four volumes; even these formed a stack tall, and weighed in at nearly . In addition to the sheer physical heft of Johnson's dictionary, came the equally hefty price: \u00a34/10/\u2013 (equivalent to approximately \u00a3 in 2023). So discouraging was the price that by 1784, thirty years after the first edition was published, when the dictionary had by then run through five editions, only about 6,000 copies were in circulation\u2014an average sale of 200 books a year for thirty years.\nJohnson's etymologies would be considered poor by modern standards, and he gave little guide to pronunciation; one example being \"Cough: A convulsion of the lungs, vellicated by some sharp serosity. It is pronounced coff\". Much of his dictionary was prescriptivist. It was also linguistically conservative, advocating traditional spellings such as \"publick\" rather than the simpler spellings that would be favoured 73\u00a0years later by Noah Webster.\nThe dictionary is in alphabetical order according to the eighteenth-century English alphabet. In the eighteenth century, the letters I and J were considered different forms of the same letter; the same with letters U and V. As a result, in Johnson's dictionary the word jargon comes before the word idle, and vagabond comes before ultimate.\nIn spite of its shortcomings, the dictionary was far and away the best of its day. Its scope and structure were carried forward in dictionaries that followed, including Noah Webster's \"Webster's Dictionary\" in 1828 and the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" later in the same century.\nReception history.\nInitial reception.\nFrom the beginning there was universal appreciation not only of the content of the \"Dictionary\" but also of Johnson's achievement in single-handedly creating it: \"When Boswell came to this part of Johnson's life, more than three decades later, he pronounced that 'the world contemplated with wonder so stupendous a work achieved by one man, while other countries had thought such undertakings fit only for whole academies'.\" \"The \"Dictionary\" was considered, from the moment of its inception, to be Johnson's, and from the time of its completion it was \"Johnson's Dictionary\"\u2014his book and his property, his monument, his memorial.\"\nImmediately after publication \"The \"Dictionary\" was enthusiastically written up in important periodicals such as the \"London Magazine\" and\u2014none too surprisingly\u2014the \"Gentleman's Magazine\". In the latter it received an eight-page notice\". Reviews, such as they were, proved generous in tone: \"Of the less positive assessments the only properly judicious one came from Adam Smith in the pro-Whig \"Edinburgh Review\" ... he wished that Johnson 'had oftener passed his own censure upon those words which are not of approved use, though sometimes to be met with in authors of no mean name'. Furthermore, Johnson's approach was not 'sufficiently grammatical'\".\nDespite the \"Dictionary\"'s critical acclaim, Johnson's general financial situation continued in its dismal fashion for some years after 1755: \"The image of Johnson racing to write \"Rasselas\" to pay for his mother's funeral, romantic hyperbole though it is, conveys the precariousness of his existence, almost four years after his work on the \"Dictionary\" was done. His financial uncertainties continued. He gave up the house in Gough Square in March 1759, probably for lack of funds. Yet, just as Johnson was plunging into another trough of despondency, the reputation of the \"Dictionary\" at last brought reward. In July 1762 Johnson was granted a state pension of \u00a3300 a year by the twenty-four-year-old monarch, George III. The pension did not make him rich, but it ensured he would no longer have to grub around for the odd guinea.\"\nCriticism.\nAs lexicography developed, faults were found with Johnson's work: \"From an early stage there were noisy detractors. Perhaps the loudest of them was John Horne Tooke ... Not content to pronounce it 'imperfect and faulty', he complained that it was 'one of the most idle performances ever offered to the public', that its author 'possessed not one single requisite for the undertaking', that its grammatical and historical parts were 'most truly contemptible performances', and that 'nearly one third ... is as much the language of the Hottentots as of the English'.\" \"Horace Walpole summed up for the unbelievers when he pronounced at the end of the eighteenth century, 'I cannot imagine that Dr Johnson's reputation will be very lasting.' His dictionary was 'a surprising work for one man', but 'the task is too much for one man, and ... a society should alone pretend to publish a standard dictionary.' Notwithstanding Walpole's reservations, the admirers out-numbered the detractors, and the reputation of the \"Dictionary\" was repeatedly boosted by other philologists, lexicographers, educationalists and word detectives.\"\nJohnson's dictionary was made when etymology was largely based on guesswork. His Classical leanings led him to prefer spellings that pointed to Latin or Greek sources, \"while his lack of sound scholarship prevented him from detecting their frequent errors\". For example, he preferred the spelling \"ache\" over \"ake\" as he wrongly thought it came from the Greek \"achos\". Some of his spelling choices were also inconsistent: \"while retaining the Latin \"p\" in \"receipt\" he left it out of \"deceit\"; he spelled \"deign\" one way and \"disdain\" another; he spelled \"uphill\" but \"downhil\", \"muckhill\" but \"dunghil\", \"instill\" but \"distil\", \"inthrall\" but \"disenthral\"\".\nBoswell relates that \"A lady once asked him [Johnson] how he came to define \"pastern\" as the \"knee\" of a horse: instead of making an elaborate reply, as she expected, he at once replied, 'Ignorance, Madam, pure ignorance.'\" On the same page, Boswell notes that Johnson's definition of \"network\" (\"Any thing reticulated or decussated, at equal distances, with interstices between the intersections\") \"has often been quoted with sportive malignity, as obscuring a thing in itself very plain.\"\nOther than stress indication, the dictionary did not feature many word-specific orthoepical guidelines, with Johnson stating that 'For\u00a0pronunciation, the best general rule is, to consider those as the most elegant speakers who deviate least from the written sounds' and referring to the irregular pronunciations as 'jargon'; this was subject to coetaneous criticism by John Walker, who wrote in the preface of his \"Critical Pronouncing Dictionary\" 'It is certain, where custom is equal, this ought to take place; and if the whole body of respectable English speakers were equally divided in their pronunciation of the word \"busy\", one half pronouncing it \"bew-ze\", and the other half \"biz-ze\", that the former ought to be accounted the most elegant speakers; but till this is the case, the latter pronunciation, though a gross deviation from orthography, will be esteemed the most elegant. Dr.\u00a0Johnson's general rule, therefore, can only take place where custom has not plainly decided.' Nevertheless, Walker scrupulously followed Johnson's explanations of words, as did many contemporary dictionaries.\nInfluence in Britain.\nDespite the criticisms, \"The influence of the \"Dictionary\" was sweeping. Johnson established both a methodology for how dictionaries should be put together and a paradigm for how entries should be presented. Anyone who sought to create a dictionary, post-Johnson, did so in his shadow.\" \"In his history of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", Simon Winchester asserts of its eighteenth-century predecessor that 'by the end of the century every educated household had, or had access to, the great book. So firmly established did it swiftly become that any request for \"The Dictionary\" would bring forth Johnson and none other.' 'One asked for The Dictionary,' writes Winchester, 'much as one might demand The Bible.'\" One of the first editors of the \"OED\", James Murray, acknowledged that many of Johnson's explanations were adopted without change, for 'When his definitions are correct, and his arrangement judicious, it seems to be expedient to follow him.' ... In the end the \"OED\" reproduced around 1,700 of Johnson's definitions, marking them simply 'J.'.\"\nReputation abroad.\nJohnson's influence was not confined to Britain and English: \"The president of the Florentine Accademia declared that the \"Dictionary\" would be 'a perpetual Monument of Fame to the Author, an Honour to his own Country in particular, and a general Benefit to the Republic of Letters'. This was no empty commendation. Johnson's work served as a model for lexicographers abroad. It is no surprise that his friend Giuseppe Baretti chose to make the \"Dictionary\" the model for his Italian\u2014English dictionary of 1760, and for his Spanish dictionary nearly two decades later. But there are numerous examples of influence beyond Johnson's own circle. His work was translated into French and German.\" And \"In 1777, when Ferdinando Bottarelli published a pocket dictionary of Italian, French and English (the three languages side by side), his authorities for the French and Italian words were the works of the French and Italian academies: for the English he used Johnson.\"\nInfluence in America.\nThe \"Dictionary\" was exported to America. \"The American adoption of the \"Dictionary\" was a momentous event not just in its history, but in the history of lexicography. For Americans in the second half of the eighteenth century, Johnson was the seminal authority on language, and the subsequent development of American lexicography was coloured by his fame.\" For American lexicographers the \"Dictionary\" was impossible to ignore: \"America's two great nineteenth-century lexicographers, Noah Webster and Joseph Emerson Worcester, argued fiercely over Johnson's legacy ... In 1789 [Webster] declared that 'Great Britain, whose children we are, and whose language we speak, should no longer be \"our\" standard; for the taste of her writers is already corrupted, and her language on the decline.'\" \"Where Webster found fault with Johnson, Joseph Worcester saluted him ... In 1846 he completed his \"Universal and Critical Dictionary of the English Language\". He defended Johnson's work, arguing that 'from the time of its publication, [it] has been, far more than any other, regarded as the standard for the language'.\" Notwithstanding the evolution of lexicography in America, \"The \"Dictionary\" has also played its part in the law, especially in the United States. Legislators are much occupied with ascertaining 'first meanings', with trying to secure the literal sense of their predecessors' legislation ... Often it is a matter of historicizing language: to understand a law, you need to understand what its terminology meant to its original architects ... as long as the American Constitution remains intact, Johnson's \"Dictionary\" will have a role to play in American law.\"\nFolio and abridged editions.\nJohnson's dictionary came out in two forms.\nThe first was the 1755 \"Folio\" edition, which came in two large volumes on 4 April. The folio edition also features full literary quotes by those authors that Johnson quoted, such as Dryden and Shakespeare. It was followed a few weeks later by a second edition published in 165 weekly parts. The third edition was published in 1765, but it was the fourth, which came out in 1773 which included significant revisions by Johnson of the original work.\nThe \"Abridged\" edition came out in 1756 in two octavo volumes with entries, \"abstracted from the folio edition by the author\", laid out as two columns per page. The abridged version did not feature the literary quotes, just the author quoted. This made it cheaper to produce and buy. It sold over a thousand copies a year for the next 30 years bringing \"The Dictionary\" to the reach of every literate home.\nReplica editions.\nJohnson's \"Dictionary\" has been available in replica editions for some years. The entire first \"Folio\" editions of 1755 1st edition and 1773 4th edition are available on \"Johnson's Dictionary Online\", a project funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities and created by a team of scholars at the University of Central Florida. This version is the first fully searchable online edition.\nThe Preface to the \"Dictionary\" is available on Project Gutenberg. In addition, scans of several editions can be found at the Internet Archive:\nIn popular culture.\nThe compilation of Johnson's \"Dictionary\" was the main plot-line for an episode of \"Blackadder the Third\" where Edmund Blackadder (Rowan Atkinson), after confounding the scholar with a barrage of fabricated nonexistent words, tries to conceal the destruction of the dictionary's manuscript. Johnson had given his only manuscript to the Prince and it was presumably destroyed by Blackadder's apprentice dogsbody Baldrick. The manuscript is later found intact, only for Johnson to discover he had forgotten to include the word \"sausage\". The episode ends with Baldrick throwing the dictionary into the fire.\n\"Dr. Johnson's Great Dictionary\" appears as a plot device in the 1944 Sherlock Holmes film, \"The Pearl of Death\", starring Basil Rathbone and Nigel Bruce.\nAt the end of Chapter 1 of Vanity Fair by William Makepeace Thackeray Becky Sharp disdainfully throws a copy of Johnson's \"Dictionary\" out the window.\nIn Melville's \"Moby Dick\", the narrator mentions using Johnson's dictionary to aid him in his leviathanic undertaking: \"Fain am I to stagger to this emprise under the weightiest words of the dictionary. And here be it said, that whenever it has been convenient to consult one in the course of these dissertations, I have invariably used a huge quarto edition of Johnson, expressly purchased for that purpose; because that famous lexicographer\u2019s uncommon personal bulk more fitted him to compile a lexicon to be used by a whale author like me.\" (Chapter 104, The Fossil Whale)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nhttps:// and https:// at Google Books."}
{"id": "53825", "revid": "33582946", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53825", "title": "New Haven, Connecticut", "text": "New Haven is a city in the U.S. state of Connecticut. It is located on New Haven Harbor on the northern shore of Long Island Sound. With a population of 134,023 at the 2020 census, it is the third-most populous city in Connecticut and the largest in the South Central Connecticut Planning Region, with the Greater New Haven metropolitan area having an estimated 577,000 residents.\nNew Haven was one of the first planned cities in the U.S. A year after its founding by English Puritans in 1638, eight streets were laid out in a three-by-three grid, creating the \"Nine Square Plan\". The central common block is the New Haven Green, a square at the center of Downtown New Haven. The Green is now a National Historic Landmark, and the \"Nine Square Plan\" is recognized by the American Planning Association as a National Planning Landmark.\nNew Haven is the home of Yale University, New Haven's biggest taxpayer and employer, and an integral part of the city's economy. Health care, professional and financial services, and retail trade also contribute to the city's economic activity.\nThe city served as co-capital of Connecticut from 1701 to 1873, when sole governance was transferred to the more centrally located city of Hartford. New Haven has since billed itself as the \"Cultural Capital of Connecticut\" for its many theaters, museums, and music venues. New Haven had the first public tree planting program in the U.S., producing a canopy of mature trees (including some large elms) that gave the city the nickname \"The Elm City\".\nHistory.\nPre-colonial foundation as an independent colony.\nBefore Europeans arrived, the New Haven area was the home of the Quinnipiac tribe of Native Americans, who lived in villages around the harbor and sustained an economy of local fisheries and the farming of maize. The area was briefly visited by Dutch explorer Adriaen Block in 1614. Dutch traders set up a small trading system of beaver pelts with the local inhabitants, but trade was sporadic and the Dutch did not settle permanently in the area.\nIn 1637, a small party of Puritans did a reconnaissance of the New Haven harbor area and wintered over. In April 1638, the main party of five hundred Puritans, who had left the Massachusetts Bay Colony under the leadership of Reverend John Davenport and London merchant Theophilus Eaton, sailed into the harbor. It was their hope to set up a theological community with the government more closely linked to the church than that in Massachusetts, and to exploit the area's potential as a port. The Quinnipiacs, who were under attack by neighboring Pequots, sold their land to the settlers in return for a pledge of protection.\nBy 1640, \"Quinnipiac's\" theocratic government and nine-square grid plan were in place, and the town was renamed New Haven, with 'haven' meaning harbor or port. However, the area to the north remained Quinnipiac until 1678, when it was renamed Hamden. The settlement became the headquarters of the New Haven Colony, distinct from the Connecticut Colony previously established to the north centering on Hartford. Reflecting its theocratic roots, the New Haven Colony forbade the establishment of other churches, whereas the Connecticut Colony permitted them.\nEconomic disaster struck New Haven in 1646, when the town sent its first fully loaded ship of local goods (the \"Great Shippe\") back to England. It never reached its destination, and its disappearance hindered New Haven's development as compared to the rising trade powers of Boston and New Amsterdam (modern day New York City).\nIn 1660, Colony founder John Davenport's wishes were fulfilled, and Hopkins School was founded in New Haven with money from the estate of Edward Hopkins.\nIn 1661, the Regicides who had signed the death warrant of Charles I of England were pursued by Charles II. Two of them, Colonel Edward Whalley and Colonel William Goffe, fled to New Haven for refuge. Davenport arranged for them to hide in the West Rock hills northwest of the town. A third judge, John Dixwell, later joined the others. None of the three were ever returned to England for trial; Dixwell died of old age in New Haven, the others likewise elsewhere in New England.\nAs part of the Connecticut Colony.\nIn 1664, New Haven became part of the Connecticut Colony when the two colonies were merged under political pressure from England. Seeking to establish a new theocracy elsewhere, some members of the New Haven Colony went on to establish Newark, New Jersey.\nNew Haven was made co-capital of Connecticut in 1701, a status it retained until 1873.\nIn 1716, the Collegiate School relocated from Old Saybrook to New Haven, establishing it as a center of learning. In 1718, in response to a large donation from East India Company merchant Elihu Yale, former Governor of Madras, the Collegiate School was renamed Yale College.\nFor over a century, New Haven citizens had fought in the colonial militia alongside regular British forces, including the French and Indian War. As the American Revolution approached, General David Wooster and other influential residents hoped that the conflict with the British parliament could be resolved short of rebellion. On April 23, 1775, Captain Benedict Arnold commanded the Second Company, Governor's Foot Guard, of New Haven to break into the powder house to arm themselves for a three-day march to Cambridge, Massachusetts, an event still celebrated in New Haven as Powder House Day. Other New Haven militia members were on hand to escort George Washington from his overnight stay in New Haven on his way to Cambridge. Contemporary reports, from both sides, remark on the New Haven volunteers' professional military bearing, including uniforms.\nOn July 5, 1779, 2,600 loyalists and British regulars under General William Tryon, governor of New York, landed in New Haven Harbor and raided the town of 3,500. A militia of Yale students had been preparing for battle, and former Yale president and Yale Divinity School professor Naphtali Daggett rode out to confront the Redcoats. Yale president Ezra Stiles recounted in his diary that while he moved furniture in anticipation of battle, he still couldn't quite believe the revolution had begun. New Haven was not torched as the invaders did with Danbury in 1777, or Fairfield and Norwalk a week after the New Haven raid, preserving many of the town's colonial features.\nPost-colonial period and industrialization.\nNew Haven was incorporated as a city in 1784, and Roger Sherman, one of the signers of the Constitution and author of the \"Connecticut Compromise\", became the new city's first mayor.\nThe city struck fortune in the late 18th century with the inventions and industrial activity of Eli Whitney, a Yale graduate who remained in New Haven to develop the cotton gin and establish a gun-manufacturing factory in the northern part of the city near the Hamden town line. That area is still known as Whitneyville, and the main road through both towns is known as Whitney Avenue. The factory is now the Eli Whitney Museum, which has a particular emphasis on activities for children and exhibits pertaining to the A. C. Gilbert Company. His factory, along with that of Simeon North, and the lively clock-making and brass hardware sectors, contributed to making early Connecticut a powerful manufacturing economy; so many arms manufacturers sprang up that the state became known as \"The Arsenal of America\". It was in Whitney's gun-manufacturing plant that Samuel Colt invented the automatic revolver in 1836. Many other talented machinists and firearms designers would go on to found successful firearms manufacturing companies in New Haven, including Oliver Winchester and O.F. Mossberg &amp; Sons.\nThe Farmington Canal, created in the early 19th century, was a short-lived transporter of goods into the interior regions of Connecticut and Massachusetts, and ran from New Haven to Northampton, Massachusetts.\nNew Haven was to be the site of the first college for African Americans in the United States, but the plan was obstructed by efforts led by Yale Law School founder and former New Haven Mayor David Daggett, who went on to serve as a U.S. Senator and judge on Connecticut's highest court. Daggett denigrated African Americans, denied they were citizens, and presided over the trial of a woman persecuted for trying to admit an African American girl to her boarding school and, having that effort blocked, running a boarding school for African American girls.\nNew Haven was home to one of the important early events in the burgeoning anti-slavery movement when, in 1839, the trial of mutineering Mende tribesmen being transported as slaves on the Spanish slaveship \"Amistad\" was held in New Haven's United States District Court. There is a statue of Joseph Cinqu\u00e9, the informal leader of the slaves, beside City Hall. See \"Museums\" below for more information. Abraham Lincoln delivered a speech on slavery in New Haven in 1860, shortly before he secured the Republican nomination for President.\nThe American Civil War boosted the local economy with wartime purchases of industrial goods, including that of the New Haven Arms Company, which would later become the Winchester Repeating Arms Company. (Winchester would continue to produce arms in New Haven until 2006, and many of the buildings that were a part of the Winchester plant are now a part of the Winchester Repeating Arms Company Historic District). After the war, population grew and doubled by the start of the 20th century, most notably due to the influx of immigrants from southern Europe, particularly Italy. Today, roughly half the populations of East Haven, West Haven, and North Haven are Italian-American. Jewish immigration to New Haven has left an enduring mark on the city. Westville was the center of Jewish life in New Haven, though today many have fanned out to suburban communities such as Woodbridge and Cheshire. Lowell House, the city's first settlement, opened in 1900.\nPost-industrial era and urban redevelopment.\nNew Haven's expansion continued during the two World Wars, with most new inhabitants being African Americans from the American South, and Puerto Ricans. The city reached its peak population after World War II. The area of New Haven is only , encouraging further development of new housing after 1950 in adjacent, suburban towns. Moreover, as in other U.S. cities in the 1950s, New Haven began to suffer white flight of middle-class workers. One author suggested that aggressive redlining and rezoning made it difficult for residents to obtain financing for older, deteriorating urban housing stock, thereby condemning such structures to deterioration.\nIn 1954, then-mayor Richard C. Lee began some of the earliest major urban renewal projects in the United States. Certain sections of downtown New Haven were redeveloped to include museums, new office towers, a hotel, and large shopping complexes. Other parts of the city, particularly the Wooster Square and Fair Haven neighborhoods were affected by the construction of Interstate 95 along the Long Wharf section, Interstate 91, and the Oak Street Connector. The Oak Street Connector (Route 34), running between Interstate 95, downtown, and The Hill neighborhood, was originally intended as a highway to the city's western suburbs but was only completed as a highway to the downtown area, with the area to the west becoming a boulevard (See \"Redevelopment\" below).\nIn 1970, a series of criminal prosecutions against various members of the Black Panther Party took place in New Haven, inciting mass protests on the New Haven Green involving twelve thousand demonstrators and many well-known New Left political activists. (See \"Political Culture\" below for more information). From the 1960s through the early 1990s, some areas of New Haven continued to decline both economically and in terms of population despite attempts to resurrect certain neighborhoods through renewal projects. In conjunction with its declining population, New Haven experienced a steep rise in its crime rate.\nSince approximately 2000, many parts of downtown New Haven have been revitalized with new restaurants, nightlife, and small retail stores. In particular, the area surrounding the New Haven Green has experienced an influx of apartments and condominiums. In addition, two new supermarkets opened to serve downtown's growing residential population: a Stop and Shop opened just west of downtown, while Elm City Market, located one block from the Green, opened in 2011. The recent turnaround of downtown New Haven has received positive press from various periodicals.\nMajor projects include the current construction of a new campus for Gateway Community College downtown, and also a 32-story, 500-unit apartment/retail building called 360 State Street. The 360 State Street project is now occupied and is the largest residential building in Connecticut. A new boathouse and dock is planned for New Haven Harbor, and the linear park Farmington Canal Trail is set to extend into downtown New Haven within the coming year. Additionally, foundation and ramp work to widen I-95 to create a new harbor crossing for New Haven, with an extradosed bridge to replace the 1950s-era Q Bridge, has begun. The city still hopes to redevelop the site of the New Haven Coliseum, which was demolished in 2007.\nIn April 2009, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear a suit over reverse discrimination brought by 18 white firefighters against the city. The suit involved the 2003 promotion test for the New Haven Fire Department. After the tests were scored, no black firefighters scored high enough to qualify for consideration for promotion, so the city announced that no one would be promoted. In the subsequent \"Ricci v. DeStefano\" decision the court found 5\u20134 that New Haven's decision to ignore the test results violated Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. As a result, a district court subsequently ordered the city to promote 14 of the white firefighters.\nIn 2010 and 2011, state and federal funds were awarded to Connecticut (and Massachusetts) to construct the Hartford Line, with a southern terminus at New Haven's Union Station and a northern terminus at Springfield's Union Station. According to the White House, \"This corridor [currently] has one train per day connecting communities in Connecticut and Massachusetts to the Northeast Corridor and Vermont. The vision for this corridor is to restore the alignment to its original route via the Knowledge Corridor in western Massachusetts, improving trip time and increasing the population base that can be served.\" Set for construction in 2013, the \"Knowledge Corridor high speed intercity passenger rail\" project will cost approximately $1\u00a0billion, and the ultimate northern terminus for the project is reported to be Montreal in Canada. Train speeds between will reportedly exceed and increase both cities' rail traffic exponentially.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 6.67%, is water.\nNew Haven's best-known geographic features are its large, shallow harbor, and two reddish basalt trap rock ridges which rise to the northeast and northwest of the city core. These trap rocks are known respectively as East Rock and West Rock, and both serve as extensive parks. West Rock has been tunneled through to make way for the east\u2013west passage of the Wilbur Cross Parkway (the only highway tunnel through a natural obstacle in Connecticut), and once served as the hideout of the \"Regicides\" (see: Regicides Trail). Most New Haveners refer to these men as \"The Three Judges\". East Rock features the prominent Soldiers and Sailors war monument on its peak as well as the \"Great/Giant Steps\" which run up the rock's cliffside.\nThe city is drained by three rivers; the West, Mill, and Quinnipiac, named in order from west to east. The West River discharges into West Haven Harbor, while the Mill and Quinnipiac rivers discharge into New Haven Harbor. Both harbors are embayments of Long Island Sound. In addition, several smaller streams flow through the city's neighborhoods, including Wintergreen Brook, the Beaver Ponds Outlet, Wilmot Brook, Belden Brook, and Prospect Creek. Not all of these small streams have continuous flow year-round.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen classification, New Haven experiences a bordering a hot-summer humid continental climate (\"Dfa\"), bordering on a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). The city has hot, humid summers and cool to cold winters. From May to late September, the weather is typically hot and humid, with average temperatures exceeding on 70 days per year. In summer, the Bermuda High creates as southern flow of warm and humid air, with frequent (but brief) thundershowers. October to early December is normally mild to cool late in the season, while early spring (April) can be cool to warm. Winters are more variable, with cool to cold temperatures, mixed with warmer spells, with both rain and snow fall.\nWhile the weather patterns that affect New Haven result from a primarily offshore direction, thus reducing the marine influence of Long Island Sound, the location on Long Island Sound often influences the weather along the coastline compared to inland. During summer heat waves, temperatures may reach or higher on occasion with heat-index values of over . Tropical cyclones have struck New Haven in the past, including 1938 Hurricane (Long Island Express), Hurricane Carol in 1954, Hurricane Gloria in 1985. The hardiness zone is 7a.\nStreetscape.\nNew Haven has a long tradition of urban planning and a purposeful design for the city's layout. The city could be argued to have some of the first preconceived layouts in the country. Upon founding, New Haven was laid out in a grid plan of nine square blocks; the central square was left open, in the tradition of many New England towns, as the city green (a commons area). The city also instituted the first public tree planting program in America. As in other cities, many of the elms that gave New Haven the nickname \"Elm City\" perished in the mid-20th century due to Dutch elm disease, although many have since been replanted. The New Haven Green is currently home to three separate historic churches which speak to the original theocratic nature of the city. The Green remains the social center of the city today. It was named a National Historic Landmark in 1970.\nDowntown New Haven, occupied by nearly 7,000 residents, has a more residential character than most downtowns. The downtown area provides about half of the city's jobs and half of its tax base and in recent years has become filled with dozens of new upscale restaurants, in addition to shops and thousands of apartments and condominium units which subsequently help overall growth of the city.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe city has many distinct neighborhoods. In addition to Downtown, centered on the central business district and the Green, are the following neighborhoods: the west central neighborhoods of Dixwell and Dwight; the southern neighborhoods of The Hill, historic water-front City Point (or Oyster Point), and the harborside district of Long Wharf; the western neighborhoods of Beaver Hills, Edgewood, West River, Westville, Amity, and West Rock-Westhills; East Rock, Cedar Hill, Prospect Hill, and Newhallville in the northern side of town; the east central neighborhoods of Mill River and Wooster Square, an Italian-American neighborhood; Fair Haven, an immigrant community located between the Mill and Quinnipiac rivers; Quinnipiac Meadows and Fair Haven Heights across the Quinnipiac River; and facing the eastern side of the harbor, The Annex and East Shore (or Morris Cove).\nDemographics.\nCensus data.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe U.S. Census Bureau reports a 2010 population of 129,779, with 47,094 households and 25,854 families within the city of New Haven. The population density was . There were 52,941 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the city was 42.6% White, 35.4% African American, 0.5% Native American, 4.6% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 12.9% from other races, and 3.9% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 27.4% of the population. Non-Hispanic whites were 31.8% of the population in 2010, down from 69.6% in 1970. The city's Latino population is growing rapidly. Previous influxes among ethnic groups have been African-Americans in the postwar era, and Irish, Italian and (to a lesser degree) Slavic peoples in the prewar period.\nBy the 2020 census, its population was 134,023; its racial and ethnic makeup was 27.61% non-Hispanic white, 30.435 Black or African American, 0.25% Native American or Alaska Native, 6.75% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.65% some other race, 3.61% multiracial, and 30.64% Hispanic or Latino of any race.\nAs of the 2010 census, of the 47,094 households, 29.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 27.5% include married couples living together, 22.9% had a female householder with no husband present, and 45.1% were non-families. 36.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.5% had someone living alone who was 65\u00a0years of age or older. The average household size was 2.40 and the average family size 3.19.\nThe ages of New Haven's residents were 25.4% under the age of 18, 16.4% from 18 to 24, 31.2% from 25 to 44, 16.7% from 45 to 64, and 10.2% who were 65\u00a0years of age or older. The median age was 29\u00a0years, which was significantly lower than the national average. There were 91.8 males per 100 females. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 87.6 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $29,604, and the median income for a family was $35,950. Median income for males was $33,605, compared with $28,424 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,393. About 20.5% of families and 24.4% of the population were living below the poverty line, including 32.2% of those under age 18 and 17.9% of those age 65 or over.\nOther data.\nIt is estimated that 14% of New Haven residents are pedestrian commuters, ranking it number four by highest percentage in the United States. This is primarily due to New Haven's small area and the presence of Yale University.\nNew Haven is noted for having the highest percentage of Italian American residents of any US city, and is noted for its local style of pizza.\nA study of the demographics of the New Haven metro area, based on age, educational attainment, and race and ethnicity, found that they were the closest of any American city to the national average.\nEconomy.\nNew Haven's economy originally was based in manufacturing, but the postwar period brought rapid industrial decline; the entire Northeast was affected, and medium-sized cities with large working-class populations, like New Haven, were hit particularly hard. Simultaneously, the growth and expansion of Yale University further affected the economic shift. Today, over half (56%) of the city's economy is now made up of services, in particular education and health care; Yale is the city's largest employer, followed by Yale \u2013 New Haven Hospital. Other large employers include Southern Connecticut State University, Assa Abloy lock manufacturing, the Knights of Columbus headquarters, Higher One, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Covidien and United Illuminating. Clothing stores Gant and Ann Taylor were founded in the city.\nIn 2017, New Haven was ranked by a Verizon study as one of the top 10 cities in America for launching tech startups, and top two in New England.\nIndustry sectors: Agriculture (.6%), Construction and Mining (4.9%), Manufacturing (2.9%), Transportation and Utilities (2.9%), Trade (21.7%), Finance and Real Estate (7.1%), Services (55.9%), Government (4.0%)\nHeadquarters.\nThe Knights of Columbus, the world's largest Catholic fraternal service organization and a Fortune 1000 company, is headquartered in New Haven. Amphenol, based in Greater New Haven (Wallingford), is a Fortune 100 company. Eight Courant 100 companies are based in Greater New Haven, with four headquartered in New Haven proper. New Haven-based companies publicly listed include NewAlliance Bank, the second largest bank in Connecticut and fourth-largest in New England (NYSE: NAL), Higher One Holdings (NYSE: ONE), a financial services firm, United Illuminating, the electricity distributor for southern Connecticut (NYSE: UIL), and Transpro Inc. (AMEX: TPR). The American division of Assa Abloy (one of the world's leading manufacturers of locks) is located in the city. The Southern New England Telephone Company (SNET) began operations in the city as the District Telephone Company of New Haven in 1878; the company remains headquartered in New Haven as a subsidiary of Frontier Communications and provides telephone service for all but two municipalities in Connecticut. SeeClickFix was founded and has been headquartered in the city since 2007. Peter Paul Candy Manufacturing Company (a candy-making division of the Hershey Company) was formerly located in the city. Achillion Pharmaceuticals and Alexion Pharmaceuticals were also formerly headquartered in New Haven.\nLaw and government.\nPolitical structure.\nNew Haven is governed via the mayor-council system. Connecticut municipalities (like those of neighboring states Massachusetts and Rhode Island) provide nearly all local services (such as fire and rescue, education, snow removal, etc.), as county government has been abolished since 1960.\nNew Haven County merely refers to a grouping of towns and a judicial district, not a governmental entity. New Haven is a member of the South Central Connecticut Regional Council of Governments (SCRCOG), a regional agency created to facilitate coordination between area municipal governments and state and federal agencies, in the absence of county government.\nJustin Elicker is the mayor of New Haven. He was sworn in as the 51st mayor of New Haven on January 1, 2020.\nThe city council, called the Board of Alders, consists of thirty members, each elected from single-member wards. Each of the 30 wards consists of slightly over 4,300 residents; redistricting takes place every ten years.\nThe city is overwhelmingly Democratic. In 2017, of the town's 83,694 voters, 66% were registered as Democrats (\u22124% since 2015), 4% were registered as Republicans (+1%), and 29% were unaffiliated (+3). The board of alders is dominated by Democrats; a Republican has not served as a New Haven alder since 2011.\nNew Haven is served by the New Haven Police Department, which had 443 sworn officers in 2011. The city is also served by the New Haven Fire Department.\nNew Haven lies within Connecticut's 3rd congressional district and has been represented by Rosa DeLauro since 1991. Martin Looney and Gary Holder-Winfield represent New Haven in the Connecticut State Senate, and the city lies within six districts (numbers 92 through 97) of the Connecticut House of Representatives.\nThe Greater New Haven area is served by the New Haven Judicial District Court and the New Haven Superior Court, both headquartered at the New Haven County Courthouse. The federal District Court for the District of Connecticut has a New Haven facility, the Richard C. Lee United States Courthouse.\nPolitical history.\nNew Haven is the birthplace of former president George W. Bush, who was born when his father, former president George H. W. Bush, was living in New Haven while a student at Yale. In addition to being the site of the college educations of both Presidents Bush, as Yale students, New Haven was also the temporary home of former presidents William Howard Taft, Gerald Ford, and Bill Clinton, as well as Secretary of State John Kerry. President Clinton met his wife, former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, while the two were students at Yale Law School. Former vice presidents John C. Calhoun and Dick Cheney also studied in New Haven (although the latter did not graduate from Yale). Before the 2008 election, the last time there was not a person with ties to New Haven and Yale on either major party's ticket was 1968. James Hillhouse, a New Haven native, served as President pro tempore of the United States Senate in 1801.\nNew Haven voters overwhelmingly supported Al Gore in the 2000 election, Yale graduate John Kerry in 2004, and Barack Obama in 2008 and 2012. In the 2008 election, New Haven County was third among all Connecticut counties in campaign contributions, after Fairfield and Hartford counties. (Connecticut, in turn, was ranked 14th among all states in total campaign contributions.)\nNew Haven was the subject of \" Who Governs? Democracy and Power in An American City\", a very influential book in political science by preeminent Yale professor Robert A. Dahl, which includes an extensive history of the city and thorough description of its politics in the 1950s. New Haven's theocratic history is also mentioned several times by Alexis de Tocqueville in his classic volume on 19th-century American political life, \"Democracy in America\". New Haven was the residence of conservative thinker William F. Buckley, Jr., in 1951, when he wrote his influential \"God and Man at Yale\". William Lee Miller's \"The Fifteenth Ward and the Great Society\" (1966) similarly explores the relationship between local politics in New Haven and national political movements, focusing on Lyndon Johnson's Great Society and urban renewal.\nGeorge Williamson Crawford, a Yale Law School graduate, served as the city's first black corporation counsel from 1954 to 1962, under Mayor Richard C. Lee.\nIn 1970, the New Haven Black Panther trials took place, the largest and longest trials in Connecticut history. Black Panther Party co-founder Bobby Seale and ten other party members were tried for murdering an alleged informant. Beginning on May Day, the city became a center of protest for 12,000 Panther supporters, college students, and New Left activists (including Jean Genet, Benjamin Spock, Abbie Hoffman, Jerry Rubin, and John Froines), who amassed on the New Haven Green, across the street from where the trials were being held. Violent confrontations between the demonstrators and the New Haven Police occurred, and several bombs were set off in the area by radicals. The event became a rallying point for the New Left and critics of the Nixon Administration.\nDuring the summer of 2007, New Haven was the center of protests by anti-immigration groups who opposed the city's program of offering municipal ID cards, known as the Elm City Resident Card, to illegal immigrants. In 2008, the country of Ecuador opened a consulate in New Haven to serve the large Ecuadorean immigrant population in the area. It is the first foreign mission to open in New Haven since Italy opened a consulate (now closed) in the city in 1910.\nIn April 2009, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear a suit over reverse discrimination brought by 20 white and Hispanic firefighters against the city. The suit involved the 2003 promotion test for the New Haven Fire Department. After the tests were scored, no blacks scored high enough to qualify for consideration for promotion, so the city announced that no one would be promoted. On June 29, 2009, the United States Supreme Court ruled in favor of the firefighters, agreeing that they were improperly denied promotion because of their race. The case, \"Ricci v. DeStefano\", became highly publicized and brought national attention to New Haven politics due to the involvement of then-Supreme Court nominee (and Yale Law School graduate) Sonia Sotomayor in a lower court decision.\nGarry Trudeau, creator of the political \"Doonesbury\" comic strip, attended Yale University. There he met fellow student and later Green Party candidate for Congress Charles Pillsbury, a long-time New Haven resident for whom Trudeau's comic strip is named. During his college years, Pillsbury was known by the nickname \"The Doones\". A theory of international law, which argues for a sociological normative approach in regards to jurisprudence, is named the New Haven Approach, after the city. Connecticut US senator Richard Blumenthal is a Yale graduate, as is former Connecticut US Senator Joe Lieberman who also was a New Haven resident for many years, before moving back to his hometown of Stamford.\nCrime.\nCrime increased in the 1990s, with New Haven having one of the ten highest violent crime rates per capita in the United States. In the late 1990s New Haven's crime began to stabilize. The city, adopting a policy of community policing, saw crime rates drop during the 2000s.\nViolent crime levels vary dramatically among New Haven's neighborhoods, with some areas having crime rates in line with the state of Connecticut average, and others having extremely high rates of crime. A 2011 New Haven Health Department report identifies these issues in greater detail.\nIn 2010, New Haven ranked as the 18th most dangerous city in the United States (albeit below the safety benchmark of 200.00 for the second consecutive year). However, according to a completely different analysis conducted by the \"24/7 Wall Street Blog\", in 2011 New Haven had risen to become the fourth most dangerous city in the United States, and was widely cited in the press as such.\nHowever, an analysis by the Regional Data Cooperative for Greater New Haven, Inc., has shown that due to issues of comparative denominators and other factors, such municipality-based rankings can be considered inaccurate. For example, two cities of identical population can cover widely differing land areas, making such analyses irrelevant. The research organization called for comparisons based on neighborhoods, blocks, or standard methodologies (similar to those used by Brookings, DiversityData, and other established institutions), not based on municipalities.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nNew Haven is a notable center for higher education. Yale University, at the heart of downtown, is one of the city's best known features and its largest employer. New Haven is also home to Southern Connecticut State University, part of the Connecticut State University System, and Albertus Magnus College, a private institution. Gateway Community College has a campus in downtown New Haven, formerly located in the Long Wharf district; Gateway consolidated into one campus downtown into a new state-of-the-art campus (on the site of the old Macy's building) and was open for the Fall 2012 semester.\nThere are several institutions immediately outside of New Haven, as well. Quinnipiac University and the Paier College of Art are located just to the north, in the town of Hamden. The University of New Haven is located not in New Haven but in neighboring West Haven.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nNew Haven Public Schools is the school district serving the city. Wilbur Cross High School and Hillhouse High School are New Haven's two largest public secondary schools.\nHopkins School, a private school, was founded in 1660 and is the fifth-oldest educational institution in the United States. New Haven is home to a number of other private schools as well as public magnet schools, including Metropolitan Business Academy, High School in the Community, Hill Regional Career High School, Co-op High School, New Haven Academy, Edgewood Magnet School, ACES Educational Center for the Arts, the Foote School and the Sound School, all of which draw students from New Haven and suburban towns. New Haven is also home to two Achievement First charter schools, Amistad Academy and Elm City College Prep, and to Common Ground, an environmental charter school.\nThe city is renowned for its progressive school lunch programs, and participation in statewide bussing efforts toward increased diversity in schools.\nCulture.\nCuisine.\nLivability.com named New Haven as the Best Foodie City in the country in 2014. There are dozens of Zagat-rated restaurants in New Haven, the most in Connecticut and the third most in New England (after Boston and Cambridge). More than 120 restaurants are located within two blocks of the New Haven Green. The city is home to an eclectic mix of ethnic restaurants and small markets specializing in various foreign foods. Represented cuisines include Malaysian, Ethiopian, Spanish, Belgian, French, Greek, Latin American, Mexican, Italian, Thai, Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, Korean, Indian, Jamaican, Cuban, Peruvian, Syrian/Lebanese, and Turkish.\nNew Haven's greatest culinary claim to fame may be its pizza, which has been claimed to be among the best in the country, or even in the world. New Haven-style pizza, called \"apizza\", made its debut at the iconic Frank Pepe Pizzeria Napoletana (known as Pepe's) in 1925. Apizza is baked in coal- or wood-fired brick ovens, and is notable for its thin crust. Apizza may be red (with a tomato-based sauce) or white (with a sauce of garlic and olive oil), and pies ordered \"plain\" are made without the otherwise customary mozzarella (originally smoked mozzarella, known as \"scamorza\" in Italian). A white clam pie is a well-known specialty of the restaurants on Wooster Street in the Little Italy section of New Haven, including Pepe's and Sally's Apizza (which opened in 1938). Modern Apizza on State Street, which opened in 1934, is also well-known.\nA second New Haven gastronomical claim to fame is Louis' Lunch, which is located in a small brick building on Crown Street and has been serving fast food since 1895. Though fiercely debated, the restaurant's founder Louis Lassen is credited by the Library of Congress with inventing the hamburger and steak sandwich. Louis' Lunch broils hamburgers, steak sandwiches and hot dogs vertically in original antique 1898 cast iron stoves using gridirons, patented by local resident Luigi Pieragostini in 1939, that hold the meat in place while it cooks.\nA third New Haven gastronomical claim to fame is Miya's, the first sustainable sushi restaurant in the world. Miya's, founded by Chef Yoshiko Lai in 1982, featured the first sustainable seafood-based sushi menu, the first plant-based sushi menu, and the first invasive species menu in the world. Second generation Miya's chef, Bun Lai, is the 2016 White House Champions of Change for Sustainable Seafood and a James Beard Foundation Award nominee. Chef Bun Lai is credited as the first chef in the world for implementing a sustainability paradigm to the cuisine of sushi.\nDuring weekday lunchtime, over 150 lunch carts and food trucks cater to diners around the city. The carts and food trucks cluster at four main points: on Long Wharf Drive, along the city's shoreline with quick access off Interstate 95, by Yale \u2013 New Haven Hospital in the center of the Hospital Green (Cedar and York streets), by Yale's Trumbull College (Elm and York streets), and on the intersection of Prospect and Sachem streets by the Yale School of Management.\nPopular farmers' markets, managed by the local non-profit CitySeed, set up shop weekly in several neighborhoods, including Westville/Edgewood Park, Fair Haven, Upper State Street, Wooster Square, and Downtown/New Haven Green.\nTheatre and film.\nThe city hosts numerous theatres and production houses, including the Yale Repertory Theatre, the Long Wharf Theatre, and the Shubert Theatre. There is also theatre activity from the Yale School of Drama, which works through the Yale University Theatre and the student-run Yale Cabaret. Southern Connecticut State University hosts the Lyman Center for the Performing Arts. The shuttered Palace Theatre (opposite the Shubert Theatre) was renovated and reopened as the College Street Music Hall in May 2015. Smaller theatres include the Little Theater on Lincoln Street. Cooperative Arts and Humanities High School also has a theatre on College Street. The theatre is used for student productions, and is the home to weekly services to a local non-denominational church, the City Church New Haven.\nThe Shubert Theatre once premiered many major theatrical productions before their Broadway debuts. Productions that premiered at the Shubert include \"Oklahoma!\" (which was also written in New Haven), \"Carousel\", \"South Pacific\", \"My Fair Lady\", \"The King and I\", and \"The Sound of Music\", and the Tennessee Williams play \"A Streetcar Named Desire\".\nBow Tie Cinemas owns and operates the Criterion Cinemas, the first new movie theater to open in New Haven in over 30 years and the first luxury movie complex in the city's history. The Criterion has seven screens and opened in November 2004, showing a mix of upscale first run commercial and independent film.\nMuseums.\nNew Haven has a variety of museums, many of them associated with Yale. The Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library features an original copy of the Gutenberg Bible. There is also the Connecticut Children's Museum; the Knights of Columbus museum near that organization's world headquarters; the Peabody Museum of Natural History; the Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments; the Eli Whitney Museum (across the town line in Hamden, Connecticut, on Whitney Avenue); the Yale Center for British Art, which houses the largest collection of British art outside the U.K.; Lost in New Haven, and the Yale University Art Gallery, the western hemisphere's oldest college art museum. New Haven is also home to the New Haven Museum and Historical Society on Whitney Avenue, which has a library of many primary source treasures dating from Colonial times to the present.\nArtspace on Orange Street is one of several contemporary art galleries around the city, showcasing the work of local, national, and international artists. Others include City Gallery and A. Leaf Gallery in the downtown area. Westville galleries include Kehler Liddell, Jennifer Jane Gallery, and The Hungry Eye. The Erector Square complex in the Fair Haven neighborhood houses, the Parachute Factory gallery along with numerous artist studios, and the complex serves as an active destination during City-Wide Open Studios held yearly in October.\nNew Haven is the home port of a life-size replica of the historical \"Freedom Schooner Amistad\", which is open for tours at Long Wharf pier at certain times during the summer. Also at Long Wharf pier is the \"Quinnipiack\" schooner, offering sailing cruises of the harbor area throughout the summer. The \"Quinnipiack\" also functions as a floating classroom for hundreds of local students.\nMusic.\nThe New Haven Green is the site of many free music concerts, especially during the summer months. These have included the New Haven Symphony Orchestra, the July Free Concerts on the Green, and the New Haven Jazz Festival in August. The Jazz Festival, which began in 1982, is one of the longest-running free outdoor festivals in the U.S., until it was canceled for 2007. Headliners such as Dave Brubeck, Ray Charles and Celia Cruz have historically drawn 30,000 to 50,000 fans, filling up the New Haven Green to capacity. The New Haven Jazz Festival was revived in 2008 and has been sponsored since by Jazz Haven.\nNew Haven is home to the concert venue Toad's Place, and a new venue, College Street Music Hall. The city has retained an alternative art and music underground that has helped to influence post-punk era music movements such as indie, college rock and underground hip-hop.\nThe Yale School of Music contributes to the city's music scene by offering hundreds of free concerts throughout the year at venues in and around the Yale campus. Large performances are held in the 2,700-seat Woolsey Hall auditorium, which contains the world's largest symphonic organs, while chamber music and recitals are performed in Sprague Hall.\nHardcore band Hatebreed are from Wallingford, but got their start in New Haven under the name Jasta 14. The band Miracle Legion formed in New Haven in 1983. Folk musicians from New Haven include Loren Mazzacane Connors and Kath Bloom.\nThe Hillhouse Opera Company is a U.S. non-profit opera company based in New Haven that performs in the New Haven area. Founded in 2008 by Victoria Leigh Gardner, Nicole Rodriguez and Jim Coatsworth Hillhouse Opera Company has performed operas as well as opera scenes programs, master classes and concert series. In 2011, the Company professionally staged the works created through the Riverview Opera Project. The Riverview Opera Project created workshops for children and adolescents at Riverview Hospital, Connecticut's only state-funded psychiatric hospital for youth, and helped them to successfully create, produce, and perform four original operas.\nFestivals.\nIn addition to the Jazz Festival (described above), New Haven serves as the home city of the annual International Festival of Arts and Ideas. New Haven's Saint Patrick's Day parade, which began in 1842, is New England's oldest and draws the largest crowds of any one-day spectator event in Connecticut. The St. Andrew the Apostle Italian Festival has taken place in the historic Wooster Square neighborhood every year since 1900. Other parishes in the city celebrate the Feast of Saint Anthony of Padua and a carnival in honor of St. Bernadette Soubirous. New Haven celebrates Powder House Day every April on the New Haven Green to commemorate the city's entrance into the Revolutionary War. The annual Wooster Square Cherry Blossom Festival commemorates the 1973 planting of 72 Yoshino Japanese cherry blossom trees by the New Haven Historic Commission in collaboration with the New Haven Parks Department and residents of the neighborhood. The Festival now draws well over 5,000 visitors. The Film Fest New Haven has been held annually since 1995.\nNewspapers and media.\nNew Haven is served by the daily \"New Haven Register\", the weekly \"alternative\" \"New Haven Advocate\" (which is run by Tribune, the corporation owning the \"Hartford Courant\"), the online daily \"New Haven Independent\", and the monthly \"Grand News Community Newspaper.\" Downtown New Haven is covered by an in-depth civic news forum, Design New Haven. The \"Register\" also backs \"PLAY\" magazine, a weekly entertainment publication. The city is also served by several student-run papers, including the \"Yale Daily News\", the weekly \"Yale Herald\" and a humor tabloid, \"Rumpus Magazine\".\nWTNH Channel 8, the ABC affiliate for Connecticut, WCTX Channel 59, the MyNetworkTV affiliate for the state, Connecticut Public Television station WEDY channel 65, a PBS affiliate, and WTXX Channel 34, the IntrigueTV affiliate, broadcast from New Haven. All New York City news and sports team stations broadcast to New Haven County.\nSports and athletics.\nNew Haven has a history of professional sports franchises dating back to the 19th century and has been the home to professional baseball, basketball, football, hockey, and soccer teams\u2014including the New York Giants of the National Football League from 1973 to 1974, who played at the Yale Bowl. Throughout the second half of the 20th century, New Haven consistently had minor league hockey and baseball teams, which played at the New Haven Arena (built in 1926, demolished in 1972), New Haven Coliseum (1972\u20132002), and Yale Field (1928\u2013present).\nWhen John DeStefano, Jr., became mayor of New Haven in 1995, he outlined a plan to transform the city into a major cultural and arts center in the Northeast, which involved investments in programs and projects other than sports franchises. As nearby Bridgeport built new sports facilities, the brutalist New Haven Coliseum rapidly deteriorated. Believing the upkeep on the venue to be a drain of tax dollars, the DeStefano administration closed the Coliseum in 2002; it was demolished in 2007. New Haven's last professional sports team, the New Haven County Cutters, left in 2009. The DeStefano administration did, however, see the construction of the New Haven Athletic Center in 1998, a indoor athletic facility with a seating capacity of over 3,000. The NHAC, built adjacent to Hillhouse High School, is used for New Haven public schools athletics, as well as large-scale area and state sporting events; it is the largest high school indoor sports complex in the state.\nNew Haven was the host of the 1995 Special Olympics World Summer Games; then-President Bill Clinton spoke at the opening ceremonies. The city is home to the Pilot Pen International tennis event, which takes place every August at the Connecticut Tennis Center, one of the largest tennis venues in the world. New Haven biannually hosts \"The Game\" between Yale and Harvard, the country's second-oldest college football rivalry. Numerous road races take place in New Haven, including the USATF 20K Championship during the New Haven Road Race.\nGreater New Haven is home to a number of college sports teams. The Yale Bulldogs play Division I college sports, as do the Quinnipiac Bobcats in neighboring Hamden. Division II athletics are played by Southern Connecticut State University and the University of New Haven (actually located in neighboring West Haven), while Albertus Magnus College athletes perform at the Division III level.\nNew Haven is home to many New York Yankees, New York Mets, and Boston Red Sox fans due to the proximity of New York City and Boston.\nWalter Camp, deemed the \"father of American football\", was a New Havener.\nThe New Haven Warriors rugby league team play in the AMNRL. They have a large number of Pacific Islanders playing for them. Their field is located at the West Haven High School's Ken Strong Stadium. They won the 2008 AMNRL Grand Final.\nStructures.\nArchitecture.\nNew Haven has many architectural landmarks dating from every important time period and architectural style in American history. The city has been home to a number of architects and architectural firms that have left their mark on the city including Ithiel Town and Henry Austin in the 19th century and Cesar Pelli, Warren Platner, Kevin Roche, Herbert Newman and Barry Svigals in the 20th. The Yale School of Architecture has fostered this important component of the city's economy. Cass Gilbert, of the Beaux-Arts school, designed New Haven's Union Station and the New Haven Free Public Library and was also commissioned for a City Beautiful plan in 1919. Frank Lloyd Wright, Marcel Breuer, Alexander Jackson Davis, Philip C. Johnson, Gordon Bunshaft, Louis Kahn, James Gamble Rogers, Frank Gehry, Charles Willard Moore, Stefan Behnisch, James Polshek, Paul Rudolph, Eero Saarinen and Robert Venturi all have designed buildings in New Haven. Yale's 1950s-era Ingalls Rink, designed by Eero Saarinen, was included on the \"America's Favorite Architecture\" list created in 2007.\nSeveral residential homes in New Haven were designed by Alice Washburn, a noted female architect whose Colonial Revival style set a standard for homes in the region.\nMany of the city's neighborhoods are well-preserved as walkable \"museums\" of 19th- and 20th-century American architecture, particularly by the New Haven Green, Hillhouse Avenue and other residential sections close to Downtown New Haven. Overall, a large proportion of the city's land area is National (NRHP) historic districts. One of the best sources on local architecture is \"New Haven: Architecture and Urban Design\", by Elizabeth Mills Brown.\nThe five tallest buildings in New Haven are:\nHistoric points of interest.\nMany historical sites exist throughout the city, including 59 properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Of these, nine are among the 60 U.S. National Historic Landmarks in Connecticut. The New Haven Green, one of the National Historic Landmarks, was formed in 1638, and is home to three 19th-century churches. Below the First Church of Christ in New Haven (referred to as the Center Church on the Green) lies a 17th-century crypt, which is open to visitors. Some of the more famous burials include the first wife of Benedict Arnold and the aunt and grandmother of President Rutherford B. Hayes; Hayes visited the crypt while President in 1880. The Old Campus of Yale University is located next to the Green, and includes Connecticut Hall, Yale's oldest building and a National Historic Landmark. The Hillhouse Avenue area, which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and is also a part of Yale's campus, has been called a walkable museum, due to its 19th-century mansions and street scape; Charles Dickens is said to have called Hillhouse Avenue \"the most beautiful street in America\" when visiting the city in 1868.\nIn 1660, Edward Whalley (a cousin and friend of Oliver Cromwell) and William Goffe, two English Civil War generals who signed the death warrant of King Charles I, hid in a rock formation in New Haven after having fled England upon the restoration of Charles II to the English throne. They were later joined by a third regicide, John Dixwell. The rock formation, which is now a part of West Rock Park, is known as Judges' Cave, and the path leading to the cave is called the Regicides Trail.\nAfter the American Revolutionary War broke out in 1776, the Connecticut colonial government ordered the construction of Black Rock Fort (to be built on top of an older 17th-century fort) to protect the port of New Haven. In 1779, during the Battle of New Haven, British soldiers captured Black Rock Fort and burned the barracks to the ground. The fort was reconstructed in 1807 by the federal government (on orders from the Thomas Jefferson administration), and rechristened Fort Nathan Hale, after the Revolutionary War hero who had lived in New Haven. The cannons of Fort Nathan Hale were successful in defying British war ships during the War of 1812. In 1863, during the Civil War, a second Fort Hale was built next to the original, complete with bomb-resistant bunkers and a moat, to defend the city should a Southern raid against New Haven be launched. The United States Congress deeded the site to the state in 1921, and all three versions of the fort have been restored. The site is now listed on the National Register of Historic Places and receives thousands of visitors each year.\nGrove Street Cemetery, a National Historic Landmark which lies adjacent to Yale's campus, contains the graves of Roger Sherman, Eli Whitney, Noah Webster, Josiah Willard Gibbs, Charles Goodyear and Walter Camp, among other notable burials. The cemetery is noted for its Egyptian Revival gateway, and is the oldest planned burial ground in the United States. The Union League Club of New Haven building, located on Chapel Street, is notable for not only being a historic Beaux-Arts building, but also is built on the site where Roger Sherman's home once stood; George Washington is known to have stayed at the Sherman residence while President in 1789 (one of three times Washington visited New Haven throughout his lifetime).\nTwo sites pay homage to the time President and Chief Justice William Howard Taft lived in the city, as both a student and later Professor at Yale: a plaque on Prospect Street marks the site where Taft's home formerly stood, and downtown's Taft Apartment Building (formerly the Taft Hotel) bears the name of the former president who resided in the building for eight years before becoming Chief Justice of the United States.\nLighthouse Point Park, a public beach run by the city, was a popular tourist destination during the Roaring Twenties, attracting luminaries of the period such as Babe Ruth and Ty Cobb. The park remains popular among New Haveners, and is home to the Five Mile Point Lighthouse, constructed in 1847, and the Lighthouse Point Carousel, constructed in 1916. Five Mile Point Light was decommissioned in 1877 following the construction of Southwest Ledge Light at the entrance of the harbor, which remains in service to this day. Both of the lighthouses and the carousel are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nOther historic sites in the city include the Soldiers and Sailors Monument, which stands at the summit of East Rock, the Marsh Botanical Garden, Wooster Square, Dwight Street, Louis' Lunch, and the Farmington Canal, all of which date back to the 19th century. Other historic parks besides the Green include Edgerton Park, Edgewood Park, and East Rock Park, each of which is included on the National Register of Historic Places.\nTransportation.\nRail.\nNew Haven has two railroad stations, connected to New York City and points along the Northeast Corridor by commuter rail, regional rail and inter-city rail. Service is provided by:\nThe city's main railroad station is the historic Beaux-Arts Union Station, which serves Metro-North, Hartford Line, and Shore Line East commuter trains. Approximately 175 trains serve Union Station on weekdays. Union Station is also served by four Amtrak lines: the \"Northeast Regional\" and the high-speed \"Acela Express\" provide service to New York, Washington, D.C., and Boston, and rank as the first and second busiest routes in the country; the New Haven\u2013Springfield Line provides service to Hartford and Springfield, Massachusetts; and the \"Vermonter\" provides service to both Washington, D.C., and Vermont, from the Canada\u2013US border.\nAn additional station, State Street Station, was opened in 2002, providing passengers easier access to downtown New Haven. State Street Station is currently serviced by Shore Line East and Hartford Line trains, plus some peak-hour Metro-North trips.\nBus.\nThe New Haven Division of Connecticut Transit (CT Transit), the state's bus system, is the second largest division in the state with 24 routes. All routes originate from the New Haven Green, making it the central transfer hub of the city. Service is provided to 19 different municipalities throughout Greater New Haven. Bus routes were formerly identified by letters, but as of October 8, 2017, all service was renamed using 200-series numbers, in accordance with a renumbering of CTtransit's statewide services.\nCT Transit's Union Station Shuttle provides free service from Union Station to the New Haven Green and several New Haven parking garages. Peter Pan and Greyhound bus lines have scheduled stops at Union Station, and connections downtown can be made via the Union Station Shuttle. A private company operates the New Haven/Hartford Express which provides commuter bus service to Hartford. The Yale University Shuttle provides free transportation around New Haven for Yale students, faculty, and staff.\nThe New Haven Division buses follow routes that had originally been covered by trolley service. Horse-drawn streetcars began operating in New Haven in the 1860s, and by the mid-1890s all the lines had become electric. In the 1920s and 1930s, some of the trolley lines began to be replaced by bus lines, with the last trolley route converted to bus in 1948. The City of New Haven is in the very early stages of considering the restoration of streetcar (light-rail) service, which has been absent since the postwar period.\nBicycle.\nBikeshare.\nOn February 21, 2018, New Haven officially launched its Bike New Haven bikeshare program. based on dockless technology powered by Noa Technologies At time of launch, the program features 10 docking stations and 100 bikes, spread throughout the urban core; there are plans to reach 30 bike stations and 300 bikes by the end of April 2018. The launch of the New Haven bikeshare program coincided with the launch of Yale University's own bikeshare program, which uses the same technology powered by Noa.\nBike lanes.\nIn 2004, the first bike lane in the city was added. The city has added covered bike parking spots at Union Station, in order to facilitate bike commuting to the station.\nFarmington Canal Greenway.\nThe Farmington Canal Trail is a rail trail that will eventually run continuously from downtown New Haven to Northampton, Massachusetts. The scenic trail follows the path of the historic New Haven and Northampton Company and the Farmington Canal. Currently, there is a continuous stretch of the trail from downtown, through Hamden and into Cheshire, making bicycle commuting between New Haven and those suburbs possible. The trail is part of the East Coast Greenway, a proposed bike path that would link every major city on the East Coast from Florida to Maine.\nRoads.\nNew Haven lies at the intersection of Interstate 95 on the coast\u2014which provides access southwards and/or westwards to the western coast of Connecticut and to New York City, and eastwards to the eastern Connecticut shoreline, Rhode Island, and eastern Massachusetts\u2014and Interstate 91, which leads northward to the interior of Connecticut, Massachusetts and Vermont and the Canada\u2013US border. I-95 is notorious for traffic jams increasing with proximity to New York City; on the east side of New Haven it passes over the Quinnipiac River via the Pearl Harbor Memorial, or \"Q Bridge\", which often presents a major bottleneck to traffic. I-91, however, is relatively less congested, except at the intersection with I-95 during peak travel times.\nThe Oak Street Connector (Connecticut Route 34) intersects I-91 at exit 1, just south of the I-95/I-91 interchange, and runs northwest for a few blocks as an expressway spur into downtown before emptying onto surface roads. The Wilbur Cross Parkway (Connecticut Route 15) runs parallel to I-95 west of New Haven, turning northwards as it nears the city and then running northwards parallel to I-91 through the outer rim of New Haven and Hamden, offering an alternative to the I-95/I-91 journey (restricted to non-commercial vehicles). Route 15 in New Haven is the site of the only highway tunnel in the state (officially designated as Heroes Tunnel), running through West Rock, home to West Rock Park and the Three Judges Cave.\nThe city also has several major surface arteries. U.S. Route 1 (Columbus Avenue, Union Avenue, Water Street, Forbes Avenue) runs in an east\u2013west direction south of downtown serving Union Station and leading out of the city to Milford, West Haven, East Haven and Branford. The main road from downtown heading northwest is Whalley Avenue (partly signed as Route 10 and Route 63) leading to Westville and Woodbridge. Heading north towards Hamden, there are two major thoroughfares, Dixwell Avenue and Whitney Avenue. To the northeast are Middletown Avenue (Route 17), which leads to the Montowese section of North Haven, and Foxon Boulevard (Route 80), which leads to the Foxon section of East Haven and to the town of North Branford. To the west is Route 34, which leads to the city of Derby. Other major intracity arteries are Ella Grasso Boulevard (Route 10) west of downtown, and College Street, Temple Street, Church Street, Elm Street, and Grove Street in the downtown area.\nTraffic safety is a major concern for drivers, pedestrians and cyclists in New Haven. In addition to many traffic-related fatalities in the city each year, since 2005, over a dozen Yale students, staff and faculty have been killed or injured in traffic collisions on or near the campus.\nAirport.\nTweed New Haven Airport is located within the city limits east of the business district, straddling the border with neighboring East Haven. Service to approximately 25 cities is provided by Avelo Airlines, which established its first East Coast base at the airport in 2021. Breeze Airways plans to begin operations at Tweed in December 2024, and will provide service to 10 destinations. The airport is currently planning a runway lengthening and new terminal on the East Haven side of the airport.\nBus service between Downtown New Haven and Tweed is available via the CT Transit New Haven Division.\nSeaport.\nNew Haven Harbor is home to the Port of New Haven, a deep-water seaport with three berths capable of hosting vessels and barges as well as the facilities required to handle break bulk cargo. The port has the capacity to load 200 trucks a day from the ground or via loading docks. Providence and Worcester Railroad provides freight rail transportation to the port, with the railroad operating a switch engine for yard movements, a private siding for loading and unloading, and trackage over the Tomlinson Lift Bridge toward the Northeast Corridor. Approximately of inside storage and of outside storage are available at the site. Five shore cranes with a 250-ton capacity and 26 forklifts, each with a 26-ton capacity, are also available.\nOn June 17, 2013, the city commissioned the \"Nathan Hale\", a port security vessel capable of serving search and rescue, firefighting, and constabulary roles.\nInfrastructure.\nHospitals and medicine.\nThe New Haven area supports several medical facilities that are considered some of the best hospitals in the country. There are two major medical centers downtown: Yale \u2013 New Haven Hospital has four pavilions, including the Yale \u2013 New Haven Children's Hospital and the Smilow Cancer Hospital; the Hospital of Saint Raphael is several blocks north, and touts its excellent cardiac emergency care program. Smaller downtown health facilities are the Temple Medical Center located downtown on Temple Street, Connecticut Mental Health Center/ across Park Street from Y-NHH, and the Hill Health Center, which serves the working-class Hill neighborhood. A large Veterans Affairs hospital is located in neighboring West Haven. To the west in Milford is Milford Hospital, and to the north in Meriden is the MidState Medical Center.\nIn recent years, Yale and the City of New Haven have been working to build a medical and biotechnology research hub in the city and Greater New Haven region. The city, state and Yale together run Science Park, a large site three blocks northwest of Yale's Science Hill campus. This multi-block site, approximately bordered by Mansfield Street, Division Street, and Shelton Avenue, is the former home of Winchester's and Olin Corporation's 45 large-scale factory buildings. Currently, sections of the site are large-scale parking lots or abandoned structures, but there is also a large remodeled and functioning area of buildings (leased primarily by a private developer) with numerous Yale employees, financial service and biotech companies.\nA second biotechnology district is being planned for the median strip on Frontage Road, on land cleared for the never-built Route 34 extension. As of late 2009, a Pfizer drug-testing clinic, a medical laboratory building serving Yale \u2013 New Haven Hospital, and a mixed-use structure containing parking, housing and office space, have been constructed on this corridor. A former SNET telephone building at 300 George Street is being converted into lab space, and has been quite successful so far in attracting biotechnology and medical firms.\nPower supply facilities.\nElectricity for New Haven is generated by a 448\u00a0MW oil and gas-fired generating station located on the shore at New Haven Harbor. PPL Corporation operates a 220\u00a0MW peaking natural gas turbine plant in nearby Wallingford.\nNear New Haven there is the static inverter plant of the HVDC Cross Sound Cable.\nThere are three PureCell Model 400 fuel cells placed in the city of New Haven\u2014one at the New Haven Public Schools and newly constructed Roberto Clemente School, one at the mixed-use 360 State Street building, and one at City Hall. According to Giovanni Zinn of the city's Office of Sustainability, each fuel cell may save the city up to $1 million in energy costs over a decade. The fuel cells were provided by ClearEdge Power, formerly UTC Power. Additional fuel cells are located at the Yale Peabody Museum of Natural History and at the Greater New Haven Water Pollution Control Authority (GNHWPCA). Ikea's New Haven facility also utilizes a 250\u00a0kW fuel cell and 940.8\u00a0kW solar array.\nNew Haven recently installed solar panels at 11 city schools with a combined power generation capacity of 1.8 MW. Owned and maintained by Greenskies, the panels allow New Haven to purchase electricity at a discounted rate through a power-purchasing agreement. The panels bring New Haven's solar capacity to 2.8 MW and will help New Haven meet its commitment to powering 100% of its municipal operations through clean energy, which it made in Summer 2017 and reaffirmed in the 2018 New Haven Climate and Sustainability Framework.\nIn popular culture.\nSeveral movies have been filmed in New Haven since 2000, including \"Mona Lisa Smile\" (2003), with Julia Roberts, \"The Life Before Her Eyes\" (2007), with Uma Thurman, and \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" (2008) directed by Steven Spielberg and starring Harrison Ford, Cate Blanchett and Shia LaBeouf. The filming of \"Crystal Skull\" involved an extensive chase sequence through the streets of New Haven. Several downtown streets were closed to traffic and received a \"makeover\" to look like streets of 1957, when the film is set. 500 locals were cast as extras for the film. In \"Everybody's Fine\" (2009), Robert De Niro has a close encounter in what is supposed to be the Denver train station; the scene was filmed in New Haven's Union Station.\n New Haven is mentioned in the song Peace Frog by the Doors, referencing a 1967 incident where vocalist Jim Morrison was arrested for \"attempting to incite a riot\" in the middle of a concert at the New Haven Arena.\nSister cities.\nNew Haven's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSome of these were selected because of historical connection\u2014Freetown because of the \"Amistad\" trial. Others, such as Amalfi and Afula, reflect ethnic groups in New Haven.\nIn 1990, the United Nations named New Haven a \"Peace Messenger City\".\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53828", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53828", "title": "Ontological commitment", "text": "Object(s) postulated to exist by a given language\nIn formal semantics, an ontological commitment of a language is one or more objects postulated to exist by that language. The 'existence' referred to need not be 'real', but exist only in a universe of discourse. As an example, legal systems use vocabulary referring to 'legal persons' that are collective entities that have rights. One says the legal doctrine has an \"ontological commitment\" to non-singular individuals.\nIn information systems and artificial intelligence, where an ontology refers to a specific vocabulary and a set of explicit assumptions about the meaning and usage of these words, an ontological commitment is an agreement to use the shared vocabulary in a coherent and consistent manner within a specific context.\nIn philosophy, a \"theory is ontologically committed to an object only if that object occurs in \"all\" the ontologies of that theory.\"\nBackground.\nThe sentence \u201cNapoleon is one of my ancestors\u201d apparently commits us only to the existence of two individuals (i.e., Napoleon and the speaker) and a line of ancestry between them. The fact that no other people or objects are mentioned seems to limit the \u201ccommitment\u201d of the sentence. However, it is well known that sentences of this kind cannot be interpreted in first-order logic, where individual variables stand for individual things. Instead, they must be represented in some second-order form. In ordinary language, such second-order forms use either grammatical plurals or terms such as \u201cset of\u201d or \u201cgroup of\u201d.\nFor example, the sentence involving Napoleon can be rewritten as \u201cany group of people that includes me and the parents of each person in the group must also include Napoleon,\u201d which is easily interpreted as a statement in second-order logic (one would naturally start by assigning a name, such as \"G\", to the group of people under consideration). Formally, collective noun forms such as \u201ca group of people\u201d are represented by second-order variables, or by first-order variables standing for sets (which are well-defined objects in mathematics and logic). Since these variables do not stand for individual objects, it seems we are \u201contologically committed\u201d to entities other than individuals \u2014 sets, classes, and so on. As Willard Van Orman Quine puts it,\nthe general adoption of class variables of quantification ushers in a theory whose laws were not in general expressible in the antecedent levels of logic. The price paid for this increased power is ontological: objects of a special and abstract kind, viz. classes, are now presupposed. Formally it is precisely in allowing quantification over class variables \u03b1, \u03b2, etc., that we assume a range of values for these variables to refer to. To be assumed as an entity is to be assumed as a value of a variable. (\"Methods of Logic\", 1950, p. 228)\nAnother statement about individuals that appears \u201contologically innocent\u201d is the well-known Geach\u2013Kaplan sentence: \"Some critics admire only one another.\"\nQuine's criterion.\nWillard Van Orman Quine provided an early and influential formulation of ontological commitment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If one affirms a statement using a name or other singular term, or an initial phrase of 'existential quantification', like 'There are some so-and-sos', then one must either (1) admit that one is committed to the existence of things answering to the singular term or satisfying the descriptions, or (2) provide a 'paraphrase' of the statement that eschews singular terms and quantification over so-and sos. Quine's criterion can be seen as a logical development of the methods of Bertrand Russell and G.E. Moore, who assumed that one must accept the existence of entities corresponding to the singular terms used in statements one accepts, unless and until one finds systematic methods of paraphrase that eliminate these terms.\u2014\u200a\nThe purpose of Quine's strategy is to determine just how the \"ontological commitment\" of a theory is to be found. Quine argued that the only ontologically committing expressions are variables bound by a first-order existential quantifier, and natural language expressions which were formalized using variables bound by first-order existential quantifiers.\nAttempts have been made to argue that predicates are also ontologically committing, and thus that subject-predicate sentences bear additional ontological commitment to abstract objects such as universals, sets, or classes. It has been suggested that the use of meaningful names in nonexistence statements such as \"Pegasus does not exist\" brings with it an ontological commitment to empty names like Pegasus, a quandary referred to as Plato's beard and escaped by using quantifiers.\nThis discussion has a connection to the Carnap\u2013Quine argument over analytic and synthetic objects. Although Quine refers to 'ontological commitment' in this connection, in his rejection of the analytic/synthetic distinction he does not rely upon the formal translation of any particular theory along the lines he has suggested. Instead, Quine argues by using examples that although there are tautological statements in a formal theory, like \"all squares are rectangles\", a formal theory necessarily contains references to objects that are not tautological, but have external connections. That is, there is an \"ontological commitment\" to such external objects. In addition, the terms used to interpret the application of the theory are not simply descriptions of sensory input, but are statements in a context. That is, inversely, there is an \"ontological commitment\" of these observational objects to the formal theory. As Ryan puts it: \"Rather than being divided between contingent synthetic claims and indubitable analytic propositions, our beliefs constitute a continuous range from a periphery of sense-reports to interior concepts that are comparatively theory-laden and general.\" Thus we end up with Quine's 'flat' ontology that does not see a distinction between analytic and synthetic objects.\nQuine further made a distinction between the ontological commitments of a theory (what the theory says exists) and the ideological commitments of a theory (those concepts, logical or non-logical, that are expressible within the theory).\nOntological parsimony.\nWhatever process one uses to determine the ontological commitments of a theory, that does not prescribe what ontological commitments one should have. Quine regarded this as a matter of epistemology, which theory one should accept. \"Appeal is made to [concerns of] explanatory power, parsimony, conservatism, precision, and so on\".\nOntological parsimony can be defined in various ways, and often is equated to versions of Occam's razor, a \"rule of thumb, which obliges us to favor theories or hypotheses that make the fewest unwarranted, or \"ad hoc\", assumptions about the data from which they are derived.\" Glock regards 'ontological parsimony' as one of the 'five main points' of Quine's conception of ontology.\nFollowing Quine, Baker states that a theory, \"T\", is \"ontologically committed\" to items \"F\" if and only if \"T\" entails that \"F\u2032\"s exist. If two theories, \"T1\" and \"T2\", have the same ontological commitments except that \"T2\" is ontologically committed to \"F\u2032\"s while \"T1\" is not, then \"T1\" is more parsimonious than \"T2\". More generally, a sufficient condition for \"T1\" being more parsimonious than \"T2\" is for the ontological commitments of \"T1\" to be a proper subset of those of \"T2\".\nThese ideas lead to the following particular formulation of Occam's razor: 'Other things being equal, if \"T1\" is more ontologically parsimonious than \"T2\" then it is rational to prefer \"T1\" to \"T2\".' While a common formulation stipulates only that entities should not be multiplied beyond necessity, this version by contrast, states that entities should not be multiplied \"other things being equal\", and this is compatible with parsimony being a comparatively weak theoretical virtue.\nRecent controversies.\nThe standard approach to ontological commitment has been that, once a theory has been regimented and/or \"paraphrased\" into an agreed \"canonical\" version, which may indeed be in formal logical notation rather than the original language of the theory, ontological commitments can be read off straightforwardly from the presence of certain ontologically committing expressions (e.g. bound variables of existential quantification). Although there is substantial debate about which expressions are ontologically committing, parties to that debate generally agree that the expressions they prefer are reliable bearers of ontological commitment, imparting ontological commitment to all regimented sentences in which they occur. This assumption has been challenged.\nInwagen has taken issue with Quine's methodology, claiming that this process did not lead to a unique set of fundamental objects, but to several possible sets, and one never could be certain that all the possible sets had been found. He also took issue with Quine's notion of a theory, which he felt was tantamount to suggesting a 'theory' was just a collection of sentences. Inwagen suggested that Quine's approach provided useful tools for discovering what entities were ontological commitments, but that he had not been successful. His attempts are comparable to an \"attempt to reach the moon by climbing ever higher trees...\"\nIt has been suggested that the ontological commitments of a theory cannot be discerned by analysis of the syntax of sentences, looking for ontologically committing expressions, because the true ontological commitments of a sentence (or theory) are restricted to the entities needed to serve as truthmakers for that sentence, and the syntax of even a regimented or formalized sentence is not a reliable guide to what entities are needed to make it true. However, this view has been attacked by Jonathan Schaffer, who has argued that truthmaking is not an adequate test for ontological commitment: at best, the search for the truthmakers of our theory will tell us what is \"fundamental\", but not what our theory is ontologically committed to, and hence will not serve as a good way of deciding what exists.\nIt also has been argued that the syntax of sentences is not a reliable guide to their ontological commitments because English has no form of words which reliably functions to make an existence-claim in every context in which it is used. For example, Jody Azzouni suggests that \"There is\" does not make any kind of genuine existence-claim when it is used in a sentence such as \"There are mice that talk\". Since the meaning of the existential quantifier in formal notation is usually explained in terms of its equivalence to English expressions such as \"there is\" and \"there exist\", and since these English expressions are not reliably ontologically committing, it comes to seem that we cannot be sure of our theory's ontological commitments even after it has been regimented into a canonical formulation. This argument has been attacked by Howard Peacock, who suggests that Azzouni's strategy conflates two different kinds of ontological commitment \u2013 one which is intended as a measure of what a theory explicitly claims to exist, and one which is intended as a measure of what is required for the theory to be true; what the ontological costs of the theory are. If ontological commitment is thought of as a matter of the ontological costs of a theory, then it is possible that a sentence may be ontologically committed to an entity even though competent speakers of the language do not recognize the sentence as asserting the existence of that entity. Ontological commitment is not a matter of what commitments one explicitly recognizes, but rather a matter of what commitments are actually incurred.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53830", "revid": "50597588", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53830", "title": "St. Elizabeths Hospital", "text": "Psychiatric hospital in Washington, D.C.\nSt. Elizabeths Hospital is a psychiatric hospital in Southeast Washington, D.C. operated by the District of Columbia Department of Mental Health. The hospital opened in 1855 under the name Government Hospital for the Insane, the first federally operated psychiatric hospital in the United States. \nHousing over 8,000 patients at its peak in the 1950s, the hospital had a fully functioning medical-surgical unit, a school of nursing, accredited internships and psychiatric residencies. Its campus was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1990.\nSince 2010, the hospital's functions have been limited to the portion of the East Campus operated by the District of Columbia Department of Mental Health. The remainder of the East Campus is slated for redevelopment by the District of Columbia. The West Campus was transferred to the United States Department of Homeland Security for its headquarters and its subsidiary agencies. The Douglas A. Munro Coast Guard Headquarters Building, with hundreds of Coast Guard personnel, is a joint tenant of the campus.\nThe campus grounds contain the Saint Elizabeths Hospital East and West Cemeteries. Burials were performed on the West Campus beginning in 1856. Approximately 450 graves of Civil War veterans and an unknown number of civilians are buried on the West Campus. In 1873, the three-quarter-acre West Campus burying ground was deemed full, and a new cemetery was opened on the East Campus. Approximately 2,050 military and 3,000 civilian interments occurred on the nine-acre cemetery on the East Campus over the next 120 years.\nThe hospital was under the control of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services until 1987. At that time, ownership of its East Campus was transferred by the federal government to the District of Columbia.\nEarly history.\nFounding.\nSt. Elizabeths Hospital was founded as the Government Hospital for the Insane in August 1852 when the United States Congress appropriated $100,000 for the construction of a hospital in Washington, D.C., to provide care for indigent residents of the District of Columbia and members of the U.S. Army and Navy with brain illnesses.\nIn the 1830s, local residents, including Dr. Thomas Miller, a medical doctor and president of the Washington, D.C. Board of Health, had begun petitioning Congress for a facility to care for people with brain diseases in the City of Washington. Dorothea Dix (1802\u20131887) served as a pioneering advocate for people living with mental illnesses and she helped convince legislators of the need for the hospital. In 1852 she wrote the legislation that established the hospital. \nDix, who was on friendly terms with U.S. President Millard Fillmore, was asked to assist the Interior Secretary in getting the hospital started. Her recommendation resulted in the appointment of Dr. Charles H. Nichols as the hospital's first superintendent. After his appointment in the fall of 1852, Nichols and Dix began formulating a plan for the hospital's design and operation. They set out to find an appropriate location, based upon guidelines created by Thomas Story Kirkbride. His 1854 manual recommended specifics such as site, ventilation, number of patients, and the need for a rural location proximate to a city. He also recommended that the location have good soil for farming and gardens for the patients. Large facilities were self-supporting and some of the work was considered good for patients to engage in.\nDr. Nichols oversaw the design and building of St. Elizabeths, which began in 1853. The hospital was constructed in three phases. The west wing was built first, followed by the east wing and finally the center portion of the building, which housed the administrative operations as well as the superintendent's residential quarters. All three sections of the hospital were operated under one roof, in keeping with Kirkbride's design. Two other buildings, the West Lodge (1856\u201398) for men and the East Lodge for women, were built to house and care for African-American patients, as the city was effectively racially segregated.\nPeak operation.\nSoon after the hospital opened to patients in January 1855, it became known officially as the Government Hospital for the Insane. During the Civil War, the West Lodge, originally built for male African-American patients, was used as a general hospital by the U.S. Navy. The unfinished east wing of the main building was used by the U.S. Army as a general hospital for sick and wounded soldiers. The Army hospital officially took the name of St. Elizabeth's Army Medical Hospital to differentiate it from the psychiatric hospital in the west wing of the same building. The name St. Elizabeth's was derived from the colonial-era name for the tract of land on which the hospital was built.\nAfter the Civil War and the closing of the Army's hospital, the St. Elizabeth's name was used unofficially and intermittently until 1916. Congress passed legislation changing the name from the Government Hospital for the Insane to St. Elizabeths Hospital, omitting the possessive apostrophe. It also transferred the hospital's administration to the United States Department of the Interior.\nIn the late 19th century, the hospital temporarily housed animals that were brought back from expeditions for the Smithsonian Institution. There were no other federal facilities for such purpose, as the National Zoo had not been built.\nBy 1940, St. Elizabeths Hospital was transferred to the Federal Security Agency, later the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, as a U.S. Public Health Service Hospital. At its peak, the St. Elizabeths campus housed 8,000 patients annually and employed 4,000 people.\nDecline.\nBeginning in the 1950s, however, large institutions such as St. Elizabeths were being criticized for hindering the treatment of patients and for outright abuses of some patients. The 1963 Community Mental Health Act led to deinstitutionalization. The act provided for local outpatient facilities and drug therapy as a more effective means of allowing patients to live near-normal lives. The first community-based center for mental health was established at St. Elizabeths in 1969.\nThe patient population of St. Elizabeths steadily declined as alternatives were sought for treatment. Unfortunately the act was never fully funded, states did not provide sufficient funds for community centers, and there has been a widespread failure to provide treatment for the mentally ill. They make up a large proportion of the homeless, an increasing problem in many cities, as well as a high proportion of people held in jails and prisons. Lacking stable lives, many get caught up in the justice system through drugs and crime.\nIn 1967, the hospital was transferred to the National Institute of Mental Health.\nRecent history.\nAfter several decades in decline, the federal government decided that the large campus could no longer be adequately maintained. In 1987, Congress transferred hospital functions on the East Campus from the United States Department of Health and Human Services to the District of Columbia government, by the St. Elizabeths Hospital and District of Columbia Mental Health Services Act of 1984. The federal government retained ownership of the West Campus. By 2002, all remaining patients on the West Campus were transferred to other facilities.\nEast Campus.\nBy 1996, only 850 patients remained at the hospital on the East Campus. The District of Columbia struggled with the poor conditions from years of neglect and inadequate funding: equipment and medicine shortages occurred frequently, and the heating system was broken for weeks at a time. Although the hospital continues to operate, it does so on a far smaller scale than it once did. As of January 31, 2009, the current patient census was 404 in-patients.\nIn the early 21st century, approximately half of St. Elizabeths' patients are civilly committed to the hospital for treatment. The other half are forensic (criminal) patients. Forensic patients are those who are adjudicated to be criminally insane (not guilty by reason of insanity) or considered incompetent to stand trial. Civil patients are those who are admitted owing to an acute need for psychiatric care. Civil patients can be voluntarily or involuntarily committed for treatment.\nIn the early 2000s, the U.S. Department of Justice undertook an investigation of the hospital because of allegations that patient rights were being violated. In 2007, the Department of Justice and the District of Columbia reached a settlement over these allegations. DOJ instituted oversight of needed changes. On August 28, 2014, the Department of Justice found that St. Elizabeths had \"significantly improved the care and treatment of persons confined to Saint Elizabeths Hospital\" and asked a federal court to dismiss the injunction. In January 2015, DC Auditors dismissed the settlement agreement and officially ended oversight of St. Elizabeths Hospital.\nA new civil and forensic hospital was built on the East Campus by the District of Columbia Department of Mental Health and opened in the spring of 2010, housing approximately 297 patients. Until the new hospital opened, civil patients were cared for in various buildings on the East Campus. Forensic patients were housed in the John Howard Pavilion. In the new facility, civil and forensic patients live in separate units of the same building. The new hospital also houses a library, an auditorium, multiple computer laboratories, and a small museum in the lobby.\nBy the early 21st century the District of Columbia had made plans to redevelop St. Elizabeths' East Campus for mixed-use and residential rental property. The first step was construction of an arena for minor league sports. Other buildings on the East Campus were to be renovated for residential and associated retail uses, starting in 2018. On September 22, 2018, CareFirst Arena opened on campus. It is home to the Washington Mystics of the WNBA and Capital City Go-Go. It also serves as the practice facility for the Washington Wizards of the NBA.\nWest Campus.\nAfter the 1987 separation of the campuses, the D.C. government and its consultants proposed several commercial redevelopment projects for the West Campus, including relocating the University of the District of Columbia to the campus or developing office and retail space. However, the tremendous cost of bringing existing facilities up to code (estimated at $50\u2013$100\u00a0million) kept developers away.\nGiven little private interest in the site, the federal government sought alternatives within agency needs. Control of the West Campus\u2014home of the oldest building on the campus, the Center Building\u2014was transferred from HHS to the General Services Administration in 2004. GSA improved security around the campus, shored up roofs, and covered windows with plywood in an attempt to secure the buildings and preserve the campus until a tenant could be found.\nOn March 20, 2007, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) announced that it would establish a new facility on the West Campus. It planned to spend approximately $4.1\u00a0billion for renovations and adaptive reuse of buildings, in order to relocate its headquarters and most of its Washington-based offices to a new facility on the site. DHS had operations housed in dozens of buildings in the Washington, D.C., area, as several elements of the agency had been independent before its formation. Consolidation of employees from at least 60 facilities to St. Elizabeths was expected to result in a savings of $64\u00a0million per year in rental costs. DHS also hoped to improve employee morale and unity within the relatively new agency by having a central location from which to operate.\nThe plans to relocate DHS to St. Elizabeths were strongly criticized. Historic preservation experts argued that the consolidation plans would result in destruction of dozens of historic buildings on the campus and urged consideration of other alternatives. Community activists expressed concern that the planned high-security facility would be cut off from the surrounding community. They had hoped for agencies with employees who might support neighborhood businesses and shopping, settle in residential areas, and help revitalize the economically depressed area.\nThe government's plans proceeded. A ceremonial groundbreaking for the DHS consolidated headquarters took place at St. Elizabeths on September 9, 2009. The event was attended by Senator Joseph Lieberman (D-CT), DHS Secretary Janet Napolitano, D.C. Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton, DC Mayor Adrian Fenty, and acting GSA administrator Paul Prouty.\nThe United States Coast Guard was scheduled to be the first agency on the site in 2010. The relocated U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters Building was projected to open in May 2013, and a ceremony was held in July 2013 at the site. The U.S. Coast Guard Headquarters Building and several former hospital buildings (Atkins Hall, cafeteria) had been rehabilitated to support the new offices.\nBy 2015, construction began in the Center Building. Initially, this building has been slated for renovation, but internal structures (floors and ceilings) appeared to be beyond repair. The entire Center Building was renovated by removing old internal structures and building new structures to replace them, while retaining the historic facades. Between March and April 2019, the Department's Headquarters components moved to Center Building.\nBy April 2020, because of the surge in the COVID-19 pandemic and illness among staff, the DHS National Operations Center relocated to Mount Weather in an effort to reduce or prevent infections of critical personnel.\nNotable resident patients.\nWell-known patients of St. Elizabeths have included would-be presidential assassins Richard Lawrence, who attempted to kill Andrew Jackson, and John Hinckley Jr., who shot Ronald Reagan. Hinckley was released in 2016, subject to a number of restrictions. The court lifted all restrictions in 2022. Charles J. Guiteau, who assassinated President James Garfield, was held here until he was executed.\nNotable residents from civil commitments were Mary Fuller, a stage and silent film actress and early star; William Chester Minor, who made major contributions to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" while committed to an asylum in Great Britain; American poet Ezra Pound, a fascist collaborator during World War II; and Frances Wieser, a scientific illustrator. James Swann, a late 20th-century serial killer in the Washington, D.C., area, has been a forensic patient since 1994.\nAccording to reporter Kelly Patricia O'Meara, St. Elizabeths is believed to have treated more than 125,000 patients; an exact number is not known because of poor record keeping and the division of responsibilities among different agencies over the years. Additionally, thousands of patients appear to have been buried in unmarked graves across the campus. Records for individuals buried in the graves have been lost. O'Meara has suggested that some bodies may have been cremated in the incinerator on-site. The General Services Administration, current owner of the property, considered using ground-penetrating radar to attempt to locate unmarked graves, but has yet to do so.\nMore than 15,000 known autopsies were performed at St. Elizabeths from 1884 through 1982. A collection of over 1,400 brains preserved in formaldehyde, 5,000 photographs of brains, and 100,000 slides of brain tissue was maintained by the hospital until the collection was transferred to a museum in 1986, according to O'Meara. In addition to mental health patients buried on the campus, several hundred American Civil War soldiers are interred at St. Elizabeths.\nContributions to medicine.\nSeveral important therapeutic techniques were pioneered at St. Elizabeths, and it served as a model for later institutions. It was the first to use hydrotherapy, Freudian psychoanalytic techniques, dance therapy and psychodrama, for instance. Walter Freeman, onetime laboratory director, was inspired by St. Elizabeths to pioneer the transorbital lobotomy. It was used to treat epilepsy and some psychiatric conditions.\nDuring American involvement in World War II, the Office of Strategic Services (OSS), the predecessor to the Central Intelligence Agency, used facilities and staff at St. Elizabeths Hospital to test \"truth serums\". OSS tested a mescaline and scopolamine cocktail as a truth drug on two volunteers at St. Elizabeths Hospital, but found the combination unsuccessful. Separate tests of THC as a truth serum were equally unsuccessful.\nIn 1963, Dr. Luther D. Robinson, the first African American superintendent of St. Elizabeths, founded the mental health program for the deaf. Throughout his career he was a leading authority on treating deaf patients with brain disorders.\nFacilities and grounds.\nThe campus of St. Elizabeths is located on bluffs overlooking the confluence of the Potomac and Anacostia rivers in the southeast quadrant of Washington, D.C. It is divided by Martin Luther King Jr. Avenue between the East Campus (now owned by the D.C. government) and the West Campus (owned by the federal government). It has many important historic buildings, foremost among them the Center Building, designed according to the principles of the Kirkbride Plan by Thomas U. Walter (1804\u201387). He is notable as the primary architect of the expansion of the U.S. Capitol that was begun in 1851.\nMuch of St. Elizabeths' campus had fallen into disuse by the early 21st century and was in serious disrepair. The number of patients had steadily declined since the mid-20th century as community alternatives were sought for large mental institutions. In 2002 the National Trust for Historic Preservation ranked the hospital complex as one of the nation's \"11 Most Endangered Places\". Access to many areas of the campus, including what was then the abandoned West Campus (which houses the Center Building), was restricted before 2010. A variety of proposals were made on how to use and/or redevelop the site. It is now further restricted because of the Coast Guard\u2019s security requirements. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53831", "revid": "48961032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53831", "title": "Missionary", "text": "Member of a religious group sent into an area to promote their faith\nA missionary is a member of a religious group who is sent into an area in order to promote its faith or provide services to people, such as education, literacy, social justice, health care, and economic development.\nIn the Latin translation of the Bible, Jesus Christ says the word when he sends the disciples into areas and commands them to preach the gospel in his name. The term is most commonly used in reference to Christian missions, but it can also be used in reference to any creed or ideology.\nThe word \"mission\" originated in 1598 when Jesuits, the members of the Society of Jesus sent members abroad, derived from the Latin (nom. ), meaning 'act of sending' or , meaning 'to send'.\nBy religion.\nBuddhist missions.\nThe first Buddhist missionaries were called \"Dharma Bhanaks\", and some see a missionary charge in the symbolism behind the Buddhist wheel, which is said to travel all over the earth bringing Buddhism with it. The Emperor Ashoka was a significant early Buddhist missioner. In the 3rd century BCE, Dharmaraksita\u2014among others\u2014was sent out by emperor Ashoka to proselytize and initially the Buddhist tradition through the Indian Maurya Empire, but later into the Mediterranean as far as Greece. Gradually, all India and the neighboring island of Ceylon were converted. Then, in later periods, Buddhism spread eastward and southeastward to the present lands of Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Indonesia.\nBuddhism was spread among the Turkic people during the 2nd and 3rd centuries BCE into modern-day Pakistan, Kashmir, Afghanistan, eastern and coastal Iran, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, and Tajikistan. It was also taken into China brought by Kasyapa Matanga in the 2nd century CE, Lokaksema and An Shigao translated Buddhist sutras into Chinese. Dharmarak\u1e63a was one of the greatest translators of Mahayana Buddhist scriptures into Chinese. Dharmaraksa came to the Chinese capital of Luoyang in 266 CE, where he made the first known translations of the Lotus Sutra and the Dasabhumika Sutra, which were to become some of the classic texts of Chinese Mahayana Buddhism. Altogether, Dharmaraksa translated around 154 H\u012bnay\u0101na and Mah\u0101y\u0101na \"sutras\", representing most of the important texts of Buddhism available in the Western Regions. His proselytizing is said to have converted many to Buddhism in China, and made Chang'an, present-day Xi'an, a major center of Buddhism. Buddhism expanded rapidly, especially among the common people, and by 381 most of the people of northwest China were Buddhist. Winning converts also among the rulers and scholars, by the end of the Tang dynasty Buddhism was found everywhere in China.\nMarananta brought Buddhism to the Korean Peninsula in the 4th century. Seong of Baekje, known as a great patron of Buddhism in Korea, built many temples and welcomed priests bringing Buddhist texts directly from India. In 528, Baekje officially adopted Buddhism as its state religion. He sent tribute missions to Liang in 534 and 541, on the second occasion requesting artisans as well as various Buddhist works and a teacher. According to Chinese records, all these requests were granted. A subsequent mission was sent in 549, only to find the Liang capital in the hands of the rebel Hou Jing, who threw them in prison for lamenting the fall of the capital. He is credited with having sent a mission in 538 to Japan that brought an image of Shakyamuni and several sutras to the Japanese court. This has traditionally been considered the official introduction of Buddhism to Japan. An account of this is given in \"Gang\u014dji Garan Engi\". First supported by the Soga clan, Buddhism rose over the objections of the pro-Shinto Mononobe and Buddhism entrenched itself in Japan with the conversion of Prince Shotoku Taishi. When in 710 Emperor Shomu established a new capital at Nara with urban grid plan modeled after the capital of China, Buddhism received official support and began to flourish.\nPadmasambhava, The Lotus Born, was a sage guru from O\u1e0d\u1e0diy\u0101na who is said to have transmitted Vajrayana Buddhism to Bhutan and Tibet and neighbouring countries in the 8th century.\nThe use of missions, councils, and monastic institutions influenced the emergence of Christian missions and organizations, which developed similar structures in places that were formerly Buddhist missions.\nDuring the 19th and 20th centuries, Western intellectuals such as Schopenhauer, Henry David Thoreau, Max M\u00fcller, and esoteric societies such as the Theosophical Society of H.P. Blavatsky, The Buddhist Society of Great Britain and Ireland and the Buddhist Society, London spread interest in Buddhism. Writers such as Hermann Hesse and Jack Kerouac, in the West, and the hippie generation of the late 1960s and early 1970s led to a re-discovery of Buddhism. During the 20th and 21st centuries Buddhism has again been propagated by missionaries into the West such as Ananda Metteyya (Theravada Buddhism), Suzuki Daisetsu Teitar\u014d (Zen Buddhism), the Dalai Lama and monks including Lama Surya Das (Tibetan Buddhism). Tibetan Buddhism has been significantly active and successful in the West since the Chinese takeover of Tibet in 1959. Today Buddhists make a decent proportion of several countries in the West such as New Zealand, Australia, Canada, the Netherlands, France, and the United States.\nIn Canada, the immense popularity and goodwill ushered in by Tibet's Dalai Lama (who has been made honorary Canadian citizen) put Buddhism in a favourable light in the country. Many non-Asian Canadians embraced Buddhism in various traditions and some have become leaders in their respective sanghas.\nIn the early 1990s, the French Buddhist Union (UBF, founded in 1986) estimated that there are 600,000 to 650,000 Buddhists in France, with 150,000 French converts among them. In 1999, sociologist Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Lenoir estimated there are 10,000 converts and up to five\u00a0million \"sympathizers\", although other researchers have questioned these numbers.\nTaisen Deshimaru was a Japanese Zen Buddhist who founded numerous zendos in France. Thich Nhat Hanh, a Nobel Peace Prize-nominated, Vietnamese-born Zen Buddhist, founded the Unified Buddhist Church (Eglise Bouddhique Unifi\u00e9e) in France in 1969. The Plum Village Monastery in the Dordogne in southern France was his residence and the headquarters of his international sangha.\nIn 1968 Leo Boer and Wener van de Wetering founded a Zen group, and through two books made Zen popular in the Netherlands. The guidance of the group was taken over by Erik Bruijn, who is still in charge of a flourishing community. The largest Zen group now is the Kanzeon Sangha, led by Nico Tydeman under the supervision of the American Zen master Dennis Genpo Merzel, Roshi, a former student of Maezumi Roshi in Los Angeles. This group has a relatively large centre where a teacher and some students live permanently. Many other groups are also represented in the Netherlands, like the Order of Buddhist Contemplatives in Apeldoorn, the Thich Nhat Hanh Order of Interbeing and the International Zen Institute Noorderpoort monastery/retreat centre in Drenthe, led by Jiun Hogen Roshi.\nPerhaps the most widely visible Buddhist leader in the world is Tenzin Gyatso, the current Dalai Lama, who first visited the United States in 1979. As the exiled political leader of Tibet, he has become a popular cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre. His early life was depicted in Hollywood films such as \"Kundun\" and \"Seven Years in Tibet\". He has attracted celebrity religious followers such as Richard Gere and Adam Yauch. The first Western-born Tibetan Buddhist monk was Robert A. F. Thurman, now an academic supporter of the Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama maintains a North American headquarters at Namgyal Monastery in Ithaca, New York.\nLewis M. Hopfe in his \"Religions of the World\" suggested that \"Buddhism is perhaps on the verge of another great missionary outreach\" (1987:170).\nChristian missions.\nA Christian missionary can be defined as \"one who is to witness across cultures\". The Lausanne Congress of 1974, defined the term, related to Christian mission as, \"to form a viable indigenous church-planting movement\". Missionaries can be found in many countries around the world.\nIn the Bible, Jesus Christ is recorded as instructing the apostles to make disciples of all nations (, ). This verse is referred to by Christian missionaries as the Great Commission and inspires missionary work.\nHistoric.\nThe Christian Church expanded throughout the Roman Empire already in New Testament times and is said by tradition to have reached even further, to Persia (Church of the East) and to India (Saint Thomas Christians). During the Middle Ages, the Christian monasteries and missionaries such as Saint Patrick (5th century) and Adalbert of Prague (c. 956\u2013997) propagated learning and religion beyond the European boundaries of the old Roman Empire. In 596, Pope Gregory the Great (in office 590\u2013604) sent the Gregorian Mission (including Augustine of Canterbury) into England. In their turn, Christians from Ireland (the Hiberno-Scottish mission) and from Britain (Saint Boniface (c. 675\u2013754) and the Anglo-Saxon mission, for example) became prominent in converting the inhabitants of central Europe.\nDuring the Age of Discovery, the Catholic Church established a number of missions in the Americas and in other Western colonies through the Augustinians, Franciscans, and Dominicans to spread Christianity in the New World and to convert the Native Americans and other indigenous people. About the same time, missionaries such as Francis Xavier (1506\u20131552), as well as other Jesuits, Augustinians, Franciscans, and Dominicans, reached Asia and the Far East, and the Portuguese sent missions into Africa. Emblematic in many respects is Matteo Ricci's Jesuit mission to China from 1582, which was totally peaceful and non-violent. These missionary movements should be distinguished from others, such as the Baltic Crusades of the 12th and 13th centuries, which were arguably compromised in their motivation by designs of military conquest.\nMuch contemporary Catholic missionary work has undergone profound change since the Second Vatican Council of 1962\u20131965, with an increased push for indigenization and inculturation, along with social justice issues as a constitutive part of preaching the Gospel.\nAs the Catholic Church normally organizes itself along territorial lines and had the human and material resources, religious orders, some even specializing in it, undertook most missionary work, especially in the era after the collapse of the Roman Empire in the West. Over time, the Holy See gradually established a normalized Church structure in the mission areas, often starting with special jurisdictions known as apostolic prefectures and apostolic vicariates. At a later stage of development these foundations are raised to regular diocesan status with a local bishop appointed. On a global front, these processes were often accelerated in the later 1960s, in part accompanying political decolonization. In some regions, however, they are still in course.\nJust as the Bishop of Rome had jurisdiction also in territories later considered to be in the Eastern sphere, so the missionary efforts of the two 9th-century saints Cyril and Methodius were largely conducted in relation to the West rather than the East, though the field of activity was central Europe.\nThe Eastern Orthodox Church, under the Orthodox Church of Constantinople, undertook vigorous missionary work under the Roman Empire and its successor, the Byzantine Empire. This had lasting effects and in some sense is at the origin of the present relations of Constantinople with some sixteen Orthodox national churches, including the Romanian Orthodox Church, the Georgian Orthodox and Apostolic Church, and the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (both traditionally said to have been founded by the missionary Apostle Andrew), and the Bulgarian Orthodox Church (said to have been founded by the missionary Apostle Paul). The Byzantines expanded their missionary work in Ukraine after the mass baptism in Kiev in 988. The Serbian Orthodox Church had its origins in the conversion by Byzantine missionaries of the Serb tribes when they arrived in the Balkans in the 7th century. Orthodox missionaries also worked successfully among the Estonians from the 10th to the 12th centuries, founding the Estonian Orthodox Church.\nUnder the Russian Empire of the 19th century, missionaries such as Nicholas Ilminsky (1822\u20131891) moved into the subject lands and propagated Orthodoxy, including through Belarus, Latvia, Moldova, Finland, Estonia, Ukraine, and China. The Russian St. Nicholas of Japan (1836\u20131912) took Eastern Orthodoxy to Japan in the 19th century. The Russian Orthodox Church also sent missionaries to Alaska beginning in the 18th century, including Saint Herman of Alaska (died 1836), to minister to the Natives. The Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia continued missionary work outside Russia after the 1917 Russian Revolution, resulting in the establishment of many new dioceses in the diaspora, from which numerous converts have been made in Eastern Europe, North America, and Oceania.\nEarly Protestant missionaries included John Eliot and contemporary ministers, including John Cotton and Richard Bourne, who ministered to the Algonquin natives who lived in lands claimed by representatives of the Massachusetts Bay Colony in the early 17th century. Quaker \"publishers of truth\" visited Boston and other mid-17th-century colonies but were not always well received.\nThe Danish government began the first organized Protestant mission work through its College of Missions, established in 1714. This funded and directed Lutheran missionaries such as Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg in Tranquebar, India, and Hans Egede in Greenland. In 1732, while on a visit in 1732 to Copenhagen for the coronation of his cousin King Christian VI, the Moravian Church's patron Nicolas Ludwig, Count von Zinzendorf, was very struck by its effects and particularly by two visiting Inuit children converted by Hans Egede. He also got to know a slave from the Danish colony in the West Indies. When he returned to Herrnhut in Saxony, he inspired the inhabitants of the village\u00a0\u2013 it had fewer than thirty houses then\u00a0\u2013 to send out \"messengers\" to the slaves in the West Indies and to the Moravian missions in Greenland. Within thirty years, Moravian missionaries had become active on every continent, and this at a time when there were fewer than three hundred people in Herrnhut. They are famous for their selfless work, living as slaves among the slaves and together with Native Americans, including the Lenape and Cherokee Indian tribes. Today, the work in the former mission provinces of the worldwide Moravian Church is carried on by native workers. The fastest-growing area of the work is in Tanzania in Eastern Africa. The Moravian work in South Africa inspired William Carey and the founders of the British Baptist missions. As of 2014[ [update]], seven of every ten Moravians live in a former mission field and belong to a race other than Caucasian.\nMuch Anglican mission work came about under the auspices of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts (SPG, founded in 1701), the Church Missionary Society (CMS, founded in 1799), and the Intercontinental Church Society (formerly the Commonwealth and Continental Church Society, originating in 1823).\nModern.\nWith a dramatic increase in efforts since the 20th century, and a strong push since the \"Lausanne I: The International Congress on World Evangelization\" in Switzerland in 1974, modern evangelical groups have focused efforts on sending missionaries to every ethnic group in the world. While this effort has not been completed, increased attention has brought larger numbers of people distributing Bibles, Jesus videos, and establishing evangelical churches in more remote areas.\nInternationally, the focus for many years in the later 20th century was on reaching every \"people group\" with Christianity by 2000. Bill Bright's leadership with Campus Crusade, the Southern Baptist International Mission Board, The Joshua Project, and others brought about the need to know who these \"unreached people groups\" are and how those wanting to tell about the Christian God and share a Christian Bible could reach them. The focus for these organizations transitioned from a \"country focus\" to a \"people group focus\". (From \"What is a People Group?\" by Dr. Orville Boyd Jenkins: A \"people group\" is an ethnolinguistic group with a common self-identity that is shared by the various members. There are two parts to that word: ethno and linguistic. Language is a primary and dominant identifying factor of a people group. But there are other factors that determine or are associated with ethnicity.)\nWhat can be viewed as a success by those inside and outside the church from this focus is a higher level of cooperation and friendliness among churches and denominations. It is very common for those working on international fields to not only cooperate in efforts to share their gospel message, but view the work of their groups in a similar light. Also, with the increased study and awareness of different people groups, western mission efforts have become far more sensitive to the cultural nuances of those they are going to and those they are working with in the effort.\nOver the years, as indigenous churches have matured, the church of the Global South (Africa, Asia, and Latin America) has become the driving force in missions. Korean and African missionaries can now be found all over the world. These missionaries represent a major shift in church history where the nations they came from were not historically Christian. Another major shift in the form of modern missionary work takes shape in the conflation of spiritual with contemporary military metaphors and practices. Missionary work as spiritual warfare (Ephesians, Chapter 6) weapons of a spiritual sense, is the primary concept in a long-standing relationship between Christian missions and militarization. Though when the Church establishes a governance, usually this results in a formation of a national or regional military. (Romans, Chapter 13) Despite the seeming opposition between the submissive and morally upstanding associations with prayer and violence associated with militarism, these two spheres interact in a dialectical way. Yet they when properly implemented they are entangled to support one another in the upholding of a civilizations morality and the prosecution and punishment of criminals. In some cases a nations military may fail to operate according to Godly principles and is not supported by the Church or missionaries, in other cases the military is made up of the Church congregants. The results of spiritual conflict are then present in different ways as prayer can be strategically used, for or against a military.\nNigeria, and other countries have had large numbers of their Christian adherents go to other countries and start churches. These non-western missionaries often have unparalleled success; because, they need few western resources and comforts to sustain their livelihood while doing the work they have chosen among a new culture and people.\nOne of the first large-scale missionary endeavors of the British colonial age was the Baptist Missionary Society, founded in 1792 as the Particular Baptist Society for the Propagation of the Gospel Amongst the Heathen.\nThe London Missionary Society was an evangelical organisation, bringing together from its inception both Anglicans and Nonconformists; it was founded in England in 1795 with missions in Africa and the islands of the South Pacific. The Colonial Missionary Society was created in 1836, and directed its efforts towards promoting Congregationalist forms of Christianity among \"British or other European settlers\" rather than indigenous peoples.\n Both of these merged in 1966, and the resultant organisation is now known as the Council for World Mission.\nThe Church Mission Society, first known as the Society for Missions to Africa and the East, was founded in 1799 by evangelical Anglicans centred around the anti-slavery activist William Wilberforce. It bent its efforts to the Coptic Church, the Ethiopian Church, and India, especially Kerala; it continues to this day. Many of the network of churches they established became the Anglican Communion.\nIn 1809, the London Society for Promoting Christianity Amongst the Jews was founded, which pioneered mission amongst the Jewish people; it continues today as the Church's Ministry Among Jewish People. In 1865, the China Inland Mission was founded, going well beyond British controlled areas; it continues as the OMF, working throughout East Asia.\nMaryknoll.\nIn Montreal in 1910, Father James Anthony Walsh, a priest from Boston, met Father Thomas Frederick Price, from North Carolina. They agreed on the need to build a seminary for the training of young American men for the foreign Missions. Countering arguments that the Church needed workers here, Fathers Walsh and Price insisted the Church would not flourish until it sent missioners overseas. Independently, the men had written extensively about the concept, Father Price in his magazine \"Truth\", and Father Walsh in the pages of \"A Field Afar\", an early incarnation of \"Maryknoll Magazine\". Winning the approval of the American hierarchy, the two priests traveled to Rome in June 1911 to receive final approval from Pope Pius X for the formation of the Catholic Foreign Mission Society of America, now better known as the Maryknoll Fathers and Brothers.\nLatter Day Saints.\nThe Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has an active missionary program. Young men between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five are encouraged to prepare themselves to serve a two-year, self-funded, full-time proselytizing mission. Young women who desire to serve as missionaries can serve starting at the age of eighteen, for one and a half years. Retired couples also have the option of serving a mission. Missionaries typically spend two weeks in a Missionary Training Center (or two to three months for those learning a new language) where they study the scriptures, learn new languages when applicable, prepare themselves to teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and learn more about the culture and the people they live among. As of December 2019, the LDS Church had over 67,000 full-time missionaries worldwide and over 31,000 Service Missionaries.\nHindu missions.\nHinduism was introduced into Java by travellers from India in ancient times. Several centuries ago, many Hindus left Java for Bali rather than convert to Islam. Hinduism has survived in Bali ever since. Dang Hyang Nirartha was responsible for facilitating a refashioning of Balinese Hinduism. He was an important promoter of the idea of moksha in Indonesia. He founded the Shaivite priesthood that is now ubiquitous in Bali, and is now regarded as the ancestor of all Shaivite pandits.\nShantidas Adhikari was a Hindu preacher from Sylhet who converted King Pamheiba of Manipur to Hinduism in 1717.\nHistorically, Hinduism has only recently had a large influence in western countries such as the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Canada. Since the 1960s, many westerners attracted by the world view presented in Asian religious systems have converted to Hinduism. Many native-born Canadians of various ethnicities have converted during the last 50 years through the actions of the Ramakrishna Mission, ISKCON, Arya Samaj and other missionary organizations as well as due to the visits and guidance of Indian gurus such as Guru Maharaj, Sai Baba, and Rajneesh. The International Society for Krishna Consciousness has a presence in New Zealand, running temples in Auckland, Hamilton, Wellington and Christchurch.\nParamahansa Yogananda, an Indian yogi and guru, introduced many westerners to the teachings of meditation and Kriya Yoga through his book, \"Autobiography of a Yogi\".\nSwami Vivekananda, the founder of the Ramakrishna Mission is one of the greatest Hindu missionaries to the West.\nAnanda Marga missions.\n\u0100nanda M\u0101rga, organizationally known as \u0100nanda M\u0101rga Pracaraka Samgha (AMPS), meaning the \"samgha\" (organization) for the propagation of the \"marga\" (path) of \"ananda\" (bliss), is a social and spiritual movement founded in Jamalpur, Bihar, India, in 1955 by Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar (1921\u20131990), also known by his spiritual name, Shrii Shrii \u00c1nandam\u00farti. Ananda Marga counts hundreds of missions around the world through which its members carry out various forms of selfless service on Relief. (The social welfare and development organization under AMPS is Ananda Marga Universal Relief Team, or AMURT.) Education and women's welfare The service activities of this section founded in 1963 are focused on:\nIslamic missions.\nDawah means to \"invite\" (in Arabic, literally \"calling\") to Islam, which is the second largest religion with 2.0\u00a0billion members. From the 7th century, it spread rapidly from the Arabian Peninsula to the rest of the world through the initial Muslim conquests and subsequently with traders and explorers after the death of Muhammad.\nInitially, the spread of Islam came through the Dawah efforts of Muhammad and his followers. After his death in 632 CE, much of the expansion of the empire came through conquest such as that of North Africa and later Iberia (Al-Andalus). The Islamic conquest of Persia put an end to the Sassanid Empire and spread the reach of Islam to as far east as Khorasan, which would later become the cradle of Islamic civilization during the Islamic Golden Age (622\u20131258 CE) and a stepping-stone towards the introduction of Islam to the Turkic tribes living in and bordering the area.\nThe missionary movement peaked during the Islamic Golden Age, with the expansion of foreign trade routes, primarily into the Indo-Pacific and as far south as the isle of Zanzibar as well as the Southeastern shores of Africa.\nWith the coming of the Sufism tradition, Islamic missionary activities increased. Later, the Seljuk Turks' conquest of Anatolia made it easier for missionaries to go lands that formerly belonged to the Byzantine Empire. In the earlier stages of the Ottoman Empire, a Turkic form of Shamanism was still widely practiced in Anatolia, but soon lost ground to Sufism.\nDuring the Ottoman presence in the Balkans, missionary movements were taken up by people from aristocratic families hailing from the region, who had been educated in Constantinople or other major city within the Empire such as the famed \"madrassahs\" and \"kulliyes\". Primarily, individuals were sent back to the place of their origin and were appointed important positions in the local governing body. This approach often resulted in the building of mosques and local \"kulliyes\" for future generations to benefit from, as well as spreading the teachings of Islam.\nThe spread of Islam towards Central and West Africa had until the early 19th century has been consistent but slow. Previously, the only connection was through Trans-Saharan trade routes. The Mali Empire, consisting predominantly of African and Berber tribes, stands as a strong example of the early Islamic conversion of the Sub-Saharan region. The gateways prominently expanded to include the aforementioned trade routes through the Eastern shores of the African continent. With the European colonization of Africa, missionaries were almost in competition with the European Christian missionaries operating in the colonies.\nThere is evidence of Arab Muslim traders entering Indonesia as early as the 8th century. Indonesia's early people were animists, Hindus, and Buddhists. However it was not until the end of the 13th century that the process of Islamization began to spread throughout the areas local communities and port towns. The spread, although at first introduced through Arab Muslim traders, continued to saturate through the Indonesian people as local rulers and royalty began to adopt the religion subsequently leading their subjects to mirror their conversion.\nRecently, Muslim groups have engaged in missionary work in Malawi. Much of this is performed by the African Muslim Agency based in Angola. The Kuwait-sponsored AMA has translated the Qur'an into Chichewa (Cinyanja), one of the official languages of Malawi, and has engaged in other missionary work in the country. All of the major cities in the country have mosques and there are several Islamic schools.\nSeveral South African, Kuwaiti, and other Muslim agencies are active in Mozambique, with one important one being the African Muslim Agency. The spread of Islam into West Africa, beginning with ancient Ghana in the 9th century, was mainly the result of the commercial activities of North African Muslims. The empires of both Mali and Songhai that followed ancient Ghana in the Western Sudan adopted the religion. Islam made its entry into the northern territories of modern Ghana around the 15th century. Mande speakers (who in Ghana are known as Wangara) traders and clerics carried the religion into the area. The northeastern sector of the country was also influenced by an influx of Hausa Muslim traders from the 16th century onwards\nIslamic influence first occurred in India in the early 7th century with the advent of Arab traders. Trade relations have existed between Arabia and the Indian subcontinent from ancient times. Even in the pre-Islamic era, Arab traders used to visit the Malabar region, which linked them with the ports of Southeast Asia. According to Historians Elliot and Dowson in their book \"The History of India as told by its own Historians\", the first ship bearing Muslim travelers was seen on the Indian coast as early as 630 CE H. G. Rawlinson, in his book: \"Ancient and Medieval History of India\" claims the first Arab Muslims settled on the Indian coast in the last part of the 7th century. Shaykh Zainuddin Makhdum's \"Tuhfat al-Mujahidin\" also is a reliable work. This fact is corroborated, by J. Sturrock in his \"South Kanara and Madras Districts Manuals\", and also by Haridas Bhattacharya in \"Cultural Heritage of India Vol. IV\". It was with the advent of Islam that the Arabs became a prominent cultural force in the world. The Arab merchants and traders became the carriers of the new religion, and they propagated it wherever they went.\nIslam in Bulgaria can be traced back to the mid-ninth century when there were Islamic missionaries in Bulgaria, evidenced by a letter from Pope Nicholas to Boris of Bulgaria calling for the extirpation of Saracens.\nPioneer Muslim missionaries to the Kenyan interior were largely Tanganyikan, who coupled their missionary work with trade, along the centres began along the railway line such as Kibwezi, Makindu, and Nairobi.\nOutstanding among them was Maalim Mtondo Islam in Kenya, a Tanganyikan credited with being the first Muslim missionary to Nairobi. Reaching Nairobi at the close of the 19th century, he led a group of other Muslims, and enthusiastic missionaries from the coast to establish a \"Swahili village\" in present-day Pumwani. A small mosque was built to serve as a starting point and he began preaching Islam in earnest. He soon attracted several Kikuyus and Wakambas, who became his disciples.\nIn 1380, Karim ul' Makhdum the first Arabian Islamic missionary reached the Sulu Archipelago and Jolo in the Philippines and established Islam in the country. In 1390, the Minangkabau's Prince Rajah Baguinda and his followers preached Islam on the islands. The Sheik Karimal Makdum Mosque was the first mosque established in the Philippines on Simunul in Mindanao in the 14th century. Subsequent settlements by Arab missionaries traveling to Malaysia and Indonesia helped strengthen Islam in the Philippines and each settlement was governed by a Datu, Rajah, and a Sultan. Islamic provinces founded in the Philippines included the Sultanate of Maguindanao, Sultanate of Sulu, and other parts of the southern Philippines.\nModern missionary work in the United States has increased greatly in the last one hundred years, with much of the recent demographic growth driven by conversion. Up to one-third of American Muslims are African Americans who have converted to Islam during the last seventy years. Conversion to Islam in prisons, and in large urban areas has also contributed to Islam's growth over the years.\nAn estimated US$45\u00a0billion has been spent by the Saudi Arabian government financing mosques and Islamic schools in foreign countries. \"Ain al-Yaqeen\", a Saudi newspaper, reported in 2002 that Saudi funds may have contributed to building as many as 1,500 mosques and 2,000 other Islamic centers.\nEarly Islamic missionaries during Muhammad's era.\nDuring the Expedition of Al Raji in 625, the Islamic Prophet Muhammad sent some men as missionaries to various different tribes. Some men came to Muhammad and requested that Muhammad send instructors to teach them Islam, but the men were bribed by the two tribes of Khuzaymah who wanted revenge for the assassination of Khalid bin Sufyan (Chief of the Banu Lahyan tribe) by Muhammad's followers 8 Muslim Missionaires were killed in this expedition., another version says 10 Muslims were killed\nThen during the Expedition of Bir Maona in July 625 Muhammad sent some Missionaries at request of some men from the Banu Amir tribe, but the Muslims were again killed as revenge for the assassination of Khalid bin Sufyan by Muhammad's followers 70 Muslims were killed during this expedition\nDuring the Expedition of Khalid ibn al-Walid (Banu Jadhimah) in January 630, Muhammad sent Khalid ibn Walid to invite the Banu Jadhimah tribe to Islam. This is mentioned in the Sunni Hadith \"Sahih al-Bukhari\", https://.\nAhmadiyya Islam missions.\nMissionaries belonging to the Ahmadiyya thought of Islam often study at International Islamic seminaries and educational institutions, known as Jamia Ahmadiyya. Upon completion of their degrees, they are sent to various parts of the world including South America, Africa, North America, Europe, and the Far East as appointed by Mirza Masroor Ahmad, present head and Caliph of the worldwide Ahmadiyya Muslim community. Jamia students may be appointed by the Caliph either as Missionaries of the community (often called Murrabi, Imam, or Mawlana) or as Qadis or Muftis of the Ahmadiyya Muslim community with a specialisation in matters of fiqh (Islamic Jurisprudence). Some Jamia alumni have also become Islamic historians such as the late Dost Muhammad Shahid, former Official Historian of the Ahmadiyya Muslim community, with a specialisation in tarikh (Islamic historiography). Missionaries stay with their careers as appointed by the Caliph for the rest of their lives, as per their commitment to the community.\nJain missions.\nAccording to Jaina tradition, Mahavira's following had swelled to 14,000 monks and 36,000 nuns by the time of his death in 527 BCE\nFor some two centuries the Jains remained a small community of monks and followers. However, in the 4th century BCE, they gained strength and spread from Bihar to Orissa, then so South India and westwards to Gujarat and the Punjab, where Jain communities became firmly established, particularly among the mercantile classes. The period of the Mauryan dynasty to the 12th century was the period of Jainism's greatest growth and influence. Thereafter, the Jainas in the South and Central regions lost ground in face of rising Hindu devotional movements. Jainism retreated to the West and Northwest, which have remained its stronghold to the present.\nEmperor Samprati is regarded as the \"Jain Ashoka\" for his patronage and efforts to spreading Jainism in east India. Samprati, according to Jain historians, is considered more powerful and famous than Ashoka himself. Samprati built thousands of Jain Temples in India, many of which remain in use, such as the Jain temples at Viramgam and Palitana (Gujarat), Agar Malwa (Ujjain). Within three and a half years, he got one hundred and twenty-five thousand new temples built, thirty-six thousand repaired, twelve and a half million murtis, holy statues, consecrated and ninety-five thousand metal murtis prepared. Samprati is said to have erected Jain temples throughout his empire. He founded Jain monasteries even in non-Aryan territory, and almost all ancient Jain temples or monuments of unknown origin are popularly attributed to him. It may be noted that all the Jain monuments of Rajasthan and Gujarat, with unknown builders are also attributed to Emperor Samprati.\nVirachand Gandhi (1864\u20131901) from Mahuva represented Jains at the first Parliament of the World's Religions in Chicago in 1893 and won a silver medal. Gandhi was most likely the first Jain and the first Gujarati to travel to the United States, and his statue still stands at the Jain temple in Chicago. In his time he was a world-famous personality. Gandhi represented Jains in Chicago because the Great Jain Saint Param Pujya Acharya Vijayanandsuri, also known as Acharya Atmaram, was invited to represent the Jain religion at the first World Parliament of Religions. As Jain monks do not travel overseas, he recommended the bright young scholar Virchand Gandhi to be the emissary for the religion. Today there are 100,000 Jains in the United States.\nThere are also tens of thousands of Jains located in the UK and Canada.\nJudaism.\nHistorically, various Jewish sects and movements have been consistent in avoiding or even forbidding proselytization (religion-to-religion conversion propaganda) to convert gentiles (non-Jews). They believe that gentiles do not need to convert to Judaism, due to Abrahamic religions being already under the Seven Laws of Noah.\nChabad Lubavitch has a sub-sect that has engaged in an effort to spread Noahidism (Seven Laws of Noah) among non-Jews who follow none of the existing Abrahamic religions.\nOrthodox Judaism outreach (\"kiruv\") encourages non-practicing Jews to become more knowledgeable and observant of \"halakha\" (Jewish law). Outreach is done worldwide, by organizations such as Chabad Lubavitch, Aish HaTorah, Ohr Somayach, and Partners In Torah.\nMembers of Reform Judaism began a program to convert to their brand of Judaism the non-Jewish spouses of its intermarried members and non-Jews who have an interest in Reform Judaism. Their rationale is that so many Jews were lost during the Holocaust that newcomers must be sought out and welcomed. This approach has been rejected by both Orthodox Judaism and Conservative Judaism as unrealistic and posing a danger on the entire Jewish faith.\nSikh missions.\nAccording to Sikhs, when he was twenty-eight, Guru Nanak went as usual down to the river to bathe and meditate. It was said that he was gone for three days. When he reappeared, it is said he was \"filled with the spirit of God\". His first words after his re-emergence were: \"there is no Hindu, there is no Muslim\". With this secular principle he began his missionary work. He made four distinct major journeys, in the four different directions, which are called \"Udasis\", spanning many thousands of kilometres, preaching the message of God.\nCurrently there are gurdwaras in over 50 countries.\nOf missionary organizations, the most famous is probably The Sikh Missionary Society UK. The aim of the Sikh Missionary Society is the \"Advancement of the Sikh faith in the U.K. and abroad\", engages in various activities:\nThere have been several Sikh missionaries:\nSikhs have emigrated to many countries of the world since Indian independence in 1947. Sikh communities exist in Britain, East Africa, Canada, the United States, Malaysia, and most European countries.\nTenrikyo missions.\nTenrikyo conducts missionary work in approximately forty countries. Its first missionary was a woman named Kokan who worked on the streets of Osaka. In 2003, it operated approximately twenty thousand mission stations worldwide.\nCriticism.\nContact of Christian missionaries with isolated tribes is asserted as a cause of the extinction of some tribes, such as extinction from infections and even simple diseases such as flu, to which many tribes have no immunity. Documented cases of European contact with isolated tribes show rapid health deterioration, such as the Nambikwara tribe.\nChristian missionary work is criticized as a form of colonialism. Some Christian missionary thinkers have recognized complicity between colonialism and missions with roots in 'colonial paternalism'.\nAspects of Christian missionary activity have come under criticism, including concerns about a lack of respect for other cultures. The potential destruction of social structure among the converts is also a concern. The Huaorani people of Amazonian Ecuador have had a well-documented mixed relation with Evangelical Christian missionaries and the contacts they brought to their communities, which some have argued led to the dissolving of unique Huaorani tribes and cultural practices.\nImpact of missions.\nJohn D. Woodberry argued that missions are parts of the roots of international liberal democracy however a 2020 study by Elena Nikolova and Jakub Polansky replicated Woodberry's analysis using twenty-six alternative democracy measures and a more extensive time period over which the democracy measures are averaged, and did not come to the same conclusion.\nA 2017 study found that areas of colonial Mexico that had Mendicant missions have higher rates of literacy and educational attainment today than regions that did not have missions. Areas that had Jesuit missions are today indistinct from the areas that had no missions. The study also found that \"the share of Catholics is higher in regions where Catholic missions of any kind were a historical present.\"\nA 2016 study found that regions in Sub-Saharan Africa that Protestant missionaries brought printing presses to are today \"associated with higher newspaper readership, trust, education, and political participation.\"\nMissionaries have also made significant contributions to linguistics and the description and documentation of many languages. \"Many languages today exist only in missionary records. More than anywhere else, our knowledge of the native languages in South America has been the product of missionary activity... Without missionary documentation the reclamation [of several languages] would have been completely impossible\" \"A satisfactory history of linguistics cannot be written before the impressive contribution of missionaries is recognised.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "53832", "revid": "7226551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53832", "title": "DARPA Agent Markup Language", "text": "The DARPA Agent Markup Language (DAML) was the name of a US funding program at the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) started in 1999 by then-Program Manager James Hendler, and later run by Murray Burke, Mark Greaves and Michael Pagels. The program focused on the creation of machine-readable representations for the Web. \nOne of the Investigators working on the program was Tim Berners-Lee. Working with the program managers and other participants, Tim helped shape the effort to create technologies and demonstrations for what is now called the Semantic Web, leading in turn to the growth of knowledge graph technology.\nA primary outcome of the DAML program was the DAML language, an agent markup language based on RDF. This language was followed by an extension entitled DAML+OIL which included researchers outside of the DARPA program in the design. The 2002 submission of the DAML+OIL language to the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) captures the work done by DAML contractors and the EU/U.S. ad hoc Joint Committee on Agent Markup Languages. This submission was the starting point for the language (later called OWL) to be developed by W3C's web ontology working group, WebOnt.\nDAML+OIL was a syntax, layered on RDF and XML, that could be used to describe sets of facts making up an ontology.\nDAML+OIL had its roots in three main languages - DAML, as described above, OIL (Ontology Inference Layer) and SHOE, an earlier US research project.\nA major innovation of the languages was to use RDF and XML for a basis, and to use RDF namespaces to organize and assist with the integration of arbitrarily many different and incompatible ontologies.\nArticulation ontologies can link these competing ontologies through codification of analogous subsets in a neutral point of view, as is done in the Wikipedia.\nCurrent ontology research derived in part from DAML is leading toward the expression of ontologies and rules for reasoning and action. \nMuch of the work in DAML has now been incorporated into RDF Schema, the OWL and their successor languages and technologies including schema.org"}
{"id": "53833", "revid": "4485480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53833", "title": "Subway listing", "text": ""}
{"id": "53834", "revid": "4485480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53834", "title": "Metro listing", "text": ""}
{"id": "53835", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53835", "title": "Haredi Judaism", "text": "Branch of Orthodox Judaism\nHaredi Judaism (, ) is a branch of Orthodox Judaism that is characterized by its strict interpretation of religious sources and its accepted (Jewish law) and traditions, in opposition to more accommodating values and practices. Its members are often referred to as ultra-Orthodox in English, a term considered pejorative by many of its adherents, who prefer the term strictly Orthodox or Haredi (plural: Haredim). Haredim regard themselves as the most authentic custodians of Jewish religious law and tradition which, in their opinion, is binding and unchangeable. They consider all other expressions of Judaism, including Modern Orthodoxy, as \"deviations from God's laws\", although other movements of Judaism would disagree.\nSome scholars have suggested that Haredi Judaism is a reaction to societal changes, including political emancipation, the movement derived from the Enlightenment, acculturation, secularization, religious reform in all its forms from mild to extreme, and the rise of the Jewish national movements. In contrast to Modern Orthodox Jews, Haredim segregate themselves from other parts of society, although some Haredi communities encourage young people to get a professional degree or establish a business. Furthermore, some Haredi groups, like Chabad-Lubavitch, encourage outreach to non-observant and unaffiliated Jews.\nAs of 2020, there were about 2.1 million Haredim globally, representing 14% of the world's Jewish population. Haredim primarily live in Israel (17% of Israeli Jews and 14% of Israel's total population), North America (12% of American Jews), and Western Europe (most notably Antwerp and Stamford Hill in London). Absence of intermarriage, coupled with both a high birth and retention rate, spur rapid growth of the Haredi population, which is on pace to more than double every 20 years. Their numbers have been further boosted since the 1970s by secular Jews adopting a Haredi lifestyle as part of the baal teshuva movement; however, this has been somewhat offset by those leaving.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nThe term is a Modern Hebrew adjective derived from the Biblical verb , which appears in the Book of Isaiah (; its plural appears in Isaiah ) and is translated as \"[one who] trembles\" at the word of God. The word connotes an awe-inspired fear to perform the will of God; it is used to distinguish them from other Orthodox Jews (similar to the names used by Christian Quakers and Shakers to describe their relationship to God).\nThe term most commonly used by outsiders, for example most American news organizations, is \"ultra-Orthodox\" Judaism. Hillel Halkin suggests the origins of the term may date to the 1950s, a period in which Haredi survivors of the Holocaust first began arriving in America. However, Isaac Leeser (1806\u20131868) was described in 1916 as \"ultra-Orthodox\".\nThe word \"Haredi\" is often used in the Jewish diaspora in place of the term \"ultra-Orthodox\", which many view as inaccurate or offensive, it being seen as a derogatory term suggesting extremism; English-language alternatives that have been proposed include \"fervently Orthodox\", \"strictly Orthodox\", or \"traditional Orthodox\". Others, however, dispute the characterization of the term as pejorative. Ari L. Goldman, a professor at Columbia University, notes that the term simply serves a practical purpose to distinguish a specific part of the Orthodox community, and is not meant as pejorative. Others, such as Samuel Heilman, criticized terms such as \"ultra-Orthodox\" and \"traditional Orthodox\", arguing that they misidentify Haredi Jews as more authentically Orthodox than others, as opposed to adopting customs and practises that reflect their desire to separate from the outside world.\nThe community has sometimes been characterized as \"traditional Orthodox\", in contradistinction to the Modern Orthodox, the other major branch of Orthodox Judaism, and not to be confused with the movement represented by the Union for Traditional Judaism, which originated in Conservative Judaism.\nHaredi Jews also use other terms to refer to themselves. Common Yiddish words include (Jews), (virtuous Jews), (son of the Torah), (pious), and (home-like; i.e., \"our crowd\").\nIn Israel, Haredi Jews are sometimes also called by the derogatory slang words (plural ), that mimics the traditional Ashkenazi Hebrew pronunciation of the Hebrew word (religious), and more rarely, (blacks), a reference to the black clothes they typically wear; a related informal term used in English is \"black hat\".\nPopulation.\nDue to its imprecise definition, lack of data collection, and rapid change over time, estimating the global Haredi population is difficult. The true number of Haredim may be significantly underestimated due to their reluctance to participate in surveys and censuses.\nIn 1992, out of a total of 1,500,000 Orthodox Jews worldwide, about 550,000 were Haredi (half of them in Israel). One estimate given in 2011 stated that there were approximately 1.3 million Haredi Jews globally. Studies have shown a very high growth rate, with a large young population. Haredi population grew to 2.1 million in 2020 and is expected to double by 2040.\nThe vast majority of Haredi Jews are Ashkenazi. However, some 20% of the Haredi population are thought to belong to the Sephardic Haredi stream. In recent decades, Haredi society has grown due to the addition of a religious population that identifies with the Shas movement. The percentage of people leaving the Haredi population has been estimated between 6% and 18%.\nIsrael.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIsrael has the largest Haredi population. In 1948, there were about 35,000 to 45,000 Haredi Jews in Israel. By 1980, Haredim made up 4% of the Israeli population. Haredim made up 9.9% of the Israeli population in 2009, with 750,000 out of 7,552,100; by 2014, that figure had risen to 11.1%, with 910,500 Haredim out of a total Israeli population of 8,183,400. According to a December 2017 study conducted by the Israeli Democracy Institute, the number of Haredi Jews in Israel exceeded 1 million in 2017, making up 12% of the population in Israel. In 2019, Haredim reached a population of almost 1,126,000; the next year, it reached 1,175,000 (12.6% of total population). By the end of 2023, it reached almost 1,335,000, or 13.6% of total population; and by the end of 2024, it passed over 1,392,000, thus representing 13.9% of the total population.\nThe number of Haredi Jews in Israel continues to rise rapidly, with their current population growth rate being 4% per year. The number of children per woman is 7.2, and the share of Haredim among those under the age of 20 was 16.3% in 2009 (29% of Jews).\nBy 2030, the Haredi Jewish community is projected to make up 16% of the total population, and by 2065, a third of the Israeli population, including non-Jews. By then, one in two Israeli children would be Haredi. It is also projected that the number of Haredim in 2059 may be between 2.73 and 5.84 million, of an estimated total number of Israeli Jews between 6.09 and 9.95 million.\nThe largest Israeli Haredi concentrations are in Jerusalem, Bnei Brak, Modi'in Illit, Beitar Illit, Beit Shemesh, Kiryat Ye'arim, Ashdod, Rekhasim, Safed, and El'ad. Two Haredi cities, Kasif and Harish, are planned.\nUnited States.\nThe United States has the second largest Haredi population, which has a growth rate on pace to double every 20 years. In 2000, there were 360,000 Haredi Jews in the US (7.2 per cent of the approximately 5 million Jews in the U.S.); by 2006, demographers estimate the number had grown to 468,000 (30% increase), or 9.4 percent of all U.S. Jews. In 2013, it was estimated that there were 530,000 total ultra-Orthodox Jews in the United States, or 10% of all American Jews. By 2011, 61% of all Jewish children in Eight-County New York City metropolitan area were Orthodox, with Haredim making up 49%.\nIn 2020, it was estimated that there were approximately 700,000 total ultra-Orthodox Jews in the United States, or 12% of all American Jews. This number is expected to grow significantly in the coming years, due to high Haredi birth rates in America.\nNew York state.\nMost American Haredi Jews live in the greater New York metropolitan area.\nNew York City.\nBrooklyn.\nThe largest centers of Haredi and Hasidic life in New York are found in Brooklyn.\nQueens.\nThe New York City borough of Queens is home to a growing Haredi population, mainly affiliated with the Yeshiva Chofetz Chaim and Yeshivas Ohr HaChaim in Kew Gardens Hills and Yeshiva Shaar Hatorah in Kew Gardens. Many of the students attend Queens College. There are major yeshivas and communities of Haredi Jews in Far Rockaway, such as Yeshiva of Far Rockaway and a number of others. Hasidic shtibelach exist in these communities as well, mostly catering to Haredi Jews who follow Hasidic customs, while living a Litvish or Modern Orthodox cultural lifestyle, although small Hasidic enclaves do exist, such as in the Bayswater section of Far Rockaway.\nManhattan.\nOne of the oldest Haredi communities in New York is on the Lower East Side, home to the Mesivtha Tifereth Jerusalem.\nWashington Heights, in northern Manhattan, is the historical home to German Jews, with Khal Adath Jeshurun and Yeshiva Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch. The presence of Yeshiva University attracts young people, many of whom remain in the area after graduation.\nLong Island.\nThe Yeshiva Sh'or Yoshuv, together with many synagogues in the Lawrence neighborhood and other Five Towns neighborhoods, such as Woodmere and Cedarhurst, have attracted many Haredi Jews.\nHudson Valley.\nThe Hudson Valley, north of New York City, has the most rapidly growing Haredi communities, such as the Hasidic communities in Kiryas Joel of Satmar Hasidim, and New Square of the Skver. A vast community of Haredi Jews lives in the Monsey, New York, area.\nNew Jersey.\nThere are significant Haredi communities in Lakewood (New Jersey), home to the largest non-Hasidic Lithuanian yeshiva in America, Beth Medrash Govoha. There are also sizable communities in Teaneck, Englewood, Mahwah, Passaic and Edison, where a branch of the Rabbi Jacob Joseph Yeshiva opened in 1982. There is also a community of Syrian Jews favorable to the Haredim in their midst in Deal, New Jersey.\nConnecticut.\nThe Haredi community of New Haven has close to 150 families and a number of thriving Haredi educational institutions.\nWaterbury, Connecticut has a growing Haredi community, in Waterbury proper, and in the neighboring areas of Blueridge and Naugatuck.\nMaryland.\nBaltimore, Maryland, has a large Haredi population. The major yeshiva is Yeshivas Ner Yisroel, founded in 1933, with thousands of alumni and their families. Ner Yisroel is also a Maryland state-accredited college, and has agreements with Johns Hopkins University, Towson University, Loyola College in Maryland, University of Baltimore, and University of Maryland, Baltimore County, allowing undergraduate students to take night courses at these colleges and universities in a variety of academic fields. The agreement also allows the students to receive academic credits for their religious studies.\nSilver Spring, Maryland, and its environs has a growing Haredi community, mostly of highly educated and skilled professionals working for the United States government in various capacities, most living in Kemp Mill, White Oak, and Woodside, and many of its children attend the Yeshiva of Greater Washington and Yeshivas Ner Yisroel in Baltimore.\nFlorida.\nAventura, Sunny Isles Beach, Golden Beach, Surfside and Bal Harbour are home to a large and growing Haredi population. The community is long-established in the area, with several synagogues including The Shul of Bal Harbour, Young Israel of Bal Harbour, Aventura Chabad, Beit Rambam, Safra Synagogue of Aventura, and Chabad of Sunny Isles; mikvehs, Jewish schools and kosher restaurants. The community has recently grown much further, due to many Orthodox Jews from New York moving to Florida during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nNorth of Miami, the communities of Boca Raton, Lauderhill, Boynton Beach, and Hollywood have significant Haredi populations.\nCalifornia.\nLos Angeles has many Haredi Jews, most living in the Pico-Robertson and Fairfax (Fairfax Avenue-La Brea Avenue) areas.\nIllinois.\nChicago is home to the Haredi Telshe Yeshiva of Chicago, with many other Haredim living in the city.\nPennsylvania.\nHaredim in Philadelphia primarily live in Bala Cynwyd, and the community is centered around Aish HaTorah and the Philadelphia Community Kollel.\nIn Pittsburgh a small yeshiva opened in 1945. Today there are approximately 200 Chabad families living in the Squirrel Hill neighborhood.\nKingston has a young growing Chabad Haredi community which has been growing steadily over the past 20 years since the first families moved there when a yeshiva was opened.\nColorado.\nDenver has a large Haredi population of Ashkenazi origin, dating back to the early 1920s. The Haredi Denver West Side Jewish Community adheres to Litvak Jewish traditions (Lithuanian), and has several congregations located within their communities.\nMassachusetts.\nBoston and Brookline, Massachusetts, have the largest Haredi populations in New England.\nOhio.\nOne of the oldest Haredi Lithuanian yeshivas, Telshe Yeshiva, transplanted itself to Cleveland in 1941. Beachwood, Ohio has a large and growing Haredi community, and is a heavily Jewish suburb of Cleveland. The haredi community is centered around the Beachwood Kehilla and Green Road Synagogue, has a mikvah and a Jewish day school.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn 1998, the Haredi population in the Jewish community of the United Kingdom was estimated at 27,000 (13% of affiliated Jews). The largest communities are located in London, particularly Stamford Hill, Golders Green, Hendon, Edgware; in Salford and Prestwich in Greater Manchester; and in Gateshead. A 2007 study asserted that three out of four British Jewish births were Haredi, who then accounted for 17% of British Jews (45,500 out of around 275,000). Another study in 2010 established that there were 9,049 Haredi households in the UK, which would account for a population of nearly 53,400, or 20% of the community. The Board of Deputies of British Jews has predicted that the Haredi community will become the largest group in Anglo-Jewry within the next three decades: In comparison with the national average of 2.4 children per family, Haredi families have an average of 5.9 children, and consequently, the population distribution is heavily biased to the under-20-year-olds. By 2006, membership of Haredi synagogues had doubled since 1990. British Haredi fertility rate has also been estimated to be as high as 6.9 children per woman.\nAn investigation by \"The Independent\" in 2014 reported that more than 1,000 children in Haredi communities were attending illegal schools where secular knowledge is banned, and they learn only religious texts, meaning they leave school with no qualifications and often unable to speak any English.\nThe 2018 Survey by the Jewish Policy Research (JPR) and the Board of Deputies of British Jews showed that the high birth rate in the Haredi and Orthodox community reversed the decline in the Jewish population in Britain.\nIn 2020, it was estimated that there were approximately 76,000 total ultra-Orthodox Jews in the United Kingdom, or 25% of all British Jews, a significant increase from 1998 and 2010.\nElsewhere.\nAbout 25,000 Haredim live in the Jewish community of France, mostly people of Sephardic, Maghrebi Jewish descent. Important communities are located in Paris (19th arrondissement), Strasbourg, and Lyon.\nOther important communities, mostly of Ashkenazi Jews, are the Antwerp community in Belgium, as well as in the Swiss communities of Z\u00fcrich and Basel, and in the Dutch community in Amsterdam. There is also a Haredi community in Vienna, in the Jewish community of Austria. Other countries with significant Haredi populations include: Canada, with a total number of 30,000 Haredim, with large Haredi centres in Montreal and Toronto; South Africa, primarily in Johannesburg; and an estimated 7,500 Haredim in Australia, centred in Melbourne. Haredi communities also exist in Argentina, especially in Buenos Aires, and in Brazil, primarily in S\u00e3o Paulo. A Haredi city is under construction (2021) in Mexico near Ixtapan de la Sal. Decades after The Holocaust, Haredim are growing again in Budapest, opening several new synagogues and two mikvehs in the city over the past couple of years.\nHistory.\nThroughout Jewish history, Judaism has always faced internal and external challenges to its beliefs and practices which have emerged over time and produced counter-responses. According to its adherents, Haredi Judaism is a continuation of Rabbinic Judaism, and the immediate forebears of contemporary Haredi Jews were the Jewish religious traditionalists of Central and Eastern Europe who fought against secular modernization's influence which reduced Jewish religious observance. Indeed, adherents of Haredi Judaism, just like Rabbinic Jews, see their beliefs as part of an unbroken tradition which dates back to the revelation at Sinai. However, most historians of Orthodoxy consider Haredi Judaism, in its most modern incarnation, to date back to the beginning of the 20th century.\nFor centuries, before Jewish emancipation, European Jews were forced to live in ghettos where Jewish culture and religious observance were preserved. Change began in the wake of the Age of Enlightenment, when some European liberals sought to include the Jewish population in the emerging empires and nation states. The influence of the movement (Jewish Enlightenment) was also evident. Supporters of the Haskalah held that Judaism must change, in keeping with the social changes around them. Other Jews insisted on strict adherence to \"\" (Jewish law and custom).\nIn Germany, the opponents of Reform rallied to Samson Raphael Hirsch, who led a secession from German Jewish communal organizations to form a strictly Orthodox movement, with its own network of synagogues and religious schools. His approach was to accept the tools of modern scholarship and apply them in defence of Orthodox Judaism. In the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth (including areas traditionally considered Lithuanian), Jews true to traditional values gathered under the banner of \"Agudas Shlumei Emunei Yisroel\".\nMoses Sofer was opposed to any philosophical, social, or practical change to customary Orthodox practice. Thus, he did not allow any secular studies to be added to the curriculum of his Pressburg Yeshiva. Sofer's student Moshe Schick, together with Sofer's sons Shimon and Samuel Benjamin, took an active role in arguing against the Reform movement. Others, such as Hillel Lichtenstein, advocated an even more stringent position for Orthodoxy.\nA major historic event was the meltdown after the Universal Israelite Congress of 1868\u20131869 in Pest, Hungary. In an attempt to unify all streams of Judaism under one constitution, the Orthodox offered the \"Shulchan Aruch\" as the ruling Code of law and observance. This was dismissed by the reformists, leading many Orthodox rabbis to resign from the Congress and form their own social and political groups. Hungarian Jewry split into two major institutionally sectarian groups: Orthodox, and Neolog. However, some communities refused to join either of the groups, calling themselves \"Status Quo\".\nSchick demonstrated support in 1877 for the separatist policies of Samson Raphael Hirsch in Germany. Schick's own son was enrolled in the Hildesheimer Rabbinical Seminary, headed by Azriel Hildesheimer, which taught secular studies. Hirsch, however, did not reciprocate, and expressed astonishment at Schick's \"halakhic\" contortions in condemning even those Status Quo communities that clearly adhered to \"halakha\". Lichtenstein opposed Hildesheimer, and his son Hirsh Hildesheimer, as they made use of the German language in sermons from the pulpit and seemed to lean in the direction of Zionism.\nShimon Sofer was somewhat more lenient than Lichtenstein on the use of German in sermons, allowing the practice as needed for the sake of keeping cordial relations with the various governments. Likewise, he allowed extra-curricular studies of the gymnasium for students whose rabbinical positions would be recognized by the governments, stipulating the necessity to prove the strict adherence to the God-fearing standards per individual case.\nIn 1912, the World Agudath Israel was founded, to differentiate itself from the Torah Nationalist Mizrachi and secular Zionist organizations. It was dominated by the Hasidic \"rebbes\" and Lithuanian rabbis and \"roshei yeshiva\" (deans). The organization nominated rabbis who subsequently were elected as representatives in the Polish legislature Sejm, such as Meir Shapiro and Yitzhak-Meir Levin. Not all Hasidic factions joined the Agudath Israel, remaining independent instead, such as Machzikei Hadat of Galicia.\nIn 1919, Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld and Yitzchok Yerucham Diskin founded the Edah HaChareidis as part of Agudath Israel in then-Mandate Palestine.\nIn 1924, Agudath Israel obtained 75 percent of the votes in the Kehilla elections.\nThe Orthodox community polled some 16,000 of a total 90,000 at the Knesseth Israel in 1929. But Sonnenfeld lobbied Sir John Chancellor, the High Commissioner, for separate representation in the Palestine Communities Ordinance from that of the Knesseth Israel. He explained that the Agudas Israel community would cooperate with the Vaad Leumi and the National Jewish Council in matters pertaining to the municipality, but sought to protect its religious convictions independently. The community petitioned the Permanent Mandates Commission of the League of Nations on this issue. The one community principle was victorious, despite their opposition, but this is seen as the creation of the Haredi community in Israel, separate from the other Orthodox and Zionist movements.\nIn 1932, Sonnenfeld was succeeded by Yosef Tzvi Dushinsky, a disciple of the Shevet Sofer, one of the grandchildren of Moses Sofer. Dushinsky promised to build up a strong Jewish Orthodoxy at peace with the other Jewish communities and the non-Jews.\nPost-Holocaust.\nIn general, the present-day Haredi population originate from two distinct post-Holocaust waves.\nThe vast majority of Hasidic and Litvak communities were destroyed during the Holocaust. Although Hasidic customs have largely been preserved, the customs of Lithuanian Jewry, including its unique Hebrew pronunciation, have been almost lost. Litvish customs are still preserved primarily by the few older Jews who were born in Lithuania prior to the Holocaust. In the decade or so after 1945, there was a strong drive to revive and maintain these lifestyles by some notable Haredi leaders. \nThe Chazon Ish was particularly prominent in the early days of the State of Israel. Aharon Kotler established many of the Haredi schools and yeshivas in the United States and Israel; and Joel Teitelbaum had a significant impact on revitalizing Hasidic Jewry, as well as many of the Jews who fled Hungary during the 1956 revolution who became followers of his Satmar dynasty, and became the largest Hasidic group in the world. These Jews typically have maintained a connection only with other religious family members. As such, those growing up in such families have little or no contact with non-Haredi Jews.\nThe second wave began in the 1970s associated with the religious revival of the so-called baal teshuva movement, although most of the newly religious become Orthodox, and not necessarily fully Haredi. The formation and spread of the Sephardic Haredi lifestyle movement also began in the 1980s by Ovadia Yosef, alongside the establishment of the Shas party in 1984. This led many Sephardi Jews to adopt the clothing and culture of the Lithuanian Haredi Judaism, though it had no historical basis in their own tradition. Many yeshivas were also established specifically for new adopters of the Haredi way of life.\nThe original Haredi population has been instrumental in the expansion of their lifestyle, though criticisms have been made of discrimination towards the later adopters of the Haredi lifestyle in \"shidduchim\" (matchmaking) and the school system.\nPractices and beliefs.\nThe Haredim represent the conservative or pietistic form of Jewish fundamentalism, distinct from the radical fundamentalism of Gush Emunim, and emphasising withdrawal from, and disdain for, the secular world, and the creation of an alternative world which insulates the Torah and the life it prescribes from outside influences.\nHaredi Judaism is not an institutionally cohesive or homogeneous group, but comprises a diversity of spiritual and cultural orientations, generally divided into a broad range of Hasidic courts and Litvishe-Yeshivish streams from Eastern Europe, and Oriental Sephardic Haredi Jews. These groups often differ significantly from one another in their specific ideologies and lifestyles, as well as the degree of stringency in religious practice, rigidity of religious philosophy, and isolation from the general culture that they maintain. Some Haredis encourage outreach to less observant and unaffiliated Jews and (secular Israeli Jews).\nSome scholars, including some secular and Reform Jews, describe the Haredim as \"radical fundamentalists\".\nEfforts to keep clear of external influence is a core characteristic of Haredi Judaism. Historically, new mediums of communication such as books, newspapers and magazines, and later tapes, CDs and television, were dealt with by either transforming and controlling the content, or choosing to have rabbinic leadership censor it selectively or altogether. In the modern digital era, difficulty in censoring the Internet and conversely, the Internet's importance, resulted in a decades long and ongoing struggle of comprehension, adaption, and regulation on the part of rabbinical leadership and community activists.\nThese beliefs and practices, which have been interpreted as \"isolationist\", can bring them into conflict with authorities. In 2018, a Haredi school in the United Kingdom was rated as \"inadequate\" by the Office for Standards in Education, after repeated complaints were raised about the censoring of textbooks and exam papers which contained mentions of homosexuality, examples of women socializing with men, pictures showing women's shoulders and legs, or information that contradicts a creationist worldview.\nLifestyle and family.\nHaredi life, like Orthodox Jewish life in general, is very family-centered and ordered. Boys and girls attend separate schools, and proceed to higher Torah study, in a yeshiva or seminary, respectively, starting anywhere between the ages of 13 and 18. A significant proportion of young men remain in yeshiva until their marriage (often arranged). After marriage, many Haredi men continue their Torah studies in a kollel.\nStudying in secular institutions is often discouraged, although educational facilities for vocational training in a Haredi framework do exist. In the United States and Europe, the majority of Haredi males are active in the workforce. For various reasons, in Israel, a majority (56%) of their male members do not work, though some of those are part of the unofficial workforce. Haredi families (and Orthodox Jewish families in general) are usually much larger than non-Orthodox families, with an average of seven children per family, but it is not unheard of for families to have twelve or more children. About 80% of female Haredi Jews in Israel work.\nHaredi Jews are typically opposed to the viewing of television and films, and the reading of secular newspapers and books. There has been a strong campaign against the Internet, and Internet-enabled mobile phones without filters have also been banned by leading rabbis. In May 2012, 40,000 Haredim gathered at Citi Field, a baseball park in New York City, to discuss the dangers of unfiltered Internet. The event was organized by the Ichud HaKehillos LeTohar HaMachane. The Internet has been allowed for business purposes, so long as filters are installed.\nIn some instances, forms of recreation which conform to Jewish law are treated as antithetical to Haredi Judaism. In 2013, the Rabbinical Court of the Ashkenazi Community in the Haredi settlement of Beitar Illit ruled against Zumba (a type of dance fitness) classes, although they were held with a female instructor and all-female participants. The Court said in part: \"Both in form and manner, the activity [Zumba] is entirely at odds with both the ways of the Torah and the holiness of Israel, as are the songs associated to it.\"\n\"Jewish Chicago\" has lauded the Haredim for their lifestyle, arguing that it has low crime and drugs, and a strong sense of family and community.\n\"Shidduch\" (matchmaking).\nWith Haredi Judaism having a heavy emphasis on marriage, especially while young, some members rely on the \"shidduch\" (matchmaking) system. They employ a schadhan (a professional matchmaker) to support them in their search for a spouse. While there is no current statistical data showing how many people use the services of a schadhan, it is estimated that the vast majority of Haredi couples were paired by one.\nHowever, with the broader societal shift to online dating, matchmaking in Orthodox and Haredi Judaism has started making inroads online. Vastly different from the most popular online dating services, apps like Shidduch pair couples based upon shared values and life goals. To do this, users fill-out a digital resume. The app was made possible by a partnership between its developers and the Orthodox Union \u2014 the same group responsible for kosher food certification (\"Circle-U\").\nDress.\nThe standard mode of dress for males of the Lithuanian stream is a black or navy suit and a white shirt. Headgear includes black Fedora or Homburg hats, with black skull caps. Pre-war Lithuanian yeshiva students also wore light coloured suits, along with beige or grey hats, and prior to the 1990s, it was common for Americans of the Lithuanian stream to wear coloured shirts throughout the week, reserving white shirts for Shabbos.\nBeards are common among Haredi and many other Orthodox Jewish men, and Hasidic men will almost never be clean-shaven.\nWomen adhere to the laws of modest dress, and wear long skirts and sleeves, high necklines, and, if married, some form of hair covering. Haredi women never wear trousers, although most do wear pajama-trousers within the home at night.\nOver the years, it has become popular among some Haredi women to wear \"sheitels\" (wigs), that are thought to be more attractive than their own natural hair (drawing criticism from some more conservative Haredi rabbis). Mainstream Sephardi Haredi rabbi Ovadia Yosef forbade the wearing of wigs altogether. Haredi women often dress more freely and casually within the home, as long as the body remains covered in accordance with the \"halakha\". More modernized Haredi women are somewhat more lenient in matters of their dress, and some follow the latest trends and fashions, while conforming to \"halakha\".\nNon-Lithuanian Hasidic men and women differ from the Lithuanian stream by having a much more specific dress code, the most obvious difference for men being the full-length suit jacket (\"rekel\") on weekdays, and the fur hat (\"shtreimel\") and silk caftan (\"bekishe\") on the Sabbath.\nNeighborhoods.\nHaredi neighborhoods have been said by some to be safer, with less violent crime, although this is a generalization, and even that may apply to only specific communities, rather than all.\nIn Israel, the entrances to some of the most extreme Haredi neighborhoods are fitted with signs that ask for modest clothing to be worn. Some areas are known to have \"modesty patrols\", and people dressed in ways perceived as immodest may suffer harassment, and advertisements featuring scantily dressed models may be targeted for vandalism. These concerns are also addressed through public lobbying and legal avenues.\nDuring the week-long Rio Carnival in Rio de Janeiro, many of the city's 7,000 Orthodox Jews feel compelled to leave the town, due to the immodest exposure of participants. In 2001, Haredi campaigners in Jerusalem succeeded in persuading the Egged bus company to get all their advertisements approved by a special committee. By 2011, Egged had gradually removed all bus adverts that featured women, in response to their continuous defacement. A court order that stated such action was discriminatory led to Egged's decision not to feature people at all (neither male nor female). Depictions of certain other creatures, such as space aliens, were also banned, in order not to offend Haredi sensibilities. Haredi Jews also campaign against other types of advertising that promote activities they deem offensive or inappropriate.\nDue to halakha, i.e., activities that Orthodox Jews believe are prohibited on Shabbat, most state-run buses in Israel do not run on Saturdays, regardless of whether riders are Orthodox, or even whether they are Jewish. In a similar vein, Haredi Jews in Israel have demanded that the roads in their neighborhoods be closed on Saturdays, vehicular traffic being viewed as an \"intolerable provocation\" upon their religious lifestyle (see Driving on Shabbat in Jewish law). In most cases, the authorities granted permission after Haredi petitioning and demonstrations, some of them including fierce clashes between Haredi Jews and secular counter-demonstrators, and violence against police and motorists.\nSex separation.\nWhile Jewish modesty law requires gender separation under various circumstances, observers have contended that there is a growing trend among some groups of Hasidic Haredi Jews to extend its observance to the public arena.\nIn the Hasidic village of Kiryas Joel, New York, an entrance sign asks visitors to \"maintain sex separation in all public areas\", and the bus stops have separate waiting areas for men and women. In New Square, another Hasidic enclave, men and women are expected to walk on opposite sides of the road. In Israel, Jerusalem residents of Mea Shearim were banned from erecting a street barrier dividing men and women during the week-long Sukkot festival's nightly parties; and street signs requesting that women avoid certain pavements in Beit Shemesh have been repeatedly removed by the municipality.\nSince 1973, buses catering to Haredi Jews running from Rockland County and Brooklyn into Manhattan have had separate areas for men and women, allowing passengers to conduct on-board prayer services. Although the lines are privately operated, they serve the general public, and in 2011, the set-up was challenged on grounds of discrimination, and the arrangement was deemed illegal. During 2010\u20132012, there was much public debate in Israel surrounding the existence of segregated Haredi Mehadrin bus lines (whose policy calls for both men and women to stay in their respective areas: men in the front of the bus, and women in the rear of the bus) following an altercation that occurred after a woman refused to move to the rear of the bus to sit among the women. A subsequent court ruling stated that while voluntary segregation should be allowed, forced separation is unlawful. Israeli national airline El Al has agreed to provide gender-separated flights in consideration of Haredi requirements.\nEducation in the Haredi community is strictly segregated by sex. Yeshiva education for boys is primarily focused on the study of Jewish scriptures, such as the Torah and Talmud (\"non-Hasidic\" yeshivas in the United States teach secular studies in the afternoon); girls obtain studies both in Jewish religious education as well as broader secular subjects.\nNewspapers and publications.\nIn 1930s Poland, the Agudath Israel movement published its own Yiddish-language paper, \"Dos Yiddishe Tagblatt\". In 1950, the Agudah started printing \"Hamodia\", a Hebrew-language Israeli daily.\nHaredi publications tend to shield their readership from objectionable material, and perceive themselves as a \"counterculture\", desisting from advertising secular entertainment and events. The editorial policy of a Haredi newspaper is determined by a rabbinical board, and every edition is checked by a rabbinical censor. A strict policy of modesty is characteristic of the Haredi press in recent years, and pictures of women are usually not printed. In 2009, the Israeli daily \"Yated Ne'eman\" doctored an Israeli cabinet photograph replacing two female ministers with images of men, and in 2013, the \"Bakehilah\" magazine pixelated the faces of women appearing in a of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. The mainstream Haredi political Shas party also refrains from publishing female images. Among Haredi publishers which have not adopted this policy is ArtScroll, which does publish pictures of women in their books.\nNo coverage is given to serious crime, violence, sex, or drugs, and little coverage is given to non-Orthodox streams of Judaism. Inclusion of \"immoral\" content is avoided, and when publication of such stories is a necessity, they are often written ambiguously. The Haredi press generally takes an ambivalent stance towards Zionism and gives more coverage to issues that concern the Haredi community, such as the drafting of girls and yeshiva students into the army, autopsies, and Shabbat observance. In Israel, it portrays the secular world as \"spitefully anti-Semitic\", and describes secular youth as \"mindless, immoral, drugged, and unspeakably lewd\". Such attacks have led to Haredi editors being warned about libelous provocations.\nWhile the Haredi press is extensive and varied in Israel, only around half the Haredi population reads newspapers. Around 10% read secular newspapers, while 40% do not read any newspaper at all. According to a 2007 survey, 27% read the weekend Friday edition of \"Hamodia\", and 26% the \"Yated Ne'eman\". In 2006, the most-read Haredi magazine in Israel was the \"Mishpacha\" weekly, which sold 110,000 copies. Other popular Haredi publications include Ami Magazine and The Flatbush Jewish Journal.\nTechnology.\nHaredi leaders have at times suggested a ban on the internet and any internet-capable device, their reasoning being that the immense amount of information can be corrupting, and the ability to use the internet with no observation from the community can lead to individuation.\nSome Haredi businessmen utilize the internet throughout the week, but they still observe Shabbat in every aspect by not accepting or processing orders from Friday evening to Saturday evening. They utilize the internet under strict filters and guidelines. The Kosher cell phone was introduced to the Jewish public with the sole ability to call other phones. It was unable to utilize the internet, text other phones, and had no camera feature. In fact, a kosher phone plan was created, with decreased rates for kosher-to-kosher calls, to encourage community.\nNews hotlines.\nNews hotlines are an important source of news in the Haredi world. Since many Haredi Jews do not listen to the radio or have access to the internet, even if they read newspapers, they are left with little or no access to breaking news. News hotlines were formed to fill this gap, and many have expanded to additional fields over time. Currently, many news lines provide rabbinic lectures, entertainment, business advice, and similar services, in addition to their primary function of reporting the news. Many Hasidic sects maintain their own hotlines, where relevant internal news is reported and the group's perspective can be advocated for. In the Israeli Haredi community, there are dozens of prominent hotlines, in both Yiddish and Hebrew. Some Haredi hotlines have played significant public roles.\nIn Israel.\nAttitudes towards Zionism.\nFrom the founding of Zionism in the 1890s, Haredi Jews leaders voiced objections to its secular orientation. After the establishment of the State of Israel, some Haredi Jews observed the Israeli Independence Day as a day of mourning and referred to Israeli state-holidays as \"byimey edeyhem\" (\"idolatrous holidays\").\nThe chief political division among Haredi Jews has been in their approach to the State of Israel. After Israeli independence, different Haredi movements took varying positions on it. Only a minority of Haredi Jews consider themselves to be Zionists. Haredim who do not consider themselves Zionists fall into two-camps: non-Zionist, and anti-Zionist. Non-Zionist Haredim, who comprise the majority, do not object to the State of Israel as an independent Jewish state, and many even consider it to be positive, but they do not believe that it has any religious significance. Anti-Zionist Haredim, who are a minority, but are more publicly visible than the non-Zionist majority, believe that any Jewish independence prior to the coming of the Messiah is a sin.\nThe ideologically non-Zionist United Torah Judaism alliance comprising Agudat Yisrael and Degel HaTorah (and the umbrella organizations World Agudath Israel and Agudath Israel of America) represents a moderate and pragmatic stance of cooperation with the State of Israel, and participation in the political system. UTJ has been a participant in numerous coalition governments, seeking to influence state and society in a more religious direction and maintain welfare and religious funding policies. In general, their position is supportive of Israel.\nHaredim who are stridently anti-Zionist are under the umbrella of Edah HaChareidis, who reject participation in politics and state funding of its affiliated institutions, in contradistinction to Agudah-affiliated institutions. Neturei Karta is a very small activist organization of anti-Zionist Haredim, whose controversial activities have been strongly condemned, including by other anti-Zionist Haredim. Haredi support is often required to form coalition governments in the Knesset.\nIn recent years, some rebbes affiliated with Agudath Israel, such as the Sadigura rebbe Avrohom Yaakov Friedman, have taken stances closer to the Israeli right wing on security, settlements and withdrawal from the Gaza Strip.\nShas represents Sephardi and Mizrahi Haredim, and, while having many points in common with Ashkenazi Haredim, differs from them by its more enthusiastic support for the State of Israel and the IDF. The Sikirim group, an anti-Zionist group composed of Haredi Jews, is considered a radical organization by Israelis.\nMarriage.\nThe purpose of marriage in the Haredi (and Orthodox) viewpoint is for the purpose of companionship, as well as for the purpose of having children.\nThere is a high rate of marriage in the Haredi community. 83% are married, compared to the non-Haredi community in Israel of 63%. Marriage is viewed as holy, and as the natural home for a man and a woman to truly love each other.\nDivorce.\nIn 2016, the divorce rate in Israel was 5% among the Haredi population, compared to the general population rate of 14%.\nIn 2016, Haaretz claimed that divorces among Haredim are increasing in Israel. In 2017, some predominantly Haredi cities reported the highest growth rates in divorce in the Israel, in the context of generally falling rates of divorce, and in 2018, some predominantly Haredi cities reported drops in divorce, in the context of generally rising rates of divorce.\nWhen the divorce is linked to one spouse leaving the community, the one who chooses to leave is often shunned from his or her communities and forced to abandon their children, as most courts prefer keeping children in an established status quo.\nEducation.\nHaredim primarily educate their children in their own private schools, starting with \"chederim\" for pre-school to primary school ages, to yeshivos for boys from secondary school ages, and in seminaries, often called Bais Yaakovs, for girls of secondary school ages. Only Jewish religiously observant students are admitted, and parents must agree to abide by the rules of the school to keep their children enrolled. Yeshivas are headed by rosh yeshivas (deans) and principals. Many Hasidic schools in Israel, Europe, and North America teach few (or no) secular subjects, while some of the Litvish (Lithuanian style) schools in Israel follow educational policies to the Hasidic school. In the U.S., most teach secular subjects to boys and girls, as part of a dual curriculum of secular subjects (generally called \"English\") and Torah subjects. Yeshivas teach mostly Talmud and Rabbinic literature, while the girls' schools teach Jewish Law, Midrash, and Tanach (Hebrew Bible).\nBetween 2007 and 2017, the number of Haredim studying in higher education had risen from 1,000 to 10,800.\nIn 2007, the Kemach Foundation was established to become an investor in the sector's social and economic development, and provide opportunities for employment. Through the philanthropy of Leo No\u00e9 of London, later joined by the Wolfson family of New York and Elie Horn from Brazil, Kemach has facilitated academic and vocational training. With a $22m budget, including government funding, Kemach provides individualized career assessment, academic or vocational scholarships, and job placement for the entire Haredi population in Israel. The Foundation is managed by specialists who, coming from the Haredi sector themselves, are familiar with the community's needs and sensitivities. By April 2014, more than 17,800 Haredim have received the services of Kemach, and more than 7,500 have received, or continue to receive, monthly scholarships to fund their academic or vocational studies. From 500 graduates, the net benefits to the government would be 80.8 million NIS if they work for one year, 572.3 million NIS if they work for 5 years, and 2.8 billion NIS (discounted) if they work for 30 years.\nThe Council for Higher Education announced in 2012 that it was investing NIS 180 million over the following five years to establish appropriate frameworks for the education of Haredim, focusing on specific professions. The largest Haredi campus in Israel is The Haredi Campus - The Academic College Ono.\nIn the midst of a controversy surrounding the limited secular education in some Haredi yeshivas, New York City mayor Eric Adams held up the Haredi yeshiva model as a model to emulate, arguing that \"We need to ask, 'What are we doing wrong in our schools?' And learn what you are doing in the yeshivas to improve education.\"\nTucker Carlson, in an interview with a former yeshiva student, observed that the yeshiva system, with its emphasis on asking questions, \"seems like a great education\".\nMilitary.\nUpon the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, universal conscription was instituted for all able-bodied Jewish males. However, military-aged Haredi men were exempted from service in the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) under the Torato Umanuto arrangement, which officially granted deferred entry into the IDF for yeshiva students, but in practice allowed young Haredi men to serve for a significantly reduced period of time or bypass military service altogether. At that time, the Haredi population was very low and only 400 individuals were affected. However, the Haredi population rapidly grew. In 2018, the Israel Democracy Institute estimated that the Haredim comprised 12% of Israel's total population and 15% of its Jewish population. Haredim are also younger than the general population. Their absence from the IDF attracts significant resentment from secular Israelis. The most common criticisms of the exemption policy are:\nOver the years, as many as 1,000 Haredi Jews have volunteered to serve in a Haredi Jewish unit of the IDF known as the Netzah Yehuda Battalion, or Nahal Haredi. The vast majority of Haredi men, however, continue to receive deferments from military service. Haredim usually reject the practice of IDF service and contend that:\nThe \"Torato Umanuto\" arrangement was enshrined in the \"Tal Law\" that came into force in 2002. The High Court of Justice later ruled that it could not be extended in its current form beyond August 2012. A replacement was expected. The IDF was, however, experiencing a shortage of personnel, and there were pressures to reduce the scope of the \"Torato Umanuto\" exemption. In March 2014, Israel's parliament approved legislation to end exemptions from military service for Haredi seminary students. The bill was passed by 65 votes to one, and an amendment allowing civilian national service by 67 to one. In June 2024, the Supreme Court of Israel declared any continued exemption of IDF conscription unlawful. The army began drafting 3,000 Haredi men the following month.\nThere has been much uproar in Haredi society following actions towards Haredi conscription. While some Haredim see this as a great social and economic opportunity, others (including leading rabbis among them) strongly oppose this move. Among the extreme Haredim, there have been some more severe reactions. Several Haredi leaders have threatened that Haredi populations would leave the country if forced to enlist. Others have fueled public incitement against secular and National-Religious Jews, and specifically against politicians Yair Lapid and Naftali Bennett, who support and promote Haredi enlistment. Some Haredim have taken to threatening their fellows who agree to enlist, to the point of physically attacking some of them.\nThe Shahar program, also known as \"Shiluv Haredim\" (Ultra-Orthodox integration), allows Haredi men aged 22 to 26 to serve in the army for about a year and a half. At the beginning of their service, they study mathematics and English, which are often not well covered in Haredi boy schools. The program is partly aimed at encouraging Haredi participation in the workforce after military service. However, not all beneficiaries seem to be Haredim.\nEmployment.\nAs of 2013[ [update]], figures from the Central Bureau of Statistics on employment rates place Haredi women at 73%, close to the 80% for the non-Haredi Jewish women's national figure; while the number of working Haredi men has increased to 56%, it is still far below the 90% of non-Haredi Jewish men nationwide. As of 2021[ [update]], most Haredi boys instead go to yeshivas and then continue to study at yeshiva after getting married.\nThe Trajtenberg Committee, charged in 2011 with drafting proposals for economic and social change, called, among other things, for increasing employment among the Haredi population. Its proposals included encouraging military or national service and offering college prep courses for volunteers, creating more employment centers targeting Haredim and experimental matriculation prep courses after yeshiva hours. The committee also called for increasing the number of Haredi students receiving technical training through the Industry, Trade, and Labor Ministry and forcing Haredi schools to carry out standardized testing, as is done at other public schools. It is estimated that half as many of the Haredi community are in employment as the rest of population. This has led to increasing financial deprivation, and 50% of children within the community live below the poverty line. This puts strain on each family, the community, and often the Israeli economy.\nThe demographic trend indicates the community will constitute an increasing percentage of the population, and consequently, Israel faces an economic challenge in the years ahead due to fewer people in the labor force. A report commissioned by the Treasury found that the Israeli economy may lose more than six billion shekels annually as a result of low Haredi participation in the workforce. The OECD in a 2010 report stated that, \"Haredi families are frequently jobless, or are one-earner families in low-paid employment. Poverty rates are around 60% for Haredim.\"\nAs of 2017, according to an Israeli finance ministry study, the Haredi participation rate in the labour force is 51%, compared to 89% for the rest of Israeli Jews.\nA 2018 study by Oren Heller, a National Insurance Institute of Israel senior economic researcher, has found that while upward mobility among Haredim is significantly greater than the national average, unlike it, this tends not to translate into significantly higher pay.\nHaredi families living in Israel benefited from government-subsidized child care when the father studied Torah and the mother worked at least 24 hours per week. However, after Israeli Finance Minister Avigdor Liberman introduced a new policy in 2021, families in which the father is a full-time yeshiva student are no longer eligible for a daycare subsidy. Under this policy, fathers must also work at least part-time in order for the family to qualify for the subsidy. The move was denounced by Haredi leaders.\nWork force and tax contribution.\nA 2025 Israel Democracy Institute study found that although Haredim made up 14% of Israel's working-age population in 2023, they generated only 4% of national tax revenue. As a result, the average non-Haredi worker is projected to pay an extra 3,540 shekels in taxes in 2025. Only 23% of Haredim pay income tax, compared to 62% of non-Haredi Jewish men and 46% of women. Employment among Haredi men declined to 54% in 2024, while rates for Haredi women rose to 81% in 2023\u2014just 2% below non-Haredi women. Due to a lack of secular education, many Haredi men are poorly equipped for the labor market, leading to lower household incomes. Despite contributing less in taxes, Haredi households consume more state services, receiving transportation and municipal tax discounts, housing aid, and other benefits; the Kohelet Policy Forum reported that 80% of Haredi households are net receivers of public funds. The IDI called this imbalance unsustainable.\nOther issues.\nThe Haredim in general are materially poorer than most other Israelis, but still represent an important market sector due to their bloc purchasing habits. For this reason, some companies and organizations in Israel refrain from including women or other images deemed immodest in their advertisements to avoid Haredi consumer boycotts. More than 50 percent of Haredim live below the poverty line, compared with 15 percent of the rest of the population. Their families are also larger, with Haredi women having an average of 6.7 children, while the average Jewish Israeli woman has 3 children. Families with many children often receive economic support through governmental child allowances, government assistance in housing, as well as specific funds by their own community institutions.\nIn recent years, there has been a process of reconciliation and an attempt to merge Haredi Jews with Israeli society, although employment discrimination is widespread. Haredi Jews such as satirist Kobi Arieli, publicist Sehara Blau, and politician Israel Eichler write regularly for leading Israeli newspapers.\nAnother important factor in the reconciliation process has been the activities of ZAKA, a Haredi organization known for providing emergency medical attention at the scene of suicide bombings, and Yad Sarah, the largest national volunteer organization in Israel established in 1977 by former Haredi mayor of Jerusalem, Uri Lupolianski. It is estimated that Yad Sarah saves the country's economy an estimated $320 million in hospital fees and long-term care costs each year.\nPresent leadership and organizations.\nRabbis and rabbinic authority.\nNotwithstanding the authority of Chief Rabbis of Israel (Ashkenazi: David Lau, Sephardi: Yitzhak Yosef), or the wide acknowledgement of specific rabbis in Israel (for example, Rabbi Gershon Edelstein of the non-Hasidic Lithuanian Jews, and Yaakov Aryeh Alter, who heads the Ger Hasidic dynasty, the largest Hasidic group in Israel), Haredi and Hasidic factions generally align with the independent authority of their respective group leaders.\nMajor representative groups and political parties.\nOther representative associations may be linked to specific Haredi and Hasidic groups. For example:\nHaredi political parties in Israel include:\nPast leaders of Haredi Jewry.\nLeaders of Haredi Jewry in America included:\nLeaders of Haredi Jewry in Israel included\nControversies.\nShunning.\nPeople who decide to leave Haredi communities are sometimes shunned and pressured or forced to abandon their children.\nPedophilia and sexual abuse cases.\nCases of pedophilia, sexual violence, assaults, and abuses against women and children occur in roughly the same rates in Haredi communities as in the general population; however, they are rarely discussed or reported to the authorities, and frequently downplayed by members of the communities.\nDivorce coercion.\nTo receive a religious divorce, a Jewish woman needs her husband's consent in the form of a \"get\" (Jewish divorce document). Without this consent, any future offspring of the wife would be considered \"mamzerim\" (bastards/impure). If the circumstances truly warrant a divorce, and the husband is unwilling, a dayan (rabbinic judge) has the prerogative of instituting community shunning measures to \"coerce him until he agrees\", with physical force reserved only for the rarest of cases.\nThe New York divorce coercion gang was a Haredi Jewish group that kidnapped, and in some cases tortured, Jewish men in the New York metropolitan area to force them to grant their wives \"gittin\" (religious divorces). The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) broke up the group after conducting a sting operation against the gang in October 2013. The sting resulted in the prosecution of four men, three of whom were convicted in late 2015.\nPolitical controversies involving Haredi communities and parties in Israel.\nIn January 2023, the Times of Israel reported that Haredi citizens in Israel pay just 2% of the country's total income tax revenues, despite making up 13.9% of the nation's population. Furthermore, the article's author described their communities as an \"epicenter of poverty\", with over 60% of Haredi households classified as \"poor\" on the government's socio-economic index, with that figure remaining nearly constant in every Haredi community.\nWhile this disparity has been present in Israel for decades, it has garnered more attention since December 2022 for numerous reasons. First, Haredi families have the highest fertility rate in Israel, at 6.6 births per woman. In comparison, the average fertility rate in Israel is much lower, at 2.9 per woman. Current projections estimate that the Haredi population will double by 2036, and they will comprise 16% of the total population by 2030.\nThe second aspect of the controversy surrounds their political connections to Israel's Religious Zionist alliance. Historically, they have remained politically uninvolved, but since the 1990s, they have continuously engaged more. Today, members of Israel's ultra-Orthodox community have long enjoyed benefits: exemption from army service for Torah students, government stipends for those choosing full-time religious study over work, and separate schools that receive state funds, even though their curriculums often do not fully teach government-mandated subjects. Today, many Israeli Haredi men do not work, preferring to study the Torah full-time, thus resulting in their high poverty rate.\nHaredi anti-draft rally.\nIt has been reported that hundreds of thousands of ultra-Orthodox men are expected to assemble at the entrance of Jerusalem in October 2025 to demonstrate against conscription. Hebrew media sources have highlighted that, in recent years, this issue has been the sole matter that has brought together all sects and factions within the ultra-Orthodox community. As per Channel 12 News, the last protest that similarly unified the Haredi community was another anti-conscription rally approximately 10 years ago.\nIn media.\n\"\" is a documentary film produced and directed by Menachem Daum and Oren Rudavsky, which aimed to portray the Hasidic Haredi world in more positive terms, stressing the close family ties as well as their rich traditions.\n\"Shtisel\" is an Israeli television drama series about a Haredi family in Jerusalem which has led to more favorable feelings about Haredi Jews.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53836", "revid": "1272568971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53836", "title": "Commercial", "text": "Commercial may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53837", "revid": "29539620", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53837", "title": "Salt Lake City", "text": "State capital and largest city of Utah, United States\nSalt Lake City, often shortened to Salt Lake or SLC, is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Utah. It is the county seat of Salt Lake County, the most populous county in the state. The population was 199,723 at the 2020 census, while the Salt Lake City metropolitan area has an estimated 1.3 million residents and is the 46th-largest metropolitan area in the United States. It is also part of the larger Salt Lake City\u2013Ogden\u2013Provo combined statistical area, an urban corridor along a segment of the Wasatch Front with a population of approximately 2.8 million. It is one of the principal urban centers within the Great Basin, along with Reno, Nevada.\nSalt Lake City was founded in 1847 by settlers led by Brigham Young who were seeking to escape persecution they had experienced while living farther east. The Mormon pioneers, as they would come to be known, entered a semi-arid valley and immediately began building an extensive irrigation network that could feed the population and foster future growth. Salt Lake City's street grid system is based on a standard compass grid plan, with the southeast corner of Temple Square serving as the origin of the Salt Lake meridian. Owing to its proximity to the Great Salt Lake, the city was originally named Great Salt Lake City; the word \"Great\" was dropped from the city's name in 1868. Immigration of international members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), mining booms, and the construction of the first transcontinental railroad brought economic growth, and the city was nicknamed \"The Crossroads of the West\". It was traversed by the Lincoln Highway, the first transcontinental highway, in 1913. Two major cross-country freeways, I-15 and I-80, now intersect in the city. The city also has a belt route, I-215.\nSalt Lake City has developed a strong tourist industry based primarily on skiing, outdoor recreation, and religious tourism. It hosted the 2002 Winter Olympics and will host the 2034 Winter Olympics. It is known for its politically liberal culture, which stands in contrast with most of the rest of the state's highly conservative leanings. It is home to a significant LGBT community and hosts the annual Utah Pride Festival. It is the industrial banking center of the United States. Salt Lake City and the surrounding area are also the location of several institutions of higher education including the state's flagship research school, the University of Utah.\nSustained drought in Utah has strained Salt Lake City's water security, caused the Great Salt Lake level to drop to record low levels, and has impacted the local and state economy. The receding lake has exposed arsenic which may become airborne, exposing area residents to poisonous dust. The city is also under threat of major earthquake damage amplified by two offshoots of the nearby Wasatch Fault that join underneath the downtown area.\nHistory.\nBefore settlement by members of the LDS Church, the Shoshone, Weber Ute, and Paiute had dwelt in the Salt Lake Valley for thousands of years. At the time of Salt Lake City's founding, the valley was within the territory of the Northwestern Shoshone. One local Shoshone tribe, the Western Goshute tribe, had names for the Jordan River, City Creek, and Red Butte Canyon (Pi'o-gw\u00fbt, So'ho-gw\u00fbt, and Mo'ni-wai-ni). The Goshutes (or, Gosiutes) also lived in the vicinity of Salt Lake and the valleys to the west. The land was treated by the United States as public domain; no aboriginal title by the Northwestern Shoshone was ever ceded or relinquished by treaty with the United States. The first explorer of European descent in the Salt Lake area was likely Jim Bridger in 1825, although others had been in Utah earlier, including some who traveled as far north as the nearby Utah Valley (the 1776 Dominguez-Escalante expedition were undoubtedly aware of Salt Lake Valley's existence). U.S. Army officer John C. Fr\u00e9mont surveyed the Great Salt Lake and the Salt Lake Valley in 1843 and 1845. The Donner Party, a group of ill-fated pioneers, had traveled through the Great Salt Lake Valley in August 1846.\nThe settling of Salt Lake City dates to the arrival of the Latter-day Saints in July 1847, during the Mexican-American War. They had traveled beyond the boundaries of the United States into Mexican Territory seeking a secluded area to safely practice their religion away from the violence and the persecution they experienced in the United States. Upon arrival at the Salt Lake Valley, president of the church Brigham Young is recorded as stating, \"This is the right place, drive on.\" Brigham Young is said to have seen the area in a vision before the wagon train's arrival. They found the broad valley empty of any human settlement.\nFour days after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young designated the building site for the Salt Lake Temple. The Salt Lake Temple, constructed on the block later called Temple Square, took 40 years to complete. Construction started in 1853, and the temple was dedicated on April 6, 1893. The temple has become an icon for the city and serves as its centerpiece. The southeast corner of Temple Square is the point of reference for the Salt Lake meridian, and for all addresses in the Salt Lake Valley.\nDuring the winter of 1847, an outbreak of measles killed many of the Shoshone in the area. The Shoshone saved the pioneers when they taught them to eat the bulb of the native sego lily, which has long been part of the ordinary diet of the Shoshone, \"sego\" being derived from the Shoshone word \"seego\". The sego lily was commemorated by the Sego Lily Dam, a flood-prevention infrastructure project in the shape of a giant sego lily, built in Sugar House Park in 2017.\nThe city was not platted until after the federal surveyor abandoned his post in 1857. In 1855 Congress directed the President of the United States to appoint a surveyor general for Utah Territory, and to cause that the lands of that territory should be surveyed preparatory to bringing them on the market. Because of numerous conflicts between the surveyor and the territorial government the first surveyor general abandoned his post in 1857, not to return till 1869.\nThe pioneers organized a state called State of Deseret, and petitioned for its recognition in 1849. The United States Congress rebuffed the settlers in 1850 and established the Utah Territory, vastly reducing its size, and designated Fillmore as its capital city. Great Salt Lake City replaced Fillmore as the territorial capital in 1856, and the name later was shortened to Salt Lake City. The city's population continued to swell with an influx of converts to the LDS Church and Gold Rush gold seekers, making it one of the most populous cities in the American Old West.\nThe first group of settlers brought African slaves with them, making Utah the only place in the western United States to have African slavery. Three slaves, Green Flake, Hark Lay, and Oscar Crosby, came west with the first group of settlers in 1847. The settlers also began to purchase Indian slaves in the well-established Indian slave trade, as well as enslaving Indian prisoners of war. In 1850, 26 slaves were counted in Salt Lake County. In 1852, the territorial legislature passed the Act in Relation to Service and the Act for the relief of Indian Slaves and Prisoners formally legalizing slavery in the territory. On June 19, 1862, during the American Civil War, Congress prohibited slavery in all US territories.\nExplorer, ethnologist, and author Richard Francis Burton traveled by coach in the summer of 1860 to document life in Great Salt Lake City. He was granted unprecedented access during his three-week visit, including audiences with Brigham Young and other contemporaries of Joseph Smith. The records of his visit include sketches of early city buildings, a description of local geography and agriculture, commentary on its politics and social order, essays, speeches, and sermons from Young, Isaac Morley, George Washington Bradley and other leaders, and snippets of everyday life such as newspaper clippings and the menu from a high-society ball.\nDisputes with the federal government ensued over the church's practice of polygamy. A climax occurred in 1857 when President James Buchanan declared the area in rebellion after Brigham Young refused to step down as governor, beginning the Utah War. A division of the United States Army, commanded by Albert Sidney Johnston, later a general in the army of the Confederate States of America, marched through the city and found it had been evacuated. They continued their march through the deserted city to vacant land at the southwest corner of the valley. There they set up Camp Floyd ( south of the city). Another military installation, Fort Douglas, was established in 1862 to maintain Union allegiance during the American Civil War. Many area leaders were incarcerated at the territorial prison in Sugar House in the 1880s for violation of anti-polygamy laws. The church began its eventual abandonment of polygamy in 1890, releasing \"The Manifesto\", which officially suggested members obey the law of the land (which was equivalent to forbidding new polygamous marriages inside the US and its territories, but not in church member settlements in Canada and Mexico). This paved the way for statehood in 1896, when Salt Lake City became the state capital.\nThe first transcontinental railroad was completed in 1869 at Promontory Summit on the north side of the Great Salt Lake. A railroad was connected to the city from the Transcontinental Railroad in 1870, making travel less burdensome. Mass migration of different groups followed. Ethnic Chinese (who had laid most of the Central Pacific railway) established a flourishing Chinatown in Salt Lake City nicknamed \"Plum Alley\", which housed around 1,800 Chinese during the early 20th century. The Chinese businesses and residences were demolished in 1952 although a historical marker has been erected near the parking ramp which has replaced Plum Alley. Immigrants also found economic opportunities in the booming mining industries. Remnants of a once-thriving Japantown \u2013 namely a Buddhist temple and Japanese Christian chapel \u2013 remain in downtown Salt Lake City. European ethnic groups and East Coast missionary groups constructed St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral in 1874, B'nai Israel Temple in 1890, the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine in 1909 and the Greek Orthodox Holy Trinity Cathedral in 1923. This time period also saw the creation of Salt Lake City's now defunct red-light district that employed 300 courtesans at its height before being closed in 1911.\nDuring the late 19th and early 20th centuries, an extensive streetcar system was constructed throughout the city, with the first streetcar running in 1872 and electrification of the system in 1889. As in the rest of the country, the automobile usurped the streetcar, and the last trolley was approved for conversion in 1941, yet ran until 1945, due to World War II. Trolley buses ran until 1946. Light rail transit returned to the city when UTA's TRAX opened in 1999. The S Line (formerly known as Sugar House Streetcar) opened for service in December 2013 on an old D&amp;RGW right-of-way.\nThe city's population began to stagnate during the 20th century as population growth shifted to suburban areas north and south of the city. Few of these areas were annexed to the city, while nearby towns incorporated and expanded. As a result, the population of the surrounding metropolitan area greatly outnumbers Salt Lake City. A major concern of recent government officials has been combating inner-city commercial decay. The city lost population from the 1960s through the 1980s, but experienced some recovery in the 1990s. Presently, the city has gained an estimated 5 percent of its population since the year 2000.\nThe city has experienced significant demographic shifts in recent years. Hispanics now account for approximately 22% of residents and the city has a significant LGBT community. There is also a large Pacific Islander population (mainly Samoans and Tongans); they compose roughly 2% of the population of the Salt Lake Valley area.\nSalt Lake City was selected in 1995 to host the 2002 Winter Olympics. The games were plagued with controversy. A bid scandal surfaced in 1998 alleging bribes had been offered to secure the bid. During the games, other scandals erupted over contested judging scores and illegal drug use. Despite the controversies, the games were heralded as a financial success, being one of the few in recent history to turn a profit. In preparation major construction projects were initiated. Local freeways were expanded and repaired, and a light rail system was constructed. Olympic venues are now used for local, national, and international sporting events and Olympic athlete training. However, the predicted increase in businesses did not happen following the games. On July 24, 2024, Salt Lake City was formally chosen by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) to host the 2034 Olympic Winter Games. All of the facilities from the previous Games can be re-used, and the bid enjoyed support from the IOC and the city.\nSalt Lake City hosted the 16th Winter Deaflympic games in 2007, taking place in the venues in Salt Lake City and Park City, and Rotary International chose the city as the host site of their 2007 convention, which was the single largest gathering in Salt Lake City since the 2002 Winter Olympics. The U.S. Volleyball Association convention in 2005 drew 39,500 attendees.\nIn 2020, the city experienced a 5.7 magnitude earthquake, protests against the killing of Bernardo Palacios-Carbajal, and a damaging windstorm with hurricane-force winds, amidst the wider national George Floyd protests, the global COVID-19 pandemic, and protests against pandemic measures.\nGeography.\nSalt Lake City has an area of and an average elevation of above sea level. The lowest point within the boundaries of the city is near the Jordan River and the Great Salt Lake, and the highest is Grandview Peak, at .\nThe city is in the northeast corner of the Salt Lake Valley surrounded by the Great Salt Lake to the northwest, the steep Wasatch Range to the east, and Oquirrh Mountains to the west. Its encircling mountains contain several narrow canyons, including City Creek, Emigration, Millcreek, and Parley's which border the eastern city limits.\nThe burgeoning population of Salt Lake City and the surrounding metropolitan area, combined with its geographical situation, has led to air quality becoming a concern. The Great Basin is subject to strong temperature inversions during the winter, which trap pollutants and decrease the air quality. The Utah Division of Air Quality monitors air quality and issues alerts for voluntary and mandatory actions when pollution exceeds federal safety standards. Protests have been held at the Utah State Capitol and Democratic lawmakers have introduced legislation in the Utah State Legislature to make public transportation free during January and July, when air quality is usually at its worst. The population of the Salt Lake City metropolitan area is projected to double by 2040, putting further pressure on the region's air quality.\nThe Great Salt Lake is separated from Salt Lake City by extensive marshlands and mudflats. The metabolic activities of bacteria in the lake result in a phenomenon known as \"lake stink\", a scent reminiscent of foul poultry eggs, two to three times per year for a few hours. The Jordan River flows through the city and is a drainage of Utah Lake that empties into the Great Salt Lake.\nThe highest mountaintop visible from Salt Lake City is Twin Peaks, which reaches . Twin Peaks is southeast of Salt Lake City in the Wasatch Range.\nThe second-highest mountain range is the Oquirrhs, reaching a maximum height of 10,620 feet (3,237 m) at Flat Top. The east\u2013west-oriented Traverse Mountains to the south extend to 6,000' (1830m), nearly connecting the Wasatch and Oquirrh Mountains. The mountains near Salt Lake City are easily visible from the city and have sharp vertical relief caused by ancient earthquakes, with a maximum difference of 7,099 feet (2164 m) being achieved with the rise of Twin Peaks from the Salt Lake Valley floor.\nThe Salt Lake Valley floor is the ancient lakebed of Lake Bonneville, which existed at the end of the last ice age. Several Lake Bonneville shorelines can be distinctly seen as terraces on the foothills or benches of nearby mountains. Ancient folds of Lake Bonneville shorelines also lie underneath Salt Lake City, amplifying the danger of earthquakes.\nEarthquake faults.\nSalt Lake City is subject to earthquakes from active fault lines running through it. These faults are related to the regional Wasatch Fault which runs north\u2013south along the western base of the Wasatch Range and is considered at high risk of producing an earthquake as large as 7.5 magnitude. Catastrophic damage is predicted in the event of an earthquake with major damage resulting from the liquefaction of the clay- and sand-based soil and the possible permanent flooding of portions of the city by the Great Salt Lake. On March 18, 2020, a 5.7 magnitude earthquake, the largest in the Salt Lake City area in modern times, hit Magna, just southwest of Salt Lake City, causing some minor damage throughout the valley. Damage in Salt Lake City was especially evident in historic brick homes\u2014unreinforced masonry buildings\u2014such as the 1892 Sears mansion which required demolition after the earthquake.\nThe Warm Springs Fault and the East Bench Fault, offshoots of the Wasatch Fault, were found in 2021 to connect underneath Salt Lake City, increasing the risk of major metropolitan damage from an earthquake. Prior to this, in 1997 the \"Salt Lake Tribune\" published a front-page expos\u00e9 about how the construction of the downtown Salt Palace convention center had been hastened by the county geologist who erased the Warm Springs Fault from earthquake maps of Salt Lake City so that the downtown area appeared to be free of faults, enabling the convention center developers to avoid the time and expense of an earthquake hazard and risk assessment. The newspaper showed that the Warm Springs Fault runs north\u2013south along W. Temple, directly adjacent to Temple Square and the convention center. A year later, a fault segment was found at the southern edge of the convention center, and expansion plans were halted until more earthquake fault studies could be completed.\nLayout.\nThe city, as well as the county, is laid out on a grid plan. Most major streets run very north\u2013south and east\u2013west. The grid's origin is the southeast corner of Temple Square, the block containing the Salt Lake Temple; the north\u2013south axis is Main Street; and the east\u2013west axis is South Temple Street. Addresses are coordinates within the system (similar to latitude and longitude). Odd and even address numbering depends on the quadrant of the grid in which an address is located. The rule is: When traveling away from the grid center (Temple Square) or its axes (Main Street, South Temple Street), odd numbers will be on the left side of the street.\nA common explanation for the unusually wide streets of Salt Lake City is that Brigham Young wanted a wagon with a team of oxen to be able to turn around. However, Young was never recorded giving this directive. Joseph Smith, founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, planned the layout in the \"Plat of the City of Zion\" (intended as a template for Mormon towns wherever they might be built). This plan included streets wide, and may be the source of the unusual width. These wide streets and grid pattern are typical of other Mormon towns of the pioneer era throughout the West.\nThough the nomenclature may initially confuse new arrivals and visitors, most consider the grid system an aid to navigation. Some streets have names, such as State Street, which would otherwise be known as 100 East. Other streets have honorary names, such as the western portion of 300 South, named \"Adam Galvez Street\" (for a local Marine corporal killed in action) or others honoring Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King Jr., C\u00e9sar Ch\u00e1vez, Harvey Milk, and John Stockton. These honorary names appear only on street signs and cannot be used in postal addresses.\nIn the Avenues neighborhood, north\u2013south streets are given letters of the alphabet, and east\u2013west streets are numbered in blocks, smaller than those in the rest of the city.\nSmith's Plat of Zion specified the city was to be developed into 135 lots. \nHowever, the blocks in Salt Lake City became irregular during the late 19th century when the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints lost authority over growth and before the adoption of zoning ordinances in the 1920s. The original blocks allowed for large garden plots, and many were supplied with irrigation water from ditches that ran approximately where modern curbs and gutters would be laid. The original water supply was from City Creek. Subsequent development of water resources was from successively more southern streams flowing from the mountains east of the city. Some old irrigation ditches are still visible in the eastern suburbs, or are still marked on maps, years after they were gone. There are still some canals that deliver water as required by water rights. Many lots, in Salt Lake City and surrounding areas, have irrigation water rights attached to them. Local water systems, in particular Salt Lake City Public Utilities, have a tendency to acquire or trade for these water rights. These can then be traded for culinary water rights to water imported into the valley. At its peak, irrigation in the valley comprised over one hundred distinct canal systems, many originating at the Jordan Narrows at the south end of the valley. Water and water rights were important in the 19th and early 20th centuries. As heavy agricultural usage changed into a more urban and suburban pattern, canal water companies were gradually replaced by culinary water systems.\nCityscape.\nDowntown Salt Lake City has been a hub of commerce for the Intermountain West and its architecture reflects this history. Main Street, which was the primary commercial avenue for the city in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, anchors the historic core of the downtown area that begins at the Salt Lake Temple and concludes at the City and County Building. Halfway between those two structures, the Walker Center, at the corner of Main and 200 South, was built in 1912 and was the tallest building between Chicago and San Francisco upon its completion. Other extant pre-war structures include the Kearns Building, Hotel Monaco, the First Security Building, the Joseph Smith Memorial Building (formerly Hotel Utah), the Boston and Newhouse Buildings, the Utah State Capitol, and the Clift Building. Salt Lake City has two historic passenger rail depots, the Denver and Rio Grande Western Depot and the Union Pacific Depot, the latter of which now anchors the Gateway district. Salt Lake City lost many significant structures to forces such as urban renewal in the 20th century, including the Dooly Building, designed by Louis Sullivan, the Hotel Newhouse, and the Salt Lake Theatre.\nAfter a period of stagnation in the era of urban sprawl, and with the construction of TRAX in the late 1990s and the City Creek Center in the early 2010s, downtown Salt Lake City is experiencing a period of revival. Empty lots and older structures are in the process of being redeveloped into apartment and office towers and the city has begun to close Main Street to automobile traffic on summer weekends to encourage pedestrian activity and business. More than 5,000 new residential units are planned or under construction for the downtown area as of April 2021 and many new breweries and restaurants have opened in the last decade. Regent Street, which in the early 20th century was the city's red-light district, has recently been redeveloped with the notable additions of the 2,468-seat Eccles Theater and 111 Main, an adjacent 24-story office building.\nA distinctive feature of Salt Lake City's cityscape is its very large block sizes, which are 660 feet square and separated by streets 132 feet wide, making them the largest in the United States. This and the resulting development patterns gives the city and its buildings a unique sense of scale but also a distinct challenge to urban walkability, with many streets boasting six lanes for automobile traffic. On the other hand, the extra-wide streets have made the addition of dedicated transit lanes and light rail more feasible and many streets are now being redesigned with features such as protected bike lanes, linear parks, and even spaces for urban development within the medians. The city also encourages new projects to incorporate mid-block walkways and other scale-mitigation strategies into planning to promote pedestrian engagement.\nNeighborhoods.\nSalt Lake City has many distinct neighborhoods. There is a general east\u2013west socioeconomic divide. The eastern neighborhoods of the city, such as the Avenues, 9th &amp; 9th, Yalecrest, Federal Heights, and Sugar House tend to be more affluent. These districts are popular with professionals, families, and students due to their proximity to Downtown, the University of Utah, commercial precincts, and the Wasatch foothills. The western neighborhoods of the city, such as Poplar Grove, Rose Park, and Glendale tend to be more working-class and ethnically diverse and are popular with immigrants and young people.\nThis divide is a result of the railroad being built in the western half as well as panoramic views from inclined ground in the eastern portion. Housing is more economically diverse on the west side, which results in demographic differences. Interstate 15 was also built in a north\u2013south line, further dividing east and west sides of the city.\nSugar House, in southeastern Salt Lake City, has a reputation as an older neighborhood with small shops in the center. Sugar House is an area which has been the focus of redevelopment efforts such as the UTA S-Line Streetcar. In late 2015 there were approximately 900 apartment units either recently built or under construction in the Sugar House area, with an additional 492 units proposed.\nNortheast of Downtown is The Avenues, a neighborhood outside of the regular grid system on smaller blocks. The area between 6th Avenue to South Temple Street is a Historical District that is nearly entirely residential, and contains many historical Victorian era homes. Recently the Avenues is becoming known for restaurants and shops opening in old retail space mixed within the community. The Avenues are situated on the upward-sloping bench in the foothills of the Wasatch Range, with the earlier built homes in the lower elevation. The Avenues, along with Federal Heights, just to the east and north of the University of Utah, and the Foothill area, south of the university, contain gated communities, large, multimillion-dollar houses, and panoramic views of the valley. Many consider this some of the most desirable real estate in the valley.\nIn addition to larger centers like Sugar House and Downtown, Salt Lake City contains several smaller neighborhoods, each named after the closest major intersection. Two examples are the 9th and 9th (at the intersection of 900 East and 900 South Streets) and 15th &amp; 15th (at the intersection of 1500 East and 1500 South Streets) neighborhoods. These areas are home to foot-traffic friendly, amenities-based businesses such as art galleries, clothing retail, salons, restaurants and coffee shops. During the summer of 2007, 9th and 9th saw sidewalk and street improvements as well as an art installation by Troy Pillow of Seattle, Washington inspired by the 9 Muses of Greek myth, thanks in part to a monetary grant from Salt Lake City.\nMany of the homes in the valley date from pre\u2013World War II times, and only a select few areas, such as Federal Heights and the East Bench, as well as the far west side, including parts of Rose Park and Glendale, have seen new home construction since the 1970s.\nClimate.\nSalt Lake City has a humid continental climate (\"Dsa\"), while western parts may experience a Mediterranean climate (\"Csa\"), as summers are dry and hot and winters are cold and wet, but rarely frigid. The eastern parts of the city are also under a Mediterranean climate when using the isotherm. Late summer and early fall monsoonal activity can keep precipitation fairly consistent throughout the year aside from early to mid summer when rain is minimal. The temperature of the Salt Lake City area is mediated by its unique geography, generally keeping highs and lows from reaching extremes.\nThe primary source of precipitation in Salt Lake City is massive storms that move in from the Pacific Ocean along the jet stream from October to May. In mid-to-late summer, when the jet stream retreats far to the north, precipitation mainly comes from afternoon thunderstorms caused by monsoon moisture moving up from the Gulf of California. Although rainfall can be heavy, these storms are usually scattered in coverage and rarely severe. However, downtown was hit by an F2 tornado on August 11, 1999, killing 1 person, injuring 60, and causing $170\u00a0million in damage. The remnants of tropical cyclones from the East Pacific can rarely reach the city during Fall. The remnants of Hurricane Olivia helped bring the record monthly precipitation of in September 1982. 1983 was the wettest year on record, with , while 1979 was the driest, when were recorded. Spring snowmelt from the surrounding mountains can cause localized stream flooding during late spring and early summer, the worst examples being in 1952 and especially 1983, when City Creek burst its banks, forcing city engineers to convert several downtown streets into waterways.\nSnow falls on average from November 6 to April 18, producing a total average of , although measurable snow has fallen as early as September 17 and as late as May 28. The snowiest season was 1951\u201352, with , while the least snowy season was in 1933\u201334. The snowiest month on record was January 1993, in which were recorded.\nThe nearby Great Salt Lake is a significant contributor to precipitation in the city. The lake effect can enhance rain from summer thunderstorms and produces lake-effect snow approximately 6 to 8 times per year, some of which can produce prodigious snowfall amounts. It is estimated about 10% of the annual precipitation in the city can be attributed to the lake effect.\nSalt Lake City features large variations in temperatures between seasons. During summer, there are an average of 56 days per year with temperatures of at least , 23 days of at least , and 9 days of . However, average daytime July humidity is only 22%. Winters are quite cold but rarely frigid. While an average of 127 days drop to or below freezing, and 26 days with high temperatures that fail to rise above freezing, the city only averages 6.3 days at or below . The record high temperature is , which occurred first on July 26, 1960, July 13, 2002, June 16, 2021, July 17, 2022, and most recently September 7, 2022, while the record low is , which occurred on February 9, 1933.\nDuring mid-winter, strong areas of high pressure often stagnate over the Great Basin, leading to strong temperature inversions. This causes air stagnation and thick smog in the valley from several days to weeks at a time and can result in the nation's worst air-pollution levels. This same effect will also occasionally play a role in the summer months, causing tropospheric ozone to peak in July &amp; August, but in 2015 it started at the beginning of June. In 2016 Salt Lake's air quality was ranked 6th worst in the nation by the American Lung Association. It received an F grade for both ozone and particulate matter. Particulate pollution is considered especially dangerous, as the tiny pollutants can lodge deep in lung tissue. Both ozone and particulate pollution are associated with increased rates of strokes, heart attacks, respiratory disease, cancer and premature death. Outdoor air particulates have been associated with low and very low birth weight, premature birth, congenital defects, and death.\nSevere drought and water diversions have shrunk the Great Salt Lake by two-thirds and reduced it to its lowest recorded levels, resulting in hundreds of square miles of dry lake bed and exposing millions of people living in the fast-growing metropolitan region to dust storms laced with arsenic and other toxic chemicals. Around 65% of the diverted water goes to agriculture, but demand for water is soaring as Utah's population grows.\nParks.\nThe largest park in Salt Lake City is This Is the Place Heritage Park, a part of the Utah State Parks system. At 217.5 acres, This is the Place Heritage Park re-creates typical 19th-century pioneer life and contains over 50 restored or replicated historical buildings. This is the Place Monument also is located within the park, marking the end of the Mormon trail.\nSugar House Park is the second largest park in Salt Lake City at and is a part of the Salt Lake County park system. The park is known for its large, rolling hills surrounding a pond with fountains. It was also the site of an annual Fourth of July fireworks display until 2018.\nRed Butte Garden and Arboretum, in the foothills of Salt Lake City, features many different exhibits and also hosts many musical concerts. It is operated by the University of Utah.\nCity parks.\nSalt Lake City has a system of 85 municipal parks. Some of the most notable, other than those mentioned above, are:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nThe most reported ancestries in 2020 were:\nThe racial makeup (including Hispanics in the racial counts) was 68.41% (136,622) White alone, 2.89% (5,766) Black alone, 1.45% (2,886) Native American alone, 5.50% (10,989) Asian alone, 2.10% (4,186) Pacific Islander alone, 9.73% (19,440) Other Race alone, and 9.93% (19,834) Multiracial or Mixed Race.\nThe racial and ethnic makeup (where Hispanics are excluded from the racial counts and placed in their own category) was 63.43% (126,678) White alone (non-Hispanic), 2.74% (5,466) Black alone (non-Hispanic), 0.78% (1,563) Native American alone (non-Hispanic), 5.43% (10,840) Asian alone (non-Hispanic), 2.04% (4,075) Pacific Islander alone (non-Hispanic), 0.58% (1,149) Other Race alone (non-Hispanic), 4.23% (8,448) Multiracial or Mixed Race alone (non-Hispanic), and 20.78% (41,504) Hispanic or Latino.\n2010 census.\nAt the 2010 census, Salt Lake City's population was 75.1% White, 2.6% African American, 1.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 4.4% Asian, 2.0% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 10.7% from other races and 3.7% of mixed descent. 22.3% of the total population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. The city's population has historically been predominantly white. Between 1860 and 1950 whites represented about 99% of the city's population but this somewhat changed in the decades that followed.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], 37.0% of the population had a bachelor's degree or higher. 18.5% of the population was foreign born and another 1.1% was born in Puerto Rico, U.S. insular territories, or born abroad to American parent(s). 27.0% spoke a language other than English at home.\nThere were 186,440 people (up from 181,743 in 2000), 75,177 households, and 57,543 families in the city. This amounts to 6.75% of Utah's population, 18.11% of Salt Lake County's population, and 16.58% of the new Salt Lake metropolitan population. The area within the city limits covers 14.2% of Salt Lake County. Salt Lake City was more densely populated than the surrounding metro area with a population density of 1,688.77/sqmi (1,049.36/km2). There were 80,724 housing units at an average density of 731.2/sqmi (454.35/km2).\nThe Salt Lake City-Ogden metropolitan area, which included Salt Lake, Davis, and Weber counties, had a population of 1,333,914 in 2000, a 24.4% increase over the 1990 figure of 1,072,227. Since the 2000 Census, the Census Bureau has added Summit and Tooele counties to the Salt Lake City metropolitan area, but removed Davis and Weber counties and designated them as the separate Ogden-Clearfield metropolitan area. The Salt Lake City-Ogden-Clearfield combined statistical area, together with the Provo-Orem metropolitan area, which lies to the south, had a combined population of 2,094,035 as of July 1, 2008.\nThere were 75,177 households, out of which 27.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 41.1% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.3% were other types of households. Of the 75,177 households, 3,904 were reported to be unmarried partner households: 3,047 heterosexual, 458 same-sex male, and 399 same-sex female. 33.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.48, and the average family size was 3.24.\nThe city's age distribution (as of 2000):\nThe median age was 30 years. For every 100 females, there were 102.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 101.2 males. The median income for a household in the city was $36,944, and the median income for a family was $45,140. Males had a median income of $31,511 versus $26,403 for females. The per capita income for the city was $20,752. 15.3% of the population and 10.4% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 18.7% of those under the age of 18 and 8.5% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.\nAccording to the Census Bureau's American Community Survey of 2017, the highest disparity in income in Utah is in Salt Lake City. Salt Lake City's GINI Index score was 0.4929, compared with the state's overall score of 0.423. The west-side areas of Salt Lake have the lowest incomes, while areas like the upper Avenues have much higher incomes. Other Utah cities with relatively high scores include Provo, 0.4734; and Ogden, 0.4632.\nLess than 50% of Salt Lake City's residents are members of the LDS Church. This is a much lower proportion than in Utah's more suburban municipalities; altogether, LDS Church members make up about 62% of Utah's population.\nThe Rose Park and Glendale sections are predominantly Spanish-speaking with Hispanic and Latino Americans accounting for 60% of public school-children. The Centro Civico Mexicano acts as a community gathering point for the Wasatch Front's estimated 300,000 Latinos, Mexican President Vicente Fox began his 2006 US tour in Salt Lake City.\nSalt Lake City is home to a Bosnian American community of more than 8,000, most of whom arrived during the Bosnian War in the 1990s. The large Pacific Islander population, mainly Samoan and Tongan, is also centered in the Rose Park, Glendale, and Poplar Grove sectors. Most of Salt Lake City's ethnic Pacific Islanders are members of the LDS Church, though various Samoan and Tongan-speaking congregations are situated throughout the Salt Lake area including Samoan Congregational, Tongan Wesleyan Methodist, and Roman Catholic. Just outside Salt Lake City limits, newer immigrant communities include Nepalis, and refugees of Karen origin from Myanmar (former Burma). Salt Lake City also has the third largest Sri Lankan community in the United States.\nThe city is home to a large, business savvy, organized, and politically supported gay community. Leaders of the Episcopal Church's Diocese of Utah, as well as leaders of Utah's largest Jewish congregation, the Salt Lake Kol Ami, along with three elected representatives of the city identify themselves as gay. These developments have attracted controversy from socially conservative officials representing other regions of the state. A 2015 Williams Institute comparison of 50 Most Populous Metro Areas ranked by Gallup Daily tracking and the US Census, ranked SLC 7th in Metro areas, up from 39th in 1990.\nSpanish, Chinese and Vietnamese are the most common spoken languages besides English.\nEconomy.\nHistorically known as the \"Crossroads of the West\" for its railroads, when nearby steel, mining and railroad operations provided a strong source of income with Silver King Coalition Mines, Geneva Steel, Bingham Canyon Mine, and oil refineries, Salt Lake City's modern economy is service-oriented. Today the city's major sectors are government, trade, transportation, utilities, and professional and business services. The daytime population of Salt Lake City proper swells to over 315,000 people, not including tourists or students.\nLocal, state, and federal governments have a large presence in the city, and trade, transportation, and utilities provide significant employment, with the major employer being the Delta hub at Salt Lake City International Airport. Equally significant are the professional and business services, while health services and health educational services are significant areas of employment, including the largest health care provider in the Intermountain West, Intermountain Healthcare. Other major employers include the University of Utah, Sinclair Oil Corporation, and the LDS Church.\nBesides its central offices, the LDS Church owns and operates a for-profit division, Deseret Management Corporation and its subsidiaries, which are headquartered in the city.\nSalt Lake City is home to two Fortune 1000 companies, Zions Bancorporation and Questar Corporation. Other notable firms headquartered in the city include AlphaGraphics, Alsco, Sinclair Oil Corporation, Smith's Food and Drug (owned by national grocer Kroger), MonaVie, Myriad Genetics, Creminelli Fine Meats and Vehix.com. Notable firms based in nearby cities within the metropolitan area include Arctic Circle Restaurants, FranklinCovey, and Overstock.com. Metropolitan Salt Lake was also once the headquarters of American Stores, the Skaggs Companies, and ZCMI, one of the first department stores; it is now owned by Macy's, Inc. Former ZCMI stores now operate under the Macy's label. High-tech firms with a large presence in the suburbs include Adobe, eBay, Unisys, Siebel, Micron, L-3 Communications, Telarus, and 3M. Goldman Sachs has its second-largest presence in Salt Lake City. It is categorized as a \"Gamma\u2212\" global city, according to the Globalization and World Cities Research Network.\nOther economic activities include tourism, conventions, and major suburban call centers. Tourism has increased since the 2002 Olympic Winter Games, and many hotels and restaurants were built for the events. The convention industry has expanded since construction of the Salt Palace convention center in the late 1990s, which hosts trade shows and conventions, including the Novell BrainShare conference. In 2020, Salt Lake City entered the bidding process to host the 2030 Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games. In 2024, the International Olympic Committee announced that Salt Lake City would host the 2034 Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.\nLaw and government.\n The Salt Lake City and County Building has been the seat of city government since 1894. It also served as Utah's first statehouse from 1896 until the current Utah State Capitol was dedicated on October 9, 1916.\nSince 1979, Salt Lake City has had a non-partisan mayor-council form of government. The mayor and the seven councillors are elected to staggered four-year terms. Council seats are defined by geographic population boundaries. Each councilor represents approximately 26,000 citizens. Officials are not subject to term limits.\nMany municipal elections throughout Utah are non-partisan, with each able to opt for ranked choice voting . Members of the city council also serve as the governing board of the city's Redevelopment Agency.\nElections are held in odd-numbered years. Candidates take office in January of the following year.\nThe separation of church and state was the most heated topic in the days of the Liberal Party and People's Party of Utah, when many candidates were also would-be LDS Church bishops. This tension is still reflected today with the \"Bridging the Religious Divide\" campaign. This campaign was initiated when some city residents complained the Utah political establishment was unfair in its dealings with non-LDS residents by giving the LDS Church preferential treatment, while LDS residents perceived a growing anti-Mormon bias in city politics.\nThe city's political demographics are considerably more liberal than the rest of Utah. While Utah as a whole is a strongly conservative and Republican state, Salt Lake City is considered a Democratic bastion. Since 1976, all of the city's mayors have been Democrats.\nThe city is home to several non-governmental think-tanks and advocacy groups such as the conservative Sutherland Institute, the progressive Alliance for a Better Utah, the gay-rights group Equality Utah, and the quality-growth advocates Envision Utah. Salt Lake hosted many foreign dignitaries during the 2002 Winter Olympics, and in 2006 the president of Mexico began his U.S. tour in the city and Israel's ambassador to the United States opened a cultural center. President George W. Bush visited in 2005 and again in 2006 for national veterans' conventions; both visits were protested by then-Mayor Rocky Anderson. Other political leaders such as Howard Dean and Harry Reid gave speeches in the city in 2005.\nIn July 2013, a new Public Safety Building housing police, fire, and emergency dispatch employees opened. It was billed as the largest net zero energy building in the nation at opening, and is expected to be certified LEED Platinum.\nThe Salt Lake City Fire Department operates out of 14 fire stations.\nEducation.\nIn 1847, LDS pioneer Jane Dillworth held the first classes in her tent for the children of the first LDS families. In the last part of the 19th century, there was a lot of controversy over how children in the area should be educated. LDS and non-LDS members could not agree on the level of religious influence in schools. Today, many LDS youths in grades 9 through 12 attend some form of religious instruction in addition to the public-school sessions, referred to as seminary. Students are released from public schools at various times of the day to attend seminary. LDS seminaries are often on church-owned property adjacent to the public school and within walking distance.\nDue to high birth rates and large classrooms, Utah spends less per student than any other state, yet also spends more per capita (of total state population) than any state with the exception of Alaska. Money is always a challenge, and many businesses donate to support schools. Several districts have set up foundations to raise money. Recently, money was approved for the reconstruction of more than half of the elementary schools and one of the middle schools in the Salt Lake City School District, which serves most of the area within the city limits. There are twenty-three K-6 elementary schools, five 7\u20138 middle schools, three 9\u201312 high schools (Highland, East, and West, with the former South High being converted to the South City campus of the Salt Lake Community College), and an alternative high school (Horizonte) within the school district. In addition, Highland has recently been selected as the site for the charter school Salt Lake School for the Performing Arts (SPA). Many Catholic schools are in the city, including Judge Memorial Catholic High School. Rowland Hall-St. Mark's School, established in 1867 by Episcopal Bishop Daniel Tuttle, is the area's premier independent school.\nThe Salt Lake City Public Library system consists of the main library downtown, and five branches in various neighborhoods. The main library, designed by renowned architect Moshe Safdie, opened in 2003. In 2006, the Salt Lake City Public Library was named \"Library of the Year\" by the American Library Association.\nPostsecondary educational options in Salt Lake City include the University of Utah, Westminster College, Salt Lake Community College, Eagle Gate College, Violin Making School of America (now named Peter Prier &amp; Sons Violins), and Ensign College (formally LDS Business College). Utah State University, Neumont College of Computer Science and Brigham Young University also operate education centers in the city. There are also many trade and technical schools such as Healing Mountain Massage School and the Utah College of Massage Therapy. The University of Utah is noted for its research and medical programs. It was one of the original four universities to be connected to ARPANET, the predecessor to the Internet, in 1969, and was the site of the first artificial heart transplant in 1982. Located in Salt Lake City, the Institute of Human Anatomy is a privately owned human cadaver lab.\nCulture.\nMuseums and the arts.\nSalt Lake City is home to several museums. Near Temple Square is the Church History Museum. Operated by the LDS Church, the museum contains collections of artifacts, documents, art, photographs, tools, clothing and furniture from the history of the LDS Church, which spans nearly two centuries. West of Temple Square, at The Gateway, is the Clark Planetarium, which houses an IMAX theater, and Discovery Gateway, a children's museum. The University of Utah campus is home to the Utah Museum of Fine Arts as well as the Natural History Museum of Utah. Other museums in the area include the Utah State Historical Society, Daughters of Utah Pioneers' Pioneer Memorial Museum, Fort Douglas Military Museum, the Social Hall Heritage Museum, and The Leonardo, an art, science and technology museum housed in the city's previous library building.\nSalt Lake City is home to several classic movie theaters including the Tower Theatre and the Broadway Theater, both of which host the Salt Lake Film Society members and shows. The Utah Film Center hosts free film screenings, many with post film Q and A's with filmmakers or subject experts every Tuesday night at the Salt Lake Public Library and monthly at the Rose Wagner Theater.\nOn December 5, 2007, the Salt Lake Chamber and Downtown Alliance announced a two-block section of downtown south of the planned City Creek Center is planned to become a new arts hub. This will include renovations to two theaters in the area and a new theater with a seating capacity of 2,400 and increased space for galleries and artists. The opening of the new facilities was anticipated to coincide with the opening of the City Creek Center in 2011, but they have yet to be completed. The $81.5\u00a0million theater site was announced, and attempts to secure funding began. The theater plans have come under criticism, however, especially from nearby smaller theaters which host Off-Broadway tours and claim such a theater cannot be supported and will hurt their business.\nPerforming arts.\nSalt Lake City provides venues for both professional and amateur theatre. The city attracts traveling Broadway and Off-Broadway performances in the historic Capitol Theatre. Local professional acting companies include the Pioneer Theatre Company, Salt Lake Acting Company, and Plan-B Theatre Company, which is the only theatre company in Utah fully devoted to developing new plays by Utah playwrights.\nSalt Lake City is home to The Tabernacle Choir at Temple Square, founded in 1847 as the Mormon Tabernacle Choir. The choir's weekly program, called \"Music and the Spoken Word\", is the world's longest-running continuous network broadcast. Salt Lake City is the home to the Utah Symphony Orchestra, which was founded in 1940 and grew to become a major US orchestra during the tenure of its former music director, Maurice Abravanel, who led the orchestra from 1947 through 1979. Its music director is Thierry Fischer. The orchestra's original home was the Salt Lake Tabernacle, but since 1979 has performed at Abravanel Hall in the western downtown area. In 2002, Utah Symphony merged with Utah Opera, which was founded in 1978 by Glade Peterson and under its Artistic Director Christopher McBeth annually presents four opera productions in the Capitol Theatre. Salt Lake City area is home to the renowned children's choir from The Madeleine Choir School, and the Salt Lake Children's Choir (established in 1979).\nThe University of Utah features two dance departments, the Ballet Department and the Department of Modern Dance. Professional dance companies in Salt Lake City include Ballet West, Ririe-Woodbury Dance Company (which celebrated its 45th anniversary season in 2008/2009) and Repertory Dance Theatre. The Rose Wagner Performing Arts Center is host to both RWDC and RDT.\nMusic.\nThe city has an eclectic music scene that includes hip hop, blues, rock and roll, rockabilly, punk, deathcore, horrorcore and indie groups. Popular groups or persons who started in the Wasatch Front area, or were raised in and influenced by it, include Iceburn, Eagle Twin, the Almost, the Brobecks, Meg and Dia, Royal Bliss, Shedaisy, the Summer Obsession, Theater of Ice, the Used and Chelsea Grin. Salt Lake has an underground metal scene with bands such as Gaza and Bird Eater. During the summer, Salt Lake City hosts the Twilight Concert series, a low-cost summer concert series. The series has been a part of the Salt Lake City music scene since the late 1980s. In 2010, crowds peaked at 40,000 attendees in downtown's Pioneer Park.\nFestivals.\nSalt Lake City has a thriving festival culture. Various festivals happen throughout the year, celebrating the diversity of the valley's communities. From culture, food, religion and spirituality, to dance, music, spoken word, and film, almost any type of festival can be found. Many of the festivals have been ongoing for decades.\nThe Utah Pride Festival is an annual LGBTQ festival, held in June. Started in 1983, it has grown to a three-day festival with attendance exceeding 50,000. It is sponsored by the Utah Pride Center. The Utah Pride Festival is Salt Lake City's second largest festival, after Days of '47, and is one of the nation's largest Pride festivals. The festival includes hundreds of vendors, food, music stars, a 5k run, a dyke and trans march, and an interfaith service by the Utah Pride Interfaith Coalition.\nThe Utah Arts Festival has been held annually since 1977 with an average attendance of 80,000. About 130 booths are available for visual artists, and five performance venues for musicians.\nThe Dark Arts Festival is an annual 3-day festival dedicated to the goth and industrial subcultures. The festival started in 1993, and is hosted at the local goth club Area 51. The festival contracts bands to play during the event. 2015's lineup included Tragic Black, The Gothsicles, Adrian H &amp; the Wounds, and Hocico. \nThe Utah Arts Alliance hosts an annual Urban Arts Festival, usually drawing over 20,000, and featuring artists displaying and selling paintings, sculpture, photography, and jewelry. Live music is provided, mixing rock, hip hop, R&amp;B, funk, and jazz, and workshops for interests such as skateboarding and gardening take place. The festival also hosts the Voice of the City film festival which allows local filmmakers to show their version of Salt Lake.\nThe Jewish Arts Festival, hosted by the IJ and Jeann\u00e9 Wagner JCC of Salt Lake City, showcases Jewish culture through workshops, theater, food, film, art, and contemporary music from the local and global Jewish communities.\nThe Sugar House neighborhood holds an annual arts festival on July 4, with local artists, performances, music, food, and vendors. The festival coincides with the fireworks show at Sugar House Park in the evening.\nSalt Lake City also hosts portions of the Sundance Film Festival. The festival, which is held each year, brings many cultural icons, movie stars, celebrities, and thousands of film buffs to see the largest independent film festival in the United States. The headquarters of the event is in nearby Park City. There are several other annual festivals, including FilmQuest, Salty Horror Con &amp; Film, Damn These Heels, and the Voice of the city. FilmQuest began in 2014 and features selected genres such as fantasy and science fiction. Salty Horror, which began in 2010, is a competition-based horror film festival. The Utah Film Center presents two annual film festivals Damn These Heels, which began in 1994 focuses on independent, documentary, and foreign feature-length films surrounding LGBTQ issues, ideas, and art. The second festival of the Utah Film center is the Tumbleweeds film festival for kids. This festival began in 2010, allows families to experience international films and media workshops. Tumbleweeds works to increasing kids awareness of different cultures, encourages independent voices, nurtures media making skills and strengthens critical review. Voice of the City film festival is part of the Urban Arts Festival and allows local filmmakers to show their version of Salt Lake.\nThe 2015 Great Salt Lake Fringe Festival was the first performance festival in Salt Lake City. The 4-day festival included various performances involving music, dance, theatre, spoken word, circus arts, magic, and puppetry.\nThe Living Traditions Festival is a 3-day multicultural arts festival hosted by the Salt Lake City Arts Council, started in 1985. The festival celebrates traditional dance, music, crafts and food from the various contemporary ethnic communities of Salt Lake City.\nEarth Jam is an annual festival celebrated in Salt Lake's Liberty Park to celebrate Earth Day through music. The free festival focuses on music, and hosts speakers, vendors, food, performing art, a Goddess pageant, and children's garden.\nThe Live Green SLC! Festival aims to showcase sustainable products, ideas, and solutions from renewable technologies for the everyday household. The festival promotes education, sustainability, and accessibility to green and organic products and services.\nCraft Lake City DIY (Do-It-Yourself) festival is an artisan festival that promotes the use of science and technology to help local artists produce their crafts such as silk screens, jewelry, and other mediums. The festival promotes education through workshops, galleries, and demonstrations which includes various vendors and food.\nThe 9th and 9th Street Festival is an annual neighborhood festival celebration of art, music, and crafts, held at 900 East/900 South Streets.\nThe Catholic Nuns of Carmelite Monastery hold an annual fair each autumn in Holladay, a suburb of Salt Lake City. The festival includes music, food, a live auction, Golf for the Nuns tournament, a prize giveaway, and a 5k Run for the Nuns road race.\nThe Sri Sri Ganesh Hindu Temple of Utah, in Salt Lake City, has an annual Ganesh Festival called Ganesh Chathurthi. The 10-day festival is devoted to rites of worship of the Hindu God Ganesh. In 2014 the festival was hosted at the Krishna Temple of Salt Lake since the Ganesh temple's exterior was under construction, which made the inner temple inaccessible.\nIndia Fest is hosted by the Krishna Temples of Salt Lake City and Spanish Fork, Utah. The festival includes food, dances, drama and a pageant of the Ramayana. Since 2011 the Krishna Temple of Salt Lake City has held an annual Festival of Colors, similar to the famous festival at the Krishna Temple in Spanish Fork.\nThe Great Salt Lake City Yoga Festival was in its fifth year (as of 2015). 2015 saw the first Downtown Yoga festival in Salt Lake City. Both festivals are intended to inspire yogis in the community by teaching about yoga, healthy living, raw food, and traditional yoga music.\nThe local Pagan community has celebrated an annual Salt Lake City Pagan Pride Day since 2001. The festival features rituals, workshops, dancers, bards, vendors, and requires only a can of food donation for admission.\nMembers of the steampunk subculture have an annual two-day festival, Steamfest. It hosts vendors, panels, and cosplayers dressed in the fashion of various punk cultures, mostly around steam, deco, and diesel punk.\nRose Park hosts an annual spring festival, to display the community's diversity. It includes dancers, music, a 5k run, silent auction and food.\nThe Greek Festival, held at the downtown Greek Orthodox Church cathedral during the weekend after Labor Day, celebrates Utah's Greek heritage. The 3-day event includes Greek music, dance groups, cathedral tours, booths and a large buffet. Attendance ranges from 35,000 to 50,000. It celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2015.\nTwo Italian-themed annual fests are held in Salt Lake City. The Italian cultural street festival Ferragosto (in August) celebrates Italian food and culture from Italian communities in Salt Lake City. Festa Italian is a 2-day festival in September that highlights regions of Italy with music, food, and entertainment. The proceeds go to local charities.\nOther cultural festivals in Salt Lake City include the Peruvian Festival, the Utah Brazilian Festival, the Polynesian Cultural Festival, the Nihon Matsuri Japanese Festival, and the Buddhist Obon Japanese Festival.\nConventions.\nSalt Lake City is host to a number of conventions that come to the Crossroads of the West. With several large venues, including the Salt Palace and Delta Center in downtown, Salt Lake is capable of accommodating conventions upwards of 100,000 people.\nSalt Lake Comic Con, which started in 2013, had over 100,000 attendance within its first few years. Because of this, Salt Lake Comic Con started having a second event, FanX (Fan Experience) to give those who were not able to come to the fall Comic Con, a spring-time opportunity. The convention broke inaugural records in 2013, hosting the largest crowd of any inaugural comic convention. The second event, FanX of 2014, and the fall event of 2014 both broke attendance records for the event, surpassing 120,000 people. The convention was sued by San Diego Comic-Con, but won the right to use the trademark of comic con in its name. In 2014, Stan Lee called the Salt Lake Comic Con \"the greatest comic con in the world\". On September 25, 2015, the Con broke the world record for the most costumed comic book cosplay characters in one location. At 1784 people, this beat the previous record.\nCrystal Mountain Pony Con, an annual My Little Pony convention, features cosplayers, vendors, and panels. 2015 saw more than 800 bronies in attendance.\nSalt Lake hosts an annual International Tattoo Convention in the spring, featuring mostly nationally and internationally noted tattoo artists.\nFantasy Con hosted its first convention, the first of its kind, in Salt Lake City in 2014. After a successful run, the convention reorganized to better serve the needs of the fantasy community. Intended to be annual, it did not host one for 2015, and further plans have not been announced.\nSalt Lake City saw its first Gaming Convention in 2015. It included contests, cosplay, panels, and focused on console, computer, card, and tabletop gaming.\nEvents.\nAlthough the LDS church holds a large influence, the city is culturally and religiously diverse and the site of many cultural activities.\nA major state holiday is Pioneer Day, July 24, the anniversary of the Mormon pioneers' entry into the Salt Lake Valley. It is celebrated with a week's worth of activities, including a children parade, a horse parade, the featured Days of '47 Parade (one of the nation's largest parades), a rodeo, and a fireworks show at Liberty Park. Fireworks can be legally sold and set off around July 24.\nFirst Night on New Year's Eve, a celebration emphasizing family-friendly entertainment and activities held at Rice-Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah, culminates with a fireworks display at midnight.\nBeginning in 2004, Salt Lake City has been the host of the international Salt Lake City Marathon. In 2006, Real Madrid and many of the nation's best cyclists had engagements.\nSalt Lake City has begun to host its own events in the last few years, most notably the Friday Night Flicks, free movies in the city's parks, and the Mayor's health and fitness awareness program, Salt Lake City Gets Fit. Salt Lake City also hosts recurring food-truck gatherings organized by the Food Truck League, including regular lunchtime events at the downtown Gallivan Center.\nSalt Lake City hosted the 2002 Winter Olympics. At that time, Salt Lake City was the most populated area to hold a Winter Olympic Games. The event put Salt Lake City in the international spotlight and is regarded by many as one of the most successful Winter Olympics ever. Salt Lake City will host the Olympics for the second time in 2034.\nIn February 2002, Torino, Italy was granted an Olympic Sister City relationship with Salt Lake City, which became a Friendship City relationship in October 2003. On January 13, 2007, an agreement was signed, where Salt Lake City and Torino officially became Olympic Sister Cities.\nOn the third Friday of every month, the Salt Lake Gallery Stroll presents a free evening of visual art; many galleries and other art-related businesses stay open late, allowing enthusiasts to tour various exhibits after hours. Sidewalk artists, street performers and musicians also sometimes participate in these monthly events.\nMedia.\nSalt Lake City has many diverse media outlets. Most of the major television and radio stations are based in or near the city. The Salt Lake City metropolitan area is ranked as the 28th largest radio and 33rd largest television market in the United States.\nPrint media include two major daily newspapers, \"The Salt Lake Tribune\" and the \"Deseret News\" (previously the \"Deseret Morning News\"). Other more specialized publications include \"Now Salt Lake\", \"Salt Lake City Weekly\" (a weekly independent publication), \"Nuestro Mundo\" of the Spanish-speaking community,\" QSaltLake\" and \"The Pillar\" for the LGBT community. Other Spanish-language newspapers include \"El Estandar\", \"Amigo Hispano\" (online only), and \"El Observador de Utah\", which offers free residential delivery. There are a number of local magazines, such as \"Wasatch Journal\" (a quarterly magazine covering Utah's arts, culture, and outdoors), \"Utah Homes &amp; Garden\", \"Salt Lake Magazine\" (a bimonthly lifestyle magazine), \"CATALYST Magazine\" (a monthly environmental, health, arts and politics magazine), \"SLUG Magazine\", an alternative underground music magazine. \"Utah Stories\" is a magazine that covers local issues, primarily focused on the Salt Lake Valley.\nKTVX 4 signed on the air as Utah's first television station in 1947 under the experimental callsign W6SIX, becoming the Mountain Time Zone's oldest and third-oldest west of the Mississippi. It is Salt Lake City's ABC affiliate. KSL-TV 5, the local NBC affiliate, has downtown studios at \"Broadcast House\" in the Triad Center office complex. KSL is operated by Bonneville International, a company owned by the Deseret Management Corporation, both of which are for-profit subsidiaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church). KUTV 2 is Salt Lake City's CBS affiliate. KSTU 13 is the area's Fox affiliate, owned by the E. W. Scripps Company. KUCW 30 is Salt Lake City's CW outlet owned and operated by Nexstar Media Group, and is part of a duopoly with KTVX. KJZZ-TV 14 is an independent station owned by Sinclair Broadcast Group, and is part of a triopoly with KUTV and St. George-licensed MyNetworkTV affiliate KMYU 12.\nBecause television and radio stations serve a larger area (usually the entire state of Utah, as well as parts of western Wyoming, southern Idaho, parts of Montana, and eastern Nevada), ratings returns tend to be higher than those in similar-sized cities. Some Salt Lake radio stations are carried on broadcast translator networks throughout the state.\nSalt Lake City has become a case of market saturation on the FM dial; one cannot go through more than about two frequencies on an FM radio tuner before encountering another broadcasting station. Several companies, most notably Millcreek Broadcasting and Simmons Media, have constructed broadcast towers on Humpy Peak in the Uinta Mountains to the east. These towers allow frequencies allocated to nearby mountain communities to be boosted by smaller, low-powered FM transmitters along the Wasatch Front.\nMain sights.\nAs the headquarters of the LDS Church, the city has many LDS-related sites open to visitors. The most popular is Temple Square, which includes the Salt Lake Temple (not open to the general public) and visitor centers open to the public. Temple Square includes the historic Salt Lake Tabernacle, home of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, now called The Tabernacle Choir at Temple Square. The LDS Conference Center is north of Temple Square. The Family History Library, the world's largest genealogical library, is west of Temple Square. It is run by the LDS Church and is open to the public. The Eagle Gate Monument is east of Temple Square.\nIn 2004, the Salt Lake City main library received an Institute Honor Award for Architecture by the American Institute of Architects and features a distinctive architectural style. The building's roof serves as a viewpoint for the Salt Lake Valley. The Utah State Capitol Building offers marble floors and a dome similar to the building that houses the US Congress. Other notable historical buildings include the Thomas Kearns Mansion (now the Governor's Mansion), City and County Building (built 1894), the Kearns Building on Main Street, St. Mark's Episcopal Cathedral (built 1874), and the Roman Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine (built 1909).\nThe Olympic Cauldron Park at Rice-Eccles Stadium features the Olympic Cauldron from the games, a visitor center, and the Hoberman Arch. The Olympic Legacy Plaza, at The Gateway, features a dancing fountain set to music and the names of 30,000 Olympic volunteers carved in stone. The Utah Olympic Park, near Park City, features the Olympic ski jumps, as well as bobsleigh, luge, and skeleton runs. Today, the Olympic Park is used for year-round training and competitions. Visitors can watch the various events and even ride a bobsled. The Utah Olympic Oval, in nearby Kearns, was home to the speed skating events and is now open to the public. Other popular Olympic venues include Soldier Hollow, the site of cross-country skiing events, southeast of Salt Lake near Heber City.\nTrolley Square is an indoor and outdoor mall with independent art boutiques, restaurants, and national retailers. The buildings housing the shops are renovated trolley barns with cobblestone streets. The Gateway, an outdoor shopping mall, has many national restaurants, clothing retailers, a movie theater, the Clark Planetarium, the Discovery Gateway, a music venue called The Depot, and the Olympic Legacy Plaza.\nOn October 3, 2006, the LDS Church, which owned the ZCMI Center Mall and Crossroads Plaza Mall, both on Main Street, announced plans to demolish the malls, a skyscraper, and several other buildings to make way for the $1.5\u00a0billion City Creek Center redevelopment. It combined new office and residential buildings (one of which is the city's third-tallest building) around an outdoor shopping center featuring a stream, fountain, and other outdoor amenities; it opened on March 22, 2012. Sugar House is a neighborhood with a small town main street shopping area and numerous old parks, which is served by the S Line (formerly known as Sugar House Streetcar).\nOther attractions near Salt Lake City include Hogle Zoo, Timpanogos Cave National Monument, Golden Spike National Historic Site (where the world's first transcontinental railroad was joined), Lagoon Amusement Park, the Great Salt Lake, the Bonneville Salt Flats, Gardner Historic Village, one of the nation's largest dinosaur museums at Thanksgiving Point in Lehi, the sculpture \"Out of the Blue\", commonly referred to as \"The Whale\" by locals, and the world's largest human-made excavation at Bingham Canyon Mine.\nSports and recreation.\nWinter sports, such as skiing and snowboarding, are popular activities in the Wasatch Mountains east of Salt Lake City. Eight ski resorts lie within of the city. Alta, Brighton, Solitude, and Snowbird all lie directly to the southeast in the Wasatch Mountains, while nearby Park City contains three more resorts. The popularity of the ski resorts has increased by a third since the 2002 Winter Olympics. Summer activities such as hiking, camping, rock climbing, mountain biking, and other related outdoor activities are popular in the mountains. The many small reservoirs and rivers in the Wasatch Mountains are popular for boating, fishing, and other water-related activities.\nSalt Lake City has hosted two of the most important and most watched games in basketball. The 1979 NCAA Division I Basketball Championship Game took place at the Special Events Center on the campus of the University of Utah, where Magic Johnson met Larry Bird for the first time in their legendary rivalry. Johnson's Michigan State team defeated Bird's previously unbeaten Indiana State team in the most watched college basketball game in history. Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals took place at the Delta Center, where Michael Jordan played his final game as a member of the Chicago Bulls. Jordan's Bulls defeated the Utah Jazz to win their sixth championship in the most watched game in the history of the National Basketball Association (NBA).\nProfessional sports.\nSalt Lake City is home to the Utah Jazz of the NBA, who moved from New Orleans in 1979 and play their home games in the Delta Center (formerly known as EnergySolutions Arena and later as Vivint Arena). Until the establishment of the Utah Mammoth in 2024, the Jazz were the only team of the four top-level professional sports leagues in the state. The franchise has enjoyed steady success, at one point making the playoffs in 22 out of 25 seasons, led by Hall of Fame duo Karl Malone and John Stockton. The duo won two Western Conference championships together, but the franchise has yet to win an NBA championship. Salt Lake City was home to a professional basketball team, the Utah Stars of the American Basketball Association (ABA), between 1970 and 1975. They won one championship in the city (in 1971) and enjoyed some of the strongest support of any ABA team, but they folded just months before the ABA\u2013NBA merger, thus preventing them from being absorbed by the NBA. Their success may have had a hand in the decision by the struggling Jazz to relocate to Salt Lake City in 1979. Salt Lake City was home to an original Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) team, the Utah Starzz, in 1997. The team relocated and became the San Antonio Silver Stars.\nReal Salt Lake of Major League Soccer was founded in 2004, initially playing at Rice-Eccles Stadium at the University of Utah before the soccer-specific America First Field (formerly Rio Tinto Stadium) was completed in 2008 in neighboring Sandy. The team won their first MLS championship by defeating the Los Angeles Galaxy at the 2009 MLS Cup. RSL advanced to the finals of the CONCACAF Champions League in 2011 but lost 3\u20132 on aggregate, and also advanced to the 2013 MLS Cup Final. In 2019, the club expanded to include the Utah Royals FC, a professional women's team in the National Women's Soccer League, though the club ceased operations in December 2020, transferring its player-related assets to the Kansas City Current and later restarted operations in 2023. The city has also played host to several international soccer games.\nBeginning in the 2024\u201325 season, the Utah Mammoth began playing in the National Hockey League's (NHL) Central Division. Their home arena is the Delta Center, alongside the Jazz. The franchise is owned by the Smith Entertainment Group, and was founded with all the transferred assets of the now-inactive Arizona Coyotes.\nUtah Warriors is a professional Major League Rugby team that launched its first season in 2018, with Zions Bank Stadium as its home venue.\nArena football expanded into the city in 2006 with the Utah Blaze of the Arena Football League. They recorded the highest average attendance in the league in their first season. After the original AFL folded in 2009, the future of the Blaze was unclear. However, a new league branded as the Arena Football League began play in 2010. The Blaze franchise was restored and is playing in the new league. The Salt Lake Stallions of the AAF were also based in the city and played most of one season in 2019 before ceasing operations.\nThere are also two minor league teams in the city. The Pacific Coast League's Salt Lake Bees, the Triple-A affiliate of the Los Angeles Angels, play at Smith's Ballpark and were established in 1994 as the Buzz. Their name was changed to the Stingers in 2002, and then to the Bees, a historical Salt Lake City baseball team name, in 2006. The Utah Grizzlies ice hockey team of the ECHL were established in 2005, replacing the previous Grizzlies team that existed from when they relocated from Denver in 1995 to 2005 in the International Hockey League (IHL), and later, the American Hockey League (AHL). They play at the Maverik Center in neighboring West Valley City.\nAmateur sports.\nThe University of Utah and Brigham Young University (BYU) both maintain large followings in the city, and the rivalry between the two colleges has a long and storied history. Despite the fact that Utah is a secular university, the rivalry is sometimes referred to as the Holy War because of BYU's status as an LDS Church-owned university. Until the 2011\u201312 season, they both played in the Mountain West Conference (MWC) of the NCAA's Division I and have played each other over 100 times in football since 1896.\nWhile Salt Lake City does not have a professional football team, the college football teams of both universities are popular in the city and the state as a whole. The University of Utah was the first school from a non-automatic qualifying conference to win two Bowl Championship Series (BCS) bowl games (and was the first from outside the BCS affiliated conferences to be invited to one) since the system was introduced in 1998. BYU defeated the University of Michigan in the 1984 Holiday Bowl to win the state's only college football national championship. The University of Utah was a part of the controversy surrounding the fairness of the BCS. Despite undefeated seasons in both 2004 and 2008, Utah was not invited to participate in the national championship in either season because it was a member of the MWC, a BCS non-automatic qualifying conference.\nCollege basketball also has an important presence in the city. The Utah Utes men's basketball team plays its home games at the Jon M. Huntsman Center on its campus in Salt Lake City. The team won the 1944 NCAA basketball tournament and made the final of the 1998 NCAA basketball tournament. The school has also hosted the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament many times, both at the Huntsman Center and Delta Center, including the Final Four of the famous 1979 tournament, when it was known as the Special Events Center.\nThe Utah Avalanche, formed in January 2011, were a development rugby league team for the now defunct American National Rugby League. In June 2012, Salt Lake City hosted the IRB Junior World Rugby Trophy, a major international rugby union tournament for under-20 national teams from \"second-tier\" nations.\nUtah became the first state outside Minnesota where bandy exists when Olympic Bandy Club was formed in Salt Lake City. Salt Lake is also home to two roller derby leagues: the Salt City Derby Girls and Wasatch Roller Derby, both of which field travel teams.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nSalt Lake City lies at the convergence of two cross-country freeways; I-15 running north\u2013south, and I-80, which connects downtown with Salt Lake City International Airport to the west and exits to the east through Parley's Canyon. I-215 forms a 270-degree loop around the city. SR-201 extends to the western Salt Lake City suburbs. The Legacy Parkway (SR-67), a controversial and oft-delayed freeway, opened September 2008, heading north from I-215 into Davis County along the east shore of the Great Salt Lake. Travel to and from Davis County is complicated by geography as roads have to squeeze through the narrow opening between the Great Salt Lake to the west and the Wasatch Mountains to the east. Only four roads run between the two counties to carry the load of rush hour traffic from Davis County.\nSalt Lake City's surface street system is laid out on a simple grid pattern. Road names are numbered with a north, south, east, or west designation, with the grid originating at the southeast corner of Temple Square downtown. One of the visions of Brigham Young and the early settlers was to create wide, spacious streets, which characterizes downtown. The grid pattern remains fairly intact in the city, except on the East Bench, where geography makes it impossible. The entire Salt Lake Valley is laid out on the same numbered grid system, although it becomes increasingly irregular further into the suburbs. Many streets carry both a name and a grid coordinate. Usually both can be used as an address. US-89 enters the city from the northwest, becomes 900 West Street through the northern part of the city, and then exits Salt Lake City as State Street (100 East).\nPublic transportation.\nSalt Lake City's mass transit service is operated by the Utah Transit Authority (UTA) and includes a bus system, light rail, and a commuter rail line. Intercity services are provided by Amtrak and various intercity bus lines. These services are all interconnected at the Salt Lake City Intermodal Hub (Salt Lake Central Station), west of the city center.\nTransit bus service.\nUTA's bus system extends throughout the Wasatch Front from Brigham City in the north to Santaquin in the south and as far west as Grantsville, as well as east to Park City. UTA also operates routes to the ski resorts in Big and Little Cottonwood Canyons, as well as Sundance in Provo Canyon, during the ski season (typically November to April). Approximately 60,000 people ride the bus daily, although ridership has reportedly declined since TRAX was constructed.\nLight rail.\nThe light rail system, called TRAX, has three lines.\nThe system has 50 stations, 23 of which are within the city limits. Daily ridership averaged 60,600 as of the fourth quarter of 2012, making TRAX the ninth most-ridden light rail system in the country.\nCommuter rail.\nThe commuter rail system, \"FrontRunner\", opened April 26, 2008, extends from the Intermodal Hub north through Davis County to Pleasant View on the northern border of Weber County. Daily ridership on the line averages 7,800, as of the fourth quarter of 2012. An expansion called \"FrontRunner South\", which extended FrontRunner to Provo in central Utah County, was completed in December 2012 as part of UTA's FrontLines 2015 project. These extensions were made possible by a sales tax hike for road improvements, light rail, and commuter rail approved by voters on November 7, 2006. In addition, a $500\u00a0million letter of intent was signed by the Federal Transit Administration for all four of the planned TRAX extensions in addition to the FrontRunner extension to Provo. In March 2018, UTA announced FrontRunner would no longer run from Ogden to Pleasant View beginning in mid-August.\nIntercity bus and rail services.\nAmtrak, the national passenger rail system, provides service to Salt Lake City operating its \"California Zephyr\" daily between Chicago and Emeryville, California. Greyhound Lines serves Salt Lake City as well. Their nine daily buses provide service to Denver, Reno, Las Vegas, and Portland, Oregon. Both of these stations are at the Salt Lake City Intermodal Hub.\nAir transportation.\nSalt Lake City International Airport is west of downtown, and falls entirely within the boundary of Salt Lake City. Delta Air Lines operates a hub at the airport, serving over 100 non-stop destinations in the United States, Mexico, and Canada, as well as Paris, London, Amsterdam, Frankfurt and Seoul. SkyWest Airlines operates its largest hub at the airport as Delta Connection, and serves 243 cities as Delta Connection and United Express. The airport is served by four UTA bus routes, and a UTA-operated light rail line (TRAX) opened services on April 14, 2013. A total of 22,029,488 passengers flew through Salt Lake City International Airport in 2007, representing a 2.19% increase over 2006. The airport ranks as the 21st busiest airport in the United States in total passengers, is consistently rated first in the country in on-time arrivals and departures, and has the second-lowest number of cancellations. The airport is undergoing a $3.6\u00a0billion rebuild that is expected to be completed in 2026, resulting in a complete reworking of the terminals and parking areas.\nThere are two general aviation airports nearby, although they lie outside Salt Lake City:\nSalt Lake City owns and operates the international airport, as well as the South Valley Regional Airport and the Tooele Valley Airport through its department of airports.\nCycling.\nSalt Lake City is considered a bicycle-friendly city. In 2010, Salt Lake City was designated as a Silver-level Bicycle Friendly Community by the League of American Bicyclists, placing the city in the top 18 bicycling cities in the U.S. with a population of at least 100,000. Many streets in the city have bike lanes, and the city has since published a bicycle map. However, off-road biking in the valley has suffered significantly as access to trails and paths has declined with the increase of housing developments and land privatization. In 2012, the Salt Lake Transportation Division launched \"BikeSLC.com\", which consolidates the city's information about bicycle routes, bicycle safety, and promotions. The website includes a form for business owners to request bicycle parking racks to be installed on public property free of charge close to their businesses, a service that has a months-long waiting list.\nSalt Lake City was the first US city to use the \"Green Shared Lane\", or \"super sharrow\", a wide green band down the middle of a travel lane where adding a dedicated bike lane is unfeasible. Other cities such as Long Beach, Oakland, and Edina, Minnesota have introduced similar designs. These four cities are participating in a study by the Federal Highway Administration to measure the effect of the design on automobile speed and passing distance when overtaking bicycles, crashes between automobiles and bicycles, and whether it encourages more bicycle ridership, along with other metrics.\nOn September 25, 2010, UTA in partnership with Salt Lake City, the Utah Department of Transportation, the Wasatch Front Regional Council, and the Mayor's Bicycle Advisory Committee, opened a Bicycle Transit Center (BTC) at the Intermodal Hub. The BTC is anticipated to serve multi-modal commuters from TRAX and \"FrontRunner\", as well as providing a secure bicycle parking space for bicycle tourists who want to tour the city on foot or transit.\nIn April 2013, Salt Lake City launched a bike share program known as GREENbike. The program allows users to pay $5 per day to access bicycles, with the option of purchasing a weekly or annual pass. The program launched with ten stations in the downtown core. By October 2014, the number of stations had expanded to 20. In addition to the bike-sharing program, eighty businesses in the city participate in the Bicycle Benefits program, which provides discounts to customers who arrive by bicycle. The city is also home to the Salt Lake City Bicycle Collective.\nAs a result of this increasing support, Salt Lake City's on-road bikeway network has grown to encompass 200 lane miles. In July 2014, the city began construction of a protected bicycle lane on a segment of 300 South between 300 West and 600 East. The project received significant opposition from business owners and residents along the route because of concerns about the 30% reduction in car parking spaces and disruptions resulting from construction. The construction proceeded in stages, with the last stage completed in October 2014. The performance of the protected bicycle lane (specifically, its role in encouraging more bicycle ridership) will influence future plans for making the city more bicycle-friendly.\nOne example of the city's cycling and walking routes is the loop around City Creek Canyon on Bonneville Boulevard. The city has designated the road as one lane only (one-way) for motor vehicles, turning the other lane over to two-way cyclists and pedestrians. From the last Monday in May to the last weekend in September, City Creek Canyon Road itself is closed to motor vehicles on odd-numbered days, while bicycles are prohibited on even-numbered days and holidays. Bicycles are allowed every day for the rest of the year.\nUtilities.\nWater.\nSalt Lake City derives most of its water from local Wasatch Mountain snowpack, the rest coming from groundwater. The primary water provider is the Salt Lake City Department of Public Utilities, which was established in 1876, making it the oldest retail water provider in the West.\nEnergy.\nThe primary electricity provider in Salt Lake City, and Utah as a whole, is Rocky Mountain Power. Natural gas is provided by Dominion Energy.\nSister cities.\nSalt Lake City's sister cities are:\nFriendship cities.\nSalt Lake City has friendly relations with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53838", "revid": "246091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53838", "title": "Dallas", "text": "Dallas is a city in the U.S. state of Texas. Located in the state's northern region, it is the ninth-most populous city in the United States and third-most populous city in Texas, with a population of 1.3 million at the 2020 census. Along with nearby Fort Worth, Dallas anchors the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, which is the fourth-most populous metropolitan area in the U.S. and the most populous metropolitan area in Texas, at 7.5\u00a0million people in 2020. Dallas is a core city of the largest metropolitan area in the Southern U.S. and the largest inland metropolitan area in the U.S. that lacks any navigable link to the sea. It is the seat of Dallas County, covering nearly and extending into Collin, Denton, Kaufman, and Rockwall counties.\nBoth Dallas and Fort Worth were initially developed as a product of the construction of major railroad lines through the area allowing access to cotton, cattle, and later oil in North and East Texas. The construction of the Interstate Highway System reinforced Dallas's prominence as a transportation hub, with four major interstate highways converging in the city and a fifth interstate loop around it. Dallas then developed as a strong industrial and financial center and a major inland port, due to the convergence of major railroad lines, interstate highways, and the construction of Dallas Fort Worth International Airport, one of the largest and busiest airports in the world. In addition, Dallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) operates rail and bus transit services throughout the city and its surrounding suburbs.\nDominant sectors of its diverse economy include defense, financial services, information technology, telecommunications, and transportation. The Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex hosts 23 \"Fortune\" 500 companies, the second-most in Texas and fourth-most in the United States, and 11 of those companies are located within Dallas city limits. Over 41 colleges and universities are located within its metropolitan area, which is the most of any metropolitan area in Texas. The city has a population from a myriad of ethnic and religious backgrounds.\nHistory.\nIndigenous tribes in North Texas included the Caddo, Tawakoni, Wichita, Kickapoo and Comanche. Spanish colonists claimed the territory of Texas in the 18th century as a part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. Later, France also claimed the area but never established much settlement. In all, six flags have flown over the area preceding and during the city's history: those of France, Spain, and Mexico, the flag of the Republic of Texas, the Confederate flag, and the flag of the United States of America.\nIn 1819, the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty between the United States and Spain defined the Red River as the northern boundary of New Spain, officially placing the future location of Dallas well within Spanish territory. The area remained under Spanish rule until 1821, when Mexico declared independence from Spain, and the area was considered part of the Mexican state of Coahuila y Tejas. In 1836, Texians, with a majority of Anglo-American settlers, gained independence from Mexico and formed the Republic of Texas.\nThree years after Texas achieved independence, John Neely Bryan surveyed the area around present-day Dallas. In 1839, accompanied by his dog and a Cherokee he called Ned, he planted a stake in the ground on a bluff located near three forks of the Trinity River and left. Two years later, in 1841, he returned to establish a permanent settlement named Dallas. The origin of the name is uncertain. The official historical marker states it was named after Vice President George M. Dallas of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. However, this is disputed. Other potential theories for the origin include his brother, Commodore Alexander James Dallas, as well as brothers Walter R. Dallas and James R. Dallas. A further theory gives the ultimate origin as the village of Dallas, Moray, Scotland, similar to the way Houston, Texas, was named after Sam Houston, whose ancestors came from the Scottish village of Houston, Renfrewshire.\nThe Republic of Texas was annexed by the United States in 1845 and Dallas County was established the following year. Dallas was formally incorporated as a city on February 2, 1856. In the mid-1800s, a group of French Socialists established La R\u00e9union, a short-lived community, along the Trinity River in what is now West Dallas.\nWith the construction of railroads, Dallas became a business and trading center and was booming by the end of the 19th century. It became an industrial city, attracting workers from Texas, the South, and the Midwest. The Praetorian Building in Dallas of 15 stories, built in 1909, was among the first skyscrapers west of the Mississippi and the tallest building in Texas for some time. It marked the prominence of Dallas as a city. A racetrack for thoroughbreds was built and their owners established the Dallas Jockey Club. Trotters raced at a track in Fort Worth, where a similar drivers club was based. The rapid expansion of population increased competition for jobs and housing.\nIn 1910, a white mob of hundreds of people lynched a black man, Allen Brooks, accused of raping a little girl. The mob tortured Brooks, then killed him at the downtown intersection of Main and Akard by hanging him from a decorative archway inscribed with the words \"Welcome Visitors\". Thousands of Dallasites came to gawk at the torture scene, collecting keepsakes and posing for photographs.\nIn 1921, the Mexican president \u00c1lvaro Obreg\u00f3n along with the former revolutionary general visited Downtown Dallas's Mexican Park in Little Mexico; the small park was on the corner of Akard and Caruth Street, site of the current Fairmont Hotel. The small neighborhood of Little Mexico was home to a Latin American population that had been drawn to Dallas by factors including the American Dream, better living conditions, and the Mexican Revolution.\nDespite the onset of the Great Depression, business in construction was flourishing in 1930. That year, Columbus Marion \"Dad\" Joiner struck oil east of Dallas in Kilgore, spawning the East Texas oil boom. Dallas quickly became the financial center for the oil industry in Texas and Oklahoma.\nDuring World War II, Dallas was a major manufacturing center for military automobiles and aircraft for the United States and Allied forces. Over 94,000 jeeps and over 6,000 military trucks were produced at the Ford plant in East Dallas. North American Aviation manufactured over 18,000 aircraft at their plant in Dallas, including the T-6 Texan trainer, P-51 Mustang fighter, and B-24 Liberator bomber.\nOn November 22, 1963, United States President John F. Kennedy was assassinated on Elm Street while his motorcade passed through Dealey Plaza in Downtown Dallas. The upper two floors of the building from which the Warren Commission reported assassin Lee Harvey Oswald shot Kennedy have been converted into a historical museum covering the former president's life and accomplishments. Kennedy was pronounced dead at Dallas Parkland Memorial Hospital just over 30 minutes after the shooting.\nOn July 7, 2016, multiple shots were fired at a Black Lives Matter protest in Downtown Dallas, held against the police killings of two black men from other states. The gunman, later identified as Micah Xavier Johnson, began firing at police officers at 8:58\u00a0p.m., killing five officers and injuring nine. Two bystanders were also injured. This marked the deadliest day for U.S. law enforcement since the September 11 attacks. Johnson told police during a standoff that he was upset about recent police shootings of black men and wanted to kill whites, especially white officers. After hours of negotiation failed, police resorted to a robot-delivered bomb, killing Johnson inside Dallas College El Centro Campus. The shooting occurred in an area of hotels, restaurants, businesses, and residential apartments only a few blocks away from Dealey Plaza.\nGeography.\nDallas is situated in the Southern United States, in North Texas. It is the county seat of Dallas County and portions of the city extend into neighboring Collin, Denton, Kaufman, and Rockwall counties. Many suburbs surround Dallas; three enclaves are within the city boundaries\u2014Cockrell Hill, Highland Park, and University Park. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of ; of Dallas is land and of it (11.75%) is water. Dallas makes up one-fifth of the much larger urbanized area known as the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, in which one quarter of all Texans live.\nArchitecture.\nDallas's skyline has twenty buildings classified as skyscrapers, over in height. Despite its tallest building not reaching , Dallas does have a signature building in Bank of America Plaza which is lit up in neon but falls outside the top two hundred tallest buildings in the world. Although some of Dallas's architecture dates from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, most of the notable architecture in the city is from the modernist and postmodernist eras. Iconic examples of modernist architecture include Reunion Tower, the John Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial, I. M. Pei's Dallas City Hall and the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center. Good examples of postmodernist skyscrapers are Fountain Place, Bank of America Plaza, Renaissance Tower, JPMorgan Chase Tower, and Comerica Bank Tower. Downtown Dallas also has residential offerings in downtown, some of which are signature skyline buildings.\nSeveral smaller structures are fashioned in the Gothic Revival style, such as the Kirby Building, and the neoclassical style, as seen in the Davis and Wilson Buildings. One architectural \"hotbed\" in the city is a stretch of historic houses along Swiss Avenue, which has all shades and variants of architecture from Victorian to neoclassical. The Dallas Downtown Historic District protects a cross-section of Dallas commercial architecture from the 1880s to the 1940s.\nNeighborhoods.\nThe city of Dallas is home to many areas, neighborhoods, and communities. Dallas can be divided into several geographical areas which include larger geographical sections of territory including many subdivisions or neighborhoods, forming macroneighborhoods.\nCentral Dallas.\nCentral Dallas is anchored by Downtown Dallas, the center of the city, along with Oak Lawn and Uptown, areas characterized by dense retail, restaurants, and nightlife. Downtown Dallas has a variety of named districts, including the West End Historic District, the Arts District, the Main Street District, Farmers Market District, the City Center Business District, the Convention Center District, and the Reunion District. This area includes Uptown, Victory Park, Harwood, Oak Lawn, Dallas Design District, Trinity Groves, Turtle Creek, Cityplace, Knox/Henderson, Greenville, and West Village.\nEast Dallas.\nEast Dallas is the location of Deep Ellum, an arts area close to Downtown, the Lakewood neighborhood (and adjacent areas, including Lakewood Heights, Wilshire Heights, Lower Greenville, Junius Heights, and Hollywood Heights/Santa Monica), Vickery Place and Bryan Place, and the architecturally significant neighborhoods of Swiss Avenue and Munger Place. Its historic district has one of the largest collections of Frank Lloyd Wright-inspired prairie-style homes in the United States. In the northeast quadrant of the city is Lake Highlands, one of Dallas's most unified middle-class neighborhoods.\nOak Cliff.\nSouthwest of Downtown lies Oak Cliff. Once a separate city founded in the mid-1800s, Oak Cliff was annexed in 1903 by Dallas. As one of the oldest areas in Dallas, the hilly North Oak Cliff is home to 5 of the 13 conservation districts in Dallas including the architecturally significant Kessler Park neighborhood and trendy Bishop Arts District.\nSouth Dallas.\nSouth Dallas is the location of Cedars, and Fair Park, where the annual State Fair of Texas is held from late September through mid-October. Also located here is Exposition Park, Dallas, noted for having artists, art galleries, and bars along tree-lined Exposition Avenue.\nSouth Side Dallas is a popular location for nightly entertainment. The neighborhood has undergone extensive development and community integration. What was once an area characterized by high rates of poverty and crime is now one of the city's most attractive social and living destinations.\nFurther east, in the southeast quadrant of the city, is the large neighborhood of Pleasant Grove. Once an independent city, it is a collection of mostly lower-income residential areas stretching to Seagoville in the southeast. Though a city neighborhood, Pleasant Grove is surrounded by undeveloped land on all sides. Swampland and wetlands separating it from South Dallas are part of the Great Trinity Forest, a subsection of the city's Trinity River Project, newly appreciated for habitat and flood control.\nDistricts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTopography.\nDallas and its surrounding area are mostly flat. The city lies at elevations ranging from above sea level. The western edge of the Austin Chalk Formation, a limestone escarpment (also known as the \"White Rock Escarpment\"), rises and runs roughly north\u2013south through Dallas County. South of the Trinity River, the uplift is particularly noticeable in the neighborhoods of Oak Cliff and the adjacent cities of Cockrell Hill, Cedar Hill, Grand Prairie, and Irving. Marked variations in terrain are also found in cities immediately to the west in Tarrant County surrounding Fort Worth, as well as along Turtle Creek north of Downtown.\nDallas, like many other cities, was founded along a river. The city was founded at the location of a \"white rock crossing\" of the Trinity River, where it was easier for wagons to cross the river in the days before ferries or bridges. The Trinity River, though not usefully navigable, is the major waterway through the city. I-35E parallels its path through Dallas along the Stemmons Corridor, then south alongside the western portion of Downtown and past South Dallas and Pleasant Grove, where the river is paralleled by Interstate 45 until it exits the city and heads southeast towards Houston. The river is flanked on both sides by tall earthen levees to protect the city from frequent floods.\nSince it was rerouted in the late 1920s, the river has been little more than a drainage ditch within a floodplain for several miles above and below Downtown, with a more normal course further upstream and downstream, but as Dallas began shifting towards postindustrial society, public outcry about the lack of aesthetic and recreational use of the river ultimately gave way to the Trinity River Project, which was begun in the early 2000s.\nThe project area reaches for over in length within the city, while the overall geographical land area addressed by the Land Use Plan is approximately in size\u2014about 20% of the land area in Dallas. Green space along the river encompasses approximately , making it one of the largest and diverse urban parks in the world.\nWhite Rock Lake and Joe Pool Lake are reservoirs that comprise Dallas's other significant water features. Built at the beginning of the 20th century, White Rock Lake Park is a popular destination for boaters, rowers, joggers, and bikers, as well as visitors seeking peaceful respite from the city at the Dallas Arboretum and Botanical Garden, on the lake's eastern shore. White Rock Creek feeds into White Rock Lake and then exits into the Trinity River southeast of Downtown Dallas. Trails along White Rock Creek are part of the extensive Dallas County Trails System.\nBachman Lake, just northwest of Love Field Airport, is a smaller lake also popularly used for recreation. Northeast of the city is Lake Ray Hubbard, a vast reservoir in an extension of Dallas surrounded by the suburbs of Garland, Rowlett, Rockwall, and Sunnyvale. To the west of the city is Mountain Creek Lake, once home to the Naval Air Station Dallas (Hensley Field) and a number of defense aircraft manufacturers.\nNorth Lake, a small body of water in an extension of the city limits surrounded by Irving and Coppell, initially served as a water source for a nearby power plant but is now being targeted for redevelopment as a recreational lake due to its proximity to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, a plan the lake's neighboring cities oppose.\nClimate.\nDallas has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification: \"Cfa\", Trewartha: \"Cfhk\") characteristic of the Southern Plains of the United States. It also has both continental and tropical characteristics, characterized by a relatively wide annual temperature range for the latitude. Located at the lower end of Tornado Alley, it is prone to extreme weather, tornadoes, and hailstorms.\nSummers in Dallas are very hot with high humidity, although extended periods of dry weather often occur. July and August are typically the hottest months, with an average high of and an average low of . Heat indices regularly surpass due to elevated humidity during the summer months, making the summer heat almost unbearable. The all-time record high is , set on June 26 and 27, 1980 during the Heat Wave of 1980 at nearby Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport.\nWinters in Dallas are usually mild, with occasional cold spells. The average date of first frost is November 12, and the average date of last frost is March 12. January is typically the coldest month, with an average daytime high of and an average nighttime low of . The normal daily average temperature in January is but sharp swings in temperature can occur, as strong cold fronts known as \"Blue Northers\" pass through the Dallas region, forcing temperatures below the mark for several days at a time and often between days with high temperatures above . Snow accumulation is seen in the city in about 70% of winter seasons, and snowfall generally occurs 1\u20132 days out of the year for a seasonal average of . Some areas in the region, however, receive more than that, while other areas receive negligible snowfall or none at all. The all-time record low temperature within the city is , set on February 12, 1899 during the Great Blizzard of 1899. The temperature at nearby Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport reached on February 16, 2021, during the February 2021 North American winter storm.\nSpring and autumn are transitional seasons with moderate and pleasant weather. Vibrant wildflowers (such as the bluebonnet, Indian paintbrush and other flora) bloom in spring and are planted around the highways throughout Texas. Springtime weather can be quite volatile, but temperatures themselves are mild. Late spring to early summer also tends to be the most humid, with humidity levels frequently exceeding 75%. The weather in Dallas is also generally pleasant from late September to early December and on many winter days. Autumn often brings more storms and tornado threats, but they are usually fewer and less severe than in spring.\nEach spring, cold fronts moving south from the North collide with warm, humid air streaming in from the Gulf Coast, leading to severe thunderstorms with lightning, torrents of rain, hail, and occasionally, tornadoes. Over time, tornadoes have probably been the most significant natural threat to the city, as it is near the heart of Tornado Alley.\nA few times each winter in Dallas, warm and humid air from the south will override cold, dry air, resulting in freezing rain or ice and causing disruptions in the city if the roads and highways become slick. Temperatures reaching on average occur on at least four days each winter month. Dallas averages 26 annual nights at or below freezing, with the winter of 1999\u20132000 holding the record for the fewest freezing nights with 14. During this same span of 15 years, the temperature in the region has only twice dropped below , though it will generally fall below in most (67%) years.\nThe U.S. Department of Agriculture places Dallas in Plant Hardiness Zone 8b. However, mild winter temperatures in the past 15 to 20 years had encouraged the horticulture of more cold-sensitive plants such as \"Washingtonia filifera\" and \"Washingtonia robusta\" palms, nearly all of which died off during the February 2021 North American winter storm. According to the American Lung Association, Dallas has the 12th highest air pollution among U.S. cities, ranking it behind Los Angeles and Houston. Much of the air pollution in Dallas and the surrounding area comes from a hazardous materials incineration plant in the small town of Midlothian and from cement plants in neighboring Ellis County.\nThe average daily low in Dallas is , and the average daily high is . Dallas receives approximately of rain per year. The record snowfall for Dallas was on February 11, 2010.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDallas is the ninth-most-populous city in the United States and third in Texas after the cities of Houston and San Antonio. Its metropolitan area encompasses one-quarter of the population of Texas, and is the largest in the Southern U.S. and Texas followed by the Greater Houston metropolitan area. At the 2020 United States census the city of Dallas had 1,304,379 residents, an increase of 106,563 since the 2010 United States census. However, as of July 1, 2022, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates that Dallas in first years since the 2020 census lost 4,835 people, leaving the city with a population of 1,299,544.\nThere were 524,498 households at the 2020 estimates, up from 2010's 458,057 households, out of which 137,523 had children under the age of 18 living with them. Approximately 36.2% of households were headed by married couples living together, 57.2% had a single householder male or female with no spouse present, and 35.6% were classified as non-family households with the householder living alone. In 2010, 33.7% of all households had one or more people under 18 years of age, and 17.6% had one or more people who were 65 years of age or older. The average household size in 2020 was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.41. In 2018, the owner-occupied housing rate was 40.2% and the renter-occupied housing rate was 59.8%. At the 2010 census, the city's age distribution of the population showed 26.5% under the age of 18 and 8.8% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 31.8 years. In 2010, 50.0% of the population was male and 50.0% was female. In 2020, the median age 32.9 years; for every 100 females, there were 98.4 males.\nAccording to the 2020 American Community Survey, the median income for a household in the city was $54,747; families had a median household income of $60,895; married-couple families $81,761; and non-families $45,658. In 2003\u20132007's survey, male full-time workers had a median income of $32,265 versus $32,402 for female full-time workers. The per capita income for the city was $25,904. About 18.7% of families and 21.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 33.6% of those under age 18 and 13.4% of those aged 65 or over. Per 2007's survey, the median price for a house was $129,600; by 2020, the median price for a house was valued at $252,300, with 54.4% of owner-occupied units from $50,000 to $299,999.\nThe 2022 Point-In-Time Homeless Count found there were 4,410 homeless people in Dallas. According to the Metro Dallas Homeless Alliance Continuum of Care 2022 Homeless Count &amp; Survey Independent Analysis, \"approximately 1 of 3 (31%) those experiencing homelessness were found on the streets or in other places not meant for human habitation.\"\nThe region surrounding Dallas is a habitat for mosquitoes, creating a pest problem for humans. Dallas and the surrounding area is sprayed regularly to control mosquito-borne diseases such as West Nile virus.\nRace and ethnicity.\nDallas's population was historically predominantly White (non-Hispanic Whites made up 82.8% of the population in 1930), but its population has diversified due to immigration and white flight over the 20th century. Since then, the non-Hispanic White population has declined to less than one-third of the city's population. According to the 2010 U.S. census, 50.7% of the population was White (28.8% non-Hispanic White), 24.8% was Black or African American, 0.7% American Indian and Alaska Native, 2.9% Asian, and 2.6% from two or more races; 42.4% of the total population was of Hispanic or Latino American origin (they may be of any race).\nAt the U.S. Census Bureau's 2019 estimates, 29.1% were non-Hispanic White 24.3% Black and African American, 0.3% American Indian or Alaska Native, 3.7% Asian, and 1.4% from two or more races. Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders made up a total of 312 residents according to 2019's census estimates, down from 606 in 2017. Hispanic or Latino Americans of any race made up 41.2% of the estimated population in 2019. Among the Hispanic or Latino American population in 2019, 34.6% of Dallas was Mexican, 0.4% Puerto Rican, 0.2% Cuban and 6.0% other Hispanic or Latino American. In 2017's American Community Survey estimates among the demographic 35.5% were Mexican, 0.6% Puerto Rican, 0.4% Cuban, and 5.4% other Hispanic or Latino. By 2020, Hispanic or Latino Americans of any race continued to constitute the largest ethnic group in the city proper, reflecting nationwide demographic trends.\nThe Dallas area is a major living destination for Mexican Americans and other Hispanic and Latino American immigrants. The southwestern portion of the city, particularly Oak Cliff is chiefly inhabited by Hispanic and Latino American residents. The southeastern portion of the city Pleasant Grove is chiefly inhabited by African American and Hispanic or Latino American residents, while the southern portion of the city is predominantly black. The west and east sides of the city are predominantly Hispanic or Latino American; Garland also has a large Spanish-speaking population. North Dallas has many enclaves of predominantly white, black and especially Hispanic or Latino American residents.\nThe Dallas area is also a major living destination for Black and African Americans primarily due to its strong and diverse economy. Between 2010 and 2020, the Dallas area had the second-most new Black and African American residents only behind the Atlanta area and slightly above the Houston area. The notable influx of African Americans is partly due to the New Great Migration. There is a significant number of people from the Horn of Africa, immigrants from Ethiopia, Eritrea and Somalia.\nThe Dallas\u2013Fort-Worth metroplex had an estimated 70,000 Russian-speakers (as of November 6, 2012) mostly immigrants from the former Soviet Bloc. Included in this population are Russians, Russian Jews, Ukrainians, Belarusians, Moldavians, Armenians, Uzbek, Kirghiz, and others. The Russian-speaking population of Dallas has continued to grow in the sector of \"American husbands-Russian wives\". Russian DFW has its own newspaper, \"The Dallas Telegraph\".\nIn addition, Dallas and its suburbs are home to a large number of Asian Americans including those of Indian, Vietnamese, Chinese, Korean, Filipino, Japanese, and other heritage. Among large-sized cities in the United States, Plano, the northern suburb of Dallas, has the 6th largest Chinese American population as of 2016. The Plano-Richardson area in particular had an estimated 30,000 Iranian Americans in 2012. With so many immigrant groups, there are often multilingual signs in the linguistic landscape. According to U.S. Census Bureau data released in December 2013, 23 percent of Dallas County residents were foreign-born, while 16 percent of Tarrant County residents were foreign-born. The 2018 census estimates determined that the city of Dallas's foreign-born population consisted of 25.4% naturalized citizens and 74.6% non-citizens.\nSexual orientation and gender identity.\nDallas and the Metroplex have one of the largest lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) populations in the country. Throughout the year there are LGBT events held in the area, including the annual Alan Ross Texas Freedom (Pride) Parade and Festival in June, which draws approximately 50,000 attendees. For decades, the Oak Lawn and Bishop Arts districts have been known as the epicenters of LGBT culture in Dallas.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the most prevalently practiced religion in Dallas and the wider metropolitan area according to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center (78%), and the Public Religion Research Institute's 2020 study (77%). There is a large Protestant Christian influence in the Dallas community, though the city of Dallas and Dallas County have more Catholic than Protestant residents, while the reverse is usually true for the suburban areas of Dallas and the city of Fort Worth.\nDallas has been called the \"Prison Ministry Capital of the World\" by the prison ministry community. It is a home for the International Network of Prison Ministries, the Coalition of Prison Evangelists, Bill Glass Champions for Life, Chaplain Ray's International Prison Ministry, and 60 other prison ministries.\nMethodist, Baptist, and Presbyterian churches are prominent in many neighborhoods and anchor two of the city's major private universities (Southern Methodist University and Dallas Baptist University). Dallas is also home to two evangelical seminaries: the Dallas Theological Seminary and Criswell College. Many Bible schools including Christ For The Nations Institute are also headquartered in the city. The Christian creationist apologetics group Institute for Creation Research is headquartered in Dallas. According to the Pew Research Center, evangelical Protestantism constituted the largest form of Protestantism in the area as of 2014. The largest single evangelical Protestant group were Baptists. The largest Baptist denomination was the Southern Baptist Convention, followed by the historically black National Baptist Convention USA. African-initiated Protestant churches including Ethiopian Evangelical churches can be found throughout the metropolitan area.\nThe Catholic Church is also a significant religious organization in the Dallas area and operates the University of Dallas, a liberal-arts university in the Dallas suburb of Irving. The Cathedral Santuario de la Virgen de Guadalupe in the Arts District is home to the second-largest Catholic church membership in the United States and overseas, consisting over 70 parishes in the Dallas Diocese. The Society of Jesus operates the Jesuit College Preparatory School of Dallas. Dallas is also home to numerous Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches including Saint Seraphim Cathedral, see of the Orthodox Church in America's Southern Diocese. The Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America (Ecumenical Patriarchate) has one parish in the city of Dallas.\nJehovah's Witnesses has a large number of members throughout the Dallas metropolitan division. In addition, there are several Unitarian Universalist congregations, including First Unitarian Church of Dallas, founded in 1899. A large community of the United Church of Christ exists in the city. The most prominent UCC-affiliated church is the Cathedral of Hope, a predominantly LGBT-affirming church.\nSince the establishment of the city's first Jewish cemetery in 1854 and its first congregation (which would eventually be known as Temple Emanu-El) in 1873, Dallasite Jews have been well represented among leaders in commerce, politics, and various professional fields in Dallas and elsewhere. Furthermore, a large Muslim community exists in the north and northeastern portions of Dallas, as well as in the northern Dallas suburbs. The oldest mosque in Dallas is Masjid Al-Islam just south of Downtown.\nDallas has a large Buddhist community. Immigrants from East Asia, Southeast Asia, Nepal, and Sri Lanka have all contributed to the Buddhist population, which is concentrated in the northern suburbs of Garland, Plano and Richardson. Numerous Buddhist temples dot the Metroplex including The Buddhist Center of Dallas, Lien Hoa Vietnamese Temple of Irving, and Kadampa Meditation Center Texas and Wat Buddhamahamunee of Arlington. A large and growing Hindu Community lives in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex. Most live in Collin County and the northern portions of Dallas County. Over 28 Hindu Temples exist in the area. Some notable ones include the DFW Hindu Temple, the North Texas Hindu Mandir, Radha Krishna Temple, Dallas and Karya Siddhi Hanuman Temple. There are also at least three Sikh Gurudwaras in this metropolitan area. For irreligious people, the Winter Solstice Celebration is held in the Metroplex although some of its participants are also neo-pagans and New Agers.\nCrime.\nAccording to the FBI, a city to city comparison of crime rates can be misleading, because recording practices vary from city to city, citizens report different percentages of crimes from one city to the next, and the actual number of people physically present in a city is unknown. With that in mind, Dallas has one of the top 10 crime rates in Texas and its crime rate is higher than the national average.\nSince 2020, Dallas's murder rate has seen a notable increase. In 2020, Dallas recorded 251 murders which was a 20-year high. By 2022 it decreased to 214 but then increased to 246 in 2023. As of 2020, the gang presence in Dallas has grown significantly and is heavily responsible for the spike in crime. Dallas leaders have made crime reduction a major priority.\nEconomy.\nIn its beginnings, Dallas relied on farming, neighboring Fort Worth's Stockyards, and its prime location on Native American trade routes to sustain itself. Dallas's key to growth came in 1873 with the construction of multiple rail lines through the city. As Dallas grew and technology developed, cotton became its boon and by 1900, Dallas was the largest inland cotton market in the world, becoming a leader in cotton gin machinery manufacturing.\nBy the early 1900s, Dallas was a hub for economic activity all over the Southern United States and was selected in 1914 as the seat of the Eleventh Federal Reserve District. By 1925, Texas churned out more than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 of the nation's cotton crop, with 31% of Texas cotton produced within a radius of Dallas. In the 1930s, petroleum was discovered east of Dallas, near Kilgore. Dallas's proximity to the discovery put it immediately at the center of the nation's petroleum market. Petroleum discoveries in the Permian Basin, the Panhandle, the Gulf Coast, and Oklahoma in the following years further solidified Dallas's position as the hub of the market.\nThe end of World War II left Dallas seeded with a nexus of communications, engineering, and production talent by companies such as Collins Radio Corporation. Decades later, the telecommunications and information revolutions still drive a large portion of the local economy. The city is sometimes referred to as the heart of \"Silicon Prairie\" because of a high concentration of telecommunications companies in the region, the epicenter of which lies along the Telecom Corridor in Richardson, a northern suburb of Dallas. The Telecom Corridor is home to more than 5,700 companies including Texas Instruments (headquartered in Dallas), Nortel Networks, Alcatel Lucent, AT&amp;T, Ericsson, Fujitsu, Nokia, Rockwell Collins, Cisco Systems, T-Mobile, Verizon Communications, and CompUSA (which is now headquartered in Miami, Florida). Texas Instruments, a major manufacturer, employs 10,400 people at its corporate headquarters and chip plants in Dallas.\nIn the 1980s Dallas was a real estate hotbed, with the increasing metropolitan population bringing with it a demand for new housing and office space. Several of Downtown Dallas's largest buildings are the fruit of this boom, but over-speculation, the savings and loan crisis and an oil bust brought the 1980s building boom to an end for Dallas as well as its sister city Houston. Between the late 1980s and the early 2000s, central Dallas went through a slow period of growth. However, since the early 2000s the central core of Dallas has been enjoying steady and significant growth encompassing both repurposing of older commercial buildings in Downtown Dallas into residential and hotel uses, as well as the construction of new office and residential towers. The opening of Klyde Warren Park, built across Woodall Rodgers Freeway seamlessly connecting the central Dallas CBD to Uptown/Victory Park, has acted synergistically with the highly successful Dallas Arts District, so both have become catalysts for significant new development in central Dallas.\nThe residential real estate market in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex has not only been resilient but has once again returned to a boom status. Dallas and the greater metro area have been leading the nation in apartment construction and net leasing, with rents reaching all-time highs. Single family home sales, whether pre-owned or new construction, along with home price appreciation, were leading the nation since 2015.\nA sudden drop in the price of oil, starting in mid-2014 and accelerating throughout 2015, has not significantly affected Dallas and its greater metro area due to the highly diversified nature of its economy. Dallas and the metropolitan region continue to see strong demand for housing, apartment and office leasing, shopping center space, warehouse and industrial space with overall job growth remaining very robust. Oil-dependent cities and regions have felt significant effects from the downturn, but Dallas's growth has continued unabated, strengthening in 2015. Significant national headquarters relocations to the area (as exemplified by Toyota's decision to leave California and establish its new North American headquarters in the Dallas area) coupled with significant expansions of regional offices for a variety of corporations and along with company relocations to Downtown Dallas helped drive the boom in the Dallas economy.\nMajor businesses.\nThe Dallas\u2013Fort Worth area has one of the largest concentrations of corporate headquarters for publicly traded companies in the United States. \"Fortune Magazine\"'s 2022 annual list of the Fortune 500 in America indicates the city of Dallas had 11 Fortune 500 companies. and the DFW region as a whole had 23. As of 2022, Dallas\u2013Fort Worth represents the second-largest concentration of Fortune 500 headquarters in Texas and fourth-largest in the United States, behind the metropolitan areas of Houston (24), Chicago (35) and New York (62).\nIn 2008, AT&amp;T relocated their headquarters to Downtown Dallas; AT&amp;T is the largest telecommunications company in the world and was the ninth largest company in the nation by revenue for 2017. Additional Fortune 500 companies headquartered in Dallas in order of ranking include Energy Transfer Equity, CBRE (which moved its headquarters from Los Angeles to Dallas in 2020), Tenet Healthcare, Southwest Airlines, Texas Instruments, Jacobs Engineering, HollyFrontier, Dean Foods, and Builders FirstSource. In October 2016, Jacobs Engineering, one of the world's largest engineering companies, relocated from Pasadena, California to Downtown Dallas.\nNearby Irving is home to six Fortune 500 companies of its own, including McKesson, the country's largest pharmaceutical distributor and listed at number seven overall on the 2021 Fortune 500 list, Fluor (engineering), Kimberly-Clark, Celanese, Michaels Companies, and Vistra Energy. Plano is home to an additional four Fortune 500 companies, including J.C. Penney, Alliance Data Systems, Yum China, and Dr. Pepper Snapple. Fort Worth is home to two Fortune 500 companies, including American Airlines, the largest airline in the world by revenue, fleet size, profit, passengers carried and revenue passenger mile and D.R. Horton, the largest homebuilder in America. Westlake, TX, north of Fort Worth, now has two Fortune 500 companies: Financial services giant, Charles Schwab, and convenience store distributor, Core-Mark. One Fortune 500 company, GameStop, is based in Grapevine.\nAdditional major companies headquartered in Dallas and its metro area include Comerica, which relocated its national headquarters to Downtown Dallas from Detroit in 2007, NTT DATA Services, Regency Energy Partners, Atmos Energy, Neiman Marcus, AECOM, Think Finance, 7-Eleven, Brinker International, Primoris Services, AMS Pictures, id Software, Mary Kay Cosmetics, Chuck E. Cheese's, Zale Corporation, and Fossil, Inc. Many of these companies\u2014and others throughout the DFW metroplex\u2014comprise the Dallas Regional Chamber. Susan G. Komen for the Cure, the world's largest breast cancer organization, was founded and is headquartered in Dallas.\nIn addition to its large number of businesses, Dallas has more shopping centers per capita than any other city in the United States and is also home to the second shopping center ever built in the United States, Highland Park Village, which opened in 1931. Dallas is home of the two other major malls in North Texas, the Dallas Galleria and NorthPark Center, which is the second largest mall in Texas. Both malls feature high-end stores and are major tourist draws for the region.\nTravel.\nDallas is the third most popular destination for business travel in the United States, and the Kay Bailey Hutchison Convention Center is one of the largest and busiest convention centers in the country, at over , and the world's single-largest column-free exhibit hall.\nTourism is an important sector of Dallas's economy and is its tenth largest employer, providing 56,000 jobs. Dallas receives on average 25 million visitors annually.\nArts and culture.\nArts and museums.\nThe Arts District in the northern section of Downtown is home to several arts venues and is the largest contiguous arts district in the United States. Notable venues in the district include the Dallas Museum of Art; the Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center, home to the Dallas Symphony Orchestra and Dallas Wind Symphony; the Nasher Sculpture Center; and the Trammell &amp; Margaret Crow Collection of Asian Art.\nThe Perot Museum of Nature and Science, also in Downtown Dallas, is a natural history and science museum. Designed by 2005 Pritzker Architecture Prize Laureate Thom Mayne and his firm Morphosis Architects, the facility has six floors and stands about 14 stories high.\nVenues that are part of the AT&amp;T Dallas Center for the Performing Arts include Moody Performance Hall, home to the Dallas Chamber Symphony; the Dee and Charles Wyly Theatre, home to the Dallas Theater Center and the Dallas Black Dance Theatre; and the Winspear Opera House, home to the Dallas Opera and Texas Ballet Theater.\nNot far north of the area is the Meadows Museum at Southern Methodist University. In 2009, it joined up with Madrid's Prado Museum for a three-year partnership. The Prado focuses on Spanish visual art and has a collection of Spanish art in North America, with works by de Juanes, El Greco, Fortuny, Goya, Murillo, Picasso, Pkensa, Ribera, Rico, Velasquez, Zurbaran, and other Spaniards.\nThese works, as well as non-Spanish highlights like sculptures by Rodin and Moore, have been so successful of a collaboration that the Prado and Meadows have agreed upon an extension of the partnership.\nThe Institute for Creation Research operates the ICR Discovery Center for Science &amp; Earth History, a creationism museum, in Dallas. The former Texas School Book Depository, from which, according to the Warren Commission Report, Lee Harvey Oswald shot and killed President John F. Kennedy in 1963, has served since the 1980s as a county government office building, except for its sixth and seventh floors, which house the Sixth Floor Museum.\nThe American Museum of the Miniature Arts is at the Hall of State in Fair Park. The Arts District is also home to DISD's Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, a magnet school that was recently expanded. City Center District, next to the Arts District, is home to the Dallas Contemporary.\nDeep Ellum, immediately east of Downtown, originally became popular during the 1920s and 1930s as the prime jazz and blues hot spot in the South. Artists such as Blind Lemon Jefferson, Robert Johnson, Huddie \"Lead Belly\" Ledbetter, and Bessie Smith played in original Deep Ellum clubs such as the Harlem and the Palace. Today, Deep Ellum is home to hundreds of artists who live in lofts or operate in studios throughout the district alongside bars, pubs, and concert venues.\nA major art infusion in the area results from the city's lax stance on graffiti, and a number of public spaces, including tunnels, sides of buildings, sidewalks, and streets, are covered in murals. One major example, the Good-Latimer tunnel, was torn down in late 2006 to accommodate the construction of a light rail line through the site.\nLike Deep Ellum before it, the Cedars neighborhood to the south of Downtown has also seen a growing population of studio artists and an expanding roster of entertainment venues. The area's art scene began to grow in the early 2000s with the opening of Southside on Lamar, an old Sears Roebuck and Company warehouse converted into lofts, studios, and retail.\nCurrent attractions include Gilley's Dallas and Poor David's Pub. Dallas Mavericks owner and local entrepreneur Mark Cuban purchased land along Lamar Street near Cedars Station in September 2005, and locals speculate he is planning an entertainment complex for the site.\nSouth of the Trinity River, the Bishop Arts District in Oak Cliff is home to a number of studio artists living in converted warehouses. Walls of buildings along alleyways and streets are painted with murals, and the surrounding streets contain many eclectic restaurants and shops.\nDallas has an Office of Cultural Affairs as a department of the city government. The office is responsible for six cultural centers throughout the city, funding for local artists and theaters, initiating public art projects, and running the city-owned classical radio station WRR. The Los Angeles-class submarine USS \"Dallas\" was planned to become a museum ship near the Trinity River after her decommissioning in September 2014, but this has since been delayed. It will be taken apart into massive sections in Houston and be transported by trucks to the museum site and will be put back together.\nLibraries.\nThe city is served by the Dallas Public Library system. The system was created by the Dallas Federation of Women's Clubs with efforts spearheaded by then president May Dickson Exall. Her fundraising efforts led to a grant from philanthropist and steel baron Andrew Carnegie, which allowed the library system to build its first branch in 1901.\nToday, the library operates 30 branch locations throughout the city, including the 8-story J. Erik Jonsson Central Library in the Government District of Downtown.\nPlaces of interest.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCuisine.\nDallas is known for its barbecue, authentic Mexican, and Tex-Mex cuisine. Famous products of the Dallas culinary scene include the Frozen margarita machine by restaurateur Mariano Martinez in 1971.\nEvents.\nThe State Fair of Texas has been held annually at Fair Park since 1886, and generates an estimated $50 million to the city's economy annually. The Red River Shootout, a football game that pits the University of Texas at Austin against the University of Oklahoma at the Cotton Bowl, also brings significant crowds to the city. The city also hosts the State Fair Classic and Heart of Dallas Bowl at the Cotton Bowl.\nOther festivals include several Cinco de Mayo celebrations hosted by the city's large Mexican American population and a Saint Patrick's Day parade along Lower Greenville Avenue, Juneteenth festivities, Taste of Dallas, the Deep Ellum Arts Festival, the Greek Food Festival of Dallas, the annual Halloween event \"The Wake\", and two annual events on Halloween, including a Halloween parade on Cedar Springs Road and a \"Zombie Walk\" held in Downtown Dallas in the Arts District.\nWith the opening of Victory Park, WFAA began hosting an annual New Year's Eve celebration in AT&amp;T Plaza that the television station hoped would be reminiscent of celebrations in New York's Times Square; New Year's Eve 2011 set a new record of 32,000 people in attendance.\nAfter the discontinuance of the \"Big D NYE\" festivities a few years later, a new end-of-year event was started downtown, with a big fireworks show put on at Reunion Tower, which has since aired on KXAS and other TV stations around the state and region. Also, several Omni hotels in the Dallas area host large events to welcome in the new year, including murder mystery parties, rave-inspired events, and other events.\nSports.\nDowntown Dallas is home to two major league sports teams that play at the American Airlines Center: the Dallas Mavericks (NBA), who won the NBA Championship in 2011, and the Dallas Stars (NHL), who won the Stanley Cup in 1999. Nearby Arlington is home to the Dallas Cowboys (NFL), who play at the AT&amp;T Stadium and have won five Super Bowls, the Texas Rangers (MLB), who play at Globe Life Field and won the World Series in 2023, and the Dallas Wings (WNBA), who play at College Park Center. MLS team FC Dallas plays at Toyota Stadium in Frisco and won the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup in 1997 and 2016. The newest team in Dallas is Dallas Trinity FC, the first professional women's soccer team that plays at the historic Cotton Bowl (stadium). The city is home to several minor league and college sports programs in the area.\nSince joining the league as an expansion team in 1960, the Cowboys have enjoyed substantial success, advancing to eight Super Bowls and winning five. The Cowboys are financially the most valuable sports franchise in the world, worth approximately $4 billion. In 2009, they relocated to their new 80,000-seat stadium in Arlington, which was the site of Super Bowl XLV and is set to host the most matches during the 2026 FIFA World Cup. The Cowboys are currently part of the East Division of the National Football Conference (NFC).\nThe Texas Rangers won the American League pennant in 2010, 2011 and 2023, and won the World Series in 2023. The franchise relocated from Washington D.C. in 1972. They play in the West Division of the American League.\nThe Dallas Mavericks joined the league as an expansion team in 1980. They won their first National Basketball Association championship in 2011 led by Dirk Nowitzki. They play in the Southwest Division of the Western Conference.\nThe Dallas Stars moved to North Texas in 1993 as a relocation from the former team, the Minnesota North Stars. The Stars have won eight division titles in Dallas, two Presidents' Trophies as the top regular season team in the NHL, the Western Conference championship three times, and in 1998\u201399, the Stanley Cup. The team plays in the Central Division of the Western Conference.\nFC Dallas play at Toyota Stadium (formerly FC Dallas Stadium and Pizza Hut Park), a stadium that opened in 2005. They currently play in MLS's Western Conference. The team was originally called the Dallas Burn and used to play in the Cotton Bowl. Although FC Dallas has not yet won a MLS Cup, they won the Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup in 1997 and 2016 and the Supporters' Shield in 2016. Previously, the Dallas Tornado played in the North American Soccer League from 1968 to 1981.\nThe Dallas Wings came to The Metroplex in 2016 after relocating from Tulsa.\nThere are many notable minor league teams in the Dallas-Fort Worth. The Allen Americans are a professional ice hockey team headquartered at the Credit Union of Texas Event Center in Allen, Texas, which currently plays in the ECHL. They are the minor league affiliate of the NHL's Seattle Kraken. The team was founded in 2009 in the Central Hockey League(CHL). They have won 4 straight championships, 2 in the CHL (2012\u201313, 2013\u201314) and 2 in the ECHL(2014\u201315, 2015\u201316).\nThe Dallas Renegades are a professional football team in the UFL that plays their home games at Toyota Stadium.\nThe Dallas Sidekicks (2012) are an American professional indoor soccer team based in Allen, Texas, a suburb of Dallas. They play their home games in the Credit Union of Texas Event Center. The team is named after the original Dallas Sidekicks that operated from 1984 to 2004. The MLS-affiliated North Texas SC team is a member of MLS Next Pro and plays in Frisco at Toyota Stadium; it is the reserve team of FC Dallas. The Dallas Mavericks own an NBA G League team, the Texas Legends.\nRugby is a developing sport in Dallas and Texas in general. The multiple clubs, ranging from men's and women's clubs to collegiate and high school, are part of the Texas Rugby Football Union. Dallas was one of only 16 cities in the United States included in the Rugby Super League, represented by Dallas Harlequins. In 2020, Major League Rugby announced the Dallas Jackals as a new franchise. Australian rules football is also growing in Dallas. The Dallas Magpies, founded in 1998, compete in the United States Australian Football League.\nThe only Division I sports program within the Dallas political boundary is the Dallas Baptist University Patriots baseball team. Although outside the city limits, the Mustangs of Southern Methodist University are in the enclave of University Park. Neighboring cities Fort Worth, Arlington, and Denton are home to the Texas Christian University Horned Frogs, UT Arlington Mavericks, and University of North Texas Mean Green respectively. The Dallas area hosted the Final Four of the 2014 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament at AT&amp;T Stadium. The college Cotton Bowl Classic football game was played at the Cotton Bowl through its 2009 game, but has moved to AT&amp;T Stadium.\nThe Red River Showdown is an American college football rivalry game played annually at the Cotton Bowl Stadium during the second weekend of the State Fair of Texas in October. The game is played by the Oklahoma Sooners football team of the University of Oklahoma and the Texas Longhorns football team of the University of Texas at Austin. The 10,000-capacity Forester Stadium, which is used mainly for football and soccer, is also located in Dallas.\nDallas Trinity FC is the first professional women's soccer team in Dallas that plays at the historic Cotton Bowl (stadium) located in Downtown Dallas. Originally founded in May 2023 by the Neil family and managed by Chris Petrucelli, the club kicked off its inaugural season in August 2024 when they played Tampa Bay Sun FC, ending in a 1 v 1 tie. Following this match was two very significant matches for the club, the friendly match and home opener. The club played their friendly match vs FC Barcelona Femen\u00ed where they lost 0-6 and the club's official home match was against DC Power FC where they tied 1-1.\nThe club finished the season 12-9-7, finishing third and getting eliminated by Tampa Bay Sun FC by the final score of 2-1 in the semi-finals of the USL Championship. Following its inaugural season, the teams parted ways with Pauline MacDonald and Gavin Beith.\nRecently, the team announced its State Fair Clasico Match during the Texas State Fair at Fair Park on October 18 vs Club Am\u00e9rica Femenil.\nParks and recreation.\nDallas maintains and operates 406 parks on of parkland.\nThe city's parks contain 17 separate lakes, including White Rock and Bachman lakes, spanning a total of . In addition, Dallas is traversed by of biking and jogging trails, including the Katy Trail, and is home to 47 community and neighborhood recreation centers, 276 sports fields, 60 swimming pools, 232 playgrounds, 173 basketball courts, 112 volleyball courts, 126 play slabs, 258 neighborhood tennis courts, 258 picnic areas, six 18-hole golf courses, two driving ranges, and 477 athletic fields as of 2013.\nFair Park.\nDallas's flagship park is Fair Park. Built in 1936 for the Texas Centennial Exposition world's fair, Fair Park is the world's largest collection of Art Deco exhibit buildings, art, and sculptures; Fair Park is also home to the State Fair of Texas, the largest state fair in the United States with 2 million visitors. In November 2019, consultants presented to the public a master plan to revitalize the area.\nKlyde Warren Park.\nNamed after Klyde Warren, the young son of billionaire Kelcy Warren, the 5.2-acre Klyde Warren Park was built above Woodall Rodgers Freeway and connects Uptown and Downtown, specifically the Arts District. Klyde Warren Park is home to an amphitheater, jogging trails, a children's park, a dog park, a putting green, croquet, ping pong, chess, an outdoor library, and two restaurants. Food trucks give another option of dining and are lined along the park's Downtown side. There are also weekly planned events, including yoga, Zumba, skyline tours, tai chi, and meditation. Klyde Warren Park is home to a free trolley stop on Olive St., which riders can connect to Downtown, McKinney Avenue, and West Village.\nTurtle Creek Parkway park.\nBuilt in 1913, Turtle Creek Parkway park is a linear park in between Turtle Creek and Turtle Creek Boulevard in the aptly named Turtle Creek neighborhood. Archaeological surveys discovered dart points and flint chips dating 3,000 years to 1,000 BCE. This site was later discovered to be home to Native Americans who cherished the trees and natural spring water. The park is across Turtle Creek from Kalita Humphreys Theater, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright.\nLake Cliff Park.\nOpened on July 4, 1906, Lake Cliff Park was called \"the Southwest's Greatest Playground\". The park was home to an amusement park, a large pool, waterslides, the world's largest skating rink, and three theaters, the largest being the 2,500-seat Casino Theater. After the streetcar bridge that brought most of the park visitors collapsed, Lake Cliff Park was sold. The Casino Theater moved and the pool was demolished after a polio scare in 1959. The pool was Dallas's first municipal pool.\nReverchon Park.\nIn 1935, Dallas purchased from John Cole's estate to develop Reverchon Park. Reverchon Park was named after botanist Julien Reverchon, who left France to live in the La Reunion colony, which was founded in the mid-1800s and was situated in present-day West Dallas. Reverchon Park was planned to be the crown jewel of the Dallas park system and was even referred to as the \"Central Park\" of Dallas. Improvements were made throughout the years, including the Iris Bowl, picnic settings, a baseball diamond, and tennis courts. The Iris Bowl celebrated many Greek pageants, dances, and other performances. The Gill Well was installed for nearby residents and drew people all across Texas who wanted to experience the water's healing powers. The baseball diamond was host to a 1953 exhibition game for the New York Giants and the Cleveland Indians.\nTrinity River Project.\nAs part of the ongoing Trinity River Project, the Great Trinity Forest, at , is the largest urban hardwood forest in the United States and is part of the largest urban park in the United States. The Trinity River Audubon Center is a new addition to the park. Opened in 2008, it serves as a gateway to many trails and other nature-viewing activities in the area. The Trinity River Audubon Center is the first LEED-certified building built by the City of Dallas Parks and Recreation Department.\nKaty Trail.\nNamed after its former railroad name, the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad (or \"MKT\" Railroad), the stretch of railroad was purchased by the city of Dallas and transformed into the city's premier trail. Stretching from Victory Park, the Katy Trail passes through the Turtle Creek and Knox Park neighborhoods and runs along the east side of Highland Park. The trail ends at Central Expressway, but extensions are underway to extend the trail to the White Rock Lake Trail in Lakewood.\nPreserves.\nDallas hosts three of the twenty-one preserves of the extensive Dallas County Preserve System. The Joppa Preserve, the McCommas Bluff Preserve, and the Cedar Ridge Preserve are within the Dallas city limits. The Cedar Ridge Preserve was known as the Dallas Nature Center, but the Audubon Dallas group now manages the natural habitat park on behalf of the city of Dallas and Dallas County. The preserve sits at an elevation of above sea level and offers a variety of outdoor activities, including of hiking trails and picnic areas.\nDallas Zoo.\nThe city is also home to Texas's first and largest zoo, the Dallas Zoo, which opened at its current location in 1888.\nGovernment.\nLocal representation.\nThe city uses a council-manager government, with Eric Johnson serving as mayor, Kimberly Tolbert serving as city manager, and 14 council members serving as representatives to the 14 council districts in the city. This organizational structure was contested by some in favor of a strong-mayor city charter, only to be rejected by Dallas voters. In 1969, Anita N. Mart\u00ednez become the first Latin American to sit as a councilwoman in Dallas's city council.\nIn the 2017\u20132018 fiscal year, the city's total budget (the sum of operating and capital budgets) was $3.3 billion. The city has seen a steady increase in its budget due to sustained growth: the budget was $1.7 billion in 2002\u20132003, $1.9 billion in 2003\u20132004, $2.0 billion in 2004\u20132005, and $2.2 billion in 2005\u20132006.\nFederal and state representation.\nNational and state legislators representing Dallas:\nThe United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas, which exercises original jurisdiction over 100 counties in North and West Texas, convenes in the Earle Cabell Federal Building and Courthouse in the Government District of Downtown. The same building additionally houses United States Bankruptcy and Magistrate Courts and a United States Attorney office. Dallas also is the seat of the Fifth Court of Appeals of Texas.\nPolitics.\nSince 2023, Dallas has been the largest city in the United States with a Republican mayor after Eric Johnson switched parties after winning re-election. He ran and was elected as a Democrat. However, the city is normally a Democratic stronghold, with over 60% of voters supporting Kamala Harris in the 2024 presidential election, 69% of voters supporting Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election and 67% of voters supporting Hillary Clinton in the 2016 presidential election (excluding write-ins). Democratic voters dominate the majority of the city, especially the central urban core and southern sectors, with Republicans spreading a sliver of suburban neighborhoods in North Dallas. In the 2004 U.S. presidential election, 57% of Dallas voters voted for John Kerry over George W. Bush. Dallas County was closely divided, with 50% of voters voting for Bush and 49% voting for Kerry. Results in the 2008 and 2012 elections favored Barack Obama, with the 44th President receiving 57% of Dallas County voters in both years, with greater margins in the city of Dallas. In the 2016 U.S. presidential election, approximately 66% of Dallas voters voted for Hillary Clinton, with 28% of city voters voting for Donald Trump. Dallas County as a whole saw 61% of voters voting for Clinton, with 35% support for Trump. In 2004, Lupe Valdez was elected Dallas County Sheriff. An open lesbian, Valdez was the only female sheriff in the state of Texas until her resignation. Despite controversies in her handling of county jails, she won re-election in 2008 with a 10-point victory over Republican challenger Lowell Cannaday. In the 2024 United States presidential election, Donald Trump, achieved 34.1% of the vote in the city of Dallas. This marked the highest level of support for a Republican candidate in the city since the 2012 election, when Mitt Romney received a comparable percentage. Trump's performance in Dallas has been attributed in part to a notable shift in Hispanic voter preferences within Texas. Trump garnered an estimated 55% of the Hispanic vote statewide, a significant improvement from his performance among Hispanic voters in 2016.\nEducation.\nThere are 337 public schools, 89 private schools, 38 colleges, and 32 libraries in Dallas. Dallas\u2013Fort Worth is also home to six Nobel Laureates.\nColleges and universities.\nThe Dallas area has a high number of colleges and universities. In addition to those in the city, the surrounding cities also have a number of universities, colleges, trade schools, and other educational institutions. The following describes the universities and their proximity to the city:\nThe Texas Legislature defines all areas in Dallas County and in the Carrollton-Farmers Branch Independent School District as being in the service area of Dallas College (formerly Dallas County Community College District or DCCCD). Areas in Collin County are assigned to Collin College.\nOther area colleges and universities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nMost areas in the city of Dallas are within the Dallas Independent School District, the 12th-largest school district in the United States and second largest in Texas. The school district operates independently of the city and enrolls over 161,000 students. As of 2003 DISD has the majority of K\u201312 students in the city of Dallas, and a proportionately larger number of students who are not non-Hispanic white. \nA few areas of Dallas also extend into other school districts in Dallas County, including Carrollton-Farmers Branch, Coppell, Duncanville, Garland, Highland Park, Irving, Mesquite, and Richardson. Portions of Dallas in Collin County are in Plano ISD, and portions of Dallas in Denton County are in the Carrollton-Farmers Branch ISD. The Wilmer-Hutchins Independent School District once served portions of southern Dallas, but it was shut down for the 2005\u20132006 year. WHISD students started attending other Dallas ISD schools during that time. Following the close, the Texas Education Agency consolidated WHISD into Dallas ISD. In 2003 Royce Hanson, author of \"\", stated that the Plano, Richardson, and Wilmer-Hutchins school districts were the \"most significant\" of the public school students with students in Dallas who were not in Dallas ISD.\nMany school districts in Dallas County, including Dallas ISD, were formerly served by a governmental agency called Dallas County Schools. The system provided busing and other transportation services, access to a massive media library, technology services, strong ties to local organizations for education/community integration, and staff development programs.\nPrivate schools.\nStudents from Dallas attend many private schools in Dallas, and in nearby areas. These schools include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nDallas has several local newspapers, magazines, television stations and radio stations that serve the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, which is the fifth-largest media market in the United States. Dallas has one major daily newspaper, \"The Dallas Morning News\", which was founded in 1885 by A. H. Belo and is A. H. Belo's flagship newspaper.\nThe \"Dallas Times Herald\", started in 1888, was the \"Morning News\"' major competitor until Belo purchased it on December 8, 1991, and closed the paper down the next day. Other daily newspapers are \"Al D\u00eda\", a Spanish-language paper published by Belo, and a number of ethnic newspapers printed in languages such as Chinese, Korean, and Vietnamese.\nOther publications include the \"Dallas Weekly\" and the \"Elite News\", all weekly news publications. The \"Dallas Observer\" and the \"North Texas Journal\" are also alternative weekly newspapers. \"The Dallas Morning News\" formerly had a weekly publication, \"Neighborsgo\", which came out every Friday and focused on community news. Readers could post stories and contribute content to the website.\n\"D Magazine\" is a notable monthly magazine about business, life, and entertainment in Dallas\u2013Fort Worth. Local visitor magazines include \"WHERE Magazine\" and \"Travelhost\"\u2013available at hotel desks or in guest rooms. In addition, the park cities and suburbs such as Plano also have their own community newspapers. Also, \"THE Magazine\" covers the contemporary arts scene.\nIn terms of the larger metro area, the \"Fort Worth Star-Telegram\" is another major daily newspaper, covering Fort Worth's metropolitan division. It also publishes a major Spanish-language newspaper for the entire metro area known as \"La Estrella\". To the north of Dallas and Fort Worth, the \"Denton Record-Chronicle\" primarily covers news for the city of Denton and Denton County.\nArea television stations affiliated with the major broadcasting networks (network O&amp;O's highlighted in bold) include KDFW 4 (Fox), KXAS 5 (NBC), WFAA 8 (ABC) (which for many years was owned by Belo alongside the \"Morning News\"), KTVT 11 (CBS), KERA 13 (PBS), KUVN 23 (UNI), KDFI 27 (MNTV), KDAF 33 (The CW), and KXTX 39 (TMD). KTXA 21 and KFAA 29 are an independent stations; KTXA \nwas previously affiliated with the now-defunct UPN network.\nOver 101 radio stations operate within range of Dallas. The city of Dallas operates WRR 101.1 FM, the area's main classical music station, from city offices in Fair Park. Its original sister station, licensed as WRR-AM in 1921, is the oldest commercially operated radio station in Texas and the second-oldest in the United States, after KDKA (AM) in Pittsburgh. KKDA-FM (K104), an urban contemporary station, and KRNB (Smooth R&amp;B 105.7), an urban adult contemporary station, are owned independently by Service Broadcasting Corporation.\nBecause of the city's central geographical position and lack of nearby mountainous terrain, high-power class A medium-wave stations KRLD and WBAP can broadcast as far as southern Canada at night and can be used for emergency messages when broadcasting is down in other major metropolitan areas in the United States.\nSlavic Voice of America media group serves Russian-speaking Americans out of Dallas. Hispanic Broadcasting Corporation (HBC), the largest company in the Spanish-language radio station business, is based in Dallas. In 2003, HBC was acquired by Univision and became Univision Radio Inc., but the radio company remains headquartered in the city.\nInfrastructure.\nPublic safety.\nThe Dallas Police Department provides most policing in Dallas. The Dallas interim chief of police is Michael Igo. The police headquarters are in the Cedars neighborhood of southern Dallas.\nEmergency medical services and fire protection in the city are provided by the Dallas Fire-Rescue Department. The Dallas Fire &amp; Rescue chief is Dominique Artis. The department operates the Dallas Firefighter's Museum built in 1907 along Parry Avenue near Fair Park. Dallas's oldest remaining fire station building still stands at the corner of McKinney Ave. and Leonard and was built in 1892. It was the home of Engine Co. Number 1, and is now a picture framing shop.\nHealth care.\nDallas has many hospitals and several medical research facilities within its city limits. One major research center is the Dallas Medical District with the UT Southwestern Medical Center in the Stemmons Corridor, along with the affiliated UT Southwestern Medical School. The health care complex includes within its bounds Parkland Memorial Hospital, Children's Medical Center, William P. Clements Jr. University Hospital (formerly St. Paul University Hospital), and the William P. Clements Jr. University Hospital.\nDallas also has a VA hospital in the southern portion of the city, the Dallas Veterans Affairs Medical Center. The center is home to a Consolidated Mail Outpatient Pharmacy (CMOP), part of an initiative by the Department of Veterans Affairs to provide mail-order prescriptions to veterans using computerization at strategic locations throughout the United States.\nOther hospitals in the city include Baylor University Medical Center in East Dallas, Methodist Dallas Medical Center in Oak Cliff, Methodist Charlton Medical Center near Duncanville, Medical City Dallas Hospital and Presbyterian Hospital in North Dallas, and the Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children in Oak Lawn.\nUtilities.\nDallas is served by Dallas Water Utilities, which operates several waste treatment plants and pulls water from several area reservoirs. Several companies maintain the city's electric system, including Stream Energy, Cirro Energy and Oncor Electric Delivery, whose parent company, Energy Future Holdings Corporation, has headquarters in the city.\nThe city offers garbage pickup and recycling service weekly through its Sanitation Services department. Telephone networks, broadband internet, and cable television service are available from several companies, including AT&amp;T, Spectrum, and Verizon FiOS.\nTransportation.\nLike many other major cities in the United States, the automobile is the primary mode of local transportation, though efforts have been made to increase the availability of alternative modes of transportation, including the construction of light rail lines, biking and walking paths, wide sidewalks, a trolley system, and buses.\nIn 2009, 78.5% of Dallas (city) commuters drive to work alone. The 2009 mode share for Dallas (city) commuters are 10.7% for carpooling, 3.9% for transit, 1.9% for walking, and .1% for cycling. In 2015, the American Community Survey estimated modal shares for Dallas (city) commuters of 75.4% for driving alone, 12.8% for carpooling, 3.5% for riding transit, 1.9% for walking, and .2% for cycling.\nThe city of Dallas has a higher than average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 10.2 percent of Dallas households lacked a car, decreased to 9.1 percent in 2016 and to 8.7 percent in 2023. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Dallas averaged 1.59 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nHighways.\nDallas is at the confluence of four major interstate highways\u2014Interstates 20, 30, 35E, and 45. The Dallas area freeway system is set up in the popular hub-and-spoke system, shaped much like a wagon wheel. Starting from the center of the city, a small freeway loop surrounds Downtown, followed by the I-635 loop about outside Downtown, and ultimately the tolled President George Bush Turnpike.\nInside these freeway loops are other boulevard- and parkway-style loops, including Loop 12 and Belt Line Road. Another beltway around the city upwards of from Downtown is under plan in Collin County.\nRadiating out of Downtown Dallas's freeway loop are the spokes of the area's highway system\u2014Interstates 30, 35E, and 45, US 75, US 77, US 175, SH Spur 366, the Dallas North Tollway, SH 114, US 80, and US 67. Other major highways around the city include SH 183 and Spur 408.\nThe recently completed interchange at the intersection of Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway (I-635) and the Central Expressway (US 75) has five stacks and is aptly called the High Five Interchange. It is one of the few five-level interchanges in Dallas and is one of the largest freeway interchanges in the United States.\nThe following is a list of the freeways and tollways in the Dallas-Fort Worth area:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAirports.\nTwo commercial airports serve Dallas: Dallas Fort Worth International Airport and Dallas Love Field. In addition, Dallas Executive Airport (formerly Redbird Airport), serves as a general aviation airport for the city, and Addison Airport functions similarly just outside the city limits in the suburb of Addison. Two more general aviation airports are about north of Dallas in McKinney, and another two are in Fort Worth, on the west side of the metroplex. Alliance Airport, in far North Fort Worth, is a cargo reliever airport to DFW Airport and general aviation facility.\nDFW Airport is in the suburbs slightly north of and equidistant to Downtown Fort Worth and Downtown Dallas. In terms of size, DFW International is the largest airport in the state, the second largest in the United States, and ninth largest in the world; DFW International Airport is larger than the island of Manhattan.\nIn terms of traffic, DFW Airport is the busiest airport in the state, fourth-busiest in the United States, and eleventh-busiest in the world. The headquarters of American Airlines, the largest air carrier in the world ahead of United Airlines and Delta Air Lines, is less than from DFW Airport within Fort Worth's city limits. Similarly, Love Field is within Dallas's city limits, about northwest of Downtown, and is headquarters to Southwest Airlines, the largest domestic airline in the United States.\nTransit systems.\nDallas Area Rapid Transit (DART) is the Dallas-area public transportation authority that provides rail, buses and HOV lanes to commuters. DART began operating the first light rail system in Texas in 1996, and it is now the largest operator of light rail in the US. Today, the system is the seventh-busiest light rail system in the country with approximately 55 stations on of light rail, and 10 stations on of commuter rail. It includes four light rail lines and a commuter line: the Red Line, the Blue Line, the Green Line, the Orange Line, and the Trinity Railway Express.\nThe Red Line travels through Oak Cliff, South Dallas, Downtown, Uptown, North Dallas, Richardson and Plano, while the Blue Line goes through Oak Cliff, Downtown, Uptown, East Dallas, Lake Highlands, and Garland. The Red and Blue lines are conjoined between 8th &amp; Corinth Station in Oak Cliff through Mockingbird Station in North Dallas. The two lines service Cityplace Station. The Green Line serves Carrollton, Farmers Branch, Love Field Airport, Stemmons Corridor, Victory Park, Downtown, Deep Ellum, Fair Park, South Dallas, and Pleasant Grove.\nThe Orange Line initially operated as a peak-service line providing extra capacity on portions of the Green and Red Lines (Bachman Station on the Green Line, through the Downtown transit mall, to Parker Road Station on the Red Line making a \"U\"-shape). However, the first stage of the Orange Line opened on December 6, 2010, extending its west end from Bachman to Belt Line Station in Irving. The second and final phase opened in August 2014 and provided DFW Airport with rail service. DFW Airport Terminal A station is the terminus for the Orange Line and connects Skylink.\nThis provides passengers the convenience of disembarking the DART rail, proceeding to security check-in and immediately boarding Skylink to be quickly transported to their desired terminal. The Blue Line has also been extended by to serve Rowlett at the Rowlett Park &amp; Ride facility.\nIn August 2009, the Regional Transportation Council agreed to seek $96\u00a0million in federal stimulus dollars for a trolley project in Dallas and Fort Worth. The Oak Cliff Transit Authority took the lead with leaders envisioning a streetcar line that would link Union Station and the Dallas Convention Center in Downtown to Oak Cliff, Methodist Medical Center, and the Bishop Arts District via the Houston Street Viaduct.\nDallas was awarded a $23\u00a0million TIGER grant towards the $58\u00a0million Dallas Streetcar Project in February 2010.\nIn addition to light rail, Amtrak's \"Texas Eagle\" also serves Union Station, providing daily service east to Chicago and west to San Antonio, and thrice-weekly service west to Los Angeles. The Trinity Rail Express terminates at Union Station and T&amp;P Station.\nInternational relations.\nThe city of Dallas has worked to build Sister &amp; Friendship City relationships around the globe. These relationships help create and strengthen partnerships between Dallas and the international community. The program aims to build global cooperation at the municipal level by promoting cultural understanding and stimulating economic development between Dallas and its foreign counterparts.\nSister cities.\nDallas's sister cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendship cities.\nDallas has friendly relations with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53839", "revid": "50487532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53839", "title": "Fort Worth, Texas", "text": "City in Texas, United States\nFort Worth (sometimes abbreviated Ft. Worth) is a city in the U.S. state of Texas and the county seat of Tarrant County, covering nearly into Denton, Johnson, Parker, and Wise counties. Fort Worth's population was estimated to be 1,008,156 in 2024, making it the 11th-most populous city in the United States. Fort Worth is the second-largest city in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, after Dallas, and the fourth most populous in Texas. The Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex is the fourth-most populous metropolitan area in the United States.\nThe city of Fort Worth was established in 1849 as an army outpost on a bluff overlooking the Trinity River. Fort Worth has historically been a center of the Texas Longhorn cattle trade. It still embraces its Western heritage and traditional architecture and design. is the first ship of the United States Navy named after the city. Nearby Dallas has held a population majority in the metropolitan area for as long as records have been kept, yet Fort Worth has become one of the fastest-growing cities in the United States.\nThe city is the location of the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition and several museums designed by contemporary architects. The Kimbell Art Museum was designed by Louis Kahn, with an addition designed by Renzo Piano. The Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth was designed by Tadao Ando. The Amon Carter Museum of American Art, designed by Philip Johnson, houses American art. The Sid Richardson Museum, redesigned by David M. Schwarz, has a collection of Western art in the United States emphasizing Frederic Remington and Charles Russell. The Fort Worth Museum of Science and History was designed by Ricardo Legorreta of Mexico.\nIn addition, Fort Worth is the location of several universities, including the University of Texas at Arlington, Texas Christian University, Texas Wesleyan, University of North Texas Health Science Center, and Texas A&amp;M University School of Law. Several multinational corporations, including Bell Textron, American Airlines, and BNSF Railway, are headquartered in Fort Worth.\nHistory.\nThe Treaty of Bird's Fort between the Republic of Texas and several Native American tribes was signed in 1843 at Bird's Fort in present-day Arlington, Texas. Article XI of the treaty provided that no one may \"pass the line of trading houses\" (at the border of the Indians' territory) without permission of the President of Texas, and may not reside or remain in the Indians' territory. These \"trading houses\" were later established at the junction of the Clear Fork and West Fork of the Trinity River in present-day Fort Worth.\nA line of seven army posts was established in 1848\u20131849 after the Mexican War to protect the settlers of Texas along the western American Frontier and included Fort Worth, Fort Graham, Fort Gates, Fort Croghan, Fort Martin Scott, Fort Lincoln, and Fort Duncan. Originally, 10 forts had been proposed by Major General William Jenkins Worth (1794\u20131849), who commanded the Department of Texas in 1849. In January 1849, Worth proposed a line of 10 forts to mark the western Texas frontier from Eagle Pass to the confluence of the West Fork and Clear Fork of the Trinity River. One month later, Worth died from cholera in South Texas.\nGeneral William S. Harney assumed command of the Department of Texas and ordered Major Ripley A. Arnold (Company F, Second United States Dragoons) to find a new fort site near the West Fork and Clear Fork. On June 6, 1849, Arnold, advised by Middleton Tate Johnson, established a camp on the bank of the Trinity River and named the post Camp Worth in honor of the late General Worth. In August 1849, Arnold moved the camp to the north-facing bluff, which overlooked the mouth of the Clear Fork of the Trinity River. The United States War Department officially named the post Fort Worth on November 14, 1849. Since its establishment, the city of Fort Worth continues to be known as \"where the West begins\".\nE. S. Terrell (1812\u20131905) from Tennessee claimed to be the first resident of Fort Worth. The fort was flooded the first year and moved to the top of the bluff; the current courthouse was built on this site. The fort was abandoned September 17, 1853. No trace of it remains.\nAs a stop on the Chisholm Trail, Fort Worth was stimulated by the business of the cattle drives and became a brawling, bustling town. Millions of head of cattle were driven north to market along this trail. Fort Worth became the center of the cattle drives, and later, the ranching industry. It was given the nickname of Cowtown.\nDuring the American Civil War, Fort Worth suffered from shortages of money, food, and supplies. The population dropped as low as 175, but began to recover during Reconstruction. By 1872, Jacob Samuels, William Jesse Boaz, and William Henry Davis had opened general stores. The next year, Khleber M. Van Zandt established Tidball, Van Zandt, and Company, which became Fort Worth National Bank in 1884.\nIn 1875, the \"Dallas Herald\" published an article by a former Fort Worth lawyer, Robert E. Cowart, who wrote that the decimation of Fort Worth's population, caused by the economic disaster and hard winter of 1873, had dealt a severe blow to the cattle industry. Added to the slowdown due to the railroad's stopping the laying of track outside of Fort Worth, Cowart said that Fort Worth was so slow that he saw a panther asleep in the street by the courthouse. Although an intended insult, the name Panther City was enthusiastically embraced when in 1876 Fort Worth recovered economically. Many businesses and organizations continue to use Panther in their name. A panther is set at the top of the police department badges.\nThe \"Panther City\" tradition is also preserved in the names and design of some of the city's geographical/architectural features, such as Panther Island (in the Trinity River), the Flat Iron Building, Fort Worth Central Station, and in two or three \"Sleeping Panther\" statues.\nIn 1876, the Texas and Pacific Railway finally was completed to Fort Worth, stimulating a boom and transforming the Fort Worth Stockyards into a premier center for the cattle wholesale trade. Migrants from the devastated war-torn South continued to swell the population, and small, community factories and mills yielded to larger businesses. Newly dubbed the \"Queen City of the Prairies\", Fort Worth supplied a regional market via the growing transportation network.\nFort Worth became the westernmost railhead and a transit point for cattle shipment. Louville Niles, a Boston, Massachusetts-based businessman and main shareholder of the Fort Worth Stockyards Company, is credited with bringing the two biggest meatpacking firms at the time, Armour and Swift, to the stockyards.\nWith the boom times came a variety of entertainments and related problems. Fort Worth had a knack for separating cattlemen from their money. Cowboys took full advantage of their last brush with civilization before the long drive on the Chisholm Trail from Fort Worth north to Kansas. They stocked up on provisions from local merchants, visited saloons for a bit of gambling and carousing, then rode northward with their cattle, only to whoop it up again on their way back. The town soon became home to \"Hell's Half-Acre\", the biggest collection of saloons, dance halls, and bawdy houses south of Dodge City (the northern terminus of the Chisholm Trail), giving Fort Worth the nickname of the \"Paris of the Plains\".\nCertain sections of town were off-limits for proper citizens. Shootings, knifings, muggings, and brawls became a nightly occurrence. Cowboys were joined by a motley assortment of buffalo hunters, gunmen, adventurers, and crooks. Hell's Half Acre (also known as simply \"The Acre\") expanded as more people were drawn to the town. Occasionally, the Acre was referred to as \"the bloody Third Ward\" after it was designated one of the city's three political wards in 1876. By 1900, the Acre covered four of the city's main north-south thoroughfares. Local citizens became alarmed about the activities, electing Timothy Isaiah \"Longhair Jim\" Courtright in 1876 as city marshal with a mandate to tame it.\nCourtright sometimes collected and jailed 30 people on a Saturday night, but allowed the gamblers to operate, as they attracted money to the city. After learning that train and stagecoach robbers, such as the Sam Bass gang, were using the area as a hideout, he intensified law enforcement, but certain businessmen advertised against too many restrictions in the area as having bad effects on the legitimate businesses. Gradually, the cowboys began to avoid the area; as businesses suffered, the city moderated its opposition. Courtright lost his office in 1879.\nDespite crusading mayors such as H.S. Broiles and newspaper editors such as B. B. Paddock, the Acre survived because it generated income for the city (all of it illegal) and excitement for visitors. Longtime Fort Worth residents claimed the place was never as wild as its reputation, but during the 1880s, Fort Worth was a regular stop on the \"gambler's circuit\" by Bat Masterson, Doc Holliday, and the Earp brothers (Wyatt, Morgan, and Virgil). James Earp, the eldest of his brothers, lived with his wife in Fort Worth during this period; their house was at the edge of Hell's Half Acre, at 9th and Calhoun. He often tended bar at the Cattlemen's Exchange saloon in the \"uptown\" part of the city.\nReforming citizens objected to the dance halls, where men and women mingled; by contrast, the saloons or gambling parlors had primarily male customers.\nIn the late 1880s, Mayor Broiles and County Attorney R. L. Carlock initiated a reform campaign. In a public shootout on February 8, 1887, Jim Courtright was killed on Main Street by Luke Short, who claimed he was \"King of Fort Worth Gamblers\". As Courtright had been popular, when Short was jailed for his murder, rumors floated of lynching him. Short's good friend Bat Masterson came armed and spent the night in his cell to protect him.\nThe first prohibition campaign in Texas was mounted in Fort Worth in 1889, allowing other business and residential development in the area. Another change was the influx of Black and African American residents. Excluded by state segregation from the business end of town and the more costly residential areas, the city's black citizens settled into the southern portion of the city. The popularity and profitability of the Acre declined and more derelicts and the homeless were seen on the streets. By 1900, most of the dance halls and gamblers were gone. Cheap variety shows and prostitution became the chief forms of entertainment. Some progressive politicians launched an offensive to seek out and abolish these perceived \"vices\" as part of the broader Progressive Era package of reforms.\nIn 1911, the Reverend J. Frank Norris launched an offensive against racetrack gambling in the \"Baptist Standard\" and used the pulpit of the First Baptist Church of Fort Worth to attack vice and prostitution. When he began to link certain Fort Worth businessmen with property in the Acre and announced their names from his pulpit, the battle heated up. On February 4, 1912, Norris's church was burned to the ground; that evening, his enemies tossed a bundle of burning oiled rags onto his porch, but the fire was extinguished and caused minimal damage. A month later, the arsonists succeeded in burning down the parsonage. In a sensational trial lasting a month, Norris was charged with perjury and arson in connection with the two fires. He was acquitted, but his continued attacks on the Acre accomplished little until 1917. A new city administration and the federal government, which was eyeing Fort Worth as a potential site for a major military training camp, joined forces with the Baptist preacher to bring down the final curtain on the Acre.\nThe police department compiled statistics showing that 50% of the violent crime in Fort Worth occurred in the Acre, which confirmed respectable citizens' opinion of the area. After Camp Bowie (a World War I U.S. Army training installation) was located on the outskirts of Fort Worth in 1917, the military used martial law to regulate prostitutes and barkeepers of the Acre. Fines and stiff jail sentences curtailed their activities. By the time Norris held a mock funeral parade to \"bury John Barleycorn\" in 1919, the Acre had become a part of Fort Worth history. The name continues to be associated with the southern end of Fort Worth.\nIn 1921, the whites-only union workers in the Fort Worth, Swift &amp; Co. meatpacking plant in the Niles City Stockyards went on strike. The owners attempted to replace them with black strikebreakers. During union protests, strikebreaker African-American Fred Rouse was lynched on a tree at the corner of NE 12th Street and Samuels Avenue. After he was hanged a white mob riddled his mutilated body with gunshots.\nOn November 21, 1963, President John F. Kennedy arrived in Fort Worth, speaking the next morning before a breakfast meeting of the Fort Worth Chamber of Commerce, then proceeding to Dallas where he was assassinated later that day.\nWhen oil began to gush in West Texas in the early 20th century, and again in the late 1970s, Fort Worth was at the center of the boom. By July 2007, advances in horizontal drilling technology made vast natural gas reserves in the Barnett Shale available directly under the city, helping many residents receive royalty checks for their mineral rights. Today, the City of Fort Worth and many residents are dealing with the benefits and issues associated with the natural-gas reserves underground.\nOn March 28, 2000, at 6:15 pm, an F3 tornado struck downtown Fort Worth, severely damaging many buildings. One of the hardest-hit structures was the Bank One Tower, which was one of the dominant features of the Fort Worth skyline and which had \"Reata,\" a popular restaurant, on its top floor. It has since been converted to upscale condominiums and officially renamed \"The Tower.\" This was the first major tornado to strike Fort Worth proper since the early 1940s.\nFrom 2000 to 2006, Fort Worth was the fastest-growing large city in the United States; it was voted one of \"America's Most Livable Communities\". In addition to the reversal migration, many African Americans have been relocating to Fort Worth for its affordable cost of living and job opportunities.\nIn 2020, Fort Worth's mayor announced the city's continued growth to 20.78%. The U.S. Census Bureau also noted the city's beginning of greater diversification from 2014\u20132018.\nGeography.\nFort Worth is located in North Texas, and has a generally humid subtropical climate. It is part of the Cross Timbers region; this region is a boundary between the more heavily forested eastern parts and the rolling hills and prairies of the central part. Specifically, the city is part of the ecoregion within the Cross Timbers. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which are land and are covered by water. It is a principal city in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, and the second largest by population.\nThe city of Fort Worth is not entirely contiguous and has several enclaves, practical enclaves, semi-enclaves, and cities that are otherwise completely or nearly surrounded by it, including: Westworth Village, River Oaks, Saginaw, Blue Mound, Benbrook, Everman, Forest Hill, Edgecliff Village, Westover Hills, White Settlement, Sansom Park, Lake Worth, Lakeside, and Haslet.\nFort Worth contains over 1,000 natural-gas wells (December 2009 count) tapping the Barnett Shale. Each well site is a bare patch of gravel in size. As city ordinances permit them in all zoning categories, including residential, well sites can be found in a variety of locations. Some wells are surrounded by masonry fences, but most are secured by chain link.\nA large storage dam was completed in 1914 on the West Fork of the Trinity River, 7 miles (11\u00a0km) from the city, with a storage capacity of 33,495 acre feet of water. The lake formed by this dam is known as Lake Worth.\nNeighborhoods.\nDowntown.\nDowntown Fort Worth consists of numerous districts comprising commercial and retail, residential, and entertainment. Among them, Sundance Square is a mixed-use district and popular for nightlife and entertainment. The Bass Performance Hall is located within Sundance Square. Nearby Upper West Side is also a notable district within downtown Fort Worth. It is bound roughly by Henderson Street to the east, the Trinity River to the west, Interstate 30 to the south, and White Settlement Road to the north. The neighborhood contains several small and mid-sized office buildings and urban residences, but very little retail.\nStockyards.\nThe Fort Worth Stockyards are a National Historic District. The Stockyards was once among the largest livestock markets in the United States and played a vital role in the city's early growth. Today the neighborhood is characterized by its many bars, restaurants, and notable country music venues such as Billy Bob's. Fort Worth celebrity chef Tim Love of \"Iron Chef America\" and \"Top Chef Masters\" has operated multiple restaurants in the neighborhood. There is a mall at the Stockyards Station and a train via Grapevine Vintage Railroad that connects to downtown Grapevine. Cowtown Coliseum hosts a weekly rodeo and also has the Texas Cowboy Hall of Fame. The world's largest honky tonk is also in the Stockyards at Billy Bob's. At the Fort Worth Stockyards, Fort Worth is the only major city that hosts a daily cattle drive.\nTanglewood.\nTanglewood consists of land in the low areas along the branch of the Trinity River and is approximately five miles southwest from the Fort Worth central business district. The Tanglewood area lies within two surveys. The western part of the addition is part of the 1854 Felix G. Beasley survey, and the eastern part, along the branch of the river, is the 1876 James Howard survey. The original approach to the Tanglewood area consisted of a two-rut dirt road, which is now Bellaire Drive South. Up to the time of development, children enjoyed swimming in the river in a deep hole that was located where the bridge is now on Bellaire Drive South near Trinity Commons Shopping Center. The portions of Tanglewood that are now Bellaire Park Court, Marquette Court, and Autumn Court were originally a dairy farm.\nArchitecture.\nDowntown Fort Worth, with its unique rustic architecture, is mainly known for its Art Deco-style buildings. The Tarrant County Courthouse was created in the American Beaux Arts design, which was modeled after the Texas State Capitol building. Most of the structures around downtown's Sundance Square have preserved their early 20th-century fa\u00e7ades. Multiple blocks surrounding Sundance Square are illuminated at night in Christmas lights year-round.\nClimate.\nFort Worth has a humid subtropical climate (Cfa) according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification system, and is within USDA hardiness zone 8a. This region features very hot, humid summers and mild to cool winters. The hottest month of the year is August, when the average high temperature is , and overnight low temperatures average , giving an average temperature of . The coldest month of the year is January, when the average high temperature is and low temperatures average . The average temperature in January is . The highest temperature ever recorded in Fort Worth is , on June 26, 1980, during the Great 1980 Heat Wave, and June 27, 1980. The coldest temperature ever recorded in Fort Worth was on February 12, 1899. Because of its position in North Texas, Fort Worth is very susceptible to supercell thunderstorms, which produce large hail and can produce tornadoes.\nThe average annual precipitation for Fort Worth is . The wettest month of the year is May, when an average of of precipitation falls. The driest month of the year is January, when only of precipitation falls. The driest calendar year since records began has been 1921 with and the wettest 2015 with . The wettest calendar month has been April 1922 with , including on April 25.\nThe average annual snowfall in Fort Worth is . The most snowfall in one month has been in February 1978, and the most in a season in 1977/1978.\nThe National Weather Service office, which serves the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, is based in northeastern Fort Worth.\nUrban wildlife.\nFort Worth\u2019s warm climate and mix of urban and natural spaces support a wide range of native wildlife, including raccoons, squirrels, skunks, armadillos, and opossums. As residential development expands near creeks and wooded areas, residents increasingly encounter these species around homes and neighborhoods. City and state agencies encourage humane prevention and exclusion practices to minimize property damage and reduce human\u2013wildlife conflict.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFort Worth is the most populous city in Tarrant County, and second-most populous community within the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex. Its metropolitan statistical area encompasses one-quarter of the population of Texas, and is the largest in the Southern U.S. and Texas followed by the Houston\u2013The Woodlands\u2013Sugar Land metropolitan area. At the American Community Survey's 2018 census estimates, the city of Fort Worth had a population near 900,000 residents. In 2019, it grew to an estimated 909,585. At the 2020 United States census, Fort Worth had a population of 918,915 and 2022 census estimates numbered approximately 956,709 residents.\nThere were 337,072 housing units, 308,188 households, and 208,389 families at the 2018 census estimates. The average household size was 2.87 persons per household, and the average family size was 3.50. Fort Worth had an owner-occupied housing rate of 56.4% and renter-occupied housing rate of 43.6%. The median income in 2018 was $58,448 and the mean income was $81,165. The city had a per capita income of $29,010. Roughly 15.6% of Fort Worthers lived at or below the poverty line.\nIn 2010's American Community Survey census estimates there were 291,676 housing units, 261,042 households, and 174,909 families. Fort Worth had an average household size of 2.78 and the average family size was 3.47. A total of 92,952 households had children under 18 years living with them. There were 5.9% opposite sex unmarried-partner households and 0.5% same sex unmarried-partner households in 2010. The owner-occupied housing rate of Fort Worth was 59.0% and the renter-occupied housing rate was 41.0%. Fort Worth's median household income was $48,224 and the mean was $63,065. An estimated 21.4% of the population lived at or below the poverty line.\nRace and ethnicity.\nAt the 2010 U.S. census, the racial composition of Fort Worth's population was 61.1% White (non-Hispanic whites: 41.7%), 18.9% Black or African American, 0.6% Native American, 3.7% Asian American, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander, 34.1% Hispanic or Latino (of any race), and 3.1% of two or more races. In 2018, 38.2% of Fort Worth was non-Hispanic white, 18.6% Black or African American, 0.4% American Indian or Alaska Native, 4.8% Asian American, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 2.1% from two or more races, and 35.5% Hispanic or Latino (of any race), marking an era of diversification in the city limits.\nA study determined Fort Worth as one of the most diverse cities in the United States in 2019. For contrast, in 1970, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Fort Worth's population as 72% non-Hispanic white, 19.9% African American, and 7.9% Hispanic or Latino. By the 2020 census, continued population growth spurred further diversification with 36.6% of the population being non-Hispanic white, 34.8% Hispanic or Latino American of any race, and 19.2% Black or African American; Asian Americans increased to forming 5.1% of the population, reflecting nationwide demographic trends at the time. In 2020, a total of 31,485 residents were of two or more races.\nReligion.\nLocated within the Bible Belt, Christianity is the largest collective religious group in Fort Worth proper, and the Metroplex. Both Dallas and Dallas County, and Fort Worth and Tarrant County have a plurality of Roman Catholic residents. Overall, the Dallas metropolitan division of the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex is more religiously diverse than Fort Worth and its surrounding suburbs, particularly in the principal cities' counties.\nThe oldest continuously operating church in Fort Worth is First Christian Church, founded in 1855. Other historical churches continuing operation in the city include St. Patrick Cathedral (founded 1888), Saint James Second Street Baptist Church (founded 1895), Tabernacle Baptist Church (built 1923), St. Mary of the Assumption Church (built 1924), Our Mother of Mercy Catholic Church and Parsonage (built 1929 and 1911), and Morning Chapel C.M.E. Church (built 1934).\nAccording to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020, Tarrant County's Catholic community numbered 359,705, and was the Fort Worth metropolitan division's single largest Christian denomination or tradition with 378,490 adherents. According to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Worth, there are approximately 1,200,000 Catholics altogether as of 2023. Among other Christian bodies embodying catholicity, the Association of Religion Data Archives reported the Coptic Orthodox Church was the largest Eastern Christian group, followed by the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America and Orthodox Church in America, the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America, and Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church numbering 6,216 altogether.\nHome to a large Protestant Christian community, Southern Baptists were the second-largest single Christian denomination for Fort Worth's metropolitan division in 2020, with 347,771 adherents. Southern Baptists have been divided between the more traditionalist and conservative Southern Baptists of Texas Convention, and the theologically moderate Baptist General Convention of Texas; according to the Baptist General Convention of Texas, there are 167 churches within the vicinity of Fort Worth proper as of 2023. The Southern Baptists of Texas Convention listed 117 churches in 2023. Other prominent Baptist denominations such as the National Missionary Baptist Convention, National Baptist Convention, National Baptist Convention of America, Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship, American Baptist Association, and the National Association of Free Will Baptists collectively numbered 51,261 at the 2020 study.\nNon- and inter-denominational churches dominated Fort Worth's religious landscape as the third-largest group of Christians. Having more than 289,554 adherents, non/inter-denominational Christians represented the growing trend of ecumenism within the United States. Methodists were the fourth-largest Christian group with more than 100,000 adherents of the United Methodist Church spread throughout Fort Worth's metropolitan division. The African Methodist Episcopal Church, Christian Methodist Episcopal Church, African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, and Free Methodist Church also formed a substantial portion of the area's Methodist population. Pentecostals, descended from the Wesleyan-Holiness movement of Methodists, formed the fifth-largest Christian constituency and primarily divided between the Assemblies of God USA and Church of God in Christ.\nAmong Fort Worther's non-Christian community, Islam and Judaism were the second- and third-largest religious communities. According to the Association of Religion Data Archives, there were an estimated 37,488 Muslims and 2,413 Jews living in Fort Worth's vicinity, although the Goldring/Woldenberg Institute of Southern Jewish Life estimated 5,000 Jews in 2010. Religions including Hinduism and Baha'i had a minuscule presence in the Fort Worth area according to the 2020 study, and Christendom remained more prevalent than in the Dallas metropolitan division.\nEconomy.\nAt its inception, Fort Worth relied on cattle drives that traveled the Chisholm Trail. Millions of cattle were driven north to market along this trail, and Fort Worth became the center of cattle drives, and later, ranching until the American Civil War. During the American Civil War, Fort Worth suffered shortages causing its population to decline. It recovered during the Reconstruction with general stores, banks, and \"Hell's Half-Acre\", a large collection of saloons and dance halls which increased business and criminal activity in the city. By the early 20th century the military used martial law to regulate Hell's Half-Acre's bartenders and prostitutes.\nSince the late 20th century several major companies have been headquartered in Fort Worth. These include American Airlines Group (and subsidiaries American Airlines and Envoy Air), Pier 1 Imports, Chip 1 Exchange, RadioShack, Pioneer Corporation, Cash America International, GM Financial, Budget Host, the BNSF Railway, and Bell Textron. Companies with a significant presence in the city are Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Lockheed Martin, GE Transportation, and Dallas-based telecommunications company AT&amp;T. Metro by T-Mobile is also prominent in the city.\nCulture.\nBuilding on its Frontier Western heritage and a history of strong local arts patronage, Fort Worth promotes itself as the \"City of Cowboys and Culture\". Fort Worth has the world's first and largest indoor rodeo, world-class museums, a calendar of festivals and a robust local arts scene. The Academy of Western Artists, based in Gene Autry, Oklahoma, presents its annual awards in Fort Worth in fields related to the American cowboy, including music, literature, and even chuck wagon cooking. Fort Worth is also the 1931 birthplace of the Official State Music of Texas\u2014Western Swing, which was created by Bob Wills and Milton Brown and their Light Crust Doughboys band in a ramshackle dancehall 4 miles west of downtown at the Crystal Springs Dance Pavilion.\nArts and sciences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNature.\nThe Fort Worth Zoo is home to over 7,000 animals.\nThe Fort Worth Botanic Garden and the Botanical Research Institute of Texas are also in the city. For those interested in hiking, birding, or canoeing, the Fort Worth Nature Center and Refuge in northwest Fort Worth is a 3,621-acre preserved natural area designated by the Department of the Interior as a National Natural Landmark Site in 1980. Established in 1964 as the Greer Island Nature Center and Refuge, it celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2014. The Nature Center has a small, genetically pure bison herd, and native prairies, forests, and wetlands. It is one of the largest urban parks of its type in the United States.\nParks.\nFort Worth has a total of 263 parks with 179 of those being neighborhood parks. The total acres of parkland is 11,700.72 acres with the average being about 12.13 acres per park.\nThe 4.3 acre (1.7 hectare) Fort Worth Water Gardens, designed by noted New York architects Philip Johnson and John Burgee, is an urban park containing three pools of water and terraced knolls; the Water Gardens are billed as a \"cooling oasis in the concrete jungle\" of downtown. Heritage Park Plaza is a Modernist-style park that was designed by Lawrence Halprin. The plaza design incorporates a set of interconnecting rooms constructed of concrete and activated throughout by flowing water walls, channels, and pools and was added to the US National Register of Historic Places on May 10, 2010.\nThere are two off-leash dog parks located in the city, ZBonz Dog Park and Fort Woof. The park includes an agility course, water fountains, shaded shelters, and waste stations.\nSports.\nWhile much of Fort Worth's sports attention is focused on Dallas's professional sports teams, the city has its own athletic identity.\nIn 2021, it was announced that Austin Bold FC would relocate to Fort Worth, providing Fort Worth with a USL Championship club. Semi-professionally, the Fort Worth Jaguars play in the North American Floorball League and the North Texas Bulls of the National Arena League play at Cowtown Coliseum.\nThere are three amateur soccer clubs in Fort Worth: Fort Worth Vaqueros FC, Inocentes FC, and Azul City Premier FC; Inocentes and Azul City Premier both play in the United Premier Soccer League. The Vaqueros play in the National Premier Soccer League.\nCollegiately, Texas Christian University's athletic teams are the premier college sports teams for Fort Worth. The TCU Horned Frogs compete in NCAA Division I athletics. The Horned Frog football team produced two national championships in the 1930s and remained a strong competitor in the Southwest Conference into the 1960s before beginning a long period of underperformance.\nThe revival of the TCU football program began under Dennis Franchione with the success of running back LaDainian Tomlinson. Under Gary Patterson, the Horned Frogs have developed into a perennial top-10 contender, and a Rose Bowl winner in 2011. Notable players include Sammy Baugh, Davey O'Brien, Bob Lilly, LaDainian Tomlinson, Jerry Hughes, and Andy Dalton. The Horned Frogs, along with their rivals and fellow non-AQ leaders the Boise State Broncos and University of Utah Utes, were deemed the quintessential \"BCS Busters\", having appeared in both the Fiesta and Rose bowls. Their \"BCS Buster\" role ended in 2012 when they joined the Big 12 athletic conference in all sports.\nNearby Texas Wesleyan University competes in the NAIA, and won the 2006 NAIA Div. I Men's Basketball Championship and three-time National Collegiate Table Tennis Association (NCTTA) team championships (2004\u20132006). Fort Worth is also home to the NCAA football Lockheed Martin Armed Forces Bowl.\nThere used to be one professional sports team in Fort Worth proper, Panther City Lacrosse Club of the National Lacrosse League. It was founded in 2020 and played at Dickies Arena until it folded in 2024.\nRecreation.\nColonial National Invitational Golf Tournament.\nFort Worth hosts an important professional men's golf tournament every May at the Colonial Country Club. The Colonial Invitational Golf Tournament, titled for sponsorship reasons as the Charles Schwab Challenge since 2019, is one of the more prestigious and historical events of the tour calendar. The Colonial Country Club was the home course of golfing legend Ben Hogan, who was from Fort Worth.\nMotor racing.\nFort Worth is home to Texas Motor Speedway, also known as \"The Great American Speedway\". Texas Motor Speedway is a 1.5-mile quad-oval track located in the far northern part of the city in Denton County. The speedway opened in 1997, and currently hosts an IndyCar event and six NASCAR events among three major race weekends a year.\nAmateur sports-car racing in the greater Fort Worth area occurs mostly at two purpose-built tracks: MotorSport Ranch and Eagles Canyon Raceway. Sanctioning bodies include the Porsche Club of America, the National Auto Sports Association, and the Sports Car Club of America.\nCowtown Marathon.\nThe annual Cowtown Marathon has been held every last weekend in February since 1978. The two-day activities include two 5Ks, a 10K, the half marathon, marathon, and ultra marathon.\nRodeo.\nIn addition to the weekly rodeos held at Cowtown Coliseum in the Stockyards, the Fort Worth Stock Show and Rodeo is held within the Will Rogers Memorial Center at the Dickies Arena. Dickies Arena also hosts a few TCU basketball games and in the future planned to host college basketball tournaments at the conference and national levels.\nGovernment.\nCity government.\nFort Worth has a council-manager government, with elections held every two years for a mayor, elected at large, and eight council members, elected by district. The mayor is a voting member of the council and represents the city on ceremonial occasions. The council has the power to adopt municipal ordinances and resolutions, make proclamations, set the city tax rate, approve the city budget, and appoint the city secretary, city attorney, city auditor, municipal court judges, and members of city boards and commissions. The day-to-day operations of city government are overseen by the city manager, who is also appointed by the council. The current mayor is Republican Mattie Parker, making Fort Worth the second-largest city in the United States with a Republican mayor.\nState government.\nState facilities.\nThe Texas Department of Transportation operates the Fort Worth District Office in Fort Worth.\nThe North Texas Intermediate Sanction Facility, a privately operated prison facility housing short-term parole violators, was in Fort Worth. It was operated on behalf of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. In 2011, the state of Texas decided not to renew its contract with the facility.\nFederal government.\nFederal facilities.\nFort Worth is home to one of the two locations of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing. In 1987, construction on this second facility began. In addition to meeting increased production requirements, a western location was seen to serve as a contingency operation in case of emergencies in the Washington, DC, metropolitan area; as well, costs for transporting currency to Federal Reserve banks in San Francisco, Dallas, and Kansas City would be reduced. Currency production began in December 1990 at the Fort Worth facility; the official dedication took place April 26, 1991. Bills produced here have a small \"FW\" in one corner.\nThe Eldon B. Mahon United States Courthouse building contains three oil-on-canvas panels on the fourth floor by artist Frank Mechau (commissioned under the Public Works Administration's art program). Mechau's paintings, \"The Taking of Sam Bass\", \"Two Texas Rangers\", and \"Flags Over Texas\" were installed in 1940, becoming the only New Deal art commission sponsored in Fort Worth. The courthouse, built in 1933, serves the United States District Court for the Northern District of Texas and was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 2001.\nFederal Medical Center, Carswell, a federal prison and health facility for women, is located in the Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base Fort Worth. Carswell houses the federal death row for female inmates. Federal Medical Center, Ft. Worth, a federal prison and health facility for men, is located across from TCC-South Campus. The Federal Aviation Administration, National Archives and Records Administration, and Federal Bureau of Investigation have offices in Fort Worth.\nPolitics.\nSince 2012, Tarrant County has shifted about 10 points to the left\u2014even though Mitt Romney won the county that year by 15.8 points. In contrast, the city of Fort Worth has moved only about 2 points left during the same period. This relative stability in Fort Worth\u2019s political leanings is largely due to its substantial Hispanic population. The Republican Party\u2014particularly under Trump\u2014has made significant inroads with Hispanic voters, capturing 55% of the Latino vote statewide in 2024. As Hispanic voters have trended right, white suburbanites in Fort Worth have moved left, effectively balancing the overall margin. Consequently, Fort Worth\u2019s voting dynamics remain roughly similar to 2012, when Romney lost the city by just one point to Barack Obama.\nFort Worth's current mayor is Mattie Parker, who has held the position since 2021. Fort Worth is one of the few major cities in the state to have a Republican mayor. Notably, Fort Worth is the second-largest city\u2014after Dallas\u2014to be governed by a Republican mayor.\nEducation.\nPublic libraries.\nFort Worth Public Library is the public library system.\nPublic schools.\nMost of Fort Worth is served by the Fort Worth Independent School District.\nOther school districts that serve portions of Fort Worth include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe portion of Fort Worth within the Arlington Independent School District contains a wastewater plant. No residential areas are in this portion.\nPinnacle Academy of the Arts (K\u201312) is a state charter school, as are Crosstimbers Academy and High Point Academy.\nPrivate schools.\nPrivate schools in Fort Worth include both secular and parochial institutions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nInstitutes of higher education.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther institutions:\nMedia.\nFort Worth and Dallas share the same media market. The city's magazine is \"Fort Worth, Texas Magazine\", which publishes information about Fort Worth events, social activity, fashion, dining, and culture.\nFort Worth has one major daily newspaper, \"Fort Worth Star-Telegram\", founded in 1906 as \"Fort Worth Star\". It dominates the western half of the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth metroplex, and \"The Dallas Morning News\" dominates the east. In 2023, the publication's print circulation was 43,342.\nThe \"Fort Worth Weekly\" is an alternative weekly newspaper for the Fort Worth metropolitan division. The newspaper had an approximate circulation of 47,000 in 2015. The \"Fort Worth Weekly\" published and features, among many things, news reporting, cultural event guides, movie reviews, and editorials. Additionally, \"Fort Worth Business Press\" is a weekly publication that chronicles news in the Fort Worth business community.\nThe \"Fort Worth Report\" is a daily nonprofit news organization covering local government, business, education and arts in Tarrant County. The nonprofit organization, founded by local business leaders and former \"Fort Worth Star-Telegram\" publisher Wes Turner, announced its intentions in February 2021 and officially launched the newsroom in April 2021.\nThe \"Fort Worth Press\" was a daily newspaper, published weekday afternoons and on Sundays from 1921 until 1975. It was owned by the E. W. Scripps Company and published under the then-prominent Scripps-Howard Lighthouse logo. The paper reportedly last made money in the early 1950s. Scripps Howard stayed with the paper until mid-1975. Circulation had dwindled to fewer than 30,000 daily, just more than 10% of that of the \"Fort Worth Star Telegram\". The name \"Fort Worth Press\" was resurrected briefly in a new \"Fort Worth Press\" paper operated by then-former publisher Bill McAda and briefer still by William Dean Singleton, then-owner of the weekly \"Azle (Texas) News\", now owner of the Media Central news group. The \"Fort Worth Press\" operated from offices and presses at 500 Jones Street in Downtown Fort Worth.\nTelevision stations shared with Dallas include (owned-and-operated stations of their affiliated networks are highlighted in bold) KDFW 4 (Fox), KXAS 5 (NBC), WFAA 8 (ABC), KTVT 11 (CBS), KERA 13 (PBS), KTXA 21 (Independent), KDFI 27 (MNTV), KDAF 33 (CW), and K07AAD-D (HC2 Holdings).\nRadio stations.\nOver 33 radio stations operate in and around Fort Worth, with many different formats.\nAM.\nOn the AM dial, like in all other markets, political talk radio is prevalent, with WBAP 820, KLIF 570, KSKY 660, KFJZ 870, KRLD 1080 the conservative talk stations serving Fort Worth and KMNY 1360 the sole progressive talk station serving the city. KFXR 1190 is a news/talk/classic country station. Sports talk can be found on KTCK 1310 (\"The Ticket\"). WBAP, a 50,000-watt clear-channel station which can be heard over much of the country at night, was a long-successful country music station before converting to its current talk format.\nSeveral religious stations are also on AM in the Dallas/Fort Worth area; KHVN 970 and KGGR 1040 are the local urban gospel stations, KEXB 1440 carries Catholic talk programming from Relevant Radio, and KKGM 1630 has a Southern gospel format.\nFort Worth's Spanish-speaking population is served by many stations on AM:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nA few mixed Asian language stations serve Fort Worth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFM.\nKLNO is a commercial radio station licensed to Fort Worth. Long-time Fort Worth resident Marcos A. Rodriguez operated Dallas-Fort Worth radio stations KLTY and KESS on 94.1 FM. Four urban-formatted radio stations, KBFB 97.9, KKDA 104.5, KRNB 105.7, and KZMJ 94.5, can also be heard. A wide variety of commercial formats, mostly music, are on the FM dial in Fort Worth.\nNoncommercial stations serve the city fairly well. Three college stations can be heard - KTCU 88.7, KCBI 90.9, and KNTU 88.1, with a variety of programming. Also, the local NPR station is KERA 90.1, along with community radio station KNON 89.3. Downtown Fort Worth also hosts the Texas Country radio station KFWR 95.9 The Ranch.\nInternet radio stations and shows.\nWhen local radio station KOAI 107.5 FM, now KMVK, dropped its smooth jazz format, fans set up smoothjazz1075.com, an internet radio station, to broadcast smooth jazz for disgruntled fans.\nTransportation.\nLike most cities that grew quickly after World War II, Fort Worth's main mode of transportation is the automobile, but bus transportation via Trinity Metro is available, as well as an interurban train service to Dallas via the Trinity Railway Express. As of January 10, 2019, train service from Downtown Fort Worth to Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport's Terminal B is available via Trinity Metro's TEXRail service.\nHistory.\nElectric streetcars.\nThe first streeetcar company in Fort Worth was the Fort Worth Street Railway Company. Its first line began operating in December 1876, and traveled from the courthouse down Main Street to the T&amp;P Depot. By 1890, more than 20 private companies were operating streetcar lines in Fort Worth. The Fort Worth Street Railway Company bought out many of its competitors, and was eventually itself bought out by the Bishop &amp; Sherwin Syndicate in 1901. The new ownership changed the company's name to the Northern Texas Traction Company, which operated 84 miles of streetcar railways in 1925, and their lines connected downtown Fort Worth to TCU, the Near Southside, Arlington Heights, Lake Como, and the Stockyards.\nElectric interurban railways.\nAt its peak, the electric interurban industry in Texas consisted of almost 500 miles of track, making Texas the second in interurban mileage in all states west of the Mississippi River. Electric interurban railways were prominent in the early 1900s, peaking in the 1910s and fading until all electric interurban railways were abandoned by 1948. Close to three-fourths of the mileage was in the Dallas\u2013Fort Worth area, running between Fort Worth and Dallas and to other area cities including Cleburne, Denison, Corsicana, and Waco. The line depicted in the associated image was the second to be constructed in Texas and ran 35 miles between Fort Worth and Dallas. Northern Texas Traction Company built the railway, which was operational from 1902 to 1934.\nCurrent transport.\nIn 2009, 80.6% of Fort Worth (city) commuters drive to work alone. The 2009 mode share for Fort Worth (city) commuters are 11.7% for carpooling, 1.5% for transit, 1.2% for walking, and .1% for cycling. In 2015, the American Community Survey estimated modal shares for Fort Worth (city) commuters of 82% for driving alone, 12% for carpooling, .8% for riding transit, 1.8% for walking, and .3% for cycling. The city of Fort Worth has a lower than average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 6.1 percent of Fort Worth households lacked a car, and decreased to 4.8 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Fort Worth averaged 1.83 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.\nRoads.\nFort Worth is served by four interstates and three U.S. highways. It also contains a number of arterial streets in a grid formation.\nInterstate highways 30, 20, 35W, and 820 all pass through the city limits.\nInterstate 820 is a loop of Interstate 20 and serves as a beltway for the city. Interstate 30 and Interstate 20 connect Fort Worth to Arlington, Grand Prairie, and Dallas. Interstate 35W connects Fort Worth with Hillsboro to the south and the cities of Denton and Gainesville to the north.\nU.S. Route 287 runs southeast through the city connecting Wichita Falls to the north and Mansfield to the south. U.S. Route 377 runs south through the northern suburbs of Haltom City and Keller through the central business district. U.S. Route 81 shares a concurrency with highway 287 on the portion northwest of I-35W.\nNotable state highways:\nPublic transportation.\nTrinity Metro, formerly known as the Fort Worth Transportation Authority, serves Fort Worth with dozens of different bus routes throughout the city, including a downtown bus circulator known as Molly the Trolley. In addition to Fort Worth, Trinity Metro operates buses in the suburbs of Blue Mound, Forest Hill, River Oaks and Sansom Park.\nIn 2010, Fort Worth won a $25 million Federal Urban Circulator grant to build a streetcar system. In December 2010, though, the city council forfeited the grant by voting to end the streetcar study.\nIn July 2019, Trinity Metro partnered with Via Transportation to launch an on-demand microtransit service called ZIPZONE. ZIPZONE offers shared rides across the Alliance, Mercantile, Southside, and South Tarrant neighborhoods and was designed as a first-and-last mile connection for TEXRail and bus commuters. Trips are booked from a smartphone app and charge a flat $3 for service as of April 2021. ZIPZONE rides are also included with multi-ride Trinity Metro local tickets.\nAirports.\nDallas Fort Worth International Airport is a major commercial airport located between the major cities of Fort Worth and Dallas. DFW Airport is the world's third-busiest airport based on operations and tenth-busiest airport based on passengers.\nPrior to the construction of the DFW Airport, the city was served by Greater Southwest International Airport, which was located just to the south of the new airport. Originally named Amon Carter Field after the publisher of the Fort Worth Star-Telegram, Greater Southwest opened in 1953 and operated as the primary airport for Fort Worth until 1974. It was then abandoned until the terminal was torn down in 1980. The site of the former airport is now a mixed-use development straddled by Texas State Highway 183 and 360. One small section of runway remains north of Highway 183, and serves as the only reminder that a major commercial airport once occupied the site.\nFort Worth is home to these four airports within city limits:\nWalkability.\nA 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Fort Worth 47th-most walkable of 50 largest U.S. cities.\nSister cities.\nFort Worth is a part of the Sister Cities International program and maintains cultural and economic exchange programs with its sister cities:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53840", "revid": "50916781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53840", "title": "Galveston, Texas", "text": "Galveston ( ) is a resort city and port on the Gulf Coast of the U.S. state of Texas. It encompasses on Galveston Island and Pelican Island. As of the 2020 census, the city had a population of 53,695, making it the second-largest municipality in Galveston County, where it also serves as the county seat. Located at the southern end of the Houston metropolitan area, Galveston sits on the northwestern coast of the Gulf of Mexico.\nGalveston, or Galvez's town, was named after 18th-century Spanish military and political leader Bernardo de G\u00e1lvez, 1st Count of G\u00e1lvez (1746\u20131786). The first European settlements on Galveston Island were built around 1816 by French pirate Louis-Michel Aury to help the fledgling First Mexican Empire fight for independence from the Spanish Empire. The Port of Galveston was established in 1825 by the Congress of Mexico following its independence. The city was the main port for the fledgling Texas Navy during the Texas Revolution of 1836, and later served temporarily as the new national capital of the Republic of Texas. In 1865, General Gordon Granger arrived at Ashton Villa and announced to some of the last enslaved African Americans that slavery was no longer legal. This event is commemorated annually on June 19, the federal holiday of Juneteenth.\nDuring the 19th century, Galveston became a major U.S. commercial center and one of the largest ports in the United States. It was, for a time, Texas' largest city, known as the \"Queen City of the Gulf\". It was devastated by the unexpected Galveston Hurricane of 1900, whose effects included massive flooding and a storm surge which nearly wiped out the town. The natural disaster on the exposed barrier island is still ranked today as the deadliest in United States history, with an estimated death toll between 6,000 and 12,000 people. The city subsequently reemerged during the Prohibition era of 1919\u20131933 as a leading tourist hub and a center of illegal gambling, nicknamed the Free State of Galveston until this era ended in the 1950s with subsequent other economic and social development.\nMuch of Galveston's economy is centered in the tourism, health care, shipping, and financial industries. The University of Texas Medical Branch campus with an enrollment of more than 2,500 students is a major economic force of the city. Galveston is home to six historic districts containing one of the largest historically significant collections of 19th-century buildings in the U.S., with over 60 structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places, maintained by the National Park Service in the United States Department of the Interior.\nHistory.\nExploration and 19th-century development.\nIndigenous inhabitants of Galveston Island called the island \"Auia\". Though there is no certainty regarding their route and their landings, Cabeza de Vaca and his crew were shipwrecked at a place he called \"Isla de Malhado\" in November 1528. This could have referred to Galveston Island or San Luis Island.\nDuring his charting of the Gulf Coast in 1785, the Spanish explorer Jos\u00e9 de Evia labeled the water features surrounding the island \"Bd. de Galvestown\" and \"Bahia de Galvestowm\" [sic]. He was working under the orders of Bernardo de G\u00e1lvez. In his early chart, he called the western end of the island \"Isla de San Luis\" and the eastern end \"Pt. de Culebras\". Evia did not label the island itself on his map of 1799. Just five years later, Alexander von Humboldt borrowed the place names Isla de San Luis, Pte. De Culebras, and Bahia de Galveston. Stephen F. Austin followed his predecessors in the use of \"San Luis Island\", but introduced \"Galveston\" to refer to the little village at the east end of the island. Evidence of the name Galveston Island appears on an 1833 map by David H. Burr.\nThe island first permanent European settlements were constructed around 1816 by the pirate Louis-Michel Aury to support Mexico's rebellion against Spain. In 1817, Aury returned from an unsuccessful raid against Spain to find Galveston occupied by the pirate Jean Lafitte. Lafitte organized Galveston into a pirate \"kingdom\" he called \"Campeche\", anointing himself the island's \"head of government\". Lafitte remained in Galveston until 1821, when the United States Navy forced him and his raiders off the island.\nIn 1825 the Congress of Mexico established the Port of Galveston and in 1830 erected a customs house. Galveston served as the capital of the Republic of Texas when in 1836 the interim president David G. Burnet relocated his government there. In 1836, the French-Canadian Michel Branamour Menard and several associates purchased of land for $50,000 to found the town that would become the modern city of Galveston. As Anglo-Americans migrated to the city, they brought along or purchased enslaved African Americans, some of whom worked domestically or on the waterfront, including on riverboats.\nIn 1839, the City of Galveston adopted a charter and was incorporated by the Congress of the Republic of Texas. The city was by then a burgeoning port of entry and attracted many new residents in the 1840s and later among the flood of German immigrants to Texas, including Jewish merchants. Together with ethnic Mexican residents, these groups tended to oppose slavery, support the Union during the Civil War, and join the Republican Party after the war.\nDuring this expansion, the city had many \"firsts\" in the state, with the founding of institutions and adoption of inventions: post office (1836), naval base (1836), Texas chapter of a Masonic order (1840); cotton compress (1842), Catholic parochial school (Ursuline Academy) (1847), insurance company (1854), and gas lights (1856).\nDuring the American Civil War, Confederate forces under Major General John B. Magruder attacked and expelled occupying Union troops from the city in January 1863 in the Battle of Galveston. On June 19, 1865, two months after the end of the war and almost three years after the issuance of the Emancipation Proclamation, General Gordon Granger of the Union Army informed the enslaved people of Texas that they were now free. This news was transmitted via General Order No. 3, an event now commemorated on the federal holiday of Juneteenth.\nAfter the Civil War, Galveston mandated street improvements and construction standards. The city required property owners facing commercial streets to construct and maintain sidewalks of wooden planks or bricks, or pay an assessment to the city for the construction of the same. During the same period, the city drew a boundary known as a \"fire zone\", within which new buildings could not be constructed of wood.\nIn 1867 Galveston suffered a yellow fever epidemic; about 1800 people died in the city. These occurred in waterfront and river cities throughout the 19th century, as did cholera epidemics.\nThe city's progress continued through the Reconstruction era with numerous \"firsts\": construction of the opera house (1870), and orphanage (1876), installation of telephone lines (1878) and electric lights (1883). Having attracted freedmen from rural areas, in 1870 the city had a black population that totaled 3,000, made up mostly of former slaves but also by persons who were free men of color and educated before the war. Blacks comprised nearly 25% of the city's population of 13,818 that year.\nDuring the post\u2013Civil War period, leaders such as George T. Ruby and Norris Wright Cuney, who headed the Texas Republican Party and promoted civil rights for freedmen, helped to dramatically improve educational and employment opportunities for blacks in Galveston and in Texas. Cuney established his own business of stevedores and a union of black dockworkers to break the white monopoly on dock jobs. Galveston was a cosmopolitan city and one of the more successful during Reconstruction; the Freedmen's Bureau was headquartered here. German families sheltered teachers from the North, and hundreds of freedmen were taught to read. Its business community promoted progress, and immigrants stayed after arriving at this port of entry.\nBy the end of the 19th century, the city of Galveston had a population of 37,000. Its position on the natural harbor of Galveston Bay along the Gulf of Mexico made it the center of trade in Texas. It was one of the nation's largest cotton ports, in competition with New Orleans. Throughout the 19th century, the port city of Galveston grew rapidly and the Strand was considered the region's primary business center. For a time, the Strand was known as the \"Wall Street of the South\". In the late 1890s, the government constructed Fort Crockett defenses and coastal artillery batteries in Galveston and along the Bolivar Roads. In February 1897, the (nicknamed Old Hoodoo), the first commissioned battleship of the United States Navy, visited Galveston. During the festivities, the ship's officers were presented with a $5,000 silver service, adorned with various Texas motifs, as a gift from the state's citizens.\nHurricane of 1900 and recovery.\nOn September 8, 1900, the island was struck by a devastating hurricane. This event holds the record as the United States' deadliest natural disaster. The city was devastated, and an estimated 6,000 to 8,000 people on the island were killed. Following the storm, a long, high seawall was built to protect the city from floods and hurricane storm surges. A team of engineers including Henry Martyn Robert (Robert's Rules of Order) designed the plan to raise much of the existing city to a sufficient elevation behind a seawall so that confidence in the city could be maintained. \nThe city developed the city commission form of city government, known as the \"Galveston Plan\", to help expedite recovery.\nDespite attempts to draw investment to the city after the hurricane, Galveston never returned to its levels of national importance or prosperity. Development was also hindered by the construction of the Houston Ship Channel, which brought the Port of Houston into competition with the natural harbor of the Port of Galveston for sea traffic. Finally, the Seawall itself created an insurmountable problem: passive erosion resulting in the gradual disappearance of the once-wide beach and the resort business with it. \"Within twenty years, the city had lost one hundred yards of sand. People who once watched auto racing on a wide beach were left with a narrow strip of sand at low tide and a gloomy vista of waves on rocks when the tide was high.\"\nTo further its recovery and rebuild its population, Galveston actively solicited immigration. Through the efforts of Rabbi Henry Cohen and Congregation B'nai Israel, Galveston became the focus of an immigration plan called the Galveston Movement that, between 1907 and 1914, diverted roughly 10,000 Eastern European Jewish immigrants from the usual destinations of the crowded cities of the Northeastern United States. Additionally numerous other immigrant groups, including Greeks, Italians and Russian Jews, came to the city during this period. This immigration trend substantially altered the ethnic makeup of the island, as well as many other areas of Texas and the western U.S. Unfortunately, just as the island was starting to recover from the devastation caused by the first flood, a second one struck in August, 1915, thanks to a major hurricane that originated in the central Atlantic, tore through the Caribbean, and then left a long trail of destruction across the Gulf of Mexico before it dissipated in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, nearly three weeks later. While the newly constructed seawall spared the island the worst, over 400 Galvestonians died, and damages totaled $30 million USD, equivalent to $903 million in 2023. Thus, in less than a single generation Galveston went from being Texas' most populous (and most important) city to being a tragic footnote to a century of frontier violence, urban lawlessness and civic greed, throughout the state. \nThough the storms stalled economic development and the city of Houston developed as the region's principal metropolis, Galveston economic leaders recognized the need to diversify from the traditional port-related industries. In 1905 William Lewis Moody, Jr. and Isaac H. Kempner, members of two of Galveston's leading families, founded the American National Insurance Company. Two years later, Moody established the City National Bank, which would become the Moody National Bank.\nDuring the 1920s and 1930s, the city re-emerged as a major tourist destination. Under the influence of Sam Maceo and Rosario Maceo, the city exploited the prohibition of liquor and gambling in clubs like the Balinese Room, which offered entertainment to wealthy Houstonians and other out-of-towners. Combined with prostitution, which had existed in the city since well before the American Civil War, Galveston became known as the \"sin city\" of the Gulf. Galvestonians accepted and supported the illegal activities, often referring to their island as the \"Free State of Galveston\". The island had entered what would later become known as the \"open era\".\nThe 1930s and 1940s brought much change to the Island City. During World War II, the Galveston Municipal Airport, predecessor to Scholes International Airport, was re-designated a U.S. Army Air Corps base and named \"Galveston Army Air Field\". In January 1943, Galveston Army Air Field was officially activated with the 46th Bombardment Group serving an anti-submarine role in the Gulf of Mexico. In 1942, William Lewis Moody, Jr., along with his wife Libbie Shearn Rice Moody, established the Moody Foundation to benefit \"present and future generations of Texans\". The foundation, one of the largest in the United States, would play a prominent role in Galveston during later decades, helping to fund numerous civic and health-oriented programs.\nAfter World War II.\nThe end of the war drastically reduced military investment in the island. Increasing enforcement of gambling laws and the growth of Las Vegas, Nevada, as a competitive center of gambling and entertainment put pressure on the gaming industry on the island. Finally in 1957, Texas Attorney General Will Wilson and the Texas Rangers began a massive campaign of raids that disrupted gambling and prostitution in the city. As these vice industries crashed, so did tourism, taking the rest of the Galveston economy with it. Neither the economy nor the culture of the city was the same afterward.\nIn 1947, buildings in the city were damaged when a ship carrying 2,200 tons of ammonium nitrate exploded at the nearby Port of Texas City, in what became known as the Texas City disaster.\nThe island's economy began a long stagnation. Many businesses relocated off the island during this period, but health care, insurance, and financial industries continue to be strong contributors to the economy. By 1959, the city of Houston had long outpaced Galveston in population and economic growth. Beginning in 1957, the Galveston Historical Foundation began its efforts to preserve historic buildings. The 1966 book \"The Galveston That Was\" helped encourage the preservation movement. Restoration efforts financed by motivated investors, notably Houston businessman George P. Mitchell, gradually developed the Strand Historic District and reinvented other areas. A new, family-oriented tourism emerged in the city over many years.\nIn September 1961, Hurricane Carla struck the city, generating an F4 tornado that killed eight and injured 200.\nWith the 1960s came the expansion of higher education in Galveston. Already home to the University of Texas Medical Branch, the city got a boost in 1962 with the creation of the Texas Maritime Academy, predecessor of Texas A&amp;M University at Galveston; and by 1967, a community college, Galveston College, had been established.\nIn the 2000s, property values rose after expensive projects were completed, and demand for second homes by the wealthy increased. It has made it difficult for middle-class workers to find affordable housing on the island.\nHurricane Ike made landfall on Galveston Island in the early morning of September 13, 2008, as a category-2 hurricane with winds of 110 miles per hour. Damage was extensive to buildings along the seawall.\nAfter the storm, the island was rebuilt with investments in tourism and shipping, and continued emphasis on higher education and health care, notably the addition of the Galveston Island Historic Pleasure Pier and the replacement of the bascule-type drawbridge on the railroad causeway with a vertical-lift-type drawbridge to allow heavier freight.\nGeography.\nThe city of Galveston is situated on Galveston Island, a barrier island off the Texas Gulf coast near the mainland coast. Made up of mostly sand-sized particles and smaller amounts of finer mud sediments and larger gravel-sized sediments, the island is unstable, affected by water and weather, and can shift its boundaries through erosion.\nThe city is about southeast of downtown Houston. The island is oriented generally northeast-southwest, with the Gulf of Mexico on the east and south, West Bay on the west, and Galveston Bay on the north. The island's main access point from the mainland is the Interstate Highway 45 causeway that crosses West Bay on the island's northeast side.\nA deepwater channel connects Galveston's harbor with the Gulf and the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has an area of , of which are land and , or 80.31%, are water. The island is southeast of Houston.\nThe western portion of Galveston is referred to as the \"West End\", roughly corresponding to the area west of the western end of the seawall. Communities in eastern Galveston (the area east of the western end of the seawall) include Havre Lafitte, Offats Bayou, Central City, Fort Crockett, Bayou Shore, Lasker Park, Carver Park, Kempner Park, Old City/Central Business District, San Jacinto, East End, and Lindale. As of 2009 many residents of the west end use golf carts as transportation to take them to and from residential houses, the Galveston Island Country Club, and stores. In 2009, Chief of Police Charles Wiley said he believed golf carts should be prohibited outside golf courses, and West End residents campaigned against any ban on their use.\nIn 2011 Rice University released a study, \"Atlas of Sustainable Strategies for Galveston Island\", which argued the West End of Galveston was quickly eroding and the city should reduce construction and/or population in that area. It recommended against any rebuilding of the West End in the event of damage from another hurricane.\nHistoric districts.\nGalveston is home to six historic districts with over 60 structures listed representing architectural significance in the National Register of Historic Places. The Silk Stocking National Historic District, between Broadway and Seawall Boulevard and bounded by Ave. K, 23rd St., Ave. P, and 26th St., contains a collection of historic homes constructed from the Civil War through World War II. The East End Historic District on both sides of Broadway and Market Streets, contains 463 buildings. Other historic districts include Cedar Lawn, Denver Court and Fort Travis.\nThe Strand National Historic Landmark District is a National Historic Landmark District of mainly Victorian era buildings that have been adapted for use as restaurants, antique stores, historical exhibits, museums and art galleries. The area is a major tourist attraction for the island city. It is the center for two very popular seasonal festivals. It is widely considered the island's shopping and entertainment center. Today, \"the Strand\" is generally used to refer to the five-block business district between 20th and 25th streets in downtown Galveston, near the city's wharf.\nArchitecture.\nGalveston contains a large and historically significant collection of 19th-century buildings in the United States. Galveston's architectural preservation and revitalization efforts over several decades have earned national recognition.\nLocated in the Strand District, the Grand 1894 Opera House is a restored historic Romanesque Revival style Opera House that is currently operated as a not-for-profit performing arts theater. The Bishop's Palace, also known as Gresham's Castle, is an ornate Victorian house located on Broadway and 14th Street in the East End Historic District of Galveston, Texas. The American Institute of Architects listed Bishop's Palace as one of the 100 most significant buildings in the United States, and the Library of Congress has classified it as one of the fourteen most representative Victorian structures in the nation.\nThe Galvez Hotel is a historic hotel that opened in 1911. The building was named the Galvez, honoring Bernardo de G\u00e1lvez y Madrid, Count of G\u00e1lvez, for whom the city was named. The hotel was added to the National Register of Historic Places on April 4, 1979. The Michel B. Menard House, built in 1838 and the oldest surviving structure in Galveston, is designed in the Greek revival style. In 1880, the house was bought by Edwin N. Ketchum who was police chief of the city during the 1900 Storm. The Ketchum family owned the home until the 1970s. Ashton Villa, a red-brick Victorian Italianate home, was constructed in 1859 by James Moreau Brown. One of the first brick structures in Texas, it is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and is a recorded Texas Historic Landmark. The structure is also the site of what was to become the holiday known as Juneteenth, where on June 19, 1865, Union General Gordon Granger, standing on its balcony, read the contents of \"General Order No. 3\", thereby emancipating all slaves in the state of Texas.\nSt. Joseph's Church was built by German immigrants in 1859\u20131860 and is the oldest wooden church building in Galveston and the oldest German Catholic Church in Texas. The church was dedicated in April 1860, to St. Joseph, the patron saint of laborers. The building is a wooden gothic revival structure, rectangular with a square bell tower with trefoil window. The U.S. Custom House began construction in 1860 and was completed in 1861. The Confederate Army occupied the building during the American Civil War, In 1865, the Custom House was the site of the ceremony officially ending the Civil War.\nGalveston's modern architecture include the American National Insurance Company Tower (One Moody Plaza), San Luis Resort South and North Towers, The Breakers Condominiums, The Galvestonian Resort and Condos, One Shearn Moody Plaza, US National Bank Building, the Rainforest Pyramid at Moody Gardens, John Sealy Hospital Towers at UTMB and Medical Arts Building (also known as Two Moody Plaza).\nOleander shrubs.\nSince the early 20th century, Galveston has been popularly known as the \"Oleander City\" because of a long history of cultivating \"Nerium oleander\", a subtropical evergreen shrub which thrives on the island. Oleanders are a defining feature of the city; when flowering (between April and October) they add masses of color to local gardens, parks, and streets. Thousands were planted in the recovery following the Hurricane of 1900 and Galvestonians continue to treasure the plant for its low water needs, tolerance of heat, salt spray and sandy soils. This makes them especially resistant to the after-effects of hurricanes and tropical storms. Galveston is reputed to have the most diverse range of Oleander cultivars in the world, numbering over 100, with many varieties developed in the city and named after prominent Galvestonians. In 2005 the month of May was declared \"Oleander Month\" by the City of Galveston and there are also Oleander-themed tours of the city exploring the history of the plant on the island. Since 1967 the International Oleander Society has operated in Galveston, which promotes the cultivation of the plant, organizes an Oleander festival every spring and maintains a commemorative Oleander garden in the city.\nClimate.\nGalveston's climate is classified as humid subtropical (\"Cfa\" in ), and is part of USDA Plant hardiness zone 10a. Prevailing winds from the south and southeast bring moisture from the Gulf of Mexico. Summer temperatures regularly exceed and the area's humidity drives the heat index even higher, while nighttime lows average around . Winters in the area are temperate with typical January highs above and lows near . Snowfall is generally rare; however, of snow fell in February 1895, making the 1894\u201395 winter the snowiest on record. Annual rainfall averages well over a year with some areas typically receiving over . Temperatures reaching or are quite rare, having last occurred on December 23, 1989, and June 25, 2012, respectively. Record temperatures range from on February 12, 1899, up to on September 5, 2000; the record cold maximum is on February 7, 1895, and again on the date of the all-time low, while, conversely, the record warm minimum is set on August 31\u00a0\u2013 September 3, 2020. On average, the warmest night is at , seldom straying far from averages.\nHurricanes are an ever-present threat during the summer and fall season, which puts Galveston in Coastal Windstorm Area. Galveston Island and the Bolivar Peninsula are generally at the greatest risk among the communities near the Galveston Bay. However, though the island and peninsula provide some shielding, the bay shoreline still faces significant danger from storm surge. Talks of building a coastal storm barrier with a mix of federal and state funding to protect Galveston and Houston have been ongoing for years.\nNotes: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 53,695 people, 23,375 households, and 12,505 families residing in the city. There were 34,259 housing units.\nEconomy.\nPort of Galveston.\nThe Port of Galveston, also called Galveston Wharves, began as a trading post in 1825. Today, the port has grown to of port facilities. The port is located on the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, on the north side of Galveston Island, with some facilities on Pelican Island. The port has facilities to handle all types of cargo including containers, dry and liquid bulk, breakbulk, Roll-on/roll-off, refrigerated cargo and project cargoes.\nThe port also serves as a passenger cruise ship terminal for cruise ships operating in the Caribbean. The terminal was home port to two Carnival Cruise Lines vessels, the \"Carnival Conquest\" and the \"Carnival Ecstasy\". In November 2011 the company made Galveston home port to its 3,960-passenger mega-ships \"Carnival Magic\" and \"Carnival Triumph\" as well. In 2015, \"Carnival Freedom\" relocated to Galveston, sailing seven-day cruises. Carnival replaced \"Carnival Magic\" and \"Carnival Triumph\" in the first half of 2016 with \"Carnival Breeze\" and \"Carnival Liberty\", respectively, but replaced \"Liberty\" with \"Carnival Valor\" later in the year due to mechanical issues. \"Carnival Breeze\" and \"Carnival Freedom\" sail seven-day Caribbean cruises, and \"Carnival Valor\" sails four- and five-day Caribbean cruises from Galveston. Carnival planned on replacing \"Breeze\" with \"Carnival Vista\" in 2018, and \"Valor\" with \"Carnival Dream\" in 2019. Galveston is the home port to Royal Caribbean International's, MS \"Liberty of the Seas\", which is the largest cruise ship ever based here and one of the largest ships in the world. In September 2012 Disney Cruise Line's \"Disney Magic\" also became based in Galveston, offering four-, six-, seven-, and eight-day cruises to the Caribbean and the Bahamas.\nFinance.\nAmerican National Insurance Company, one of the largest life insurance companies in the United States, is based in Galveston. The company and its subsidiaries operate in all 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and American Samoa. Through its subsidiary, American National de M\u00e9xico, Compa\u00f1\u00eda de Seguros de Vida, it provides products and services in Mexico. Moody National Bank, with headquarters in downtown Galveston, is one of the largest privately owned Texas-based banks. Its trust department, established in 1927, administers over 12 billion dollars in assets, one of the largest in the state. In addition, the regional headquarters of Iowa-based United Fire &amp; Casualty Company are located in the city.\nTourism.\nIn the late 1800s Galveston was known as the \"Playground of the South\". Today, it still retains a shared claim to the title among major cities along the Gulf Coast states. Galveston is a popular tourist destination which in 2007 brought $808 million to the local economy and attracted 5.4 million visitors. The city features an array of lodging options, including hotels such as the historic Hotel Galvez and Tremont House, vintage bed and breakfast inns, and beachfront condominiums.\nThe city's tourist attractions include the Galveston Island Historic Pleasure Pier, Galveston Schlitterbahn waterpark, Moody Gardens botanical park, the Ocean Star Offshore Drilling Rig &amp; Museum, Galveston Railroad Museum, a downtown neighborhood of historic buildings known as The Strand, many historical museums and mansions, and miles of beach front from the East End's Porretto Beach, Stewart Beach to the West End pocket parks. Previously Galveston had a aquarium theme park called Sea-Arama Marineworld, which opened in 1965, closed in January 1990, and was demolished in 2006.\nThe Strand plays host to a yearly Mardi Gras festival, Galveston Island Jazz &amp; Blues Festival and a Victorian-themed Christmas festival called Dickens on the Strand (honoring the works of novelist Charles Dickens, especially \"A Christmas Carol\") in early December. Galveston is home to several historic ships: the tall ship \"Elissa\" (the official Tall Ship of Texas) at the Texas Seaport Museum and USS \"Cavalla\" and , both berthed at Seawolf Park on nearby Pelican Island. Galveston is ranked the number one cruise port on the Gulf Coast and fourth in the United States.\nThe Galveston Summer Musicals was a professional summer stock theater company performing at Galveston's Moody Gardens. Prior to 2004, they performed at the Mary Moody Northen Amphitheater in West Galveston Island.\nArts and culture.\nGalveston Arts Center.\nIncorporated in 1986, Galveston Arts Center (GAC) is a non-profit, non-collecting arts organization. The center exhibits contemporary art, often by Texas-based artists, and offers educational and outreach programs. Notably, GAC organizes and produces Galveston ArtWalk. Museum entry is free to the public.\nGalveston Arts Center is located in the historic 1878 First National Bank Building on the Strand. This Italianate-style 1900 Storm survivor was extensively damaged during Hurricane Ike in 2008, forcing the center to temporarily relocate to a nearby facility on Market Street. After a lengthy fundraising campaign, the total restoration of the original building was completed and Galveston Arts Center returned to the Strand in 2015.\nGalveston ArtWalk.\nArtWalk takes place approximately every six weeks on Saturday evenings throughout the year. ArtWalk is organized by Galveston Arts Center, which releases an ArtWalk brochure featuring a map of participating venues as well as descriptions of shows and exhibits. Venues include GAC, Galveston Artist Residency and artist's studios and galleries. Additionally, art is shown in \"other walls\"\u2014for example MOD Coffeehouse or Mosquito Cafe\u2014or outdoors at Art Market on Market Street. Musicians perform outdoors and at venues such as the Proletariat Gallery &amp; Public House or Old Quarter Acoustic Cafe. While most ArtWalk events are concentrated downtown, there are a number or participants elsewhere on the island.\nSculpture.\nNotable statues and sculptures in Galveston include:\nMusic and performing arts.\nGalveston is home to the Galveston Symphony Orchestra, an ensemble of amateur and professional musicians formed in 1979 under the direction of Richard W. Pickar, Musical Director-Conductor.\nThe Galveston Ballet is a regional pre-professional ballet company and academy serving Galveston county. The company presents one full-length classical ballet in the spring of each year and one mixed repertory program in the fall, both presented at the Grand 1894 Opera House.\nArtist residency.\nGalveston Artist Residency (GAR) grants studio space, living space and a stipend to three visual artists each year. Resident artists work in a variety of mediums and exhibit their work in the GAR Gallery and Courtyards. Located in renovated industrial structures on the west side of downtown, GAR also hosts performances and other public events.\nThe National Hotel Artist Lofts (NHAL) is an Artspace Projects developed property featuring twenty-seven live/work units designated as affordable housing for artists. The project brought new life to the historic E.S. Levy Building, which was left abandoned for twenty years. Originally built as the Tremont Opera House in 1870, the structure was extensively renovated to serve various functions, from offices and stores to the National Hotel. The building also housed the U.S. National Weather Bureau's Galveston office under Isaac Cline during the 1900 Storm.\nUnder Property Manager/Creative Director Becky Major, the unused retail space in the front of the building found a new purpose as a DIY art and music venue, despite its gutted and undeveloped state. In May 2015, the newly renovated space reopened as the Proletariat Gallery &amp; Public House. This bar and gallery provides a common area for NHAL and neighborhood residents and a cultural hub for the broader community. Visual art, events and live music are regularly hosted in the space.\nGovernment.\nCity government.\nAfter the hurricane of 1900, the city originated the city commission form of city government (which became known as the \"Galveston Plan\"). The city has since adopted the council-manager form of government. Galveston's city council serves as the city's legislative branch, while the city manager works as the chief executive officer, and the municipal court system serves as the city's judicial branch.\nThe city council and mayor promote ordinances to establish municipal policies. The Galveston City Council consists of six elected positions, each derived from a specified electoral district. Each city council member is elected to a two-year term, while the mayor is elected to a two-year term. The city council appoints the city manager, the city secretary, the city auditor, the city attorney, and the municipal judge. The city's Tax Collector is determined by the city council and is outsourced to Galveston County. The city manager hires employees, promotes development, presents and administers the budget, and implements city council policies. Craig Brown is the incumbent mayor of Galveston.\nCounty, state, and federal government.\nGalveston is the seat and second-largest city (after League City) of Galveston County in population. The Galveston County Justice Center, which houses all the county's judicial functions as well as jail, is located on 59th street. The Galveston County Administrative Courthouse, the seat of civil and administrative functions, is located near the city's downtown. Galveston is within the County Precinct 1; as of 2008[ [update]] Patrick Doyle serves as the Commissioner of Precinct 1.\nThe Galveston County Sheriff's Office operates its law enforcement headquarters and jail from the Justice Center. The Galveston County Department of Parks and Senior Services operates the Galveston Community Center. Galveston is located in District 23 of the Texas House of Representatives. As of 2021[ [update]], Mayes Middleton represents the district. Most of Galveston is within District 17 of the Texas Senate; as of 2008[ [update]] Joan Huffman represents the district. A portion of Galveston is within District 11 of the Texas Senate; as of 2021[ [update]] Larry Taylor represents the district. Galveston is in Texas's 14th congressional district and is represented by Republican Randy Weber as of 2012[ [update]].\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nEstablished in 1891 with one building and fewer than 50 students, today the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) campus has grown to more than 70 buildings and an enrollment of more than 2,500 students. The campus includes schools of medicine, nursing, allied health professions, and a graduate school of biomedical sciences, as well as three institutes for advanced studies &amp; medical humanities, a major medical library, seven hospitals, a network of clinics that provide a full range of primary and specialized medical care, and numerous research facilities.\nGalveston is home to two post-secondary institutions offering traditional degrees in higher education. Galveston College, a junior college that opened in 1967, and Texas A&amp;M University at Galveston, an ocean-oriented branch campus of Texas A&amp;M University.\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nThe city of Galveston is served by Galveston Independent School District, which includes six elementary schools, two middle schools and one high school, Ball High School. There is also one magnet middle school, Austin Middle School, serving grades 5 through 8. Galveston has several state-funded charter schools not affiliated with local school districts, including kindergarten through 8th grade Ambassadors Preparatory Academy and pre-kindergarten through 8th Grade Odyssey Academy. In addition opened KIPP Coastal Village in Galveston under the auspices of GISD.\nSeveral private schools exist in Galveston. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston operates two Roman Catholic private schools, including Holy Family Catholic School (K through 8th) and O'Connell College Preparatory School (9\u201312). Other private schools include Satori Elementary School, Trinity Episcopal School, Seaside Christian Academy, and Heritage Christian Academy.\nMedia.\nThe \"Daily News\" (previously \"The Galveston County Daily News\") founded in 1842, is the city's primary newspaper and the oldest continuously printed newspaper in Texas. It currently serves as the newspaper of record for the city and the \"Texas City Post\" serves as the newspaper of record for the county. Radio station KGBC, on air from 1947 to 2010, has previously served as a local media outlet. Television station KHOU signed on the air as KGUL-TV on March 23, 1953. Originally licensed in Galveston, KGUL was the second television station to launch in the Houston area after KPRC-TV. One of the original investors in the station was actor James Stewart, along with a small group of other Galveston investors. In June 1959, KGUL changed its call sign to KHOU and moved their main office to Houston. The local hip hop name for Galveston is \"G-town\".\nInfrastructure.\nHealthcare.\nGalveston is the home of several of the largest teaching hospitals in the state, located on the campus of the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston. Prior to Hurricane Ike, the University employed more than 12,000 people. Its significant growth in the 1970s and 1980s was attributable to a uniquely qualified management and medical faculty including: Mr. John Thompson; Dr. William James McGanity, Dr. William Levin, Dr. David Daeschner and many more.\nIke severely damaged the 550-bed John Sealy Hospital causing the University of Texas System Board of Regents to cut nearly one-third of the hospital staff. Since the storm, the regents have committed to spending $713 million to restore the campus, construct new medical towers, and return John Sealy Hospital to its 550-bed pre-storm capacity.\nIn 2011, the UT Board of Regents approved the construction of a new 13 story hospital that will be located next to John Sealy Hospital. Construction will begin in the fall of 2011, with the demolition of the old Jennie Sealy and Shriners hospitals, and continue until completion in 2016. The facility will have 250 room, 20 operating suites and 54 intensive care beds. When the new hospital is complete, along with the renovations at John Sealy, both complexes will have around 600 beds.\nThe university reopened their Level I Trauma Center on August 1, 2009, which had been closed for eleven months after the hurricane and, as of \u00a02009[ [update]], had reopened 370 hospital beds.\nThe city is also home to a 30-bed acute burns hospital for children, the Shriners Burns Hospital at Galveston. The Galveston hospital is one of only four in the chain of 22 non-profit Shriners hospitals, that provides acute burns care. Although the Galveston Hospital was damaged by Hurricane Ike, the Shriners national convention held in July 2009 voted to repair and reopen the hospital.\nFire department.\nThe Galveston Fire Department provides fire protection services through six fire stations and 17 pieces of apparatus. The https:// has provided the city's police protection for more than 165 years. Over 170 authorized officers serve in three divisions.\nLibrary.\nThe city is served by the Rosenberg Library, successor to the Galveston Mercantile Library, which was founded in 1871. It is the oldest public library in the State of Texas. The library also serves as headquarters of the Galveston County Library System, and its librarian also functions as the Galveston County Librarian.\nCourts.\nThe Galveston Division of the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, the first federal court in Texas, is based in Galveston and has jurisdiction over the counties of Galveston, Brazoria, Chambers and Matagorda. It is housed in the United States Post Office, Customs House and Court House federal building in downtown Galveston. The United States Postal Service operates several post offices in Galveston, including the Galveston Main Post Office and the Bob Lyons Post Office Station. In addition the post office has a contract postal unit at the Medical Branch Unit on the campus of the University of Texas Medical Branch and the West Galveston Contract Postal Unit, located on the west end of Galveston Island in the beachside community of Jamaica Beach.\nTransportation.\nSea.\nGalveston is home to several historic ships: the tall ship \"Elissa\" (the official Tall Ship of Texas) at the Texas Seaport Museum and USS \"Cavalla\" and USS \"Stewart\", both berthed at Seawolf Park on nearby Pelican Island. Galveston is ranked the number one cruise port on the Gulf Coast and fourth in the United States.\nAir.\nScholes International Airport at Galveston () is a two-runway airport in Galveston; the airport is primarily used for general aviation, offshore energy transportation, and some limited military operations. The nearest commercial airline service for the city is operated out of Houston through William P. Hobby Airport and George Bush Intercontinental Airport. The University of Texas Medical Branch has two heliports, one for Ewing Hall and one for its emergency room.\nRailroad.\nThe Galveston Railway, originally established and named in 1854 as the Galveston Wharf and Cotton Press Company, is a Class III terminal switching railroad that primarily serves the transportation of cargo to and from the Port of Galveston. The railway operates of yard track at Galveston, over a facility. The Galveston Railroad today owned Rail Link Inc. interchanges with the Union Pacific Railroad Company and BNSF Railway Company on Galveston Island. The two class one Railroads reach Galveston by way of a new vertical lift railroad causeway bridge that crosses Galveston Bay next to the Interstate-45 bridge.\nThe city last had direct intercity passenger train service in 1967 with the Santa Fe Railroad's \"Texas Chief\" from Chicago. Galveston is served by Amtrak Thruway service at Galveston Amtrak bus stop, with service to Houston for Amtrak's \"Sunset Limited\", continuing further north to Longview for Amtrak's \"Texas Eagle\".\nRoads.\nJohn D. Groesbeck surveyed and mapped the town in 1837 and 1838 on behalf of the Galveston City Company. A new Galveston resident most recently from New York City, he laid out the streets based on a gridiron, and named the east\u2013west avenues according to letters of the alphabet, with Avenue A running along the back bay on the north side of the island. He assigned numbers to names of north\u2013south streets, with First Street on the far eastern side of the grid, and the numbered street names increased as they progressed westward. The names of some of the avenues changed over the years. Most notably, Avenue B became known as The Strand, and Avenue J became known as Broadway, a major thoroughfare which runs from the Interstate-45 viaduct to Seawall Boulevard.\nInterstate 45 has a southern terminus in Galveston and serves as a main artery to Galveston from mainland Galveston County and Houston. US Route 75 used to reach Galveston before it was decommissioned in 1987 from Dallas. Farm to Market Road 3005 (locally called Seawall Boulevard) connects Galveston to Brazoria County via the San Luis Pass-Vacek Toll Bridge. State Highway 87, known locally as Broadway Street, connects the island to the Bolivar Peninsula via the Bolivar Ferry. A project to construct the proposed Bolivar Bridge to link Galveston to Bolivar Peninsula was cancelled in 2007.\nTransit.\nIsland Transit, which operates the Galveston Island Trolley manages the city's public transportation services. Intercity bus service to Galveston was previously operated by Kerrville Bus Company; following the company's acquisition by Coach USA, service was operated by Megabus.\nSports.\nGalveston was home to minor league baseball from 1888 to 1955. The Galveston White Caps (1950\u20131955), Galveston Buccaneers (1931\u20131937)\nGalveston Sand Crabs (1889\u20131890, 1892, 1897\u20131899, 1907\u20131911, 1922\u20131924) Galveston Pirates (1912\u20131917, 1919\u20131921) and Galveston Giants (1888) all called Galveston home. Galveston was a member of the Big State League (1954\u20131955), Gulf Coast League (1950\u20131953) and Texas League (1888\u20131890, 1892, 1897\u20131899, 1907\u20131917, 1919\u20131924, 1931\u20131937). The teams played at Moody Stadium/White Cap Stadium (1931\u20131937, 1950\u20131955), Gulfview Park (1921\u20131924)/Pirate Field (1915\u20131920) and Beach Park (1888\u20131915).\nNotable people.\nGalveston has been home to many important figures in Texas and U.S. history. During the island's earliest history it became the domain of Jean Lafitte, the famed pirate and American hero of the War of 1812. Richard Bache, Jr. who settled in Galveston in 1842 and represented it in the Senate of the Second Texas Legislature in 1847 and assisted in drawing up the Constitution of 1845 was another. He was also the grandson of Benjamin Franklin, one of the Founding Fathers of the United States of America and Deborah Read. In 1886, the African-American Galveston civil rights leader Norris Wright Cuney rose to become the head of the Texas Republican Party and one of the most important Southern black leaders of the century.\nBritish playwright and actor Charles Francis Coghlan died in Galveston in 1899 while touring with his theatre company and was initially entombed there until his body was washed out to sea in the 1900 hurricane. Portrait and landscape artist Verner Moore White moved from Galveston the day before the 1900 hurricane. While he survived, his studio and much of his portfolio were destroyed. Another survivor of the hurricane was the Hollywood director King Vidor, who made his directing debut in 1913 with the film \"Hurricane in Galveston\". Later Jack Johnson, nicknamed the \"Galveston Giant\", became the first black world heavyweight boxing champion.\nDuring the first half of the 20th century, William L. Moody Jr. established a business empire, which includes American National Insurance Company, a major national insurer, and founded the Moody Foundation, one of the largest charitable organizations in the United States. Sam Maceo, a nationally known organized crime boss, with the help of his family, was largely responsible for making Galveston a major U.S. tourist destination from the 1920s to the 1940s. Grammy-award-winning singer-songwriter Barry White was born on the island and later moved to Los Angeles.\nGeorge P. Mitchell, pioneer of hydraulic fracturing technology and developer of The Woodlands, Texas, was born and raised in Galveston.\nAnita Martini, pioneering female sports journalist who was the first woman allowed in a major league locker room for a post-game press conference, was born in Galveston. Surfer Dorian \"Doc\" Paskowitz was born in Galveston.\nProfessional baseball pitcher Sig Jakucki made Galveston his home after joining the Galveston Buccaneers in 1934. He is best remembered for defeating the New York Yankees in the final game of the 1944 MLB season, giving the St. Louis Browns their only pennant.\nTerran Petteway, a basketball player in the Israeli Basketball Premier League, was born in Galveston.\nMore recently Tilman J. Fertitta, part of the Maceo bloodline, established the Landry's Restaurants corporation, which owns numerous restaurants and entertainment venues in Texas and Nevada.\nKay Bailey Hutchison was the senior senator from Texas and the first female Texas senator.\nGilbert Pena, former Republican member of the Texas House of Representatives from Pasadena, was born in Galveston in 1949 and lived there in early childhood.\nJonathan Pollard, who spied for Israel and was convicted in the US and sentenced to life in jail, was born in Galveston. The film and television actor Lee Patterson, a native of Vancouver, British Columbia, lived in Galveston and died there in 2007.\nOther notable people include Brandon Backe, a former Major League Baseball pitcher for the Tampa Bay Devil Rays and Houston Astros who played in the 2005 World Series, Matt Carpenter of the St. Louis Cardinals, Mike Evans, wide receiver for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, 1998 Heisman Trophy runner-up and pro quarterback Michael Bishop, Pittsburgh Steelers great Casey Hampton, comedian Bill Engvall, actresses Valerie Perrine and Katherine Helmond, painter Ethel Fisher, Tina Knowles fashion designer and creator of House of Der\u00e9on, mother of Beyonc\u00e9 and Solange Knowles, and Grammy award-winning R&amp;B and Jazz legend Esther Phillips, was born in Galveston in 1935.\nSister cities.\nGalveston's sister cities are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53842", "revid": "9148558", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53842", "title": "New Orleans", "text": "New Orleans (commonly known as NOLA or The Big Easy among other nicknames) is a consolidated city-parish located along the Mississippi River in the U.S. state of Louisiana. With a population of 383,997 at the 2020 census, New Orleans is the most populous city in Louisiana, the second-most populous in the Deep South after Atlanta, and the twelfth-most populous in the Southeastern United States; the New Orleans metropolitan area, with about 1 million residents, is the 59th-most populous metropolitan area in the country. New Orleans serves as a major port and commercial hub for the broader Gulf Coast region. The city is coextensive with Orleans Parish.\nNew Orleans is renowned for its distinctive music, Creole cuisine, unique dialects, and its annual celebrations and festivals, most notably Mardi Gras. The historic heart of the city is the French Quarter, known for its French and Spanish Creole architecture and vibrant nightlife along Bourbon Street. The city has been described as the \"most interesting\" in the United States, owing in large part to its cross-cultural and multilingual heritage. Additionally, New Orleans has increasingly been known as \"Hollywood South\" due to its prominent role in the film industry and in pop culture.\nFounded in 1718 by French colonists, New Orleans was once the territorial capital of French Louisiana before becoming part of the United States in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803. New Orleans in 1840 was the third most populous city in the United States, and it was the largest city in the American South from the Antebellum era until after World War II. The city has historically been very vulnerable to flooding, due to its high rainfall, low-lying elevation, poor natural drainage, and proximity to multiple bodies of water. State and federal authorities have installed a complex system of levees and drainage pumps in an effort to protect the city.\nNew Orleans was severely affected by Hurricane Katrina in late August 2005, which flooded more than 80% of the city, killed more than 1,800 people, and displaced thousands of residents, causing a population decline of over 50%. Since Katrina, major redevelopment efforts have led to a rebound in the city's population. Concerns have been expressed about gentrification and consequent displacement. Rates of violent crime in New Orleans remain higher than those in most other U.S. cities, but by mid-2025 a prolonged focus on addressing its root causes and reforming the local criminal justice system have reduced the incidence of violent crime to its lowest levels since the early 1970s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and nicknames.\nBefore the arrival of European colonists, the indigenous Choctaw people called the area of present-day New Orleans , which translates as \"land of many tongues\". It appears to have been a contraction of , which means \"there are foreign speakers\". In his book , Antoine-Simon Le Page du Pratz wrote that the indigenous name referred to the Mississippi River and that the use of the same name for the settlement relates to Native American concepts of the close interaction between rivers and their surrounding land.\nThe name of New Orleans derives from the original French name, , which was given to the city in honor of Philippe II, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, who served as Louis XV's regent from 1715 to 1723. The French city of Orl\u00e9ans itself is named after the Roman emperor Aurelian, originally being known as Aurelianum. Thus, by extension, since New Orleans is also named after Aurelian, its name in Latin would translate to Nova Aurelia.\nFollowing the defeat in the Seven Years' War, France formally transferred the possession of Louisiana to Spain, with which France had secretly signed the Treaty of Fontainebleau a year earlier, in the Treaty of Paris of 1763. The Spanish renamed the city (), which was used until 1800. The United States, which had acquired possession from France in 1803, adopted the French name and anglicized it to \"New Orleans\".\nNew Orleans has several nicknames, including these:\nHistory.\nFrench\u2013Spanish colonial era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical claims\n Kingdom of France 1718\u20131762 Spanish Empire 1762\u20131801 First French Empire 1801\u20131803 1803\u2013present\n\"La Nouvelle-Orl\u00e9ans\" (New Orleans) was founded in the spring of 1718 by the French Mississippi Company under Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville, on land traditionally inhabited by the Chitimacha people. The city was named for Philippe II, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, then-regent of the Kingdom of France whose title derived from the French city of Orl\u00e9ans. As a colony, French Louisiana faced conflict with Native American tribes navigating rival European powers. In 1729, the Natchez revolt erupted with an attack on Fort Rosalie, resulting in the deaths of over 200 French colonists. Governor \u00c9tienne Perier launched a retaliatory campaign that effectively destroyed the Natchez people, but it soured relations between France and the territory's Native Americans leading directly into the Chickasaw Wars of the 1730s.\nNative resistance continued into the 1740s under governor Pierre de Rigaud, marquis de Vaudreuil-Cavagnial, as tribes like the Chickasaw and Choctaw leveraged competing colonial interests. Raids intensified as French economic instability weakened colonial defenses, with some Chickasaw attacks reaching as far south as Baton Rouge. Meanwhile, labor shortages led the French colonists to turn to the Atlantic slave trade. By the early 1720s, enslaved Africans were arriving in significant numbers, and in 1724, the Code Noir formalized harsh laws governing their lives. A distinct Afro-Creole culture began to develop, blending African traditions with Catholicism and French language, giving rise to practices like Louisiana Voodoo and the Louisiana Creole language.\nNew Orleans quickly emerged as a cultural and commercial hub in French Louisiana. Its position as a key port made it the gateway for goods moving between the interior of North America and the Atlantic world. Institutions like the Ursuline sisters, founded in 1727 by nuns sponsored by the Company of the Indies, reflected the city's integration into French religious and educational networks. The convent educated girls and remains foundational to several modern schools in the city. Early city planning and architecture were shaped by military engineers like Pierre Le Blond de Tour and Adrien de Pauger, whose designs laid out the enduring street grid and fortifications. By the 1740s, public works programs under engineer Ignace Fran\u00e7ois Broutin transformed the city's architecture, blending colonial governance with a distinct Creole character.\nAfter France ceded Louisiana to the Spanish Empire in the 1763 Treaty of Paris, New Orleans residents resisted Spanish rule. Local residents staged the Louisiana Rebellion of 1768, briefly seizing control of the city and sending a delegation to France to appeal for renewed French authority. Their efforts failed, and King Louis XV reaffirmed Spanish sovereignty. Nearly all of the surviving 18th-century architecture of the Vieux Carr\u00e9 (French Quarter) dates from the Spanish period, notably excepting the Old Ursuline Convent. During the American Revolutionary War, New Orleans played a key role as a supply hub for the American cause, particularly under Spanish governor Bernardo de G\u00e1lvez y Madrid, Count of G\u00e1lvez, who led a campaign against the British from the city in 1779. From the 1760s onward, Filipinos also began settling in the region.\nUnited States territorial era.\nThe Third Treaty of San Ildefonso in 1800 restored French control of New Orleans and Louisiana, but Napoleon sold both to the United States in the Louisiana Purchase in 1803. Thereafter, the city grew rapidly with influxes of Americans, French, Creoles and Africans. Later immigrants were Irish, Germans, Poles and Italians. Major commodity crops of sugar and cotton were cultivated with slave labor on nearby large plantations.\nBetween 1791 and 1810, thousands of St. Dominican refugees from the Haitian Revolution, both whites and free people of color (\"affranchis\" or \"gens de couleur libres\"), arrived in New Orleans; a number brought their slaves with them, many of whom were native Africans or of full-blood descent. While Governor Claiborne and other officials wanted to keep out additional free black people, the French Creoles wanted to increase the French-speaking population. In addition to bolstering the territory's French-speaking population, these refugees had a significant impact on the culture of Louisiana, including developing its sugar industry and cultural institutions.\nAs more refugees were allowed into the Territory of Orleans, St. Dominican refugees who had first gone to Cuba also arrived. Many of the white Francophones had been deported by officials in Cuba in 1809 as retaliation for Bonapartist schemes. Nearly 90 percent of these immigrants settled in New Orleans. The 1809 migration brought 2,731 whites, 3,102 free people of color (of mixed-race European and African descent), and 3,226 slaves of primarily African descent, doubling the city's population. The city became 63 percent black, a greater proportion than Charleston, South Carolina's 53 percent at that time.\nSlave rebellion.\nOn January 8\u201311, 1811, about 500 enslaved Africans in St. Charles and St. John the Baptist parishes rose up in the German Coast rebellion against their enslavers, killing two white men in the process. They proceeded to march south toward New Orleans and were eventually controlled by the local militia, with numerous casualties on both sides.\nThe uprising has been called the \"largest slave rebellion in US history.\"\nBattle of New Orleans and antebellum period.\nDuring the final campaign of the War of 1812, the British sent a force of 11,000 in an attempt to capture New Orleans. Despite great challenges, General Andrew Jackson, with support from the U.S. Navy, successfully cobbled together a force of militia from Louisiana and Mississippi, U.S. Army regulars, a large contingent of Tennessee state militia, Kentucky frontiersmen and local privateers (the latter led by the pirate Jean Lafitte), to decisively defeat the British in the Battle of New Orleans on January 8, 1815. The armies had not learned of the Treaty of Ghent, which had been signed on December 24, 1814 (although not ratified by the U.S. government until February 16, 1815). The fighting in Louisiana began in December 1814 and did not end until late January, after the Americans held off the Royal Navy during a ten-day siege of Fort St. Philip.\nAs a port, New Orleans played a major role during the antebellum period in the Atlantic slave trade. The port handled commodities for export from the interior and imported goods from other countries, which were warehoused and transferred in New Orleans to smaller vessels and distributed along the Mississippi River watershed. The river was filled with steamboats, flatboats and sailing ships. Despite its role in the slave trade, New Orleans at the time also had the largest and most prosperous community of free persons of color in the nation, who were often educated, middle-class property owners.\nNew Orleans housed the largest slave market in the country, particularly after the U.S. ended the international slave trade in 1808. The domestic trade surged, with two-thirds of more than a million enslaved people forcibly relocated to the Deep South. The trade's economic value was immense as slaves were collectively valued at half a billion dollars, and the broader economy surrounding the trade, including transport and services, generated billions more. As a result, New Orleans benefited significantly, both financially and commercially, from this system.\nFollowing the Louisiana Purchase, Anglo-Americans and later German and Irish immigrants migrated to the city, contributing to its rapid growth. By 1840, New Orleans was the wealthiest and third-most populous city in the U.S. The white Francophone population remained influential, with French still used in some schools. Free people of color (\"gens de couleur libres\"), mostly of mixed race and largely Francophone, formed a distinct artisan and professional class, even as the majority of black residents remained enslaved. The city's prosperity was shadowed by repeated epidemics of yellow fever and other tropical and infectious diseases, which killed over 150,000 residents in the 19th century. By 1860, the city's population had reached nearly 170,000, its per capita income was the second highest in the nation, and it was the third-largest U.S. port by import tonnage.\nCivil War\u2013Reconstruction era.\nAs the Creole elite feared, the American Civil War changed their world. In April 1862, following the city's occupation by the Union Navy after the Battle of Forts Jackson and St. Philip, Gen. Benjamin F. Butler \u2013 a respected Massachusetts lawyer serving in that state's militia \u2013 was appointed military governor. New Orleans residents supportive of the Confederacy nicknamed him \"Beast\" Butler, because of an order he issued. After his troops had been assaulted and harassed in the streets by women still loyal to the Confederate cause, his order warned that such future occurrences would result in his men treating such women as those \"plying their avocation in the streets\", implying that they would treat the women like prostitutes. Accounts of this spread widely. He also came to be called \"Spoons\" Butler because of the alleged looting that his troops did while occupying the city, during which time he himself supposedly pilfered silver flatware.\nSignificantly, Butler abolished French-language instruction in city schools. Statewide measures in 1864 and, after the war, 1868 further strengthened the English-only policy imposed by federal representatives. With the predominance of English speakers, that language had already become dominant in business and government. By the end of the 19th century, French usage had faded. It was also under pressure from Irish, Italian and German immigrants. However, as late as 1902 \"one-fourth of the population of the city spoke French in ordinary daily intercourse, while another two-fourths was able to understand the language perfectly,\" and as late as 1945, many elderly Creole women spoke no English. The last major French language newspaper, \"L'Abeille de la Nouvelle-Orl\u00e9ans\" (New Orleans Bee), ceased publication on December 27, 1923, after 96 years. According to some sources, \"Le Courrier de la Nouvelle Orl\u00e9ans\" continued until 1955.\nAs the city was captured and occupied early in the war, it was spared the destruction through warfare suffered by many other cities of the American South. The Union Army eventually extended its control north along the Mississippi River and along the coastal areas. As a result, most of the southern portion of Louisiana was originally exempted from the liberating provisions of the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation issued by President Abraham Lincoln. Large numbers of rural ex-slaves and some free people of color from the city volunteered for the first regiments of Black troops in the War. Led by Brigadier General Daniel Ullman (1810\u20131892), of the 78th Regiment of New York State Volunteers Militia, they were known as the \"Corps d'Afrique\". While that name had been used by a militia before the war, that group was composed of free people of color. The new group was made up mostly of former slaves. They were supplemented in the last two years of the War by newly organized United States Colored Troops, who played an increasingly important part in the war.\nViolence in the South, including the Memphis Riots and New Orleans Riot of 1866, spurred Congress to pass the Reconstruction Act and Fourteenth Amendment, granting citizenship and civil rights to freedmen and free people of color. During Reconstruction, Louisiana and Texas were governed under the Fifth Military District, and Louisiana was readmitted to the Union in 1868 with a new constitution that established universal male suffrage, universal public education, and elected both black and white officials. P.B.S. Pinchback briefly served as Louisiana's Republican governor in 1872, becoming the first U.S. governor of African descent. New Orleans also maintained a racially integrated public school system during this period. However, wartime destruction, a financial recession, and the Panic of 1873 hindered economic recovery. From 1868, white insurgents used violence to suppress Black voters and disrupt Republican gatherings, culminating in the 1872 contested gubernatorial election and the rise of the \"White League\", a paramilitary group supporting Democrats. In 1874, they seized state offices during the Battle of Liberty Place, and by 1876, Redeemers had reclaimed the state legislature. Federal troops withdrew in 1877, ending Reconstruction. In 1892 the racially integrated unions of New Orleans led a general strike in the city from November 8 to 12, shutting down the city &amp; winning the vast majority of their demands.\nJim Crow era.\nDixiecrats passed Jim Crow laws, establishing racial segregation in public facilities. In 1889, the legislature passed a constitutional amendment incorporating a \"grandfather clause\" that effectively disfranchised freedmen as well as the propertied people of color manumitted before the war. Unable to vote, African Americans could not serve on juries or in local office, and were closed out of formal politics for generations. The Southern U.S. was ruled by a white Democratic Party. Public schools were racially segregated and remained so until 1960.\nNew Orleans's large community of well-educated, often French-speaking free persons of color (\"gens de couleur libres\"), who had been free prior to the Civil War, fought against Jim Crow. They organized the \"Comit\u00e9 des Citoyens\" (Citizens Committee) to work for civil rights. As part of their legal campaign, they recruited one of their own, Homer Plessy, to test whether Louisiana's newly enacted Separate Car Act was constitutional. Plessy boarded a commuter train departing New Orleans for Covington, Louisiana, sat in the car reserved for whites only, and was arrested. The case resulting from this incident, \"Plessy v. Ferguson\", was heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1896. The court ruled that \"separate but equal\" accommodations were constitutional, effectively upholding Jim Crow measures.\nIn practice, African-American public schools and facilities were underfunded across the South. The Supreme Court ruling contributed to this period as the nadir of race relations in the United States. The rate of lynchings of black men was high across the South, as other states also disfranchised blacks and sought to impose Jim Crow. Nativist prejudices also surfaced. Anti-Italian sentiment in 1891 contributed to the lynchings of 11 Italians, some of whom had been acquitted of the murder of the police chief. Some were shot and killed in the jail where they were detained. It was the largest mass lynching in U.S. history. In July 1900 the city was swept by white mobs rioting after Robert Charles, a young African American, killed a policeman and temporarily escaped. The mob killed him and an estimated 20 other blacks; seven whites died in the days-long conflict, until a state militia suppressed it.\n20th century.\nNew Orleans's economic and population zenith in relation to other American cities occurred in the antebellum period. It was the nation's fifth-largest city in 1860 (after New York, Philadelphia, Boston and Baltimore) and was significantly larger than all other southern cities. From the mid-19th century onward rapid economic growth shifted to other areas, while New Orleans's relative importance steadily declined. The growth of railways and highways decreased river traffic, diverting goods to other transportation corridors and markets. Thousands of the most ambitious people of color left the state in the Great Migration around World War II and after, many for West Coast destinations. From the late 1800s, most censuses recorded New Orleans slipping down the ranks in the list of largest American cities (New Orleans's population still continued to increase throughout the period, but at a slower rate than before the Civil War).\nIn 1929, a streetcar strike took place in the city, during which serious unrest occurred. It is also credited for the creation of the distinctly Louisianan po' boy sandwich.\nBy the mid-20th century, New Orleanians recognized that their city was no longer the leading urban area in the South. By 1950, Houston, Dallas, and Atlanta exceeded New Orleans in size, and in 1960 Miami eclipsed New Orleans, even as the latter's population reached its historic peak. As with other older American cities, highway construction and suburban development drew residents from the center city to newer housing outside. The 1970 census recorded the first absolute decline in population since the city became part of the United States in 1803. The New Orleans metropolitan area continued expanding in population, albeit more slowly than other major Sun Belt cities. While the Port of New Orleans remained one of the nation's largest, automation and containerization cost many jobs. The city's former role as banker to the South was supplanted by larger peer cities. New Orleans's economy had always been based more on trade and financial services than on manufacturing, but the city's relatively small manufacturing sector also shrank after World War II. Despite some economic development successes under the administrations of deLesseps Story Morrison (1946\u20131961) and Victor H. Schiro (1961\u20131970), metropolitan New Orleans's growth rate consistently lagged behind more vigorous cities.\nDuring the later years of Mayor deLesseps Morrison's administration and throughout Victor Schiro's tenure, New Orleans became a focal point of the Civil Rights Movement. The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was founded in the city, and lunch counter sit-ins took place in Canal Street department stores. Tensions escalated in 1960 during school desegregation following the \"Brown v. Board of Education\" (1954) ruling. Six-year-old Ruby Bridges integrated William Frantz Elementary School, becoming the first child of color to attend a previously all-white Southern school. Racial controversy also surrounded the 1956 Sugar Bowl, when Georgia governor Marvin Griffin opposed the participation of Pitt Panthers African-American fullback Bobby Grier. Georgia Institute of Technology president Blake R. Van Leer defied the governor, and the game proceeded. The federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 restored key constitutional protections, but economic and educational disparities between Black and White residents remained. As more affluent residents left the city, its population became increasingly poor and predominantly African-American. Beginning in 1980, Black-majority leadership emerged, working to address entrenched socioeconomic inequities.\nBy the late 20th century, New Orleans had grown increasingly reliant on tourism amid rising poverty, low educational attainment, and high crime, which hindered its adaptation to the broader U.S. shift toward a post-industrial service economy. Meanwhile, city leaders pursued geographic expansion through ambitious drainage efforts. Engineer A. Baldwin Wood designed a pump system that allowed development in formerly uninhabitable swamp and marsh areas, but over time, these areas subsided significantly below sea level. Although the city had always faced flooding risks, awareness of its vulnerability grew after Hurricane Betsy in 1965 and the May 8th 1995 Louisiana Flood. These events exposed the limits of the drainage system, prompting upgrades. By the 1980s and 1990s, scientists warned that erosion of the marshlands and swamp surrounding New Orleans, exacerbated by developments like the Mississippi River\u2013Gulf Outlet Canal, had left the city more exposed than ever to hurricane storm surges.\n21st century.\nNew Orleans was catastrophically affected by what Raymond B. Seed called \"the worst engineering disaster in the world since Chernobyl\", when the federal levee system failed during Hurricane Katrina on August 29, 2005. By the time the hurricane approached the city on August 29, 2005, most residents had evacuated. As the hurricane passed through the Gulf Coast region that day, the city's federal flood protection system failed, resulting in the worst civil engineering disaster in American history at the time. Floodwalls and levees constructed by the United States Army Corps of Engineers failed below design specifications and 80% of the city flooded. Tens of thousands of residents who had remained were rescued or otherwise made their way to shelters of last resort at the Louisiana Superdome or the New Orleans Morial Convention Center. More than 1,500 people were recorded as having died in Louisiana, most in New Orleans, while others remain unaccounted for. Before Hurricane Katrina, the city called for the first mandatory evacuation in its history, to be followed by another mandatory evacuation three years later with Hurricane Gustav.\nThe city was declared off-limits to residents while efforts to clean up after Hurricane Katrina began. The approach of Hurricane Rita in September 2005 caused repopulation efforts to be postponed, and the Lower Ninth Ward was reflooded by Rita's storm surge. Because of the scale of damage, many people resettled permanently outside the area. Federal, state, and local efforts supported recovery and rebuilding in severely damaged neighborhoods. The U.S. Census Bureau in July 2006 estimated the population to be 223,000; the city was estimated to have regained approximately 60% of its pre-Katrina population by summer 2007. Ten years after the hurricane, the population had recovered to 80% of what it was at the 2000 census.\nSeveral major tourist events and other forms of revenue for the city have returned. Large conventions returned. College bowl games returned for the 2006\u20132007 season. The New Orleans Saints returned that season. The New Orleans Hornets (now named the Pelicans) returned to the city for the 2007\u20132008 season. New Orleans hosted the 2008 NBA All-Star Game in addition to Super Bowl XLVII. Major annual events such as Mardi Gras, Voodoo Experience, and the Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival were never displaced or canceled. A new annual festival, \"The Running of the Bulls New Orleans\", was created in 2007.\nOn August 29, 2021, coincidentally the 16th anniversary of the landfall of Hurricane Katrina, Hurricane Ida, a category 4 hurricane, made landfall near Port Fourchon, where the Hurricane Ida tornado outbreak caused damage. On January 1, 2025, a truck attack occurred in New Orleans, killing 15 people and injuring 35. The attack was carried out as an act of domestic terrorism and was committed by Shamsud-Din Jabbar.\nGeography.\nNew Orleans is located in the Mississippi River Delta, south of Lake Pontchartrain, on the banks of the Mississippi River, approximately upriver from the Gulf of Mexico. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city's area is , of which is land and (52%) is water. The area along the river is characterized by ridges and hollows.\nElevation.\nNew Orleans was originally settled on the river's natural levees or high ground. After the Flood Control Act of 1965, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built floodwalls and man-made levees around a much larger geographic footprint that included previous marshland and swamp. Over time, pumping of water from marshland allowed for development into lower elevation areas. Today, half of the city is at or below local mean sea level, while the other half is slightly above sea level. Evidence suggests that portions of the city may be dropping in elevation due to subsidence.\nA 2007 study by Tulane and Xavier University suggested that \"51%... of the contiguous urbanized portions of Orleans, Jefferson, and St. Bernard parishes lie at or above sea level,\" with the more densely populated areas generally on higher ground. The average elevation of the city is currently between below sea level, with some portions of the city as high as at the base of the river levee in Uptown and others as low as below sea level in the farthest reaches of Eastern New Orleans. A study published by the ASCE \"Journal of Hydrologic Engineering\" in 2016, however, stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...most of New Orleans proper\u2014about 65%\u2014is at or below mean sea level, as defined by the average elevation of Lake Pontchartrain\nThe magnitude of subsidence potentially caused by the draining of natural marsh in the New Orleans area and southeast Louisiana is a topic of debate. A study published in \"Geology\" in 2006 by an associate professor at Tulane University claims:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While erosion and wetland loss are huge problems along Louisiana's coast, the basement to beneath much of the Mississippi Delta has been highly stable for the past 8,000 years with negligible subsidence rates.\nThe study noted, however, that the results did not necessarily apply to the Mississippi River Delta, nor the New Orleans metropolitan area proper. On the other hand, a report by the American Society of Civil Engineers claims that \"New Orleans is subsiding (sinking)\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn May 2016, NASA published a study which suggested that most areas were, in fact, experiencing subsidence at a \"highly variable rate\" which was \"generally consistent with, but somewhat higher than, previous studies.\"\nCityscape.\nThe Central Business District is located immediately north and west of the Mississippi and was historically called the \"American Quarter\" or \"American Sector\". It was developed after the heart of French and Spanish settlement. It includes Lafayette Square. Most streets in this area fan out from a central point. Major streets include Canal Street, Poydras Street, Tulane Avenue and Loyola Avenue. Canal Street divides the traditional \"downtown\" area from the \"uptown\" area.\nEvery street crossing Canal Street between the Mississippi River and Rampart Street, which is the northern edge of the French Quarter, has a different name for the \"uptown\" and \"downtown\" portions. For example, St. Charles Avenue, known for its street car line, is called Royal Street below Canal Street, though where it traverses the Central Business District between Canal and Lee Circle, it is properly called St. Charles Street. Elsewhere in the city, Canal Street serves as the dividing point between the \"South\" and \"North\" portions of various streets. In the local parlance \"downtown\" means \"downriver from Canal Street\", while \"uptown\" means \"upriver from Canal Street\". Downtown neighborhoods include the French Quarter, Trem\u00e9, the 7th Ward, Faubourg Marigny, Bywater (the Upper Ninth Ward), and the Lower Ninth Ward. Uptown neighborhoods include the Warehouse District, the Lower Garden District, the Garden District, the Irish Channel, the University District, Carrollton, Gert Town, Fontainebleau and Broadmoor. However, the Warehouse and the Central Business District are frequently called \"Downtown\" as a specific region, as in the Downtown Development District.\nOther major districts within the city include Bayou St. John, Mid-City, Gentilly, Lakeview, Lakefront, New Orleans East and Algiers.\nHistoric and residential architecture.\n New Orleans is world-famous for its abundance of architectural styles that reflect the city's multicultural heritage. Though New Orleans possesses numerous structures of national architectural significance, it is equally, if not more, revered for its enormous, largely intact (even post-Katrina) historic built environment. Twenty National Register Historic Districts have been established, and fourteen local historic districts aid in preservation. Thirteen of the districts are administered by the New Orleans Historic District Landmarks Commission (HDLC), while one\u2014the French Quarter\u2014is administered by the Vieux Carre Commission (VCC). Additionally, both the National Park Service, via the National Register of Historic Places, and the HDLC have landmarked individual buildings, many of which lie outside the boundaries of existing historic districts.\nHousing styles include the shotgun house and the bungalow style. Creole cottages and townhouses, notable for their large courtyards and intricate iron balconies, line the streets of the French Quarter. American townhouses, double-gallery houses, and Raised Center-Hall Cottages are notable. St. Charles Avenue is famed for its large antebellum homes. Its mansions are in various styles, such as Greek Revival, American Colonial and the Victorian styles of Queen Anne and Italianate architecture. New Orleans is also noted for its large, European-style Catholic cemeteries.\nTallest buildings.\nFor much of its history, New Orleans's skyline displayed only low- and mid-rise structures. The soft soils are susceptible to subsidence, and there was doubt about the feasibility of constructing high rises. Developments in engineering throughout the 20th century eventually made it possible to build sturdy foundations in the foundations that underlie the structures. In the 1960s, the World Trade Center New Orleans and Plaza Tower demonstrated skyscrapers' viability. One Shell Square became the city's tallest building in 1972. The oil boom of the 1970s and early 1980s redefined New Orleans's skyline with the development of the Poydras Street corridor. Most are clustered along Canal Street and Poydras Street in the Central Business District.\nClimate.\nThe climate of New Orleans is humid subtropical (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\"), with short, generally mild winters and hot, humid summers; in the 1991\u20132020 climate normals the USDA hardiness zone is 9b, with the coldest temperature in most years being about . The monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in August. Officially, as measured at New Orleans International Airport, temperature records range from on December 23, 1989, and August 27, 2023, respectively; Audubon Park has recorded temperatures ranging from on February 13, 1899, up to on June 24, 2009, and August 28, 2023. Dewpoints in the summer months (June\u2013August) are relatively high, ranging from .\nThe average precipitation is annually; the summer months are the wettest, while October is the driest month. Precipitation in winter usually accompanies the passing of a cold front. There are a median of over 80 days of + highs, 9 days per winter where the high does not exceed , and less than 8 nights with freezing lows annually, although it is not uncommon for entire winter seasons to pass with no freezing temperatures at all, such as the 2003\u201304 winter, the 2012\u201313 winter, the 2015\u201316 winter and the consecutive winters of 2018\u201319 and 2019\u201320. It is rare for the temperature to reach , with the last occurrence of each being January 17, 2018, and August 27, 2023, respectively.\nNew Orleans experiences snowfall only on rare occasions. The New Year's Eve 1963 snowstorm affected New Orleans and brought . Snow fell again on December 22, 1989, during the December 1989 United States cold wave, when most of the city received . A small amount of snow fell during the 2004 Christmas Eve Snowstorm and again on Christmas (December 25) when a combination of rain, sleet, and snow fell on the city, leaving some bridges icy. The last significant snowfall in New Orleans was on January 21, 2025, when the city received of snow. \nThreat from tropical cyclones.\nHurricanes pose a severe threat to the area, and the city is particularly at risk due to its low elevation, the city being surrounded by water from the north, east, and south, and Louisiana's sinking coast. According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, New Orleans is the nation's most vulnerable city to hurricanes. Indeed, portions of Greater New Orleans have been flooded by the Grand Isle Hurricane of 1909, the New Orleans Hurricane of 1915, 1947 Fort Lauderdale Hurricane, Hurricane Flossy in 1956, Hurricane Betsy in 1965, Hurricane Georges in 1998, Hurricanes Katrina and Rita in 2005, Hurricane Gustav in 2008, Hurricane Isaac in 2012, Hurricane Zeta in 2020 (Zeta was also the most intense hurricane to pass over New Orleans) and Hurricane Ida in 2021. The flooding from Betsy was significant and in a few neighborhoods severe, and that from Katrina was disastrous for the majority of the city.\nOn August 29, 2005, storm surge from Hurricane Katrina caused catastrophic failure of the federally designed and built levees, flooding 80% of the city. A report by the American Society of Civil Engineers says that \"had the levees and floodwalls not failed and had the pump stations operated, nearly two-thirds of the deaths would not have occurred\".\nNew Orleans has always had to consider the risk of hurricanes, but the risks are dramatically greater today due to coastal erosion from human interference. Since the beginning of the 20th century, it has been estimated that Louisiana has lost of coast (including many of its barrier islands), which once protected New Orleans against storm surge. Following Hurricane Katrina, the Army Corps of Engineers has instituted massive levee repair and hurricane protection measures to protect the city.\nIn 2006, Louisiana voters overwhelmingly adopted an amendment to the state's constitution to dedicate all revenues from off-shore drilling to restore Louisiana's eroding coast line. U.S. Congress has allocated $7 billion to bolster New Orleans's flood protection.\nAccording to a study by the National Academy of Engineering and the National Research Council, levees and floodwalls surrounding New Orleans\u2014no matter how large or sturdy\u2014cannot provide absolute protection against overtopping or failure in extreme events. Rather, the city's levees and floodwalls should be viewed as a way to reduce risks from hurricanes and storm surges instead of eliminating those risks. For structures in hazardous areas and residents who do not relocate, the committee recommended major floodproofing measures (such as elevating the first floor of buildings to at least the 100-year flood level). Due to rising sea levels, most of New Orleans is at risk of being permanently underwater by the 2050s.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrom the 2010 U.S. census to 2014 census estimates the city grew by 12%, adding an average of more than 10,000 new residents each year following the official decennial census. According to the 2020 United States census, there were 383,997 people, 151,753 households, and 69,370 families residing in the city. Prior to 1960, the population of New Orleans steadily increased to a historic 627,525.\nBeginning in 1960, the population decreased due to factors such as the cycles of oil production and tourism, and as suburbanization, diversity, and white flight increased (as with many U.S. cities), and jobs migrated to surrounding parishes. This economic and population decline resulted in high levels of poverty in the city; in 1960 it had the fifth-highest poverty rate of all U.S. cities, and was almost twice the national average in 2005, at 24.5%. New Orleans experienced an increase in residential segregation from 1900 to 1980, leaving the disproportionately Black and African American poor in older, low-lying locations. These areas were especially susceptible to flood and storm damage.\nThe last population estimate before Hurricane Katrina was 454,865, as of July 1, 2005. A population analysis released in August 2007 estimated the population to be 273,000, 60% of the pre-Katrina population and an increase of about 50,000 since July 2006. A September 2007 report by The Greater New Orleans Community Data Center, which tracks population based on U.S. Postal Service figures, found that in August 2007, just over 137,000 households received mail. That compares with about 198,000 households in July 2005, representing about 70% of pre-Katrina population. In 2010, the U.S. Census Bureau revised upward its 2008 population estimate for the city, to 336,644 inhabitants. Estimates from 2010 showed that neighborhoods that did not flood were near or even greater than 100% of their pre-Katrina populations.\nKatrina displaced 800,000 people, contributing significantly to the decline. Black and African Americans, renters, the elderly, and people with low income were disproportionately affected by Katrina, compared to affluent and White residents. Those same groups also had the slowest growth rate in the city after Katrina primarily due to the rising cost of living, low performing public schools, and high crime in lower income neighborhoods. In Katrina's aftermath, city government commissioned groups such as Bring New Orleans Back Commission, the New Orleans Neighborhood Rebuilding Plan, the Unified New Orleans Plan, and the Office of Recovery Management to contribute to plans addressing depopulation. Their ideas included shrinking the city's footprint from before the storm, incorporating community voices into development plans, and creating green spaces, some of which incited controversy.\nA 2006 study by researchers at Tulane University and the University of California, Berkeley, determined that as many as 10,000 to 14,000 undocumented immigrants, many from Mexico, resided in New Orleans. In 2016, the Pew Research Center estimated at least 35,000 undocumented immigrants lived in New Orleans and its metropolitan area. The New Orleans Police Department began a new policy to \"no longer cooperate with federal immigration enforcement\" beginning on February 28, 2016.\nAs of 2010[ [update]], 90.3% of residents age five and older spoke English at home as a primary language, while 4.8% spoke Spanish, 1.9% Vietnamese, and 1.1% spoke French. In total, 9.7% population age five and older spoke a mother language other than English.\nRace and ethnicity.\nGrowing into a predominantly Black and African-American city by race and ethnicity since 1990, in 2010 the racial and ethnic makeup of New Orleans was 60.2% Black and African American, 33.0% White, 2.9% Asian (1.7% Vietnamese, 0.3% Indian, 0.3% Chinese, 0.1% Filipino, 0.1% Korean), 0.0% Pacific Islander, and 1.7% people of two or more races. People of Hispanic or Latino American origin made up 5.3% of the population; 1.3% were Mexican, 1.3% Honduran, 0.4% Cuban, 0.3% Puerto Rican, and 0.3% Nicaraguan.\nIn 2020, the racial and ethnic makeup of the city was 53.61% Black or African American, 31.61% non-Hispanic white, 0.2% American Indian and Alaska Native, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 3.71% multiracial or of another race, and 8.08% Hispanic and Latino American of any race. The growth of the Hispanic and Latino population in New Orleans proper from 2010 to 2020 reflected national demographic trends of diversification throughout regions once predominantly non-Hispanic white. Additionally, the 2020 census revealed the city now has a more diverse population than it did before Katrina, yet 21% fewer people than it had in 2000. Out of Louisiana's 64 parishes, it is one of six that have an African-American majority as of the 2020 census.\nAs of 2011[ [update]], the Hispanic and Latino American population had also grown in the Greater New Orleans area alongside Black and African American residents, including in Kenner, central Metairie, and Terrytown in Jefferson Parish and Eastern New Orleans and Mid-City in New Orleans proper. Janet Murgu\u00eda, president and chief executive officer of the UnidosUS, stated that up to 120,000 Hispanic and Latino Americans workers lived in New Orleans. In June 2007, one study stated that the Hispanic and Latino American population had risen from 15,000, pre-Katrina, to over 50,000.\nAfter Katrina the small Brazilian American population expanded. Portuguese speakers were the second most numerous group to take English as a second language classes in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans, after Spanish speakers. Many Brazilians worked in skilled trades such as tile and flooring, although fewer worked as day laborers than other Hispanic and Latino Americans. Many had moved from Brazilian communities in the northeastern United States, and Florida and Georgia. Brazilians settled throughout the metropolitan area; most were undocumented. In January 2008, the New Orleans Brazilian population had a mid-range estimate of 3,000 people. By 2008, Brazilians had opened many small churches, shops and restaurants catering to their community.\nAmong the growing Asian American community, the earliest Filipino Americans to live within the city arrived in the early 1800s. The Vietnamese American community grew to become the largest by 2010 as many fled the aftermath of the Vietnam War in the 1970s.\nSexual orientation and gender identity.\nNew Orleans and its metropolitan area have historically been popular destinations for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender communities. In 2015, a Gallup survey determined New Orleans was one of the largest cities in the American South with a significant LGBT population. Much of the LGBT community in New Orleans lives near the Central Business District, Mid-City, and Uptown; several gay bars and nightclubs are present in those areas.\nReligion.\nNew Orleans's colonial history of French and Spanish settlement generated a strong Roman Catholic tradition. Catholic missions ministered to slaves and free people of color and established schools for them. In addition, many late 19th and early 20th century European immigrants, such as the Irish, some Germans, and Italians were Catholic. Within the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans (which includes not only the city but the surrounding parishes as well), 40% percent of the population was Roman Catholic since 2016. Catholicism is reflected in French and Spanish cultural traditions, including its many parochial schools, street names, architecture and festivals, including Mardi Gras. Within the city and metropolitan area, Catholicism is also reflected in the Black and African cultural traditions with Gospel mass. The statue of Our Lady of Prompt Succor is a notable symbol of the Catholic faith in New Orleans and throughout Louisiana.\nInfluenced by the Bible Belt's prominent Protestant population, New Orleans also has a sizable non-Catholic Christian demographic. Roughly the majority of Protestant Christians were Baptist, and the city proper's largest non-Catholic bodies were the Southern Baptist Convention, the National Missionary Baptist Convention of America, non-denominationals, the National Baptist Convention, the United Methodist Church, the Episcopal Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, the National Baptist Convention of America, and the Church of God in Christ according to the Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020.\nNew Orleans displays a distinctive variety of Louisiana Voodoo, due in part to syncretism with African and Afro-Caribbean Roman Catholic beliefs. The fame of voodoo practitioner Marie Laveau contributed to this, as did New Orleans's Caribbean cultural influences. Although the tourism industry strongly associated Voodoo with the city, only a small number of people are serious adherents.\nNew Orleans was also home to the occultist Mary Oneida Toups, who was nicknamed the \"Witch Queen of New Orleans\". Toups' coven, The Religious Order of Witchcraft, was the first coven to be officially recognized as a religious institution by the state of Louisiana. They would meet at Popp Fountain in City Park.\nJewish settlers, primarily Sephardim, settled in New Orleans from the early nineteenth century. Some migrated from the communities established in the colonial years in Charleston, South Carolina, and Savannah, Georgia. The merchant Abraham Cohen Labatt helped found the first Jewish congregation in New Orleans in the 1830s, which became known as the Portuguese Jewish Nefutzot Yehudah congregation (he and some other members were Sephardic Jews, whose ancestors had lived in Portugal and Spain). Ashkenazi Jews from eastern Europe immigrated in the late 19th and 20th centuries.\nBy the beginning of the 21st century, 10,000 Jews lived in New Orleans. This number dropped to 7,000 after Hurricane Katrina, but rose again after efforts to incentivize the community's growth resulted in the arrival of about an additional 2,000 Jews. New Orleans synagogues lost members, but most re-opened in their original locations. The exception was Congregation Beth Israel, the oldest and most prominent Orthodox synagogue in the New Orleans region. Beth Israel's building in Lakeview was destroyed by flooding. After seven years of holding services in temporary quarters, the congregation consecrated a new synagogue on land purchased from the Reform Congregation Gates of Prayer in Metairie.\nA visible religious minority, Muslims constituted 0.6% of the religious population as of 2019 according to Sperling's BestPlaces. The Association of Religion Data Archives in 2020 estimated that there were 6,150 Muslims in the city proper. The Islamic demographic in New Orleans and its metropolitan area have been mainly made up of Middle Eastern immigrants and African Americans.\nEconomy.\nNew Orleans operates one of the world's largest and busiest ports and metropolitan New Orleans is a center of maritime industry. The region accounts for a significant portion of the nation's oil refining and petrochemical production, and serves as a white-collar corporate base for onshore and offshore petroleum and natural gas production. Since the beginning of the 21st century, New Orleans has also grown into a technology hub.\nNew Orleans is also a center for higher learning, with over 50,000 students enrolled in the region's eleven two- and four-year degree-granting institutions. Tulane University, a top-50 research university, is located in Uptown. Metropolitan New Orleans is a major regional hub for the health care industry and boasts a small, globally competitive manufacturing sector. The center city possesses a rapidly growing, entrepreneurial creative industries sector and is renowned for its cultural tourism. Greater New Orleans, Inc. (GNO, Inc.) acts as the first point-of-contact for regional economic development, coordinating between Louisiana's Department of Economic Development and the various business development agencies.\nPort.\nNew Orleans began as a strategically located trading \"entrep\u00f4t\" and it remains, above all, a crucial transportation hub and distribution center for waterborne commerce. The Port of New Orleans is the fifth-largest in the United States based on cargo volume, and second-largest in the state after the Port of South Louisiana. It is the twelfth-largest in the U.S. based on cargo value. The Port of South Louisiana, also located in the New Orleans area, is the world's busiest in terms of bulk tonnage. When combined with Port of New Orleans, it forms the 4th-largest port system in volume. Many shipbuilding, shipping, logistics, freight forwarding and commodity brokerage firms either are based in metropolitan New Orleans or maintain a local presence. Examples include Intermarine, Bisso Towboat, Northrop Grumman Ship Systems, Trinity Yachts, Expeditors International, Bollinger Shipyards, IMTT, International Coffee Corp, Boasso America, Transoceanic Shipping, Transportation Consultants Inc., Dupuy Storage &amp; Forwarding and Silocaf. The largest coffee-roasting plant in the world, operated by Folgers, is located in New Orleans East.\nNew Orleans is located near to the Gulf of Mexico and its many oil rigs. Louisiana ranks fifth among states in oil production and eighth in reserves. It has two of the four Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) storage facilities: West Hackberry in Cameron Parish and Bayou Choctaw in Iberville Parish. The area hosts 17 petroleum refineries, with a combined crude oil distillation capacity of nearly , the second highest after Texas. Louisiana's numerous ports include the Louisiana Offshore Oil Port (LOOP), which is capable of receiving the largest oil tankers. Given the quantity of oil imports, Louisiana is home to many major pipelines: Crude Oil (Exxon, Chevron, BP, Texaco, Shell, Scurloch-Permian, Mid-Valley, Calumet, Conoco, Koch Inc., Unocal, U.S. Dept. of Energy, Locap); Product (TEPPCO Partners, Colonial, Plantation, Explorer, Texaco, Collins); and Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Dixie, TEPPCO, Black Lake, Koch, Chevron, Dynegy, Kinder Morgan Energy Partners, Dow Chemical Company, Bridgeline, FMP, Tejas, Texaco, UTP). Several energy companies have regional headquarters in the area, including Shell plc, Eni and Chevron. Other energy producers and oilfield services companies are headquartered in the city or region, and the sector supports a large professional services base of specialized engineering and design firms, as well as a term office for the federal government's Minerals Management Service.\nBusiness.\nThe city is the home to a single Fortune 500 company: Entergy, a power generation utility and nuclear power plant operations specialist. After Katrina, the city lost its other Fortune 500 company, Freeport-McMoRan, when it merged its copper and gold exploration unit with an Arizona company and relocated that division to Phoenix. Its McMoRan Exploration affiliate remains headquartered in New Orleans.\nCompanies with significant operations or headquarters in New Orleans include: Pan American Life Insurance, Pool Corp, Rolls-Royce, Newpark Resources, AT&amp;T, TurboSquid, iSeatz, IBM, Navtech, Superior Energy Services, Textron Marine &amp; Land Systems, McDermott International, Pellerin Milnor, Lockheed Martin, Imperial Trading, Laitram, Harrah's Entertainment, Stewart Enterprises, Edison Chouest Offshore, Zatarain's, Waldemar S. Nelson &amp; Co., Whitney National Bank, Capital One, Tidewater Marine, Popeyes Chicken &amp; Biscuits, Parsons Brinckerhoff, MWH Global, CH2M Hill, Energy Partners Ltd, The Receivables Exchange, GE Capital, and Smoothie King.\nEntrepreneurship is encouraged, with a number of initiatives designed to support small business and start-ups, including Entrepreneurs' Row and the New Orleans Startup Fund.\nTourist and convention business.\nTourism is a staple of the city's economy. Perhaps more visible than any other sector, New Orleans's tourist and convention industry is a $5.5 billion industry that accounts for 40 percent of city tax revenues. In 2004, the hospitality industry employed 85,000 people, making it the city's top economic sector as measured by employment. New Orleans also hosts the World Cultural Economic Forum (WCEF). The forum, held annually at the New Orleans Morial Convention Center, is directed toward promoting cultural and economic development opportunities through the strategic convening of cultural ambassadors and leaders from around the world. The first WCEF took place in October 2008.\nFederal and military agencies.\nFederal agencies and the Armed forces operate significant facilities there. The U.S. Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals operates at the US. Courthouse downtown. NASA's Michoud Assembly Facility is located in New Orleans East and has multiple tenants including Lockheed Martin and Boeing. It is a huge manufacturing complex that produced the external fuel tanks for the Space Shuttles, the Saturn V first stage, the Integrated Truss Structure of the International Space Station, and is now used for the construction of NASA's Space Launch System. The rocket factory lies within the enormous New Orleans Regional Business Park, also home to the National Finance Center, operated by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Crescent Crown distribution center. Other large governmental installations include the U.S. Navy's Space and Naval Warfare (SPAWAR) Systems Command, located within the University of New Orleans Research and Technology Park in Gentilly, Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans; and the headquarters for the Marine Force Reserves in Federal City in Algiers.\nCulture and contemporary life.\nTourism.\nNew Orleans has many visitor attractions, from the world-renowned French Quarter to St. Charles Avenue, (home of Tulane and Loyola universities, the historic Pontchartrain Hotel and many 19th-century mansions) to Magazine Street with its boutique stores and antique shops.\nAccording to current travel guides, New Orleans is one of the top ten most-visited cities in the United States; 10.1 million visitors came to New Orleans in 2004. Prior to Katrina, 265 hotels with 38,338 rooms operated in the Greater New Orleans Area. In May 2007, that had declined to some 140 hotels and motels with over 31,000 rooms.\nA 2009 \"Travel + Leisure\" poll of \"America's Favorite Cities\" ranked New Orleans first in ten categories, the most first-place rankings of the 30 cities included. According to the poll, New Orleans was the best U.S. city as a spring break destination and for \"wild weekends\", stylish boutique hotels, cocktail hours, singles/bar scenes, live music/concerts and bands, antique and vintage shops, caf\u00e9s/coffee bars, neighborhood restaurants, and people watching. The city ranked second for: friendliness (behind Charleston, South Carolina), gay-friendliness (behind San Francisco), bed and breakfast hotels/inns, and ethnic food. However, the city placed near the bottom in cleanliness, safety and as a family destination.\nThe French Quarter (known locally as \"the Quarter\" or \"Vieux Carr\u00e9\"), which was the colonial-era city and is bounded by the Mississippi River, Rampart Street, Canal Street, and Esplanade Avenue, contains popular hotels, bars and nightclubs. Notable tourist attractions in the Quarter include Bourbon Street, Jackson Square, St. Louis Cathedral, the French Market (including Caf\u00e9 du Monde, famous for caf\u00e9 au lait and beignets) and Preservation Hall. Also in the French Quarter is the old New Orleans Mint, a former branch of the United States Mint which now operates as a museum, and The Historic New Orleans Collection, a museum and research center housing art and artifacts relating to the history and the Gulf South.\nClose to the Quarter is the Trem\u00e9 community, which contains the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park and the New Orleans African American Museum\u2014a site which is listed on the Louisiana African American Heritage Trail.\nThe \"Natchez\" is an authentic steamboat with a calliope that cruises the length of the city twice daily. Unlike most other places in the United States, New Orleans has become widely known for its elegant decay. The city's historic cemeteries and their distinct above-ground tombs are attractions in themselves, the oldest and most famous of which, Saint Louis Cemetery, greatly resembles P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.\nThe National WWII Museum offers a multi-building odyssey through the history of the Pacific and European theaters. Nearby, Confederate Memorial Hall Museum, the oldest continually operating museum in Louisiana (although under renovation since Hurricane Katrina), contains the second-largest collection of Confederate memorabilia. Art museums include the Contemporary Arts Center, the New Orleans Museum of Art (NOMA) in City Park, and the Ogden Museum of Southern Art.\nNew Orleans is home to the Audubon Nature Institute (which consists of Audubon Park, the Audubon Zoo, the Aquarium of the Americas and the Audubon Insectarium), and home to gardens which include Longue Vue House and Gardens and the New Orleans Botanical Garden. City Park, one of the country's most expansive and visited urban parks, has one of the largest stands of oak trees in the world.\nOther points of interest can be found in the surrounding areas. Many wetlands are found nearby, including Honey Island Swamp and Barataria Preserve. Chalmette Battlefield and National Cemetery, located just south of the city, is the site of the 1815 Battle of New Orleans.\nEntertainment and performing arts.\nThe New Orleans area is home to numerous annual celebrations. The most well known is Carnival, or Mardi Gras. Carnival officially begins on the Feast of the Epiphany, also known in some Christian traditions as the \"Twelfth Night\" of Christmas. \"Mardi Gras\" (French for \"Fat Tuesday\"), the final and grandest day of traditional Catholic festivities, is the last Tuesday before the Christian liturgical season of Lent, which commences on Ash Wednesday.\nThe largest of the city's many music festivals is the New Orleans Jazz &amp; Heritage Festival. Commonly referred to simply as \"Jazz Fest\", it is one of the nation's largest music festivals. The festival features a variety of music, including both native Louisiana and international artists. Along with Jazz Fest, New Orleans's Voodoo Experience (\"Voodoo Fest\") and the Essence Music Festival also feature local and international artists.\nOther major festivals include Southern Decadence, the French Quarter Festival, and the Tennessee Williams/New Orleans Literary Festival. The American playwright lived and wrote in New Orleans early in his career, and set his play, \"Streetcar Named Desire,\" there.\nIn 2002, Louisiana began offering tax incentives for film and television production. This has resulted in a substantial increase in activity and brought the nickname of \"Hollywood South\" for New Orleans. Films produced in and around the city include \"Ray\", \"Runaway Jury\", \"The Pelican Brief\", \"Glory Road\", \"All the King's Men\", \"D\u00e9j\u00e0 Vu\", \"Last Holiday\", \"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button\", \"12 Years a Slave\", and \"Project Power\". In 2006, work began on the Louisiana Film &amp; Television studio complex, based in the Trem\u00e9 neighborhood. Louisiana began to offer similar tax incentives for music and theater productions in 2007, and some commentators began to refer to New Orleans as \"Broadway South\".\nThe first theatre in New Orleans was the French-language Theatre de la Rue Saint Pierre, which opened in 1792. The first opera in New Orleans was performed there in 1796. In the nineteenth century, the city was the home of two of America's most important venues for French opera, the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre d'Orl\u00e9ans and later the French Opera House. Today, opera is performed by the New Orleans Opera. The Marigny Opera House is home to the Marigny Opera Ballet and also hosts opera, jazz, and classical music performances.\nNew Orleans has long been a significant center for music, showcasing its intertwined European, African and Latino American cultures. The city's unique musical heritage was born in its colonial and early American days from a unique blending of European musical instruments with African rhythms. As the only North American city to have allowed slaves to gather in public and play their native music (largely in Congo Square, now located within Louis Armstrong Park), New Orleans gave birth in the early 20th century to an epochal indigenous music: jazz. Soon, African American brass bands formed, beginning a century-long tradition. The Louis Armstrong Park area, near the French Quarter in Trem\u00e9, contains the New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park. The city's music was later also significantly influenced by Acadiana, home of Cajun and Zydeco music, and by Delta blues.\nNew Orleans's unique musical culture is on display in its traditional funerals. A spin on military funerals, New Orleans's traditional funerals feature sad music (mostly dirges and hymns) in processions on the way to the cemetery and happier music (hot jazz) on the way back. Until the 1990s, most locals preferred to call these \"funerals with music\". Visitors to the city have long dubbed them \"jazz funerals\".\nMuch later in its musical development, New Orleans was home to a distinctive brand of rhythm and blues that contributed greatly to the growth of rock and roll. An example of the New Orleans's sound in the 1960s is the No. 1 U.S. hit \"Chapel of Love\" by the Dixie Cups, a song which knocked the Beatles out of the top spot on the Billboard Hot 100. New Orleans became a hotbed for funk music in the 1960s and 1970s, and by the late 1980s, it had developed its own localized variant of hip hop, called bounce music. While not commercially successful outside of the Deep South, bounce music was immensely popular in poorer neighborhoods throughout the 1990s.\nA cousin of bounce, New Orleans hip hop achieved commercial success locally and internationally, producing Lil Wayne, Master P, Birdman, Juvenile, Suicideboys, Cash Money Records and No Limit Records. Additionally, the popularity of cowpunk, a fast form of southern rock, originated with the help of several local bands, such as The Radiators, Better Than Ezra, Cowboy Mouth and Dash Rip Rock. Throughout the 1990s, many sludge metal bands started. New Orleans's heavy metal bands such as Eyehategod, Soilent Green, Crowbar, and Down incorporated styles such as hardcore punk, doom metal, and southern rock to create an original and heady brew of swampy and aggravated metal that has largely avoided standardization.\nNew Orleans is the southern terminus of the famed Highway 61, made musically famous by musician Bob Dylan in his song, \"Highway 61 Revisited\".\nCuisine.\nNew Orleans is world-famous for its cuisine. The indigenous cuisine is distinctive and influential. New Orleans food combined local Creole, haute Creole and New Orleans French cuisines. Local ingredients, French, Spanish, Italian, African, Native American, Cajun, Chinese, and a hint of Cuban traditions combine to produce a truly unique and easily recognizable New Orleans flavor.\nNew Orleans is known for specialties including beignets (locally pronounced like \"ben-yays\"), square-shaped fried dough that could be called \"French doughnuts\" (served with \"caf\u00e9 au lait\" made with a blend of coffee and chicory rather than only coffee); and po' boy and Italian muffuletta sandwiches; Gulf oysters on the half-shell, fried oysters, boiled crawfish and other seafood; \u00e9touff\u00e9e, jambalaya, gumbo and other Creole dishes; and the Monday favorite of red beans and rice (Louis Armstrong often signed his letters, \"Red beans and ricely yours\"). Another New Orleans specialty is the praline , a candy made with brown sugar, granulated sugar, cream, butter, and pecans. The city offers notable street food including the Asian inspired beef Yaka mein.\nDialect.\nNew Orleans developed a distinctive local dialect that is neither Cajun English nor the stereotypical Southern accent that is often misportrayed by film and television actors. Like earlier Southern Englishes, it features frequent deletion of the pre-consonantal \"r\", though the local white dialect also came to be quite similar to New York accents. No consensus describes how this happened, but it likely resulted from New Orleans's geographic isolation by water and the fact that the city was a major immigration port throughout the 19th century and early 20th century. Specifically, many members of European immigrant families originally raised in the cities of the Northeast, namely New York, moved to New Orleans during this time frame, bringing their Northeastern accents along with their Irish, Italian (especially Sicilian), German, and Jewish culture.\nOne of the strongest varieties of the New Orleans accent is sometimes identified as the Yat dialect, from the greeting \"Where y'at?\" This distinctive accent is dying out in the city, but remains strong in the surrounding parishes.\nLess visibly, various ethnic groups throughout the area have retained distinct language traditions. The French-speaking community has had a cultural center, the Alliance Fran\u00e7aise of New Orleans, since 1984. The association is a chapter of the international Alliance Fran\u00e7aise organization and promotes French language and culture in New Orleans and the surrounding region. Since Louisiana became the first U.S. state to join the in 2018, New Orleans has reemerged as an important center for the state's francophone and creolophone cultures and languages, as seen in new organizations such as the Nous Foundation. Although rare, Louisiana French and Louisiana Creole are still spoken in the city. There is also Louisiana-Canarian Spanish dialect, the Isle\u00f1o Spanish, spoken by the Isle\u00f1o people and older members of the population.\nSports.\nNew Orleans's professional sports teams include the 2009 Super Bowl XLIV champion New Orleans Saints (NFL) and the New Orleans Pelicans (NBA). It is also home to the Big Easy Rollergirls, an all-female flat track roller derby team, and the New Orleans Blaze, a women's football team. New Orleans is also home to two NCAA Division I athletic programs, the Tulane Green Wave of the American Athletic Conference and the UNO Privateers of the Southland Conference.\nThe Caesars Superdome is the home of the Saints, the Sugar Bowl, and other prominent events. It has hosted the Super Bowl a record eight times (1978, 1981, 1986, 1990, 1997, 2002, 2013, and 2025). The Smoothie King Center is the home of the Pelicans, VooDoo, and many events that are not large enough to need the Superdome. New Orleans is also home to the Fair Grounds Race Course, the nation's third-oldest thoroughbred track. The city's Lakefront Arena has also been home to sporting events.\nEach year New Orleans plays host to the Sugar Bowl, the New Orleans Bowl, the Bayou Classic, and the Zurich Classic, a golf tournament on the PGA Tour. In addition, it has often hosted major sporting events that have no permanent home, such as the Super Bowl, ArenaBowl, NBA All-Star Game, BCS National Championship Game, and the NCAA Final Four. The Rock 'n' Roll Mardi Gras Marathon and the Crescent City Classic are two annual road running events.\nIn 2017, Major League Rugby had its inaugural season, and NOLA Gold were one of the first teams in the league. They play at the Gold Mine on Airline, a former minor league baseball stadium in the suburb of Metairie. In 2022, a consortium started an attempt to bring professional soccer to New Orleans, hoping to place teams in the male USL Championship and women's USL Super League by 2025.\nGovernment.\nThe city of New Orleans is a political subdivision of the U.S. state of Louisiana. The city and the parish of Orleans operate as a merged city-parish government. The original city was composed of what are now the 1st through 9th wards. The city of Lafayette (including the Garden District) was added in 1852 as the 10th and 11th wards. In 1870, Jefferson City, including Faubourg Bouligny and much of the Audubon and University areas, was annexed as the 12th, 13th, and 14th wards. Algiers, on the west bank of the Mississippi, was also annexed in 1870, becoming the 15th ward.\nNew Orleans has a mayor-council government, following a home rule charter adopted in 1954, as later amended. The city council consists of seven members, five elected from single-member districts and two members elected at-large, that is, across the city-parish. LaToya Cantrell assumed the mayor's office in 2018 as the first female mayor of the city. An ordinance in 2006 established an Office of Inspector General to review city government activities.\nNew Orleans's government is largely centralized in the city council and mayor's office, but it maintains earlier systems from when various sections of the city managed their affairs separately. For example, New Orleans had seven elected tax assessors, each with their own staff, representing various districts of the city, rather than one centralized office. A constitutional amendment passed on November 7, 2006, consolidated the seven assessors into one in 2010.\nThe City of New Orleans, used Archon Information Systems software and services to host multiple online tax sales. The first tax sale was held after Hurricane Katrina. The New Orleans government operates both a fire department and the New Orleans Emergency Medical Services.\nNew Orleans is the only city in Louisiana that refuses to pay court-ordered judgments when it loses a case that were awarded to the other party. The city uses a provision in the Louisiana Constitution that prohibits the seizure of a city's property to pay a judgment when it loses a lawsuit. According to an article, \"The constitution says the funds can't be seized and can only be paid out if the government appropriates the money. In other words, if the City of New Orleans doesn't budget the funds for judgments, no judge can force the city to pay.\" Only if the city council chooses to vote to pay a judgment can the other party be paid. Since the city cannot be forced to pay judgments unless it chooses to do so, it simply does not pay. More than $36 million in over 500 unpaid judgments issued against the city are simply ignored, some going as far back as 1996.\nThe Orleans Parish Civil Sheriff's Office serves papers involving lawsuits, provides court security, and operates the city's correctional facilities, including Orleans Parish Prison. The sheriff's office shares legal jurisdiction with the New Orleans Police Department and provides it with backup on an as-needed basis. Before 2010, New Orleans (and all other parishes in Louisiana) had separate criminal and civil sheriff's offices, corresponding to the separate criminal and civil courts: these were merged in 2010 by Louisiana Revised Statute 33:1500. As of 2024[ [update]] the sheriff is Susan Hutson, who defeated 17-year incumbent Marlin Gusman in the 2021 New Orleans City Election.\nCrime.\nNew Orleans is considered one of the most dangerous cities in the nation. As in comparable U.S. cities, the incidence of homicide and other violent crimes is usually highly concentrated in certain lower income neighborhoods. Arrested offenders in New Orleans are almost exclusively black males from lower income neighborhoods: in 2011, 97% were black and 95% were male; 91% of victims were black as well. The city's murder rate has been historically high and consistently among the highest rates nationwide since the 1970s. From 1994 to 2013, New Orleans was the country's \"Murder Capital\", annually averaging over 200 murders. The first record was broken in 1979 when the city reached 242 homicides. The record was broken again reaching 250 by 1989 to 345 by the end of 1991. By 1993, New Orleans had 395 murders: 80.5 for every 100,000 residents. In 1994, the city was officially named the \"Murder Capital of America\", hitting a historic peak of 424 murders. The murder count was one of the highest in the world and surpassed that of such cities as Gary, Indiana, Washington, D.C., and Baltimore. In 1999, the city's murder rate dropped down to a low of 158 and climbed to the high 200s in the early 2000s. Between 2000 and 2004, New Orleans had the highest homicide rate per capita of any city in the U.S., with 59 people killed per year per 100,000 citizens.\nIn 2006, with nearly half the population gone and widespread disruption and dislocation because of deaths and refugee relocations from Hurricane Katrina, the city hit another record of homicides. It was ranked as the most dangerous city in the country. By 2009, there was a 17% decrease in violent crime, a decrease seen in other cities across the country. But the homicide rate remained among the highest in the United States, at between 55 and 64 per 100,000 residents. In 2010, New Orleans's homicide rate dropped to 49.1 per 100,000, but increased again in 2012, to 53.2, the highest rate among cities of 250,000 population or larger.\nThe violent crime rate is a key issue in every modern mayoral race. In January 2007, several thousand New Orleans residents marched to City Hall for a rally demanding police and city leaders tackle the crime problem. Then-Mayor Ray Nagin said he was \"totally and solely focused\" on addressing the problem. Later, the city implemented checkpoints during late night hours in problem areas. The murder rate climbed 14% in 2011 to 57.88 per 100,000 rising to No. 21 in the world. In 2016, according to annual crime statistics released by the New Orleans Police Department (NOPD), 176 were murdered. In 2017, New Orleans had the highest rate of gun violence, surpassing the more populated Chicago and Detroit. In 2020, murders increased 68% from 2019 with a total of 202 murders. Criminal justice observers blamed impacts from COVID-19 and changes in police strategies for the uptick. In 2022, New Orleans's homicide rate skyrocketed, leading every major city, hence the city again being declared as the \"Murder Capital of America\". The 2022 city homicide count increased to 280 which was a 26-year high. The NOPD dropped to under 1,000 officers in 2022 which meant the department was severely understaffed for the city's population. NOPD is actively working to reduce violent crime by offering attractive incentives to recruit and retain more officers.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nNew Orleans has the highest concentration of colleges and universities in Louisiana and one of the highest in the Southern United States. New Orleans also has the third highest concentration of historically black collegiate institutions in the U.S.\nColleges and universities based within the city include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nOrleans Parish School Board (OPSB), also known as New Orleans Public Schools (NOPS), is the public school district for the entire city. Katrina was a watershed moment for the school system. Pre-Katrina, NOPS was one of the area's largest systems (along with the Jefferson Parish public school system). It was also the lowest-performing school district in Louisiana. According to researchers Carl L. Bankston and Stephen J. Caldas, only 12 of the 103 public schools within the city limits showed reasonably good performance.\nFollowing Hurricane Katrina, the state of Louisiana took over most of the schools within the system (all schools that matched a nominal \"worst-performing\" metric). Many of these schools (and others) were subsequently granted operating charters giving them administrative independence from the Orleans Parish School Board, the Recovery School District or the Louisiana Board of Elementary and Secondary Education (BESE). At the start of the 2014 school year, all public school students in the NOPS system attended these independent public charter schools, the nation's first to do so.\nThe charter schools made significant and sustained gains in student achievement, led by outside operators such as KIPP, the Algiers Charter School Network, and the Capital One\u2013University of New Orleans Charter School Network. An October 2009 assessment demonstrated continued growth in the academic performance of public schools. Considering the scores of all public schools in New Orleans gives an overall school district performance score of 70.6. This score represents a 24% improvement over an equivalent pre-Katrina (2004) metric, when a district score of 56.9 was posted. Notably, this score of 70.6 approaches the score (78.4) posted in 2009 by the adjacent, suburban Jefferson Parish public school system, though that system's performance score is itself below the state average of 91.\nOne particular change was that parents could choose which school to enroll their children in, rather than attending the school nearest them.\nLibraries.\nAcademic and public libraries as well as archives in New Orleans include Monroe Library at Loyola University, Howard-Tilton Memorial Library at Tulane University, the Law Library of Louisiana, and the Earl K. Long Library at the University of New Orleans.\nThe New Orleans Public Library operates in 13 locations. The main library includes a Louisiana Division that houses city archives and special collections.\nOther research archives are located at the Historic New Orleans Collection and the Old U.S. Mint.\nAn independently operated lending library called Iron Rail Book Collective specializes in radical and hard-to-find books. The library contains over 8,000 titles and is open to the public.\nThe Louisiana Historical Association was founded in New Orleans in 1889. It operated first at Howard Memorial Library. A separate Memorial Hall for it was later added to Howard Library, designed by New Orleans architect Thomas Sully.\nMedia.\nHistorically, the major newspaper in the area was \"The Times-Picayune\". The paper made headlines of its own in 2012 when owner Advance Publications cut its print schedule to three days each week, instead focusing its efforts on its website, NOLA.com. That action briefly made New Orleans the largest city in the country without a daily newspaper, until the Baton Rouge newspaper \"The Advocate\" began a New Orleans edition in September 2012. In June 2013, the \"Times-Picayune\" resumed daily printing with a condensed newsstand tabloid edition, nicknamed \"TP Street\", which is published on the three days each week that its namesake broadsheet edition is not printed (the Picayune has not returned to daily delivery). With the resumption of daily print editions from the \"Times-Picayune\" and the launch of the New Orleans edition of \"The Advocate\", now \"The New Orleans Advocate\", the city had two daily newspapers for the first time since the afternoon \"States-Item\" ceased publication on May 31, 1980. In 2019, the papers merged to form \"The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate\".\nIn addition to the daily newspaper, weekly publications include \"The Louisiana Weekly\" and \"Gambit Weekly\". Also in wide circulation is the \"Clarion Herald\", the newspaper of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New Orleans.\nGreater New Orleans is the 54th largest designated market area (DMA) in the U.S., serving at least 566,960 homes. Major television network affiliates serving the area include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWWOZ, the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Station, broadcasts modern and traditional jazz, blues, rhythm and blues, brass band, gospel, cajun, zydeco, Caribbean, Latin, Brazilian, African and bluegrass 24 hours per day.\nWTUL is Tulane University's radio station. Its programming includes 20th century classical, reggae, jazz, showtunes, indie rock, electronic music, soul/funk, goth, punk, hip hop, New Orleans music, opera, folk, hardcore, Americana, country, blues, Latin, cheese, techno, local, world, ska, swing and big band, kids' shows, and news programming. WTUL is listener-supported and non-commercial. The disc jockeys are volunteers, many of them college students.\nLouisiana's film and television tax credits spurred growth in the television industry, although to a lesser degree than in the film industry. Many films and advertisements were set there, along with television programs such as ' in 2000, ' in 2009 and 2010, and \"Bad Girls Club: New Orleans\" in 2011.\nTwo radio stations that were influential in promoting New Orleans\u2013based bands and singers were 50,000-watt WNOE (1060) and 10,000-watt WTIX (690 AM). These two stations competed head-to-head from the late 1950s to the late 1970s.\nTransportation.\nPublic transportation.\nHurricane Katrina devastated transit service in 2005. The New Orleans Regional Transit Authority (RTA) was quicker to restore the streetcars to service, while bus service had only been restored to 35% of pre-Katrina levels as recently as the end of 2013. During the same period, streetcars arrived at an average of once every seventeen minutes, compared to bus frequencies of once every thirty-eight minutes. The same priority was demonstrated in RTA's spending, increasing the proportion of its budget devoted to streetcars to more than three times compared to its pre-Katrina budget. Through the end of 2017, counting both streetcar and bus trips, only 51% of service had been restored to pre-Katrina levels.\nIn 2017, the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority began operation on the extension of the Rampart\u2013St. Claude streetcar line. Another change to transit service that year was the re-routing of the 15 Freret and 28 Martin Luther King bus routes to Canal Street. These increased the number of jobs accessible by a thirty-minute walk or transit ride: from 83,722 in 2016 to 89,216 in 2017. This resulted in a regional increase in such job access by more than a full percentage point.\nStreetcars.\nNew Orleans has four active streetcar lines:\nThe city's streetcars were featured in the Tennessee Williams play \"A Streetcar Named Desire\". The streetcar line to Desire Street became a bus line in 1948.\nBuses.\nPublic transportation is operated by the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority (\"RTA\"). Many bus routes connect the city and suburban areas. The RTA lost 200+ buses in the flood. Some of the replacement buses operate on biodiesel. The Jefferson Parish Department of Transit Administration operates Jefferson Transit, which provides service between the city and its suburbs.\nFerries.\nNew Orleans has had continuous ferry service since 1827, operating three routes as of 2017. The Canal Street Ferry (or Algiers Ferry) connects downtown New Orleans at the foot of Canal Street with the National Historic Landmark District of Algiers Point across the Mississippi (\"West Bank\" in local parlance). It services passenger vehicles, bicycles and pedestrians. This same terminal also serves the Canal Street/Gretna Ferry, connecting Gretna, Louisiana for pedestrians and bicyclists only. A third auto/bicycle/pedestrian connects Chalmette, Louisiana and Lower Algiers.\nBicycling.\nThe city's flat landscape, simple street grid and mild winters facilitate bicycle ridership, helping to make New Orleans eighth among U.S. cities in its rate of bicycle and pedestrian transportation as of 2010, and sixth in terms of the percentage of bicycling commuters. New Orleans is located at the start of the Mississippi River Trail, a bicycle path that stretches from the city's Audubon Park to Minnesota. Since Katrina the city has actively sought to promote bicycling by constructing a $1.5\u00a0million bike trail from Mid-City to Lake Pontchartrain, and by adding over of bicycle lanes to various streets, including St. Charles Avenue. In 2009, Tulane University contributed to these efforts by converting the main street through its Uptown campus, McAlister Place, into a pedestrian mall open to bicycle traffic. The Lafitte Greenway bicycle and pedestrian trail opened in 2015, and is ultimately planned to extend from the French Quarter to Lakeview. New Orleans has been recognized for its abundance of uniquely decorated and uniquely designed bicycles.\nRoads.\nNew Orleans is served by Interstate 10, Interstate 610 and Interstate 510. I-10 travels east\u2013west through the city as the Pontchartrain Expressway. In New Orleans East it is known as the Eastern Expressway. I-610 provides a direct shortcut for traffic passing through New Orleans via I-10, allowing that traffic to bypass I-10's southward curve.\nIn addition to the interstates, U.S. 90 travels through the city, while U.S. 61 terminates downtown. In addition, U.S. 11 terminates in the eastern portion of the city.\nNew Orleans is home to many bridges; Crescent City Connection is perhaps the most notable. It serves as New Orleans's major bridge across the Mississippi, providing a connection between the city's downtown on the eastbank and its westbank suburbs. Other Mississippi crossings are the Huey P. Long Bridge, carrying U.S. 90 and the Hale Boggs Memorial Bridge, carrying Interstate 310.\nThe Twin Span Bridge, a five-mile (8\u00a0km) causeway in eastern New Orleans, carries I-10 across Lake Pontchartrain. Also in eastern New Orleans, Interstate 510/LA 47 travels across the Intracoastal Waterway/Mississippi River-Gulf Outlet Canal via the Paris Road Bridge, connecting New Orleans East and suburban Chalmette.\nThe tolled Lake Pontchartrain Causeway, consisting of two parallel bridges are, at long, the longest bridges in the world. Built in the 1950s (southbound span) and 1960s (northbound span), the bridges connect New Orleans with its suburbs on the north shore of Lake Pontchartrain via Metairie.\nTaxi service.\nUnited Cab is the city's largest taxi service, with a fleet of over 300 cabs. It has operated 365 days a year since its establishment in 1938, with the exception of the month after Hurricane Katrina, in which operations were temporarily shut down due to disruptions in radio service.\nUnited Cab's fleet was once larger than 450 cabs, but has been reduced in recent years due to competition from services like Uber and Lyft, according to owner Syed Kazmi. In January 2016, New Orleans-based sweet shop Sucr\u00e9 approached United Cab with to deliver its king cakes locally on-demand. Sucr\u00e9 saw this partnership as a way to alleviate some of the financial pressure being placed on taxi services due to Uber's presence in the city.\nAirports.\nThe metropolitan area is served by the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, located in the suburb of Kenner. Regional airports include the Lakefront Airport, Naval Air Station Joint Reserve Base New Orleans (Callender Field) in the suburb of Belle Chasse and Southern Seaplane Airport, also located in Belle Chasse. Southern Seaplane has a runway for wheeled planes and a water runway for seaplanes.\nArmstrong International is the busiest airport in Louisiana and the only to handle scheduled international passenger flights. As of 2018, more than 13\u00a0million passengers passed through Armstrong, on nonstops flights from more than 57 destinations, including foreign nonstops from the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, Mexico, Jamaica and the Dominican Republic.\nRail.\nThe city is served by Amtrak. The New Orleans Union Passenger Terminal is the central rail depot and is served by the \"Crescent\", operating between New Orleans and New York City; the \"City of New Orleans\", operating between New Orleans and Chicago and the \"Sunset Limited\", operating between New Orleans and Los Angeles. Up until August 2005 (when Hurricane Katrina struck), the \"Sunset Limited's\" route continued east to Orlando. The \"Mardi Gras Service\" provides service to Mobile following that route.\nWith the strategic benefits of both the port and its double-track Mississippi River crossings, the city attracted all six of the Class I railroads in North America: Union Pacific Railroad, BNSF Railway, Norfolk Southern Railway, Canadian Pacific Kansas City, CSX Transportation and Canadian National Railway. The New Orleans Public Belt Railroad provides interchange services between the railroads.\nModal characteristics.\nAccording to the 2016 American Community Survey, 67.4% of working city of New Orleans residents commuted by driving alone, 9.7% carpooled, 7.3% used public transportation, and 4.9% walked. About 5% used all other forms of transportation, including taxicab, motorcycle, and bicycle. About 5.7% of working New Orleans residents worked at home.\nMany city of New Orleans households own no personal automobiles. In 2015, 18.8% of New Orleans households were without a car, which increased to 20.2% in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. New Orleans averaged 1.26 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8 per household.\nNew Orleans ranks high among cities in terms of the percentage of working residents who commute by walking or bicycling. In 2013, 5% of working people from New Orleans commuted by walking and 2.8% commuted by cycling. During the same period, New Orleans ranked thirteenth for percentage of workers who commuted by walking or biking among cities not included within the fifty most populous cities. Only nine of the most fifty most populous cities had a higher percentage of commuters who walked or biked than did New Orleans in 2013.\nSister cities.\nSister cities of New Orleans are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53845", "revid": "869314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53845", "title": "Alaskan Panhandle", "text": ""}
{"id": "53846", "revid": "466067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53846", "title": "Miami", "text": "City in Florida, United States\nMiami is a coastal city in the U.S. state of Florida. It is the second-most populous city proper in Florida, with a population of 442,241 at the 2020 census. The Miami metropolitan area in South Florida has an estimated 6.46\u00a0million residents, ranking as the third-largest metropolitan area in the Southeast and sixth-largest metropolitan area in the United States. Miami has the third-largest skyline in the U.S. with over 300 high-rises, 70 of which exceed . It is the county seat of Miami-Dade County.\nMiami is a major center and leader in finance, commerce, culture, arts, and international trade. Miami's metropolitan area is by far the largest urban economy in Florida, with a 2017 gross domestic product of $344.9\u00a0billion. In a 2018 UBS study of 77 world cities, Miami was the third-richest city in the U.S. and the third-richest globally in purchasing power. Miami is a majority-minority city, with 70.2 percent of the city's population identifying as Hispanic and Latino as of 2020.\nDowntown Miami has among the largest concentrations of international banks in the U.S. and is home to several large national and international companies. The Health District is home to several major University of Miami-affiliated hospital and health facilities, including Jackson Memorial Hospital, the nation's largest hospital with 1,547 beds, and the Miller School of Medicine, the University of Miami's academic medical center and teaching hospital, and others engaged in health-related care and research. PortMiami, the city's seaport, is the busiest cruise port in the world in both passenger traffic and cruise lines.\nThe Miami metropolitan area is the second-most visited city or metropolitan statistical area in the U.S. after New York City, with over four million visitors in 2022. Due to its strong commercial and cultural ties to Latin America and majority-Hispanic population (at 70%), Miami has been called the \"Gateway to Latin America\" or even the \"Capital of Latin America.\"\nToponymy.\nMiami was named after the Miami River, derived from Mayaimi, the historic name of Lake Okeechobee and the Native Americans who lived around it. Miami is sometimes colloquially referred to as \"The 305\", \"Magic City\", \"Gateway to the Americas\", \"Gateway to Latin America\", \"Capital of Latin America\", and \"Vice City\".\nHistory.\nThe Tequesta tribe occupied the Miami area for around 2,000 years before contact with Europeans. A village of hundreds of people, dating to 500\u2013600 BCE, was located at the mouth of the Miami River. It is believed that the entire tribe migrated to Cuba by the mid-1700s. In 1566, admiral Pedro Men\u00e9ndez de Avil\u00e9s, Florida's first governor, claimed the area for Spain. A Spanish mission was constructed one year later. Florida was ruled by Spain for centuries\u2014aside from a brief British interlude (1763\u20131783) that ended with Britain losing the territory back to Spain\u2014until Spain ceded it to the United States in 1821, in exchange for U.S. recognition of Spanish sovereignty in Texas and the resolution of the border dispute along the Sabine River. In 1836, the U.S. built Fort Dallas on the banks of the Miami River as part of their development of the Florida Territory and their attempt to suppress and remove the Seminoles. As a result, the Miami area became a site of fighting in the Second Seminole War.\nMiami is noted as the only major city in the United States founded by a woman. Julia Tuttle, a local citrus grower and a wealthy Cleveland native, was the original owner of the land upon which Miami was built. In the late 19th century, the area was known as \"Biscayne Bay Country\", and reports described it as a promising wilderness and \"one of the finest building sites in Florida\". The Great Freeze of 1894\u20131895 hastened Miami's growth, as the crops there were the only ones in Florida that survived. Julia Tuttle subsequently convinced railroad tycoon Henry Flagler to extend his Florida East Coast Railway to the region, for which she became known as \"the mother of Miami\". Miami was officially incorporated as a city on July 28, 1896, with a population of just over 300.\nIn the early twentieth century, Miami's development was deeply shaped by waves of migrant labor, particularly from the Caribbean. Scholars note that Bahamian immigrants formed a critical portion of Miami's construction and service workforce during the city's formative decades, contributing essential labor to roadbuilding, hotel construction, and other urban expansion projects (Shell-Weiss, 2005). Their role in Miami's labor force helped anchor the city's early economic growth and laid a foundation for its later multicultural identity. During the early 20th century, migrants from the Bahamas and African-Americans constituted 40 percent of the city's population. When landlords began to rent homes to African-Americans around Avenue J, what would later become NW Fifth Avenue, a gang of white men with torches marched through the neighborhood and warned the residents to move or be bombed. Miami's economy was heavily based on seasonal tourism and construction work, which created a volatile job market of low-wage, temporary employment and contributed to pronounced income inequality even as the city promoted itself as a booming leisure destination.\nDespite the city's image of resort-style prosperity, workers and activists during the interwar period organized around unemployment and labor exclusion, helping to lay early foundations for labor mobilization in South Florida.\nMiami prospered during the 1920s with an increase in population and development in infrastructure as northerners moved to the city. The legacy of Jim Crow was embedded in these developments. Miami's chief of police at the time, H. Leslie Quigg, did not hide the fact that he, like many other white Miami police officers, was a member of the Ku Klux Klan. Unsurprisingly, these officers enforced social codes far beyond the written law. Quigg, for example, \"personally and publicly beat a colored bellboy to death for speaking directly to a white woman\". The collapse of the Florida land boom of the 1920s, the 1926 Miami Hurricane, and the Great Depression in the 1930s slowed development. When World War II began, Miami became a base for U.S. defense against German submarines due to its prime location on the southern coast of Florida. This brought an increase in Miami's population; 172,172 people lived in the city by 1940. The city's nickname, \"The Magic City\", came from its rapid growth, which was noticed by winter visitors who remarked that the city grew so much from one year to the next that it was like magic.\nAfter Fidel Castro rose to power in Cuba following the Revolution in 1959, many wealthy Cubans sought refuge in Miami, further increasing the city's population. Miami's national profile expanded dramatically in the 1970s, particularly in 1972. The region hosted both the Democratic and Republican National Conventions in the 1972 Presidential election. The Miami Dolphins also made history with their undefeated \"perfect\" season. The area's educational and cultural institutions also developed significantly in this period, positioning the city to service a larger and increasingly international population.\nMiami developed new businesses and cultural amenities as part of the New South in the 1980s and 1990s. At the same time, South Florida weathered social problems related to drug wars, immigration from Haiti and Latin America, and the widespread destruction of Hurricane Andrew. Racial and cultural tensions sometimes sparked, but Miami developed in the latter half of the 20th century as a major international, financial, and cultural center. It is the second-largest U.S. city with a Spanish-speaking majority (after El Paso, Texas), and the largest city with a Cuban-American plurality.\nGeography.\nMiami and its suburbs are located on a broad plain between the Everglades to the west and Biscayne Bay to the east, which extends from Lake Okeechobee southward to Florida Bay. The elevation of the area averages at around above sea level in most neighborhoods, especially near the coast. The highest points are found along the Miami Rock Ridge, which lies under most of the eastern Miami metro. The main portion of Miami is on the shores of Biscayne Bay, which contains several hundred natural and artificial barrier islands, the largest of which contains Miami Beach and South Beach. The Gulf Stream, a warm ocean current, runs northward just off the coast, allowing Miami's climate to stay warm and mild all year.\nGeology.\nThe surface bedrock under the Miami area is called Miami oolite or Miami limestone. This bedrock is covered by a thin layer of soil, and is no more than thick. Miami limestone formed as the result of the drastic changes in sea level associated with recent glacial periods, or ice ages. Beginning some 130,000 years ago, the Sangamonian Stage raised sea levels to approximately above the current level. All of southern Florida was covered by a shallow sea. Several parallel lines of reef formed along the edge of the submerged Florida plateau, stretching from the present Miami area to what is now the Dry Tortugas.\nThe area behind this reef line was a large lagoon. Miami limestone formed throughout the area from the deposition of oolites and the shells of bryozoans. Starting about 100,000 years ago, the Wisconsin glaciation began lowering sea levels, exposing the floor of the lagoon. By 15,000 years ago, the sea level had dropped below the current level. The sea level rose quickly after that, stabilizing at the current level about 4,000 years ago, leaving the mainland of South Florida just above sea level.\nBeneath the plain lies the Biscayne Aquifer, a natural underground source of fresh water that extends from southern Palm Beach County to Florida Bay. It comes closest to the surface around the cities of Miami Springs and Hialeah. Most of the Miami metropolitan area obtains its drinking water from the Biscayne Aquifer. As a result of the aquifer, it is not possible to dig more than beneath the city without hitting water, which impedes underground construction, though some underground parking garages exist. For this reason, the mass transit systems in and around Miami are elevated or at-grade.\nMost of the western fringes of Miami border the Everglades, a tropical marshland covering most of the southern portion of Florida. Alligators that live in the marshes have ventured into Miami communities and onto major highways.\nCityscape.\nNeighborhoods.\nMiami is split roughly into north, south, west, and Downtown areas. The heart of the city is Downtown Miami, which is on the eastern side and includes the neighborhoods of Brickell, Virginia Key, Watson Island, and PortMiami. Downtown Miami is Florida's largest and most influential central business district, with many major banks, courthouses, financial headquarters, cultural and tourist attractions, schools, parks, and a large residential population. Brickell Avenue has the largest concentration of international banks in the United States. Just northwest of Downtown is the Health District, which is Miami's center for hospitals, research institutes and biotechnology, with hospitals such as Jackson Memorial Hospital, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, and the University of Miami's Miller School of Medicine.\nThe southern side of Miami includes the neighborhoods of Coral Way, The Roads, and Coconut Grove. Coral Way is a historic residential neighborhood built in 1922 between Downtown and Coral Gables, and is home to many old homes and tree-lined streets. Coconut Grove, settled in 1825, and annexed into Miami in 1925, is a historic neighborhood with narrow, winding roads and a heavy tree canopy. It is the location of Miami's City Hall at Dinner Key, the former Coconut Grove Playhouse, CocoWalk, and the Coconut Grove Convention Center. It is home to many nightclubs, bars, restaurants, and bohemian shops, which makes it very popular with local college students. Coconut Grove is known for its many parks and gardens, such as Vizcaya Museum, The Kampong, The Barnacle Historic State Park, and numerous other historic homes and estates.\nThe western side of Miami includes the neighborhoods of Little Havana, West Flagler, and Flagami. Although at one time a mostly Jewish neighborhood, today western Miami is home to immigrants from mostly Central America and Cuba. The west central neighborhood of Allapattah is a multicultural community of many ethnicities.\nThe northern side of Miami includes Midtown, a district with a great mix of diversity ranging from Caribbeans to Central Americans, South Americans and Europeans. The Edgewater neighborhood of Midtown is mostly composed of high-rise residential towers and is home to the Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts. Wynwood is an art district with ten galleries in former warehouses, as well as a large outdoor mural project. The wealthier residents of Miami usually live in the Design District and the Upper Eastside, which has many 1920s homes as well as examples of Miami Modern architecture in the MiMo Historic District. The northern side of Miami also has notable African-American and Caribbean immigrant communities, including Little Haiti, Overtown (home of the Lyric Theater), and Liberty City.\nClimate.\nMiami has a tropical monsoon climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Am\") with hot and wet summers and warm and dry winters.\nMiami's sea-level elevation, coastal location, position just above the Tropic of Cancer, and proximity to the Gulf Stream shape its climate. Average winter high temperatures, from December to March, range from . January is the coolest month with an average daily temperature of . Low temperatures fall below about 3 to 4 nights during the winter season, after the passage of cold fronts that produce what little rainfall that falls in the winter.\nThere are two basic seasons in Miami, a hot and wet season from May to October, and a warm and dry season from November to April. During the hot and wet season, daily thundershowers occur in the humid unstable air masses. The wet season in Miami is defined as the period during which the average daily dew point temperature is above . The rainy season typically begins on the first day that occurs, or within a few days later.\nDaily rainfall in Miami decreases sharply when the average daily dew point falls to or below. In some years, a stalled front to the south of the Florida peninsula may cause rains to continue for a few more days. From 1956 to 1997, the date summer began ranged from April 16 to June 3, with a median date of May 21. In those same years, the date summer ended ranged from September 24 to November 1, with a median date of October 17.\nDuring summer, temperatures range from the mid-80s to low 90s \u00b0F (29\u201335\u00a0\u00b0C) and are accompanied by high humidity. The heat is often relieved in the afternoon by thunderstorms or a sea breeze that develops off the Atlantic Ocean. Much of the year's of rainfall occurs during this period. Dew points in the warm months range from in June to in August.\nHistorical temperature extremes range from on February 3, 1917, to on July 21, 1942. While Miami has never recorded snowfall at any official weather station since records have been kept, snow flurries fell in some parts of Miami on January 19, 1977. The coldest daytime maximum temperature on record is in December 1989 during the December 1989 United States cold wave. The warmest overnight low measured is on several occasions.\nHurricane season officially runs from June 1 to November 30, although hurricanes can develop beyond those dates. The most likely time for Miami to be hit is during the peak of the Cape Verde season, which is mid-August to the end of September. Although tornadoes are uncommon in the area, one struck in 1925 and another in 1997. Around 40% of homes in Miami are built upon floodplains and are considered as flood-risk zones.\nMiami falls within the Department of Agriculture's 10b/11a plant hardiness zone.\nMiami is one of the major coastal cities and major cities in the United States that will be most affected by climate change. Globally, it is one of the most at-risk cities, according to a 2020 report by Resources for the Future. Global sea level rise. Historical tide-gauge observations show a measurable upward trend in sea level along Florida's coastline, and projections estimate that Miami may experience significantly higher flooding frequency by mid-century which in Miami is projected to be to by 2070, will lead to an increase in storm damage, more intense flooding, and will threaten Miami's water supply. Other potential impacts of climate change include higher hurricane wind speeds and severe thunderstorms, which can bring about hail or tornadoes. Some protective efforts are in place, including nourishing beaches and adding protective barriers, raising buildings and roads that are vulnerable, and restoring natural habitats such as wetlands. Miami Beach has invested $500\u00a0million to protect roads, buildings, and water systems. Real estate prices in Miami already reflect the increase in prices for real estate at a higher elevation within the city compared to real estate at a lower elevation.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMiami is the largest city in South Florida, the second-largest city in Florida, and is the anchor of the largest metropolitan area in Florida: the Miami metropolitan area, which has over 6 million residents. Despite Miami being home to less than a fourteenth (1/14) of the population of the metro area, it is an outlier compared to its neighbors, being nearly twice the size of the next-largest city in the metro: Hialeah. Miami has approximately a sixth of the population of its own county, Miami-Dade, which is the state's largest.\nMiami had rapid growth in the first half of the twentieth century. Its population grew from 1,681 in the 1900 census to 249,276 in the 1950 census. This made it Florida's largest city, a title it retained until the Jacksonville Consolidation, when the city of Jacksonville absorbed most of Duval County, nearly tripling its population. Since then, Miami has retained its spot as Florida's second-largest city.\nThroughout the latter half of the twentieth century, Miami experienced a certain amount of stagnation in its population, with expansion slowing during the 1950s and 1960s before nearly halting in the next three decades as suburbanization occurred. Miami grew by 34.3% in the 1950s and 1960s as its population reached 334,859 at the 1970 census. In the next three decades, it only grew 8.2%. By the time of the 2000 census, Miami's population stood at 362,470.\nIn the 2000s and 2010s, spurred by high-rise construction in Downtown Miami, Edgewater, and Brickell, Miami's population began to grow quickly once more. An estimate by the American Community Survey found that the downtown population, from Brickell north to Midtown Miami, grew nearly 40% between 2010 and 2018. From 2000 to 2010, Miami's population grew by 10.2% and reached 399,457 in 2010. In the early 2010s, Miami's population crossed a milestone of 400,000 people. In the 2020 census, it had grown by a further 10.7%, up to a population of 442,241.\nIn 1970, the Census Bureau reported Miami's population as 45.3% Hispanic, 32.9% non-Hispanic White, and 22.7% Black. Miami's explosive population growth has been driven by internal migration from other parts of the country, up until the 1960s. From 1970 to 2000, population growth in Miami was stagnant, as non-Hispanic White Miamians left and significant immigration from Latin America, particularly Cuba, made up the balance. Miami's Hispanic majority solidified itself in this period of time, and in 1985, Miami elected its first Cuban-born mayor, Xavier Suarez.\nAccording to the U.S Census Bureau's 2024 population estimates, Miami-dade county continues to experience steady growth, driven largely by domestic migration and ongoing international immigration. The county's population in 2024 reflects its status as one of the most diverse metropolitan regions in the United States, with large Hispanic, Caribbean, and Latin American communities contributing to its demographic profile (U.S Census Bureau, 2024)\nThe non-Hispanic Black population of the city of Miami peaked in 1990 at almost 90,000, making up nearly a quarter of the population of Miami. Since then, Miami's non-Hispanic Black population has experienced a precipitous and steady decline. In the 2020 census, it was 52,447, only 11.7% of the population. Reasons for this include high costs in areas such as Liberty City and Little Haiti, compounded with gentrification.\nThe non-Hispanic White population began to rebound in the twenty-first century, as the monolithically Hispanic areas in the Western and Central parts of Miami experienced population stagnation. This caused them to begin to be outweighed by migration into the Downtown region, from Latin America and the rest of the United States. This caused the non-Hispanic White population to rise from a nadir of 11.8% at the time of the 2000 census to 11.9% at the time of the 2010 census. After this, the non-Hispanic White population grew significantly faster than Miami as a whole did during the 2010s. In the 2020 census, non-Hispanic Whites were 14.0% of the population of Miami and numbered 61,829, the highest number since the 1980s. The non-Hispanic White population of Miami surpassed the non-Hispanic Black population of Miami in the 2010s.\nIn 2010, 34.4% of city residents were of Cuban origin, 15.8% had a Central American background (7.2% Nicaraguan, 5.8% Honduran, 1.2% Salvadoran, and 1.0% Guatemalan), 8.7% were of South American descent (3.2% Colombian, 1.4% Venezuelan, 1.2% Peruvian, 1.2% Argentine, 1.0% Chilean and 0.7% Ecuadorian), 4.0% had other Hispanic or Latino origins (0.5% Spaniard), 3.2% descended from Puerto Ricans, 2.4% were Dominican, and 1.5% had Mexican ancestry.\nIn 2010, 5.6% of city residents were West Indian or Afro-Caribbean American origin (4.4% Haitian, 0.4% Jamaican, 0.4% Bahamian, 0.1% British West Indian, and 0.1% Trinidadian and Tobagonian, 0.1% Other or Unspecified West Indian), 3.0% were Black Hispanics, and 0.4% were Subsaharan African origin.\nIn 2010, those of (non-Hispanic white) European ancestry were 11.9% of Miami's population. Of the city's total population, 1.7% were German, 1.6% Italian, 1.4% Irish, 1.0% English, 0.8% French, 0.6% Russian, and 0.5% were Polish.\nIn 2010, those of Asian ancestry were 1.0% of Miami's population. Of the city's total population, 0.3% were Indian/Indo-Caribbean (1,206 people), 0.3% Chinese/Chinese Caribbean (1,804 people), 0.2% Filipino (647 people), 0.1% were other Asian (433 people), 0.1% Japanese (245 people), 0.1% Korean (213 people), and 0.0% were Vietnamese (125 people).\nIn 2010, 1.9% of the population considered themselves to be of only American ancestry (regardless of race or ethnicity), while 0.5% were of Arab ancestry, in 2010.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn a 2014 Pew Research Center study, Christianity was the most-practiced religion in Miami (68%), with 39% professing attendance at a variety of churches that could be considered Protestant, and 27% professing Catholicism. Followed by Judaism (9%); Islam, Buddhism, Hinduism, and a variety of other religions have smaller followings; atheism or no self-identifying organized religious affiliation was practiced by 21%.\nThere has been a Norwegian Seamen's church in Miami since the early 1980s. In November 2011, Crown Princess of Norway Mette-Marit opened a new building for the church. The church was built as a center for the 10,000 Scandinavians that live in Florida. Around 4,000 of them are Norwegian. The church is also an important place for the 150 Norwegians that work at Walt Disney World in Central Florida.\nIn a 2022 Point-In-Time Homeless Count, there were 3,440 homeless people in Miami-Dade County, 970 of which were on the streets. In the city limits of Miami, there were 591 unsheltered homeless people on the streets, up from 555 in 2021.\nAccording to National Immigration Forum, the top countries of origin for Miami's immigrants are Latin America (86%): Cuba (741,666), Haiti (213,000), Colombia (166,338), Jamaica (144,445); Europe (6.1%): United Kingdom (23,334), Germany (15,611), Italy (14,240) and Asia (5.2%): India (23,602), China (21,580) and the Philippines (15,078).\nEconomy.\nMiami is a major center of commerce and finance and has a strong international business community. According to the 2020 ranking of world cities undertaken by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network (GaWC) based on the level of presence of global corporate service organizations, Miami is considered a Beta + level world city, along with Atlanta, Dallas, and Houston. However, according to the U.S. census between 2015 and 2019, Miami lacks in terms of owner-occupied housing, computer and internet usage, education of bachelor's degree or higher, median household income, per capita income, while having a higher percentage of persons in poverty. In 2013, Miami had a Gross Metropolitan Product of $257\u00a0billion, ranking 11th in the United States and 20th worldwide in GMP.\nSeveral large companies are headquartered in Miami, including but not limited to Akerman LLP, Alienware, Arquitectonica, Brightstar Corporation, Celebrity Cruises, Carnival Corporation, Duany Plater-Zyberk, Greenberg Traurig, Inktel Direct, Lennar Corporation, Norwegian Cruise Line, Oceania Cruises, OPKO Health, Parkjockey, RCTV International, Royal Caribbean International, Sitel, Southern Wine &amp; Spirits, Telemundo, Vector Group, Watsco and World Fuel Services. In 2022, hedge fund Citadel LLC and market maker Citadel Securities relocated their headquarters from Chicago to Miami. Over 1,400 multinational firms are located in Miami, with many major global organizations headquartering their Latin American operations (or regional offices) in the city including Walmart. Companies based in nearby cities or unincorporated areas of Miami-Dade County include, Benihana, Burger King, Carnival Cruise Line, Navarro Discount Pharmacies, Perry Ellis International, Ryder, Sedano's, UniM\u00e1s, and U.S. Century Bank.\nMiami is a major television production center, and the most important city in the United States for Spanish-language media. Telemundo and UniM\u00e1s have their headquarters in the Miami area. Univisi\u00f3n Studios and Telemundo Global Studios produce much of the original programming for their respective parent networks, such as telenovelas, news, sports, and talk shows. In 2011, 85% of Telemundo's original programming was filmed in Miami. Miami is a significant music recording center, with the Sony Music Latin headquarters in the city, along with many other smaller record labels. Miami also attracts many artists for music video and film shoots.\nDuring the mid-2000s, Miami witnessed its largest real estate boom since the Florida land boom of the 1920s, and the city had well over a hundred approved high-rise construction projects. However, only 50 were actually built. A rapid wave of Manhattanization, or high-rise construction, led to fast population growth in Miami's inner neighborhoods, with Downtown, Brickell and Edgewater becoming the fastest-growing areas of Miami. Miami currently has the seven tallest, as well as fifteen of top twenty, skyscrapers in the state of Florida, with the tallest being the Panorama Tower.\nThe housing market crash of 2007 caused a foreclosure crisis in the area. Like other metro areas in the United States, crime in Miami is localized to specific neighborhoods.\nMiami International Airport (IATA: MIA) and PortMiami are among the nation's busiest ports of entry, especially for cargo from South America and the Caribbean. PortMiami is the world's busiest cruise port. Miami International Airport is the busiest airport in Florida and the largest gateway between the United States and Latin America. Due to its strength in international business, finance and trade, Miami has among the largest concentration of international banks in the country, primarily along Brickell Avenue in Brickell, Miami's financial district. Miami was the host city of the 2003 Free Trade Area of the Americas negotiations.\nMiami is the home to the National Hurricane Center and the headquarters of the United States Southern Command, responsible for military operations in Central and South America. Miami is also an industrial center, especially for stone quarrying and warehousing. These industries are centered largely on the western fringes of Miami near Doral and Hialeah.\nIn the 2012 census, Miami had the fourth highest percentage of family incomes below the federal poverty line out of all large cities in the United States, behind Detroit, Cleveland, and Cincinnati, respectively. Miami is also one of the very few cities in the U.S. where the local government has gone bankrupt, in 2001.\nThe Little Fire Ant, \"Wasmannia auropunctata\", is an invasive agricultural pest in parts of Miami.\nPortMiami.\nPortMiami in Miami is the largest cruise ship port in the world. It has retained its status as the number one cruise and passenger port in the world for well over a decade, accommodating the largest cruise ships and the major cruise lines. In 2017, the port served 5,340,559 cruise passengers. The port is one of the nation's busiest cargo ports, importing 9,162,340 tons of cargo in 2017.\nAmong North American ports, it ranks second to New Orleans' Port of South Louisiana in cargo tonnage imported from Latin America. The port sits on and has seven passenger terminals. China is the port's number one import country and number one export country. Miami has the world's largest amount of cruise line headquarters, home to Carnival Cruise Line, Celebrity Cruises, Norwegian Cruise Line, Oceania Cruises, and Royal Caribbean International. In 2014, the Port of Miami Tunnel opened, connecting the MacArthur Causeway to PortMiami.\nTourism and conventions.\nTourism is one of the Miami's largest private-sector industries, accounting for more than 144,800 jobs in Miami-Dade County. Miami's frequent portrayal in music, film, and popular culture has made Miami and its landmarks recognizable worldwide. In 2016, it attracted the second-highest number of foreign tourists of any city in the United States, after New York City, and is among the top 20 cities worldwide by international visitor spending. More than 15.9\u00a0million visitors arrived in Miami in 2017, adding $26.1\u00a0billion to the economy. With a large hotel infrastructure and the newly renovated Miami Beach Convention Center, Miami is a popular destination for annual conventions and conferences.\nSome of the most popular tourist destinations in Miami include South Beach, Lincoln Road, Bayside Marketplace, Downtown Miami, and Brickell City Centre. The Art Deco District in Miami Beach is reputed as one of the most glamorous in the world for its nightclubs, beaches, historical buildings, and shopping. Annual events such as the Miami Open, Art Basel, the Winter Music Conference, the South Beach Wine and Food Festival, and Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami attract millions to the metropolis every year.\nCulture.\nMiami enjoys a vibrant culture that is influenced by a diverse population from all around the world. Miami is known as the \"Magic City\" for seemingly popping up overnight due to its young age and massive growth. Miami is infamous for its drug war in the early 1980s and its outrun aesthetics. It is nicknamed the \"Capital of Latin America\" because of its high population of Spanish speakers.\nMiami has been the setting of numerous films and television shows, including \"Bad Boys\", \"Miami Vice\", \"Cocaine Cowboys\", ', \"Burn Notice\", \"Jane the Virgin\", \"Scarface\", \"The Birdcage\", \"Ballers\", \"South Beach Tow\", ', \"Ride Along 2\", ', \"Kourtney &amp; Kim Take Miami\", \"Family Karma\", \"The Golden Girls\", \"2 Fast 2 Furious\", \"Austin &amp; Ally\", ', and \"Dexter\". Several video games, including \"Hotline Miami\", the Gameloft racing game \"Asphalt Overdrive\", ', and the fictional Vice City in several video games across the \"Grand Theft Auto\" series, most notably ' and the upcoming \"Grand Theft Auto VI\", is based on Miami.\nVenues.\nMiami is home to many entertainment venues, theaters, museums, parks, and performing arts centers. The Adrienne Arsht Center for the Performing Arts is the home of the Florida Grand Opera and the second-largest performing arts center in the United States after Lincoln Center in New York City. The center attracts many large-scale operas, ballets, concerts, and musicals from around the world.\nOther performing arts venues in Miami include the Olympia Theater, Wertheim Performing Arts Center, the Fair Expo Center, the Tower Theater, and the Bayfront Park Amphitheater.\nMiami's first boat-in movie theater opened in 2020.\nEvents.\nMiami is home to a number of annual festivals, such as the Calle Ocho Festival, the largest Latin music festival in the country, which has run since 1978.\nAnother celebrated event is the Miami International Film Festival, taking place every year for 10 days around the first week of March, during which independent international and American films are screened across Miami. Miami has over a half dozen independent film theaters.\nThe Miami Jewish Film Festival (MJFF) was established in 1996. It is an annual event held in January that screens a variety of films relating to Jewish history and culture. As of 2025[ [update]], the festival awards a number of film awards: Critics Jury Prize, Next Wave Jury Prize, Kadima Jury Prize, Torchbearer Award, Emerging Filmmaker Award, and the Audience Awards for Best Narrative Film, Documentary Film, and Short Film. The Miami Jewish Film Club holds special screenings throughout the year.\nMiami is a major fashion center, home to models and some of the top modeling agencies in the world. Miami hosts many fashion shows and events, including the annual Miami Fashion Week and the Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Miami, held in the Wynwood Art District.\nMusic and performing arts.\nMiami attracts a large number of musicians, singers, actors, dancers, and orchestral players. The city has numerous orchestras, symphonies, and performing art conservatories. These include the Florida Grand Opera, FIU School of Music, Frost School of Music, and the New World School of the Arts.\nMuseums and visual arts.\nSome of the museums in Miami include the Frost Art Museum, Frost Museum of Science, HistoryMiami, Institute of Contemporary Art, Miami Children's Museum, P\u00e9rez Art Museum, Lowe Art Museum, and the Vizcaya Museum and Gardens, a National Historic Landmark set on a 28-acre early 20th century estate in Coconut Grove.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of Miami is a reflection of its diverse population, with a heavy influence from Latin American, Caribbean, Soul, and Jewish cuisine. By combining them with mainstream American cuisine, it has spawned a unique South Florida style of cooking known as Floribbean cuisine. It is widely available throughout Miami and South Florida and can be found in restaurant chains such as Pollo Tropical.\nCuban immigrants in the 1960s originated the Cuban sandwich and brought medianoche, Cuban espresso, Bistec de palomilla, and croquetas, all of which have grown in popularity among all Miamians and have become symbols of the city's varied cuisine. Today, these are part of the local culture and can be found throughout the city at window caf\u00e9s, particularly outside of supermarkets and restaurants. Some of these locations, such as the Versailles restaurant in Little Havana, are landmark eateries of Miami. Located on the Atlantic Ocean, and with a long history as a seaport, Miami is also known for its seafood, with many seafood restaurants located along the Miami River and in and around Biscayne Bay. The city is also the headquarters of restaurant chains such as Burger King and Benihana.\nDialect.\nThe Miami area has a unique dialect of American English, commonly called the \"Miami accent\", that is widely spoken. The accent developed among second- or third-generation Hispanics, including Cuban Americans, whose first language was English. Some non-Hispanic white, black and other races who were born and raised in the Miami area have tended to adopt it as well.\nIt is based on a fairly standard American accent but with some changes, very similar to dialects in the Mid-Atlantic, especially those in the New York area and Northern New Jersey, including New York Latino English. Unlike Virginia Piedmont, Coastal Southern American, Northeast American dialects and Florida Cracker dialect, \"Miami accent\" is rhotic. It incorporates a rhythm and pronunciation heavily influenced by Spanish, where rhythm is syllable-timed.\nThis is a native dialect of English, not learner English or interlanguage. It is possible to differentiate this variety from an interlanguage spoken by second-language speakers, in that the \"Miami accent\" does \"not\" generally display the following features: there is no addition of before initial consonant clusters with , speakers do not confuse with , (e.g., \"Yale\" with \"jail\"), and /r/ and /rr/ are pronounced as alveolar approximant [] instead of alveolar tap or alveolar trill [r] in Spanish.\nSports.\nMiami's main five sports teams are Inter Miami of Major League Soccer (MLS), the Miami Marlins of Major League Baseball (MLB), the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League (NHL), the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association (NBA) and the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League (NFL). The Miami Open, an annual tennis tournament, was previously held in Key Biscayne before moving to Hard Rock Stadium after the tournament was purchased by Miami Dolphins owner Stephen Ross in 2019.\nMiami is home to numerous marinas, jai alai venues, and golf courses. The city streets have hosted professional auto races in the past, most notably the open-wheel Grand Prix of Miami, the sports car Grand Prix of Miami, and Miami Grand Prix of Formula One. In 2015, Miami hosted a one-off Formula E race. The Homestead\u2013Miami Speedway oval hosts NASCAR races.\nThe Heat and the Marlins play within Miami's city limits, at the Kaseya Center in Downtown and LoanDepot Park in Little Havana, respectively. Marlins Park is built on the site of the old Miami Orange Bowl stadium.\nThe Miami Dolphins play at Hard Rock Stadium in suburban Miami Gardens, while the Florida Panthers play in nearby Sunrise at Amerant Bank Arena. Inter Miami CF plays at Chase Stadium in nearby Fort Lauderdale, temporarily until a stadium is built at Miami Freedom Park. Miami FC is another professional soccer club that plays in the USL Championship second tier of the United States soccer league system. The Club plays its home matches at the FIU Stadium on the campus of Florida International University (FIU) in Miami.\nThe Orange Bowl, one of the major bowl games in the College Football Playoff of the NCAA, is played at Hard Rock Stadium every winter. The stadium has also hosted the Super Bowl. The Miami metro area has hosted the game ten times, five times at the current Hard Rock Stadium and five at the Miami Orange Bowl, tying New Orleans for the most games.\nMiami is also the home of many college sports teams. The two largest are the University of Miami Hurricanes, whose football team plays at Hard Rock Stadium and Florida International University Panthers, whose football team plays at FIU Stadium. The Hurricanes compete in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC), while the Panthers compete in the Conference USA of the National Collegiate Athletic Association.\nMiami is home to Paso Fino horses. Competitions are held at Tropical Park Equestrian Center.\nMiami hosted the 2024 Copa Am\u00e9rica final in July 2024.\nMiami will serve as one of eleven U.S. host cities for the 2026 FIFA World Cup.\nThe following are the major professional sports teams in the Miami metropolitan area:\nBeaches and parks.\nThe City of Miami has various lands operated by the National Park Service, the Florida Division of Recreation and Parks, and the City of Miami Department of Parks and Recreation.\nMiami's tropical weather allows for year-round outdoor activities. Miami has numerous marinas, rivers, bays, canals, and the Atlantic Ocean, which make boating, canoeing, sailing, and fishing popular outdoor activities. Biscayne Bay has numerous coral reefs that make snorkeling and scuba diving popular. There are over 80 parks and gardens in the city. The largest and most popular parks are Bayfront Park and Museum Park (located in the heart of Downtown and the location of the Miami-Dade Arena and Bayside Marketplace), Tropical Park, Peacock Park, Virginia Key, and Watson Island.\nOther popular cultural destinations in or near Miami include Zoo Miami, Jungle Island, the Miami Seaquarium, Monkey Jungle, Coral Castle, Charles Deering Estate, Fairchild Tropical Botanic Garden, and Key Biscayne.\nIn its 2020 ParkScore ranking, The Trust for Public Land reported that the park system in the City of Miami was the 64th best park system among the 100 most populous U.S. cities, down slightly from 48th place in the 2017 ranking. The City of Miami was analyzed to have a median park size of 2.6 acres, park land as percent of city area of 6.5%, 87% of residents living within a 10-minute walk of a park, $48.39 spending per capita of park services, and 1.3 playgrounds per 10,000 residents.\nLaw and government.\nThe government of the City of Miami uses the mayor-commissioner type of system. The city commission consists of five commissioners that are elected from single member districts. The city commission constitutes the governing body with powers to pass ordinances, adopt regulations, and exercise all powers conferred upon the city in the city charter. The mayor is elected at large and appoints a city manager. The City of Miami is governed by Mayor Francis Suarez and 5 city commissioners that oversee the five districts in the city.\nThe commission's regular meetings are held at Miami City Hall, which is located at 3500 Pan American Drive on Dinner Key in the neighborhood of Coconut Grove. In the United States House of Representatives, Miami is represented by Republicans Maria Elvira Salazar and Mario Diaz-Balart, along with Democrat Frederica Wilson.\nAllapattah and Grapeland Heights\nArts &amp; Entertainment District, Brickell, Coconut Grove, Coral Way, Downtown Miami, Edgewater, Midtown Miami, Park West and the South part Upper Eastside\nCoral Way, Little Havana and The Roads\nCoral Way, Flagami and West Flagler\nBuena Vista, Design District, Liberty City, Little Haiti, Little River, Lummus Park, Overtown, Spring Garden and Wynwood and northern part of the Upper Eastside \nPolitics.\nFor much of the 20th century, Miami and its surrounding area, Miami-Dade County, were solidly Democratic, reflecting the city's diverse population and liberal political leanings. However, in recent election cycles, a notable shift has occurred. The 2020 presidential election marked a turning point, with Trump making substantial gains among Hispanic voters, especially within the Cuban-American community. This shift was reflected in Miami-Dade County, where Trump only lost the county by seven points and lost the city by 19 points, a 21-point shift to the right from 2016. Then in the 2022 Florida gubernatorial election, Ron DeSantis won the county for the first time for a Republican candidate since 2002 and only lost the city of Miami by one-and-a-half points. That trend continued in the 2024 presidential election in Florida, with Trump winning the county by eleven points and losing the city less than a point, a rare occurrence for a Republican presidential candidate. This was the first time a Republican candidate had won Miami-Dade County since 1988, a major political transformation in what had traditionally been a Democratic stronghold.\nEducation.\nColleges and universities.\nMiami-Dade County has over 200,000 students enrolled in local colleges and universities, placing it seventh in the nation in per capita university enrollment. In 2010, the city's four largest colleges and universities, Miami Dade College, Florida International University, University of Miami, and Barry University, graduated 28,000 students.\nMiami is also home to both for-profit and nonprofit organizations that offer a range of professional training and other, related educational programs. \"Per\" Scholas, for example is a nonprofit organization that offers free professional certification training directed towards successfully passing CompTIA A+ and Network+ certification exams as a route to securing jobs and building careers.\nColleges and universities in and around Miami:\nPrimary and secondary schools.\nPublic schools in Miami are governed by Miami-Dade County Public Schools, which is the largest school district in Florida and the fourth-largest in the United States. In September 2008 it had a student enrollment of 385,655 and over 392 schools and centers. The district is the largest minority public school system in the country, with 60% of its students being of Hispanic origin, 28% Black or West Indian American, 10% White (non-Hispanic) and 2% non-white of other minorities.\nThe Miami city limits is home to several key high schools: Design and Architecture High School, ranked seventh highest on the \"Gold Medal\" by list \"US News and World Report\", MAST Academy, Coral Reef High School, and the New World School of the Arts. M-DCPS is also one of a few public school districts in the United States to offer optional bilingual education in Spanish, French, German, Haitian Creole, and Mandarin Chinese.\nMiami is home to several well-known Roman Catholic, Jewish and non-denominational private schools. The Archdiocese of Miami operates the area's Catholic private schools, which include Immaculata-Lasalle High School (in the Miami city limits), St. Theresa School (Coral Gables), Monsignor Edward Pace High School (Miami Gardens), and St. Brendan High School (in Westchester), among numerous other Catholic elementary and high schools. Archbishop Curley-Notre Dame High School was in the Miami city limits until its closure in 2016.\nCatholic preparatory schools operated by religious orders in the area are Belen Jesuit Preparatory School (Tamiami) and Christopher Columbus High School (Westchester) for boys and Carrollton School of the Sacred Heart (Miami city limits) and Our Lady of Lourdes Academy (Ponce-Davis) for girls.\nNon-denominational private schools in Miami are Ransom Everglades, Gulliver Preparatory School, The Cushman School, and Miami Country Day School. Other schools in the area include Samuel Scheck Hillel Community Day School, Dade Christian School, Dawere International High School, Palmer Trinity School, Westminster Christian School, and Riviera Schools.\nSupplementary education.\nThe Miami Hoshuko, is a part-time Japanese school for Japanese citizens and ethnic Japanese people in the area. Previously it was located on Virginia Key, at the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science. Currently the school holds classes in Westchester and has offices in Doral.\nMedia.\nMiami has one of the largest television markets in the nation and the second largest in the state of Florida after Tampa Bay. Miami has several major newspapers, the main and largest newspaper being \"The Miami Herald\". \"El Nuevo Herald\" is the major and largest Spanish-language newspaper. \"The Miami Herald\" and \"El Nuevo Herald\" are Miami's and South Florida's main, major and largest newspapers. The papers left their longtime home in Downtown Miami in 2013. The newspapers are now headquartered at the former home of U.S. Southern Command in Doral.\nOther major newspapers include \"Miami Today\", headquartered in Brickell, \"Miami New Times\", headquartered in Midtown, \"Miami SunPost\", \"South Florida Business Journal\", and \"The Miami Times\". An additional Spanish-language newspaper, \"Diario Las Americas\" also serves Miami. Student newspapers from the local universities include the University of Miami's \"The Miami Hurricane\", Florida International University's \"The Beacon\", Miami-Dade College's \"The Metropolis\", and Barry University's \"The Buccaneer\". Many neighborhoods and neighboring areas have their own local newspapers, such as the \"Aventura News\", \"Coral Gables Tribune\", \"Biscayne Bay Tribune\", \"Biscayne Times\", and the \"Palmetto Bay News\".\nA number of magazines circulate throughout the greater Miami area, including \"Miami Monthly\", Southeast Florida's only city/regional, and \"Ocean Drive\", a hot-spot social scene glossy.\nMiami is the headquarters and main production city of many of the world's largest television networks, record label companies, broadcasting companies and production facilities, such as Telemundo, Univision, Univision Communications, Mega TV, Universal Music Latin Entertainment, RCTV International and Sunbeam Television. In 2009, Univision announced plans to build a new production studio in Miami, dubbed Univision Studios. Univision Studios is headquartered in Miami, and will produce programming for all of Univision Communications' television networks.\nMiami is the twelfth largest radio market and the seventeenth largest television market in the United States. Television stations serving the Miami area include WFOR 4 (CBS O&amp;O), WTVJ 6 (NBC O&amp;O), WSVN 7 (Fox, with ABC on DT2 via WDFL-LD 18), WLTV 23 (Univision O&amp;O), WBFS 33 (The CW), WPXM 35 (Ion O&amp;O), WHFT 45 (TBN (O&amp;O), WSCV 51 (Telemundo) and WAMI 69 (UniM\u00e1s O&amp;O). Independent stations include WPLG 10 and WSFL 39, while WPBT 2 and WLRN 17 are member stations of PBS.\nTransportation.\nIn the 2016 American Community Survey, 72.3% of working city of Miami residents commuted by driving alone, 8.7% carpooled, 9% used public transportation, and 3.7% walked. About 1.8% used all other forms of transportation, including taxicab, motorcycle, and bicycle. About 4.5% of working city of Miami residents worked at home. In 2015, 19.9% of city of Miami households were without a car, which decreased to 18.6% in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Miami averaged 1.24 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8 per household.\nExpressways and roads.\nMiami's road system is based along the numerical Miami grid where Flagler Street forms the east\u2013west baseline and Miami Avenue forms the north\u2013south meridian. The corner of Flagler Street and Miami Avenue is in the middle of Downtown in front of the Downtown Macy's (formerly the Burdine's headquarters). The Miami grid is primarily numerical so that, for example, all street addresses north of Flagler Street and west of Miami Avenue have \"NW\" in their address. Because its point of origin is in Downtown, which is close to the coast, the \"NW\" and \"SW\" quadrants are much larger than the \"SE\" and \"NE\" quadrants. Many roads, especially major ones, are also named (e.g., Tamiami Trail/SW 8th St), although, with exceptions, the number is in more common usage among locals.\nWith few exceptions, within this grid north\u2013south roads are designated as Courts, Roads, Avenues or Places (often remembered by their acronym), while east\u2013west roads are streets, Terraces, Drives or occasionally Ways. Major roads in each direction are located at one mile intervals. There are 16 blocks to each mile on north\u2013south avenues, and 10 blocks to each mile on east\u2013west streets. Major north\u2013south avenues generally end in \"7\" \u2013 e.g., 17th, 27th, 37th/Douglas Aves., 57th/Red Rd., 67th/Ludlam, 87th/Galloway, etc., all the way west beyond 177th/Krome Avenue. One prominent exception is 42nd Avenue, LeJeune Road, located at the half-mile point instead.\nMajor east\u2013west streets to the south of Downtown are multiples of 16, though the beginning point of this system is at SW 8th St, one half-mile south of Flagler (\"zeroth\") Street. Thus, major streets are at 8th St., 24th St./Coral Way, 40th St./Bird, 56th/Miller, 72nd/ Sunset, 88th/N. Kendall, 104th (originally S. Kendall), 120th/Montgomery, 136th/Howard, 152nd/Coral Reef, 168th/Richmond, 184th/Eureka, 200th/Quail Roost, 216th/Hainlin Mill, 232nd/Silver Palm, 248th/Coconut Palm, etc., well into the 300s. Within the grid, odd-numbered addresses are generally on the north or east side, and even-numbered addresses are on the south or west side.\nAll streets and avenues in Miami-Dade County follow the Miami grid, with a few exceptions, most notably in Coral Gables, Hialeah, Coconut Grove and Miami Beach. One neighborhood, The Roads, is named as such because its streets run off the Miami grid at a 45-degree angle, and therefore are all named roads.\nMiami-Dade County is served by four Interstate Highways (I-75, I-95, I-195, I-395) and several U.S. Highways including U.S. Route 1, U.S. Route 27, U.S. Route 41, and U.S. Route 441.\nSome of the major Florida State Roads (and their common names) serving Miami are:\nMiami has six major causeways that span over Biscayne Bay connecting the western mainland, with the eastern barrier islands along the Atlantic Ocean. The Rickenbacker Causeway is the southernmost causeway and connects Brickell to Virginia Key and Key Biscayne. The Venetian Causeway and MacArthur Causeway connect Downtown with South Beach. The Julia Tuttle Causeway connects Midtown and Miami Beach. The 79th Street Causeway connects the Upper East Side with North Beach. The northernmost causeway, the Broad Causeway, is the smallest of Miami's six causeways and connects North Miami to Bay Harbor Islands and Bal Harbour.\nIn 2007, Miami was identified as having the rudest drivers in the United States, the second year in a row to have been cited, in a poll commissioned by automobile club AutoVantage. Miami is also consistently ranked as one of the most dangerous cities in the United States for pedestrians.\nPublic transportation.\nPublic transportation in Miami is operated by Miami-Dade Transit and SFRTA, and includes commuter rail (Tri-Rail), heavy-rail rapid transit (Metrorail), an elevated people mover (Metromover), and buses (Metrobus). Miami has Florida's highest transit ridership as about 17% of Miamians use transit on a daily basis. The average Miami public transit commute on weekdays is 90 minutes, while 39% of public transit riders commute for more than 2 hours a day. The average wait time at a public transit stop or station is 18 minutes, while 37% of riders wait for more than 20 minutes on average every day. The average single trip distance with public transit is , while 38% travel more than in each direction.\nMiami's heavy-rail rapid transit system, Metrorail, is an elevated system comprising two lines and 23 stations on a -long line. Metrorail connects the urban western suburbs of Hialeah, Medley, and inner-city Miami with suburban The Roads, Coconut Grove, Coral Gables, South Miami, and urban Kendall via the central business districts of Miami International Airport, the Health District, and Downtown. A free, elevated people mover, Metromover, operates 21 stations on three different lines in greater Downtown Miami, with a station at roughly every two blocks of Downtown and Brickell. Several expansion projects are being funded by a transit development sales tax surcharge throughout Miami-Dade County.\nTri-Rail, a commuter rail system operated by the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority (SFRTA), runs from Miami International Airport northward to West Palm Beach, making eighteen stops throughout Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach counties.\nThe Miami Intermodal Center is a massive transportation hub servicing Metrorail, Amtrak, Tri-Rail, Brightline, Metrobus, Greyhound Lines, taxis, rental cars, MIA Mover, private automobiles, bicycles and pedestrians adjacent to Miami International Airport. Miami Intermodal Center was completed in 2010, and is serving about 150,000 commuters and travelers in the Miami area. Phase I of MiamiCentral Station was completed in 2012, and the Tri-Rail part of Phase II was completed in 2015, but the construction of the Amtrak part remains delayed.\nTwo new light rail systems, Baylink and the Miami Streetcar, have been proposed and are currently in the planning stage. BayLink would connect Downtown with South Beach, and the Miami Streetcar would connect Downtown with Midtown.\nMiami is the southern terminus of Amtrak's Atlantic Coast services, running two lines, the Silver Meteor and the Silver Star, both terminating in New York City. The Miami Amtrak Station is located in the suburb of Hialeah near the Tri-Rail/Metrorail Station on NW 79 St and NW 38 Ave. Current construction of the Miami Central Station will move all Amtrak operations from its current out-of-the-way location to a centralized location with Metrorail, MIA Mover, Tri-Rail, Miami International Airport, and the Miami Intermodal Center all within the same station closer to Downtown. The station was expected to be completed by 2012, but experienced several delays and was later expected to be completed in late 2014, again pushed back to early 2015.\nAirports.\nMiami International Airport serves as the primary international airport of the Greater Miami Area. One of the busiest international airports in the world because of its centric location, Miami International Airport caters to over 45\u00a0million passengers a year. The airport is a major hub and the largest international gateway for American Airlines.\nMiami International is the second busiest airport by passenger traffic in Florida, the United States' third-largest international port of entry for foreign air passengers, behind New York's John F. Kennedy International Airport and Los Angeles International Airport. The airport's extensive international route network includes non-stop flights to over seventy international cities in North and South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.\nNearby Fort Lauderdale\u2013Hollywood International Airport and Palm Beach International Airport also serve commercial traffic in the Miami area. Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport in Opa-locka and Miami Executive Airport in an unincorporated area southwest of Miami serve general aviation traffic in the Miami area.\nCycling and walking.\nThe city government under former mayor Manny Diaz took an ambitious stance in support of bicycling in Miami for both recreation and commuting. In 2010, Miami was ranked as the 44th-most bike-friendly city in the U.S., according to \"Bicycling Magazine\".\nA 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Miami the eighth-most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the U.S.\nInternational relations.\nSister cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
