{"id": "51572", "revid": "37664675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51572", "title": "Santiago", "text": "Capital and largest city of Chile\nSantiago ( , , ), also known as Santiago de Chile (), is the capital and largest city of Chile and one of the largest cities in the Americas. Most of the city is situated between above sea level. Located in the Chilean Central Valley within the Santiago Basin, between the Andes to the east and the Chilean Coastal Range to the west, it anchors the Santiago Metropolitan Region and its conurbation of Greater Santiago, which comprises more than forty communes and concentrates over a third of the national population and around 45% of Chile\u2019s GDP. Most of the city lies between 500 and 650 m (1,640\u20132,133 ft) above sea level, with recent urban growth extending into the Andean foothills.\nThe basin that Santiago occupies has been inhabited since at least the 10th millennium BC, with early agricultural villages established along the Mapocho River and later incorporated into the Inca sphere of influence. During the Spanish invasion of the Americas, conquistador Pedro de Valdivia founded the colonial city of Santiago del Nuevo Extremo on 12 February 1541, laying out a grid plan around the Plaza Mayor (now Plaza de Armas). Despite early food shortages, Indigenous attacks, floods, and devastating earthquakes\u2014notably in 1647\u2014the city consolidated as the capital of the Captaincy General of Chile. Santiago remained the political center during the Chilean War of Independence, beginning with the First Government Junta in 1810 and culminating in patriot victory at the Battle of Maip\u00fa in 1818, and subsequently expanded through 19th-century railway construction, state-building projects, and the creation of major educational and cultural institutions.\nThe city today is the political and administrative heart of Chile: it houses the presidential palace and the main organs of the executive and judiciary, while the National Congress meets primarily in nearby Valpara\u00edso. Economically, Santiago is the country\u2019s principal industrial, commercial, and financial hub and a regional center for services, hosting the headquarters of major Chilean companies, regional offices of international organizations such as the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), and several of the nation\u2019s leading universities and research institutes. Urban growth has been marked by the emergence of high-rise business districts such as Sanhattan, dominated by Gran Torre Santiago, the tallest building in South America and the second tallest building in Latin America (behind Mexico's T.Op Torre 1).\nSantiago\u2019s urban landscape combines a 19th-century neoclassical core and surviving colonial churches with extensive modern residential districts, standalone hills such as Cerro Santa Luc\u00eda and Cerro San Crist\u00f3bal, and parklands along the Mapocho River, including Parque Forestal, Parque Bicentenario, and Santiago Metropolitan Park. The city has a cool semi-arid climate with Mediterranean characteristics, with warm, dry summers and cool, wetter winters; its location in an enclosed valley contributes both to its scenic views of the high Andes and to chronic air pollution and winter smog. Santiago is served by Arturo Merino Ben\u00edtez International Airport, a dense network of urban highways, and one of Latin America\u2019s most extensive metro systems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Santiago\" was chosen by the Spanish conqueror Pedro de Valdivia when he founded the city in 1541 as \"Santiago del Nuevo Extremo,\" in reference to his home region of Extremadura and as a tribute to James the Great, the patron saint of Spain. The saint's name appears in various forms in Spanish, such as Diego, Jaime, Jacobo, or Santiago, with the latter derived from the Galician evolution of Vulgar Latin . Allegedly, there was no indigenous name for the area where Santiago is located, but the Mapuche language uses the adapted name .\nIn Chile, several entities share the name \"Santiago\", which can often lead to confusion. The commune of Santiago, also referred to as , is an administrative division encompassing the area occupied by the city during colonial times. It is governed by the Municipality of Santiago and led by a mayor. This commune is part of Santiago Province, which is headed by a provincial delegate appointed by the President of the Republic, and it is also part of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, governed by a popularly elected governor.\nWhen the term \"Santiago\" is used without further clarification, it typically refers to ('Greater Santiago'), the metropolitan area characterized by continuous urban development. This area includes the commune of Santiago and over 40 other communes, encompassing much of Santiago Province and parts of neighboring provinces. The definition of the metropolitan area has evolved over time as the city has expanded, incorporating smaller cities and rural areas.\nResidents of the city and region are referred to as (for males) and (for females).\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nArchaeological evidence suggests that the first human groups arrived in the Santiago basin around the 10th millennium BC. These groups were primarily nomadic hunter-gatherers, traveling from the coast to the interior to hunt guanacos during the Andean snowmelt. By around 800 AD, the first permanent settlers established agricultural communities along the Mapocho River, where they cultivated crops such as maize, potatoes, and beans, and domesticated camelids.\nThe villages of the Picunche people (as they were known to Chileans) or the Promaucae (as referred to by the Incas) were under Inca rule from the late 15th century to the early 16th century. The Incas established a settlement of mitimas in the valley, located in the center of present-day Santiago, with fortifications such as Huaca de Chena and the El Plomo hill sanctuary. According to Chilean historian Armando de Ram\u00f3n, the area served as a base for failed Inca expeditions to the south and was a junction along the Inca Trail.\nFounding of the city.\nPedro de Valdivia, a conquistador from Extremadura sent by Francisco Pizarro from Peru, arrived in the Mapocho valley on 13 December 1540, after a long journey from Cusco. Valdivia and his party camped by the river on the slopes of the Tupahue hill and gradually began interacting with the Picunche people who lived in the area. Valdivia later called a meeting with the local chiefs, during which he explained his plan to establish a city on behalf of Charles I of Spain. The city would serve as the capital of his governorship of Nueva Extremadura. \nOn 12 February 1541, Valdivia officially founded the city of ('Santiago of New Extremadura') in honor of the Apostle James, the patron saint of Spain. The city was established near Huel\u00e9n, which Valdivia renamed Santa Luc\u00eda. He assigned the city's layout to master builder Pedro de Gamboa, who designed a grid plan. At its center, Gamboa placed a Plaza Mayor, which became the town's central hub. Surrounding the plaza, plots were designated for the cathedral, the jail, and the governor's house. The city was divided into eight blocks from north to south and ten blocks from east to west, between the Mapocho River and the with each quarter-block, or , granted to settlers. The colonial architecture following the grid plan consisted of one or two-story houses, adobe walls, tile roofs, and rooms around interior corridors and patios.\nValdivia left for the south with his troops months later, initiating the Arauco War. Santiago was left vulnerable, and a coalition of Mapuche and Picunche tribes led by chief Michimalonco destroyed the city on 11 September 1541, despite the efforts of a Spanish garrison of 55 soldiers defending the fort. The defense was led by Spanish Conquistadora In\u00e9s de Su\u00e1rez. When she realized they were being overpowered, she ordered the execution of all indigenous prisoners, displaying their heads on pikes and throwing some towards the attackers. In response to this brutal act, the indigenous forces dispersed in fear. The city was gradually rebuilt, with the newly established city of Concepci\u00f3n gaining political prominence as the Royal Audiencia of Chile was established there in 1565. However, the ongoing threat of the Arauco War and frequent earthquakes delayed the establishment of the Royal Court in Santiago until 1607, which solidified the city's status as the capital.\nDuring the early years of the city, the Spanish suffered from severe shortages of food and other supplies. The Picunches had adopted a strategy of halting cultivation and retreating to more remote locations, which isolated the Spanish and forced them to resort to eating whatever they could find. The shortage of clothing meant that some Spanish had to dress with hides from dogs, cats, sea lions, and foxes.\nColonial Santiago.\nAlthough Santiago was facing the threat of permanent destruction early on, due to attacks from indigenous peoples, earthquakes, and floods, the city began to grow rapidly. Out of the 126 blocks designed by Pedro de Gamboa in 1558, 40 were occupied. In 1580, the first major buildings in the city started to be erected, marked by the placement of the foundation stone of the first Cathedral in 1561 and the building of the church of San Francisco in 1572. Both of these structures were primarily made of adobe and stone. In addition to the construction of significant buildings, the city began to thrive as the surrounding areas welcomed tens of thousands of livestock.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, the growth of the city was hindered by a series of disasters including an earthquake, a smallpox epidemic in 1575, the Mapocho River floods in 1590, 1608, and 1618, and a devastating earthquake on 13 May 1647 which resulted in the death of over 600 people and affected over 5,000 others. Despite these setbacks, the capital of the Captaincy General of Chile continued to grow, with all the power of the country being centered on the Plaza de Armas in Santiago.\nIn 1767, the corregidor Luis Manuel de Za\u00f1artu launched one of the most significant architectural projects of the colonial period, the Calicanto Bridge, connecting the city to La Chimba on the north side of the Mapocho River. He also began constructing embankments to prevent river overflows. Although the bridge was completed, its piers were frequently damaged by the river. In 1780, Governor Agust\u00edn de J\u00e1uregui hired the Italian architect Joaqu\u00edn Toesca, who designed several important buildings, including the cathedral's fa\u00e7ade, the Palacio de La Moneda, the San Carlos Canal, and the completion of the embankments during the government of Ambrosio O'Higgins. These works were officially opened in 1798. The O'Higgins government also opened the road to Valpara\u00edso in 1791, connecting the capital with the country's main port.\nCapital of the Republic.\nOn September 18, 1810, the First Government Junta was proclaimed in Santiago, marking the beginning of Chile\u2019s path to independence. The city, which became the capital of the newly formed nation, faced various challenges, particularly from military actions in the vicinity.\nAlthough institutions like the Instituto Nacional and the National Library were established during the Patria Vieja, they were shut down after the patriots\u2019 defeat at the Battle of Rancagua in 1814. The royal government continued until 1817, when the Army of the Andes emerged victorious at the Battle of Chacabuco and restored the patriot government in Santiago. However, independence was still uncertain. The Spanish army achieved further victories in 1818 and advanced toward Santiago, but their progress was finally halted at the Battle of Maip\u00fa on April 5, 1818, on the Maipo River plains.\nWith the end of the war, Bernardo O'Higgins was accepted as Supreme Director and, like his father, undertook several important projects for the city. During the Patria Nueva era, previously closed institutions were reopened. The General Cemetery was inaugurated, work on the San Carlos Canal was completed, and the drying riverbed in the south arm of the Mapocho River, known as La Ca\u00f1ada, which had been used as a landfill for some time, was transformed into an avenue now known as the Alameda de las Delicias.\nTwo earthquakes struck the city in the 19th century: one on November 19, 1822, and another on February 20, 1835. Despite these disasters, the city continued to grow rapidly. In 1820, the population was recorded as 46,000, but by 1854, it had risen to 69,018. By 1865, the census reported 115,337 residents. This significant increase was due to suburban expansion to the south and west of the capital, as well as the growth of the bustling district of La Chimba, which resulted from the division of old properties in the area. This new peripheral development marked the end of the previous checkerboard structure that had dominated the city center.\n19th century.\nDuring the Republican era, several institutions were founded, including the University of Chile, the Normal School of Preceptors, the School of Arts and Crafts, and the Quinta Normal. The latter comprised the Museum of Fine Arts (now the Museum of Science and Technology) and the National Museum of Natural History. These institutions were established primarily for educational purposes, but also served as examples of public planning during that period. In 1851, the first telegraph system connecting the capital to the Port of Valpara\u00edso was inaugurated.\nDuring the \"Liberal Republic\" and the administration of Mayor Benjam\u00edn Vicu\u00f1a Mackenna, a new phase in the urban development of the capital was initiated. One of the main projects during this period was the remodeling of Cerro Santa Luc\u00eda, which had fallen into disrepair despite its central location. In his effort to transform Santiago, Vicu\u00f1a Mackenna initiated the construction of the \"Camino de Cintura\", a road surrounding the entire city. The redevelopment of Alameda Avenue also took place during this time, turning it into the city's main road.\nAlso during this era, O'Higgins Park was established with the help of European landscapers in 1873. The public park, known for its large gardens, lakes, and carriage trails, became a landmark in Santiago. Other notable structures were also opened during this period, including the Teatro Municipal opera house and the Club H\u00edpico de Santiago. In addition, the 1875 International Exposition was held in the Quinta Normal grounds.\nSantiago emerged as the central hub of the national railway system. On 14 September 1857, the first railway arrived in the city and terminated at the Santiago Estaci\u00f3n Central railway station, which was under construction at the time and officially opened in 1884. During this period, rail lines connected Santiago to Valpara\u00edso and regions in northern and southern Chile. The streets of Santiago were also paved, and by 1875, there were 1,107 railway cars in the city, while 45,000 people used trams daily.\nThe centennial Santiago.\nAs the new century began, Santiago underwent various changes due to the rapid growth of industry. Valpara\u00edso, which had previously been the economic center of the country, gradually lost its prominence to the capital. By 1895, 75% of the national manufacturing industry was located in Santiago, while only 28% was in Valpara\u00edso. By 1910, major banks and shops had established themselves in the central streets of Santiago, further diminishing the role of Valpara\u00edso.\nThe enactment of the Autonomous Municipalities Act empowered municipalities to establish various administrative divisions within the Santiago department, with the goal of enhancing local governance. In 1891, the municipalities of Maip\u00fa, \u00d1u\u00f1oa, Renca, Lampa, and Colina were created, followed by Providencia and Barrancas in 1897, and Las Condes in 1901. The La Victoria \"departmento\" was also divided, leading to the creation of Lo Ca\u00f1as in 1891, which was then further split into La Granja and Puente Alto in 1892, followed by La Florida in 1899, and La Cisterna in 1925.\nThe San Cristobal Hill underwent a prolonged process of development during this period. In 1903, an astronomical observatory was established on the hill, and the following year, construction began on a statue of the Virgin Mary. Today, the statue is visible from various points in the city. However, the shrine was not completed until several decades later.\nThe 1910 Chile Centennial celebrations marked the beginning of several urban development projects. The railway network was expanded, connecting the city and its growing suburbs with a new ring and route to Caj\u00f3n del Maipo. A new railway station was also built in the north of the city: the Mapocho Station. The Parque Forestal was established on the southern side of the Mapocho river, and new buildings such as the Museum of Fine Arts, the Barros Arana public boarding school, and the National Library were opened. In addition, a sewer system was installed, serving approximately 85% of the city's population.\nPopulation explosion.\nThe 1920 census estimated the population of Santiago to be 507,296 inhabitants, equivalent to 13.6% of the total population of Chile. This represented a growth of 52.5% from the 1907 census, an annual increase of 3.3%, which was almost three times the national average. This growth was mainly due to an influx of farmers from the southern regions who came to work in the factories and railroads that were being built. However, this growth was concentrated in the suburbs and not downtown.\nDuring this time, the downtown district consolidated as a commercial, financial, and administrative center, with the establishment of various shops and businesses around Ahumada Street and a Civic District in the vicinity of the Palace of La Moneda. The latter project involved the construction of modernist buildings for the offices of the ministries and other public services, as well as the start of the construction of medium-rise buildings. Meanwhile, the traditional residents of the center began to migrate to more rural areas like Providencia and \u00d1u\u00f1oa, which attracted the oligarchy and European immigrant professionals, and San Miguel for middle-class families. Additionally, in the periphery, villas were built by various organizations of the time. Modernity also spread in the city, with the introduction of the first theaters, the expansion of the telephone network, and the opening of Los Cerrillos Airport in 1928, among other advancements.\nThe perception that the early 20th century was a time of economic prosperity due to technological advancements was in stark contrast to the living conditions of lower social classes. The previous decades of growth resulted in an unprecedented population boom starting in 1929, but was met with tragedy as the Great Depression hit. The collapse of the nitrate industry in the north left 60,000 people unemployed, compounded by a decline in agricultural exports, resulting in an estimated 300,000 unemployed people nationwide. Desperate for survival, many migrants flocked to Santiago and its thriving industry. However, they often found themselves struggling to find housing, with many being forced to live on the streets. The harsh living conditions resulted in widespread diseases like tuberculosis, and took a toll on the homeless population. At the same time, unemployment rates and living costs skyrocketed, while the salaries of the people in Santiago fell.\nThe situation would change several years later with a new industrial boom fostered by CORFO and the expansion of the state apparatus from the late 1930s. At this time, the aristocracy lost much of its power, and the middle class, composed of merchants, bureaucrats, and professionals, acquired the role of setting national policy. In this context, Santiago began to develop a substantial middle- and lower-class population, while the upper classes sought refuge in the districts of the capital. Thus, the old moneyed class, who previously frequented Cousi\u00f1o and Alameda Park, lost their hegemony over popular entertainment venues, and the National Stadium emerged in 1938.\nGreater Santiago.\nIn the following decades, Santiago continued to grow at an unprecedented rate. In 1940, the city had a population of 952,075 residents, which increased to 1,350,409 by 1952, and reached 1,907,378 in the 1960 census. This growth was reflected in the urbanization of rural areas on the outskirts of the city, where middle and lower-class families with stable housing were established. In 1930, the urban area covered 6,500 hectares, which increased to 20,900 in 1960 and to 38,296 in 1980. Although growth was mainly concentrated in communities such as Barrancas to the west, Conchal\u00ed to the north, and La Cisterna and La Granja to the south, the center of the city lost population, leaving more space for commercial, banking, and government development. The upper class, on the other hand, began to settle in the foothills of Las Condes and the La Reina sector.\nThe regulation of growth in Santiago only began in the 1960s with the creation of various development plans for Greater Santiago, a concept that reflected the city's new reality as a much larger urban center. In 1958, the Intercommunal Plan of Santiago was released, which proposed a limit of 38,600 urban and semi-urban hectares for a maximum population of 3,260,000 residents. The plan also included plans for the construction of new avenues, such as the Am\u00e9rico Vespucio Avenue and Panamericana Route 5, as well as the expansion of 'industrial belts'. The 1962 World Cup provided a new impetus for city improvement efforts, and in 1966, the Santiago Metropolitan Park was established on Cerro San Crist\u00f3bal. The Ministry of Housing and Urbanism (MINVU) also began to eradicate shantytowns and build new homes. Finally, the Edificio Diego Portales was constructed in 1972.\nIn 1967, the new Pudahuel International Airport was opened, and after years of discussion, construction of the Santiago Metro began in 1969. The first phase of the Metro, which ran beneath the western section of Alameda, was opened in 1975 and soon became one of the most prestigious buildings in the city. Over the following years, the Metro continued to expand, with two perpendicular lines in place by the end of 1978. Building telecommunications infrastructure was also an important development of this period, as reflected in the construction of the Torre Entel, which, since its construction in 1975, has become one of the symbols of the capital and remained the tallest structure in the country for two decades.\nAfter the military coup of 1973 and the establishment of the military regime, significant changes in urban planning did not occur until the 1980s when the government embraced a neoliberal economic model. In 1979, the master plan was revised, expanding the urban area to over 62,000 hectares for real estate development. This led to urban sprawl, particularly in La Florida, causing the city to reach 40,619 hectares in size in the early 1990s. According to the 1992 census, Santiago became the country's most populous municipality, with 328,881 residents. \nOn March 21, 1981, a fire in the Torre Santa Mar\u00eda killed 11 people.\nA powerful earthquake struck the city on 3 March 1985, causing minimal casualties but leaving many homeless and destroying numerous historic buildings.\nThe metropolis in the early twenty-first century.\nWith the onset of the transition to democracy in 1990, the city of Santiago surpassed four million inhabitants, with the majority residing in the south, particularly in La Florida, which was the most populous area, followed by Puente Alto and Maip\u00fa. The real estate development in these municipalities, as well as in others such as Quilicura and Pe\u00f1alol\u00e9n, was largely driven by the construction of housing projects for middle-class families. Meanwhile, high-income families relocated to the foothills, now commonly referred to as \"Barrio Alto\", boosting the population of Las Condes and giving rise to young communes, including Lo Barnechea and Vitacura, both established in 1981 and 1991, respectively.\nThe area around Providencia Avenue became an important commercial hub in the eastern sector. This development extended to the \"Barrio Alto\", which became an attractive location for the construction of high-rise buildings. Major companies and financial corporations established themselves in the area, giving rise to a thriving modern business center commonly known as \"Sanhattan\". The departure of these companies to \"Barrio Alto\" and the construction of shopping centers all around the city created a crisis in the city center. To reinvigorate the area, the government transformed the main shopping streets into pedestrian walkways, as it did in the 1970s, and offered tax benefits for the construction of residential buildings, which attracted young adults.\nThe city faced a series of problems due to disorganized growth. During the winter months, air pollution reached critical levels and a layer of smog blanketed the city. In response, the authorities implemented legislative measures to reduce industrial pollution and placed restrictions on vehicle use. To address the problem of transportation, the metro system underwent significant expansion, with lines being extended and three new lines added between 1997 and 2006 in the southeastern sector. In 2011, a new extension was inaugurated in Maip\u00fa, bringing the total length of the metropolitan railway to . In the early 1990s, the bus system also underwent a major reform. In 2007, the master plan known as Transantiago was established, although it has faced various challenges since its implementation.\nEntering the 21st century, rapid development continued in Santiago. The Civic District was revitalized with the creation of the Plaza de la Ciudadan\u00eda and the construction of the Ciudad Parque Bicentenario, which marked the bicentenary of the Republic. The trend of constructing tall buildings continued in the eastern sector, which was highlighted by the opening of the Titanium La Portada and Gran Torre Santiago skyscrapers in the Costanera Center complex.\nOn 27 February 2010, a powerful earthquake hit the capital city of Santiago, causing damage to some older buildings and rendering some modern structures uninhabitable. This sparked a heated discussion about the actual implementation of mandatory earthquake standards in the city's modern architecture.\nDespite urban integration efforts, socioeconomic inequality and geosocial fragmentation remain two of the most important problems, both in the city and in the country. These problems have been considered one of the factors that led to the \"Estallido Social\", a series of massive protests and severe riots carried out between 2019 and 2020. The protests led to a serious civil confrontation, which led to thousands of arrests and accusations of human rights violations. Meanwhile, the demonstrations registered serious episodes of violence against public and private infrastructure, mainly in the surroundings of Plaza Baquedano, with the Santiago Metro being one of the most affected by these episodes: more than half of its stations registered damage (several being partially set on fire) and only eleven months later the network returned to full normal service.\nGeography.\nThe city lies in the center of the \"Santiago Basin\", a large bowl-shaped valley consisting of broad and fertile lands surrounded by mountains. The city has a varying elevation, gradually increasing from in the western areas to more than in the eastern areas. Santiago's international airport, in the west, lies at an altitude of . Plaza Baquedano, near the center, lies at . Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo, at the eastern edge of the city, has an elevation of .\nThe Santiago Basin is part of the Intermediate Depression and is remarkably flat, interrupted only by a few \"island hills;\" among them are Cerro Renca, Cerro Blanco, and Cerro Santa Luc\u00eda. The basin is approximately in a north\u2013south direction and from east to west. The Mapocho River flows through the city.\nThe city is flanked by the main chain of the Andes to the east and the Chilean Coastal Range to the west. On the north, it is bordered by the \"Cord\u00f3n de Chacabuco\", a mountain range of the Andes. At the southern border lies the \"Angostura de Paine\", an elongated spur of the Andes that almost reaches the coast.\nThe mountain range immediately bordering the city on the east is known as the Sierra de Ram\u00f3n, which was formed due to tectonic activity of the San Ram\u00f3n Fault. This range reaches 3296 meters at Cerro de Ram\u00f3n. The Sierra de Ram\u00f3n represents the \"Precordillera\" of the Andes. further east is the even larger Cordillera of the Andes, which has mountains and volcanoes that exceed and on which some glaciers are present. The tallest is the Tupungato mountain at . Other mountains include Tupungatito, San Jos\u00e9, and Maipo. Cerro El Plomo is the highest mountain visible from Santiago's urban area.\nDuring recent decades, urban growth has outgrown the boundaries of the city, expanding to the east up the slopes of the Andean Precordillera. In areas such as La Dehesa, Lo Curro, and El Arrayan, urban development is present at over 1,000 meters of altitude.\nThe natural vegetation of Santiago is made up of a thorny woodland of \"Vachellia caven\" (also known as \"Acacia caven\" and espinillo) and \"Prosopis chilensis\" in the west and an association of \"Vachellia caven\" and Baccharis paniculata in the east around the Andean foothills.\nClimate.\nSantiago has a cool semi-arid climate (\"BSk\" according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification), with Mediterranean (\"Csb\") patterns, while the eastern areas, being closer to the mountain range, have a true Mediterranean climate (Csb): warm dry summers (October to March) with temperatures reaching up to on the hottest days; winters (April to September) are cool with cool to cold mornings; typical daily maximum temperatures of , and low temperatures near . In climate station of Quinta Normal (near downtown) the precipitation average is 286.3\u00a0mm, and in climate station of Quebrada de Macul between the communes of Pe\u00f1alol\u00e9n and La Florida (in higher grounds near the Andes mountains) the precipitation average is 438\u00a0mm.\nIn the airport area of Pudahuel, mean rainfall is per year, about 80% of which occurs during the winter months (May to September), varying between of rainfall during these months. That amount contrasts with a very sunny season during the summer months between December and March, when rainfall does not exceed on average, caused by an anticyclonic dominance continued for about seven or eight months. There is significant variation within the city, with rainfall at the lower-elevation Pudahuel site near the airport being about 20 percent lower than at the older Quinta Normal site near the city center.\nSantiago's rainfall is highly variable and heavily influenced by the El Ni\u00f1o Southern Oscillation cycle, with rainy years coinciding with El Ni\u00f1o events and dry years with La Ni\u00f1a events. The wettest year since records began in 1866 was 1900 with \u2013 part of a \"pluvial\" from 1898 to 1905 that saw an average of over eight years incorporating the second wettest year in 1899 with \u2013 and the driest 1924 with . Typically there are lengthy dry spells even in the rainiest of winters, intercepted with similarly lengthy periods of heavy rainfall. For instance, in 1987, the fourth wettest year on record with , there was only in the 36 days between 3 June and 8 July, followed by in the 38 days between 9 July and 15 August.\nPrecipitation is usually only rain, as snowfall only occurs in the Andes and Precordillera, being rare in eastern districts, and extremely rare in the central and western districts of the city. In winter, the snow line is about , and it ranges from .\nThe city is affected only occasionally by snowfall. The period between 2000 and 2017 has been registered 9 snowfalls and only two have been measured in the central Santiago (2007 and 2017). The amount of snow registered in Santiago on 15 July 2017 ranged between 3.0\u00a0cm in Quinta Normal and 10.0\u00a0cm in La Reina (Tobalaba).\nTemperatures vary throughout the year from an average of in January to in June and July. In the summer days are very warm to hot, often reaching over and a record high close to , while nights are very pleasant and cool, at . During autumn and winter the temperature drops, and is slightly lower than . The temperature may even drop to , especially during the morning. The historic low of was in July 1976.\nSantiago's location within a watershed is one of the most important factors determining the climate of the city. The coastal mountain range serves as a screen that stops the spread of maritime influence, contributing to the increase in annual and daily thermal oscillation (the difference between the maximum and minimum daily temperatures can reach 14\u00a0\u00b0C) and maintaining low relative humidity, close to an annual average of 70%. It also prevents the entry of air masses, with the exception of some coastal low clouds that penetrate to the basin through the river valleys.\nPrevailing winds are from the southwest, with an average of , especially during the summer; the winter is less windy.\nNatural disasters.\nSantiago is located on the Pacific Ring of Fire, where two tectonic plates, the Nazca and South American Plates, collide. This results in a high frequency of earthquakes. The first recorded earthquake to hit Santiago was in 1575, just 34 years after its founding. The most devastating earthquake in the city's history took place in 1647, inspiring the novel \"The Earthquake In Chile\" by Heinrich von Kleist.\nIn response to the destructive earthquakes of 1960 (Valdivia) and 1985 (Algarrobo), Santiago implemented strict building codes to minimize damage from future earthquakes. In 2010, Chile was hit by the sixth largest recorded earthquake with a magnitude of 8.8 on the moment magnitude scale. The earthquake caused the death of 525 people, 13 of whom were in Santiago, and resulted in an estimated cost of 15\u201330\u00a0billion US dollars. Although many homes were damaged, the stricter building codes prevented the scale of destruction seen in the Haiti earthquake of the same year, in which over 100,000 people lost their lives. While large earthquakes pose a threat, smaller earthquakes from local faults in and around Santiago are also a significant risk. In particular, the San Ram\u00f3n and El Array\u00e1n faults in the east and north of the city are considered to be particularly dangerous.\nThe eastern neighborhoods of Santiago are also susceptible to landslides, especially of the debris flow type, which pose a significant hazard to the area.\nEnvironmental issues.\nSantiago has a serious air pollution problem. Despite a decrease in air pollution in the 1990s, the level of pollution has not significantly improved since 2000. In fact, a study conducted by a Chilean university in 2010 showed that the pollution levels in Santiago had doubled since 2002. Particulate matter air pollution, specifically PM2.5 and PM10, frequently exceeds the standards set by the US Environmental Protection Agency and the World Health Organization, posing a significant threat to public health.\nOne of the major sources of air pollution in Santiago is the El Teniente copper mine smelter, which operates year-round. The government typically does not classify it as a local pollution source, as it is located just outside the reporting area of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, 110 kilometers from downtown.During the winter months, thermal inversion can trap and concentrate smog and air pollution in the Central Valley.\nSantiago has made progress in treating its wastewater, with the Mapocho Wastewater Treatment Plant starting operations in March 2012. This increased the city's wastewater treatment capacity to 100%, making Santiago the first capital city in Latin America to treat all of its municipal sewage.\nStray dogs are a common sight in Santiago, but the country as a whole has a low incidence of rabies.\nDemographics.\nAccording to data collected in the 2002 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the Santiago metropolitan area population reached 5,428,590 inhabitants, equivalent to 35.9% of the national total and 89.6% of total regional inhabitants. This figure reflects broad growth in the population of the city during the 20th century: it had 383,587 inhabitants in 1907; 1,010,102 in 1940; 2,009,118 in 1960; 3,899,619 in 1982; and 4,729,118 in 1992. (percentage of total population, 2007)\nThe growth of Santiago has undergone several changes over the course of its history. In its early years, the city had a rate of growth 2.9% annually until the 17th century, then down to less than 2% per year until the early 20th century figures. During the 20th century, Santiago experienced a demographic explosion as it absorbed migration from mining camps in northern Chile during the economic crisis of the 1930s. The population surged again via migration from rural sectors between 1940 and 1960. This migration was coupled with high fertility rates, and annual growth reached 4.9% between 1952 and 1960. Growth has declined, reaching 1.4% in the early 2000s. The size of the city expanded constantly; The 20,000 hectares Santiago covered in 1960 doubled by 1980, reaching 64,140 hectares in 2002. The population density in Santiago is 8,464 inhabitants/km2.\nThe population of Santiago has seen a steady increase in recent years. In 1990 the total population under 20 years was 38.0% and 8.9% were over 60. Estimates in 2007 show that 32.9% of men and 30.7% of women were less than 20 years old, while 10.2% of men and 13.4% of women were over 60 years. For the year 2020, it is estimated that the figures will be 26.7% and 16.8%.\n4,313,719 people in Chile say they were born in one of the communes of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, which, according to the 2002 census, amounts to 28.5% of the national total. 67.6% of the inhabitants of Santiago claim to have been born in one of the communes of the metropolitan area. In communes such as Santiago Centro and Independencia, according to 2017 census, 1/3 of residents is a Latin American immigrant (28% and 31% of the population of these communes, respectively). Other communes of Greater Santiago with high numbers of immigrants are Estaci\u00f3n Central (17%) and Recoleta (16%).\nEconomy.\nSantiago is the industrial and financial center of Chile, and generates 45% of the country's GDP. Some international institutions, such as ECLAC (Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean), have their offices in Santiago. The strong economy and low government debt is attracting migrants from Europe and the United States.\nSantiago's steady economic growth over the past few decades has transformed it into a modern metropolis. The city is now home to a growing theater and restaurant scene, extensive suburban development, dozens of shopping centers, and a rising skyline, including the second tallest building in Latin America, the Gran Torre Santiago. It includes several major universities, and has developed a modern transportation infrastructure, including a free flow toll-based, partly underground urban freeway system and the Metro de Santiago, South America's most extensive subway system.\nSantiago is an economically divided city (Gini coefficient of 0.47). The western half (\"zona poniente\") of the city is, on average, much poorer than the eastern communes, where the high-standard public and private facilities are concentrated.\nCommercial development.\nThe Costanera Center, a mega project in Santiago's Financial District, includes a mall, a tower, two office towers of each, and a hotel tall. In January 2009 the retailer in charge, Cencosud, said in a statement that the construction of the mega-mall would gradually be reduced until financial uncertainty is cleared. In January 2010, Cencosud announced the restart of the project, and this was taken generally as a symbol of the country's success despite the Great Recession. Close to Costanera Center another skyscraper is already in use, Titanium La Portada, tall. Although these are the two biggest projects, there are many other office buildings under construction in Santiago, as well as hundreds of high rise residential buildings. In February 2011, Gran Torre Santiago, part of the Costanera Center project, located in the called Sanhattan district, reached the 300-meter mark, officially becoming the tallest structure in Latin America.\nCommerce.\nSantiago is Chile's retail capital. Falabella, Paris, Johnson, Ripley, La Polar, and several other department stores dot the mall landscape of Chile. The east side neighborhoods like Vitacura, La Dehesa, and Las Condes are home to Santiago's Alonso de Cordova street, and malls like Parque Arauco, Alto Las Condes, Mall Plaza (a chain of malls present in Chile and other Latin American countries) and Costanera Center are known for their luxurious shopping. Alonso de Cordova, Santiago's equivalent to Rodeo Drive or Rua Oscar Freire in S\u00e3o Paulo, has exclusive stores like Louis Vuitton, Herm\u00e8s, Emporio Armani, Salvatore Ferragamo, Ermenegildo Zegna, Swarovski, MaxMara, Longchamp, and others. Alonso de Cordova also houses some of Santiago's most famous restaurants, art galleries, wine showrooms and furniture stores. The Costanera Center has stores like Armani Exchange, Banana Republic, Fa\u00e7onnable, Hugo Boss, Swarovski, and Zara. There are plans for a Saks Fifth Avenue in Santiago. Several mercados in the city such as the Mercado Central de Santiago sell local goods. Barrio Bellavista and Barrio Lastarria have some of the most exclusive night clubs, chic caf\u00e9s and restaurants.\nTransportation.\nAir.\nArturo Merino Ben\u00edtez International Airport (IATA: SCL) is Santiago's national and international airport and the principal hub of LATAM Airlines, Sky Airline, Aerocardal and JetSmart. The airport is located in the western commune of Pudahuel. The largest airport in Chile, it is ranked sixth in passenger traffic among Latin American airports, with 14,168,282 passengers served in 2012 \u2013 a 17% increase over 2011. It is located from the city center.\nPeldehue airport in Colina began operations on 13 December 2021. It will be able to service up to 25 flights each hour.\nSantiago is also served by Eulogio S\u00e1nchez Airport (ICAO: SCTB), a small, privately owned general aviation airport in the commune of La Reina.\nRail.\nTrains operated by Chile's national railway company, Empresa de los Ferrocarriles del Estado (EFE), connect Santiago to several cities in the south-central part of the country: Rancagua, San Fernando, Talca (connected to the coastal city of Constituci\u00f3n by a different train service), Linares and Chill\u00e1n. All such trains arrive and depart from the Estaci\u00f3n Central railway station (Central Station), which can be accessed by bus or subway. The proposed Santiago\u2013Valpara\u00edso railway line would connect Santiago with Valpara\u00edso in 45 minutes, and expansions of the commuter rail network to Melipilla and Batuco are under discussion.\nInter-urban buses.\nBus companies provide passenger transportation from Santiago to most areas of the country as well as to foreign destinations, while some also provide parcel shipping and delivery services.\nThere are several bus terminals in Santiago:\nHighways.\nA network of free flow toll highways connects the various areas of the city. They include the Vespucio Norte and Vespucio Sur highways, which surround the city completing a nearly full circle; Autopista Central, the section of the Pan American highway crossing the city from north to south, divided in two highways apart; and the Costanera Norte, running next to the Mapocho River and connecting the international airport with the downtown and with the wealthier areas of the city to the east, where it divides into two highways.\nOther non-free flow toll roads connecting Santiago to other cities, include: Rutas del Pac\u00edfico (Ruta 68), the continuation of the \"Alameda\" Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins Avenue to the west, provides direct access to Valpara\u00edso and Vi\u00f1a del Mar; Autopista del Sol (Ruta 78), connects Melipilla and the port of San Antonio with the capital; Autopista Ruta del Maipo (a.k.a. \"Acceso Sur\") is an alternative to the Pan American highway to access the various localities south of Santiago; Autopista Los Libertadores provides access to the main border crossing to Argentina, via Colina and Los Andes; and Autopista Nororiente, which provides access to the suburban development known as Chicureo, north of the capital.\nPublic transportation.\nSantiago has 37% of Chile's vehicles, totaling 991,838, of which 979,346 are motorized. An extensive network of streets and avenues crisscrosses Santiago, facilitating travel between the different communities that make up the metropolitan area.\nIn the 1990s, the government attempted to reorganize the public transportation system. New routes were introduced in 1994, and the buses were painted yellow. However, the system faced significant issues such as route overlaps, high levels of air and noise pollution, and safety concerns for both riders and drivers. To address these problems, a new transportation system called Transantiago was devised. It was officially launched on February 10, 2007, combining core services across the city with the subway and local feeder routes, all under a unified payment system using a contactless smartcard called Tarjeta bip!\nThe change was not well received by users, who complained of a lack of buses, excessive transfers between buses, and reduced coverage. While some of these issues were eventually addressed, the system developed a poor reputation that it struggled to overcome. As of 2011, fare evasion remained persistently high.\nIn 2019, the government rebranded the public transportation system as RED, aiming to distance it from the problematic Transantiago brand.\nIn recent years, many cycle paths have been constructed, but their number remains limited, and the routes are poorly connected. Most cyclists ride on the streets, and despite helmet and light use being mandatory, compliance is not widespread.\nMetro.\nSantiago Metro has seven operating lines (1, 2, 3, 4, 4A, 5 and 6), extending over and connecting 143 stations. The system carries around 2,400,000 passengers per day. Two underground lines (Line 4 and 4A) and an extension of Line 2 were inaugurated in 2005 and 2006, while an extension of Line 5 was inaugurated in 2011. Line 6 was inaugurated in 2017, adding 10 stations to the network and approximately of track. Line 3 opened on 22 January 2019, with 18 new stations.\nCommuter rail.\nEFE provides suburban rail service under the brandname of Metrotren. There are 2 southbound routes. The most popular is the Metrotren Nos service, between the Central Station of Santiago and Nos station, in San Bernardo. This line, inaugurated in 2017, serves 8\u00a0million people per year, with 12 trains serving 10 stations with a frequency of 6 minutes during rush hours, and 12 during the rest of the time. The other route is the Metrotren Rancagua service, between the Central Station of Santiago and the Rancagua station, connecting Santiago with the regional capital of O'Higgins.\nBus.\nRed (formerly known as Transantiago) is the name of Santiago's comprehensive public transportation system. It operates by integrating local feeder bus lines, main bus lines, EFE commuter trains, and the metro network. The system features an integrated fare system that enables passengers to make transfers between bus, metro, and train services using a single, contactless smartcard known as \"Bip!\". Additionally, it offers reduced fares for senior citizens, high school students, and university students.\nVehicles for hire.\nTaxicabs are prevalent in Santiago and are easily recognizable by their black bodies and yellow roofs, as well as their orange license plates. Another type of taxi called \"radiotaxis\" can be ordered by phone and can come in any make, model, or color, but must always have the orange license plates. \"Colectivos\" are shared taxis that follow a specific route and charge a fixed fee for the ride.\nCabify, Uber and DiDi are also available in Santiago, though authorities warn they currently operate outside the law.\nPublic transportation statistics.\nThe average amount of time people spend commuting with public transit in Santiago - to and from work, for example - on a weekday is 53 min. Just 4,3% of public transit riders ride for more than 2 hours every day while . The average amount of time people wait at a stop or station for public transit (considering transfers) is 14 min, while 17,4% of riders wait less than 5 minutes on average every day. The average distance people usually ride in a single trip with public transit is 8.03\u00a0km, while 18% travel for over 12\u00a0km in a single direction.\nInternal transportation.\nAs of 2006, Santiago was home to 992,000 vehicles, 979,000 of which were motorized. This made up 37.3% of Chile's total vehicle count. 805,000 cars passed through the city, which is 37.6% of the national total or one car for every seven people.\nThe main road is the Avenida Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins, better known as Alameda Avenue, which runs northeast and southwest. From north to south, it is crossed by Autopista Central and the Independencia, Gran Avenida, Recoleta, Santa Rosa, Vicu\u00f1a Mackenna and Tobalaba avenues. Other major roads include the Avenida Los Pajaritos to the west and Providencia Avenue and Apoquindo Avenue to the east. Finally, the Am\u00e9rico Vespucio Avenue acts as a ring road.\nDuring the 2000s, several urban highways were built through Santiago in order to improve the situation for vehicles. The road General Vel\u00e1squez and sections of the Pan-American Highway in Santiago were converted into the Autopista Central, while Am\u00e9rico Vespucio became variously the highways Vespucio Norte Express and Vespucio Sur, as well as Vespucio Oriente in the future. Following the edge of the Mapocho River, Costanera Norte was built to link the northeast of the capital to the airport and the downtown area. All these highways, totaling 210\u00a0km in length, have a free flow toll system.\nAdministrative divisions.\nGreater Santiago lacks a metropolitan government for its administration, which is distributed between authorities, complicating the operation of the city as a single entity. The highest authorities in Santiago are considered to be the governor of the Santiago Metropolitan Region, who is popularly elected to the office, now held by Claudio Orrego, and the regional presidential delegate of Santiago Metropolitan Region, an official appointed by the president of Chile.\nThe conurbation of Greater Santiago does not fit perfectly into any administrative division, as it extends into four different provinces and 35 communes plus 11 satellite communes which together make the Santiago Metropolitan Area. The majority of its (as of 2002) lie within Santiago Province, with some peripheral areas contained in the provinces of Cordillera, Maipo, and Talagante.\nAlthough there is no official consensus in this regard, the communes of the city are usually grouped into seven sectors: north, center, northeast, southeast, south, southeast and southwest.\nCulture.\nOnly a few historical buildings from the Spanish colonial period remain in the city, because \u2013 like the rest of the country \u2013 Santiago is regularly hit by earthquakes. Extant buildings include the Casa Colorada (1769), the San Francisco Church (1586), and Posada del Corregidor (1750).\nThe cathedral on the central square (Plaza de Armas) is a sight that ranks as high as the Palacio de La Moneda, the Presidential Palace. The original building was built between 1784 and 1805, and architect Joaqu\u00edn Toesca was in charge of its construction. Other buildings surrounding the Plaza de Armas are the Central Post Office Building, which was finished in 1882, and the Palacio de la Real Audiencia de Santiago, built between 1804 and 1807. It houses the Chilean National History Museum, with 12,000 objects that can be exhibited. On the southeast corner of the square stands the green cast-iron Commercial Edwards building, which was built in 1893. East of that is the colonial building of the Casa Colorada (1769), which houses the Museum of Santiago. Close by is the Municipal Theater of Santiago, which was built in 1857 by the French architect Brunet of Edward Baines. It was badly damaged by an earthquake in 1906. Not far from the theater is the Subercaseaux Mansion and the National Library, one of the largest libraries of South America.\nThe Former National Congress Building, the Justice Palace, and the Royal Customs Palace (\"Palacio de la Real Aduana de Santiago\") are located close to each other. The latter houses the Museum of pre-Columbian art. A fire destroyed the building of the Congress in 1895, which was then rebuilt in a neoclassical style and reopened in 1901. The Congress was deposed under the military dictatorship (1973\u201389) of Augusto Pinochet, and after the dictatorship was newly constituted on 11 March 1990, in Valpara\u00edso.\nThe building of the Justice Palace (Palacio de Tribunales) is located on the south side of the Montt Square. It was designed by the architect Emilio Doy\u00e9re and built between 1907 and 1926. The building is home to the Supreme Court of Chile. The panel of 21 judges is the highest judicial power in Chile. The building is also the headquarters of the Court of Appeals of Santiago.\nBandera street leads toward the building of the Santiago Stock Exchange (the \"Bolsa de Comercio\"), completed in 1917, the Club de la Uni\u00f3n (opened in 1925), the Universidad de Chile (1872), and toward the oldest churchhouse in the city, the San Francisco Church (constructed between 1586 and 1628), with its Marian statue of the \"Virgen del Socorro\" (\"Our Lady of Help\"), which was brought to Chile by Pedro de Valdivia. North of the \"Plaza de Armas\" (\"Square of Arms\", where the colonial militia was mustered) are the Paseo Puente, the Santo Domingo Church (1771), and the Central Market (Mercado Central), an ornamental iron building. Also in downtown Santiago is the Torre Entel, a 127.4-meter-high television tower with observation deck completed in 1974; the tower serves as a communication center for the communications company, ENTEL Chile.\nThe Costanera Center was completed in 2009, and includes housing, shopping, and entertainment venues. The project, with a total area of 600,000 square meters, includes the 300-meter high Gran Torre Santiago (South America's tallest building) and other commercial buildings. The four office towers are served by highway and subway connections.\nHeritage and monuments.\nWithin the metropolitan area of Santiago, there are 174 heritage sites in the custody of the National Monuments Council, among which are archeological, architectural and historical monuments, neighborhoods and typical areas. Of these, 93 are located within the commune of Santiago, considered the historic center of the city. Although no santiaguino monument has been declared a World Heritage Site by Unesco three have already been proposed by the Chilean government: the Incan sanctuary of El Plomo, the church and convent of San Francisco and the palace of La Moneda.\nIn the center of Santiago are several buildings built during the Spanish domination and that mostly correspond to, as the Metropolitan Cathedral and the aforementioned church of San Francisco Catholic churches. Buildings of the period are those located on the sides of Plaza de Armas, as the seat of Real Audiencia, the Post Office or the Casa Colorada.\nDuring the nineteenth century and the advent of independence, new architectural works began to be erected in the capital of the young republic. The aristocracy built small palaces for residential use, mainly around the neighborhood Republica and preserved until today. To this other structures adopted artistic trends from Europe, as the Equestrian Club of Santiago, the head offices of the University of Chile and the Catholic University, Central Station and the Mapocho Station, Mercado Central, join the National Library, Museum of Fine Arts and the Barrio Par\u00eds-Londres, among others.\nVarious green areas in the city contain within and around various sites of heritage character. Among the most important are the fortifications of Santa Lucia hill, the shrine of the Virgin Mary on the summit of San Cristobal hill, the lavish crypt of the General Cemetery, Parque Forestal, the O'Higgins Park and the Quinta Normal Park.\nCultural activities and entertainment.\nIn Santiago's major theater companies are located, hosting several national and international projects, with the highest expression during the International Theater Festival known as Santiago a Mil, which takes place every January since 1994 and has gathered more than one million spectators. Also is the Planetarium at the University of Santiago de Chile.\nTo carry out various cultural, artistic and musical events, there are several precincts within which highlight the Mapocho Cultural Center, 100 Matucana Cultural Center, the Gabriela Mistral Cultural Center, Centro Cultural Palacio de La Moneda, the Movistar Arena and the Caupolican Theater. On the other hand, the opera and ballet performances are permanently accepted by the Municipal Theater of Santiago, located in the heart of the city and which has a capacity of 1500 spectators.\nThere are 18 cinemas in the capital with a total of 144 rooms and over 32,000 seats, the projection centers than 5 arthouse add.\nFor children and teenagers, there are several entertainment venues, such as amusement park Fantasilandia, the National Zoo or the Buin Zoo on the outskirts of the city. The Bellavista, Brasil, Manuel Montt, Plaza \u00d1u\u00f1oa and Suecia account for most of the nightclubs, restaurants and bars in the city, the main evening entertainment centers in the capital. In order to promote the economic development of other regions, the law prohibits the construction of a casino in the metropolitan region, but nearby are the casino from the coastal city of Vina del Mar, 120\u00a0km from distance from Santiago, and Monticello Grand Casino in Mostazal, 56 kilometers south of Santiago, which opened in 2008.\nMuseums and libraries.\nSantiago has a wealth of museums of different kinds, among which are three of 'National' class administered by the Directorate of Libraries, Archives and Museums (DIBAM): the National History Museum, National Museum of Fine Arts and the National Museum of Natural History.\nMost of the museums are located in the historic city center, occupying the old buildings of colonial origin, such as with the National History Museum, which is located in the Palacio de la Real Audiencia. La Casa Colorada houses the Museum of Santiago, while the Colonial Museum is housed in a wing of the Church of San Francisco and the Museum of Pre-Columbian Art occupies part of the old Palacio de la Aduana. The Museum of Fine Arts, though it is located in the city center, was built in the early twentieth century, especially for housing the museum and in the back of the building was laid in 1947, the Museum of Contemporary Art, under the Faculty of Arts of the University of Chile.\nQuinta Normal Park also has several museums, among which are the already mentioned Natural History, Artequin Museum, the Museum of Science and Technology, and the Museo Ferroviario. In 2010, the Museum of Memory and Human Rights was inaugurated, which commemorates the victims of human rights violations committed during the country's military dictatorship.\nIn other parts of the city there are some museums such as the Aeronautical Museum in Cerrillos, Museum of Tajamares in Providence and the Museo Interactivo Mirador in La Granja. The latter opened in 2000 and designed mainly for children and youth has been visited by more than 2.8\u00a0million visitors, making it the busiest museum in the country.\nThe most important public library is the National Library located in downtown Santiago. Its origins date back to 1813, when it was created by the nascent Republic and was moved to its current premises a century later, also home to the headquarters of the National Archives. In order to provide more closeness to the population, incorporating new technologies and complement the services provided by public libraries and the National Library was opened in 2005 the Library of Santiago at Barrio Matucana.\nMusic.\nSantiago has two symphony orchestras:\nThere are a number of jazz establishments, some of them, including \"El Perseguidor\", \"Thelonious\", and \"Le Fournil Jazz Club\", are located in Bellavista, one of Santiago's \"hippest\" neighborhoods, though \"Club de Jazz de Santiago\", the oldest and most traditional one, is in \u00d1u\u00f1oa. Annual festivals featured in Santiago include Lollapalooza and the Maquinaria festival.\nNewspapers.\nThe most widely circulated newspapers in Chile are published by and \"Copesa\" and have earned more than the 91% of revenues generated in printed advertizing in Chile.\nSome newspapers available in Santiago are:\nMedia.\nSantiago is home to the major Chilean television networks including the public broadcaster TVN and the privately held Canal 13, Chilevisi\u00f3n, La Red and Mega. In addition, the radio stations ADN Radio Chile, Radio Agricultura, Radio Concierto, Radio Cooperativa, Radio Pudahuel and Radio Rock &amp; Pop are located in the city.\nSports.\nSantiago is home to some of Chile's most successful soccer clubs. Colo-Colo, founded on 19 April 1925, has a long tradition, and has played continuously in the highest league since the establishment of the first Chilean league in 1933. The club's wins include 30 national titles, 10 Copa Chile successes, and champions of the Copa Libertadores tournament in 1991, the only Chilean team to have won this tournament. The club hosts its home games in the Estadio Monumental in the commune of Macul.\nUniversidad de Chile has 18 national titles and 5 Copa Chile wins. In 2011 they were champions of Copa Sudamericana, the only Chilean team to have won this tournament. The club was founded on 24 May 1927, under the name Club Deportivo Universitario as a union of Club N\u00e1utico and Federaci\u00f3n Universitaria. The founders were students of the University of Chile. In 1980, the organization separated from the University of Chile and the club is now completely independent. The team plays its home games in the Estadio Nacional de Chile in the commune of \u00d1u\u00f1oa.\nClub Deportivo Universidad Cat\u00f3lica (UC) was founded on 21 April 1937. It consists of fourteen different departments. This team plays its home games in Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo. Universidad Cat\u00f3lica has 13 national titles, making it the third most successful soccer club in the country. It has played the Copa Libertadores more than 20 times, reaching the final in 1993, losing to S\u00e3o Paulo FC.\nSeveral other soccer clubs are based in Santiago, including Uni\u00f3n Espa\u00f1ola, Audax Italiano, Palestino, Santiago Morning, Magallanes and Barnechea. Other sports, mainly tennis and basketball, are also popular. The Club H\u00edpico de Santiago and the Hip\u00f3dromo Chile are the two horseracing tracks in the city.\nSantiago hosted the final stages of the official 1959 Basketball World Cup, where Chile won the bronze medal.\nThe city held a round of the all-electric FIA Formula E Championship on 3 February 2018, on a temporary street circuit incorporating the Plaza Baquedano and Parque Forestal. It was the first FIA sanctioned race in the country.\nThe 2023 Pan American Games were held in Santiago.\nThe 2027 Special Olympics World Summer Games will be held in Santiago. This will mark the first time that a Spanish speaking country, the southern hemisphere and Latin America has ever hosted the Special Olympics World Games.\nRecreation.\nThere is an extensive network of bicycle trails in the city, especially in the Providencia commune. The longest section is the Americo Vespuccio road, which contains a very wide dirt path with many trees through the center of a street used by motorists on both sides. The next longest path is along the Mapocho River along Andr\u00e9s Bello Avenue. Many people use folding bicycles to commute to work.\nThe city's main parks are:\nThere are ski resorts to the east of the city (Valle Nevado, La Parva, El Colorado) and wineries in the plains west of the city.\nCultural venues include:\nThe main sports venues are Estadio Nacional (site of the 1962 World Cup final), Estadio Monumental David Arellano, Estadio Santa Laura, and Estadio San Carlos de Apoquindo.\nReligion.\nAs in most of Chile, the majority of the population of Santiago is Catholic. According to the National Census, carried out in 2002 by the National Statistics Bureau (INE), in the Santiago Metropolitan Region, 3,129,249 people 15 and older identified themselves as Catholics, equivalent to 68.7% of the total population, while 595,173 (13.1%) described themselves as Evangelical Protestants. Around 1.2% of the population declared themselves as being Jehovah's Witnesses, while 2.0% identified themselves as Latter-day Saints (Mormons), 0.3% as Jewish, 0.1% as Eastern Orthodox and 0.1% as Muslim. Approximately 10.4% of the population of the Metropolitan Region stated that they were atheist or agnostic, while 5.4% declared that they followed other religions.\nIn 2010 construction was initiated on the Santiago Bah\u00e1'\u00ed Temple, serving as the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed House of Worship for South America, in the commune of Pe\u00f1alolen. Construction at the site was completed and the temple was dedicated in October 2016.\nEducation.\nThe city is home to numerous universities, colleges, research institutions, and libraries.\nThe largest university and one of the oldest in the Americas is Universidad de Chile. The roots of the university date back to the year 1622, as on 19 August the first university in Chile under the name of Santo Tom\u00e1s de Aquino was founded. On 28 July 1738, it was named the Real Universidad de San Felipe in honor of King Philip V of Spain. In the vernacular, it is also known as Casa de Bello (Spanish: House of Bello \u2013 after their first Rector, Andr\u00e9s Bello). On 17 April 1839, after Chile's independence from the Kingdom of Spain, it was renamed the Universidad de Chile, and reopened on 17 September 1843.\nThe Pontificia Universidad Cat\u00f3lica de Chile (PUC) was founded in June 1888 and was ranked as the best school in Latin America in 2014. On 11 February 1930 it was declared a university by a decree of Pope Pius XI. It received recognition by the Chilean government as an appointed Pontifical University in 1931. Joaqu\u00edn Larra\u00edn Gandarillas (1822\u20131897), Archbishop of Anazarba, was the founder and first rector of the PUC. The PUC is a modern university; the campus of San Joaquin has a number of contemporary buildings and offers many parks and sports facilities. Several courses are conducted in English. Ex-president, Sebasti\u00e1n Pi\u00f1era, minister Ricardo Raineri, and minister Hern\u00e1n de Solminihac all attended PUC as students and worked in PUC as professors. In the 2010 admission process, approximately 48% of the students who achieved the best score in the Prueba de Selecci\u00f3n Universitaria matriculated in the UC.\nInternational relations.\nSantiago is home to a number of international relations institutions, such as the Regional Unit for International Affairs (URAI) of the Metropolitan Regional Government of Santiago, responsible for analyzing and managing the Santiago Metropolitan Region\u2019s bilateral and multilateral relations with Latin America and the rest of the world; the International Cooperation Commission of the Metropolitan Regional Council of Santiago; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chile; the National Migration Service; the National Headquarters for Migration and International Police of the Investigations Police of Chile; the General Directorate for Export Promotion; the Chilean Agency for International Cooperation for Development; the International Relations Unit of the Municipality of Pe\u00f1alol\u00e9n; and municipal migration offices in 32 communes of the Santiago Metropolitan Area.\nInternational organizations.\nSantiago serves as the national and Latin American regional headquarters for several international organizations, such as the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and CAF \u2013 Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean.\nInternationalization in higher education.\nIn the field of international relations and higher education, the main actors in Santiago are the Office of the Vice President for International Affairs of the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile, the Office of International Relations of the University of Chile, the Department of International and Interuniversity Relations of the University of Santiago, Chile, the Office of International Relations of the Adolfo Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez University, the Vice-Rector\u2019s Office for International Affairs of the Andr\u00e9s Bello University, the Directorate of Globalization of the University of Development, and the General Directorate of International Relations of the Diego Portales University.\nSantiago also hosts higher education and research institutions specializing in International Relations, such as the Institute of International Studies of the University of Chile, the Institute for Advanced Studies of the University of Santiago, Chile, the Diplomatic Academy of Chile \u201cAndr\u00e9s Bello\u201d (ACADE), and the National Academy of Political and Strategic Studies (ANEPE).\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nSantiago is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnion of Ibero-American Capital Cities.\nSantiago is part of the Union of Ibero-American Capital Cities from 12 October 1982.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51574", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51574", "title": "Mycologist", "text": ""}
{"id": "51575", "revid": "41419081", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51575", "title": "Biologists", "text": ""}
{"id": "51577", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51577", "title": "Pau d'arco", "text": ""}
{"id": "51578", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51578", "title": "Tabebuia", "text": "Genus of flowering plants\nTabebuia is a genus of flowering plants in the family Bignoniaceae. \"Tabebuia\" consists almost entirely of trees, but a few are often large shrubs. A few species produce timber, but the genus is mostly known for those that are cultivated as flowering trees.\nEtymology.\nThe genus name is derived from the Tupi words for \"ant\" and \"wood\", referring to the fact that many \"Tabebuia\" species have twigs with soft pith which forms hollows within which ants live, defending the trees from other herbivores. The ants are attracted to the plants by special extra-floral nectar glands on at the apex of the petioles. The common name \"roble\" is sometimes found in English. \"Tabebuias\" have been called \"trumpet trees\", but this name is usually applied to other trees and has become a source of confusion and misidentification.\nDistribution.\n\"Tabebuia\" is native to the American tropics and subtropics from Mexico and the Caribbean to Argentina. Most of the species known are from the islands of Cuba and Hispaniola. It is commonly cultivated and often naturalized or adventive beyond its natural range. It easily escapes cultivation because of its numerous, air-borne seeds.\nTaxonomy.\nIn 1992, a revision of \"Tabebuia\" described 99 species and one hybrid. Phylogenetic studies of DNA sequences later showed that \"Tabebuia\", as then circumscribed, was polyphyletic. In 2007, it was divided into three separate genera. Primavera (\"Roseodendron donnell-smithii\") and a related species with no unique common name (\"Roseodendron chryseum\") were transferred to \"Roseodendron\". Those species known as \"ip\u00ea\" and \"pau d'arco\" (in Portuguese) or poui were transferred to \"Handroanthus\". Sixty-seven species remained in \"Tabebuia\". The former genus and polyphyletic group of 99 species described by Gentry in 1992 is now usually referred to as \"\"Tabebuia\" sensu lato\".\nSpecies.\nAll of the species in the first two columns below were recognized and described by Gentry in 1992. Listed in the third column are species names that have been used recently, but were not accepted by Gentry. The currently accepted synonym for each is in parentheses.\nSome recently used names in \"Tabebuia\" that were not recognized by Gentry are not listed in the third column below because they apply to species that are now in \"Handroanthus\". \"Tabebuia spectabilis\" is an obsolete name for \"Handroanthus chrysanthus\" subsp. \"meridionalis\". \"Tabebuia ecuadorensis\" is now synonymized under \"Handroanthus billbergii\". \"Tabebuia heteropoda\" is now synonymized under \"Handroanthus ochraceus\".\nNo species that is now assigned to \"Roseodendron\" or to \"Handroanthus\" is listed below.\nAuthorities are cited for some of the names below. These can be found in Gentry (1992) or at the International Plant Names Index.\nTaxonomic history.\nThe name \"Tabebuia\" entered the botanical literature in 1803, when Ant\u00f3nio Bernardino Gomes used it as a common name for \"Tabebuia uliginosa\", now a synonym for \"Tabebuia cassinoides\", which he described as a species of \"Bignonia\". \"Tabebuia\" is an abbreviation of \"tacyba bebuya\", a Tupi name meaning \"ant wood\". Among the Indigenous peoples in Brazil, similar names exist for various species of \"Tabebuia\".\n\"Tabebuia\" was first used as a generic name by Augustin Pyramus de Candolle in 1838. The type species for the genus is \"Tabebuia uliginosa\", which is now a synonym for \"Tabebuia cassinoides\". Confusion soon ensued over the meaning of \"Tabebuia\" and what to include within it. Most of the misunderstanding was cleared up by Nathaniel Lord Britton in 1915. Britton revived the concept of \"Tabebuia\" that had been originated in 1876 by Bentham and Hooker, consisting of species with either simple or palmately compound leaves. Similar plants with pinnately compound leaves were placed in \"Tecoma\". This is the concept of \"Tabebuia\" that was usually followed until 2007.\nThe genus \"Roseodendron\" was established by Faustino Miranda Gonz\u00e1lez in 1965 for the two species now known as \"Roseodendron donnell-smithii\" and \"Roseodendron chryseum\". These species had been placed in \"Cybistax\" by Russell J. Seibert in 1940, but were returned to \"Tabebuia\" by Alwyn H. Gentry in 1992.\n\"Handroanthus\" was established by Jo\u00e1o Rodrigues de Mattos in 1970. Gentry did not agree with the segregation of \"Handroanthus\" from \"Tabebuia\" and warned against \"succumbing to further paroxysms of unwarranted splitting\". In 1992, Gentry published a revision of \"Tabebuia\" in Flora Neotropica, in which he described 99 species and one hybrid, including those species placed by some authors in \"Roseodendron\" or \"Handroanthus\". Gentry divided \"Tabebuia\" into ten \"species groups\", some of them intentionally artificial. \"Tabebuia\", as currently circumscribed, consists of groups 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. Group 1 is now the genus \"Roseodendron\". Groups 3, 4, and 5 compose the genus \"Handroanthus\".\nIn 2007, a molecular phylogenetic study found \"Handroanthus\" to be closer to a certain group of four genera than to \"Tabebuia\". This group consists of \"Spirotecoma\", \"Parmentiera\", \"Crescentia\", and \"Amphitecna\". A phylogenetic tree can be seen at Bignoniaceae. \"Handroanthus\" was duly resurrected and 30 species were assigned to it, with species boundaries the same as those of Gentry (1992).\n\"Roseodendron\" was resolved as sister to a clade consisting of \"Handroanthus\" and four other genera. This result had only weak statistical support, but \"Roseodendron\" clearly did not group with the remainder of \"Tabebuia\". Consequently, \"Roseodendron\" was resurrected in its original form. The remaining 67 species of \"Tabebuia\" formed a strongly supported clade that is sister to \"Ekmanianthe\", a genus of two species from Cuba and Hispaniola. \"Tabebuia\" had been traditionally placed in the tribe Tecomeae, but that tribe is now defined much more narrowly than it had been, and it now excludes \"Tabebuia\". \"Tabebuia\" is now one of 12 to 14 genera belonging to a group that is informally called the \"Tabebuia\" alliance. This group has not been placed at any particular taxonomic rank.\nCladistic analysis of DNA data has strongly supported \"Tabebuia\" by Bayesian inference and maximum parsimony. Such studies have so far revealed almost nothing about relationships within the genus, placing nearly all of the sampled species in a large polytomy.\nDescription.\nThe description below is excerpted from Grose and Olmstead (2007).\n\"Tabebuia\" is distinguished from \"Handroanthus\" by wood that is not especially hard or heavy, and not abruptly divided into heartwood and sapwood. Lapachol is absent. Scales are present, but no hair. The calyx is usually spathaceous in \"Tabebuia\", but never so in \"Handroanthus\". Only two species of \"Tabebuia\" are yellow-flowered, but most species of \"Handroanthus\" are.\nUnlike \"Roseodendron\", the calyx of \"Tabebuia\" is always distinctly harder and thicker than the corolla. \"Tabebuia\" always has a dichotomously branched inflorescence; never a central rachis as in \"Roseodendron\". Some species of \"Tabebuia\" have ribbed fruit, but not as conspicuously so as the two species of \"Roseodendron\".\nUses.\nThe wood of \"Tabebuia\" is light to medium in weight. \"Tabebuia rosea\" (including \"T. pentaphylla\") is an important timber tree of tropical America. \"Tabebuia heterophylla\" and \"Tabebuia angustata\" are the most important timber trees of some of the Caribbean islands. Their wood is of medium weight and is exceptionally durable in contact with salt water.\nThe swamp species of \"Tabebuia\" have wood that is unusually light in weight. The most prominent example of these is \"Tabebuia cassinoides\". Its roots produce a soft and spongy wood that is used for floats, razor strops, and the inner soles of shoes.\nIn spite of its use for lumber, \"Tabebuia\" is best known as an ornamental flowering tree. \"Tabebuia aurea\", \"Tabebuia rosea\", \"Tabebuia pallida\", \"Tabebuia berteroi\", and \"Tabebuia heterophylla\" are cultivated throughout the tropics for their showy flowers. \"Tabebuia dubia\", \"Tabebuia haemantha\", \"Tabebuia obtusifolia\", \"Tabebuia nodosa\", and \"Tabebuia roseo-alba\" are also known in cultivation and are sometimes locally abundant.\nSome species of \"Tabebuia\" have been grown as honey plants by beekeepers.\nEcology.\nThe nectar of \"Tabebuia\" flowers is an important food source for several species of bees and hummingbirds.\nSymbolism.\n\"Tabebuia rosea\" is the national tree of El Salvador and the state tree of Cojedes, Venezuela.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51579", "revid": "29077096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51579", "title": "Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz", "text": "German state (1701\u20131815)\nThe Duchy of Mecklenburg-Strelitz was a duchy in Northern Germany consisting of the eastern fifth of the historic Mecklenburg region, roughly corresponding with the present-day Mecklenburg-Strelitz district (the former Lordship of Stargard), and the western Principality of Ratzeburg exclave (the former Prince-Bishopric of Ratzeburg), which lay mostly in the west of the modern district. At the time of its establishment, the main part of the duchy bordered on the territory of Swedish Pomerania in the north and of Brandenburg in the south; Ratzeburg bordered Saxe-Lauenburg and the Free City of L\u00fcbeck.\nHistory.\nAfter more than five years of dispute over succession to the House of Mecklenburg, the duchy was established in 1701 in the territory of the former duchy of Mecklenburg-G\u00fcstrow. The G\u00fcstrow branch of the House of Mecklenburg had died out with the death of Duke Gustav Adolph in 1695. Duke Frederick William of Mecklenburg-Schwerin claimed heirship, but he had to deal with the demands of his uncle Adolphus Frederick, husband of Mary of Mecklenburg-G\u00fcstrow, the daughter of Gustav Adolph. The emissaries of the Lower Saxon Circle finally negotiated a compromise on March 8, 1701. The agreement created the final, definitive division of Mecklenburg and was sealed with the 1701 Treaty of Hamburg. Section 2 of the treaty established Mecklenburg-Strelitz as a duchy in its own right and assigned it to Adolphus Frederick, together with the Principality of Ratzeburg on the western border of Mecklenburg south of L\u00fcbeck, the Herrschaft Stargard in the southeast of Mecklenburg, with the cities of Neubrandenburg, Friedland, Woldegk, Strelitz, Burg Stargard, F\u00fcrstenberg/Havel and Wesenberg, and the commandries of Mirow and Nemerow. At the same time the principle of primogeniture was reasserted, and the right to summon the joint Landtag was reserved to the Duke of Mecklenburg-Schwerin. The 1701 provisions were maintained with minor changes until the end of the monarchy. Both parties continued to call themselves Dukes of Mecklenburg; Adolphus Frederick took his residence at Strelitz.\nThe Strelitz duchy remained one of the most backward regions of the Empire. Nevertheless, its princesses achieved prominent marriages: Princess Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, sister of Duke Adolphus Frederick IV, married King George III in 1761, thus becoming queen consort of Great Britain. Her niece Princess Louise of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, daughter of Duke Charles II, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg, married Frederick William III of Hohenzollern in 1793 and became queen consort of Prussia in 1797. Her other niece, Louise's sister, Princess Friederike of Mecklenburg-Strelitz married in 1815 Prince Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, who, in 1837, became King of Hanover, making her queen consort of Hanover.\nMecklenburg-Strelitz adopted the constitution of the sister duchy in September 1755. In 1806 it was spared the infliction of a French occupation through the good offices of the king of Bavaria. In 1808 its duke, Charles, joined the Confederation of the Rhine, but in 1813 he withdrew from it. The Congress of Vienna recognized both Mecklenburg-Strelitz and Mecklenburg-Schwerin as grand duchies and members of the German Confederation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51580", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51580", "title": "Grunge", "text": "Genre of rock music\nGrunge (originally known as the Seattle Sound) is an alternative rock genre and subculture that emerged during the mid-1980s in the U.S. state of Washington, particularly in Seattle and Olympia, and other nearby cities. Grunge fuses elements of punk rock and heavy metal, and features the distorted electric guitar sound used in both genres, as well as bass guitar, drums, and vocals. Grunge also incorporates influences from indie rock bands such as Sonic Youth, Pixies, and Dinosaur Jr. Lyrics are typically angst-filled and introspective, often addressing themes such as social alienation, self-doubt, abuse, neglect, betrayal, social isolation and emotional isolation, addiction, psychological trauma, and a desire for freedom.\nThe early grunge movement revolved around Seattle's independent record label Sub Pop and the region's underground music scene, with local bands such as Green River, the Melvins, and Mudhoney playing key roles in the genre's development. Sub Pop marketed the style shrewdly, encouraging media outlets to describe the Seattle sound as \"grunge\"; the style became known as a hybrid of punk and metal. By the early 1990s, its popularity had spread, with similar sounding bands appearing in California, then emerging in other parts of the United States and Australia, building strong followings and signing major record deals. Grunge broke through into the mainstream in the early-to-mid-1990s, led by Nirvana's \"Nevermind\" in 1991, and followed by other crossover successes including Pearl Jam's \"Ten\", Soundgarden's \"Badmotorfinger\", and Alice in Chains' \"Dirt\". The success of these bands boosted the popularity of alternative rock, eventually making grunge the most popular form of hard rock music during the 1990s.\nSeveral factors contributed to grunge's decline in prominence. During the mid-to-late 1990s, many grunge bands broke up or became less visible. Nirvana's Kurt Cobain, labeled by \"Time\" as \"the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest\", struggled with an addiction to heroin before his suicide in 1994. Although most grunge bands had disbanded or faded from view by the late 1990s, they influenced modern rock music, as their lyrics brought socially conscious issues into pop culture and added introspection and an exploration of what it means to be true to oneself. Grunge was also an influence on later genres, such as post-grunge.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"grunge\" is American slang for \"someone or something that is repugnant\" and also for \"dirt\". The word was first recorded as being applied to Seattle musicians in July 1987 when Bruce Pavitt described Green River's \"Dry as a Bone\" EP in a Sub Pop record company catalogue as \"gritty vocals, roaring Marshall amps, ultra-loose GRUNGE that destroyed the morals of a generation\". Although the word \"grunge\" has been used to describe bands since the 1960s, this was the first association of grunge with the grinding, sludgy sound of Seattle. It is expensive and time-consuming to get a recording to sound clean, so for those northwestern bands just starting out it was cheaper for them to leave the sound dirty and just turn up their volume. This dirty sound, due to low budgets, unfamiliarity with recording, and a lack of professionalism may be the origin of the term \"grunge\".\nThe \"Seattle scene\" refers to a regional Pacific Northwest alternative music movement that was linked to the University of Washington in Seattle, and the Evergreen State College in Olympia. Evergreen is a progressive college which does not use a conventional grading system and has its own radio station, KAOS. The music of these bands, many of which had recorded with Seattle's independent record label Sub Pop, became labeled as \"grunge\". Nirvana's frontman Kurt Cobain, in one of his final interviews, credited Jonathan Poneman, cofounder of Sub Pop, with coining the term \"grunge\" to describe the music.\nThe term \"Seattle sound\" became a marketing ploy for the music industry. In September 1991, the Nirvana album \"Nevermind\" was released, bringing mainstream attention to the music of Seattle. Cobain loathed the word \"grunge\" and despised the new scene that was developing, feeling that record companies were signing old \"cock-rock\" bands who were pretending to be grunge and claiming to be from Seattle.\nSome bands associated with the genre have not been receptive to the label, preferring instead to be referred to as \"rock and roll\" bands. Ben Shepherd from Soundgarden stated that he \"hates the word\" grunge and hates \"being associated with it.\" Seattle musician Jeff Stetson states that when he visited Seattle in the late 1980s and early 1990s as a touring musician, the local musicians did not refer to themselves as \"grunge\" performers or their style as \"grunge\" and they were not flattered that their music was being called \"grunge\".\n\"Rolling Stone\" noted the genre's lack of a clear definition. Robert Loss acknowledges the challenges of defining \"grunge\"; he stated that, while he can recount stories about grunge, they do not serve to provide a useful definition. Roy Shuker states that the term \"obscured a variety of styles.\" Stetson states that grunge was not a movement, \"monolithic musical genre\", or a way to react to 1980s-era metal pop; he calls the term a misnomer mostly based on hype. Stetson states that prominent bands considered to be grunge (Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains, Mudhoney and Hammerbox) all sound different. Mark Yarm, author of \"Everybody Loves Our Town: An Oral History of Grunge\", pointed out vast differences between grunge bands, with some being punk and others being metal-based.\nChris Cornell, in a 1994 interview with \"Rolling Stone\" noted the limitation of the \"Seattle scene\":\n... the rest of the country and the world and probably a lot of the bands that play in Seattle now think that what the Seattle scene was about is Soundgarden, Pearl Jam, Nirvana and Alice in Chains \u2014 guitar-based rock with punk influences and \u201970s influences. Period. End of story. And that's so far from what was going on. What was left out was the completely experimental music, from free jazz to theatrical bands to a lot of very Gothic-bent bands.\nMusical style.\nIn 1984, the punk rock band Black Flag toured small towns across the US to bring punk to the more remote parts of the country. By this time, their music had become slow and sludgy, less like the Sex Pistols and more like Black Sabbath. Krist Novoselic, later the bassist with Nirvana, recalled going with the Melvins to see one of these shows, after which Melvins frontman Buzz Osborne began writing \"slow and heavy riffs\" to form a dirge-like music that was the beginning of northwest grunge. The Melvins were the most influential of the early grunge bands. Malfunkshun have also been cited as an influence on the early sound of grunge by figures such as Kurt Cobain and Mark Arm. Sub Pop producer Jack Endino described grunge as \"seventies-influenced, slowed-down punk music\".\nLeighton Beezer, who played with Mark Arm and Steve Turner in the Thrown Ups, state that when he heard Green River play \"Come On Down\", he realized that they were playing punk rock backwards. He noted that the diminished fifth note was used by Black Sabbath to produce an ominous feeling but it is not used in punk rock. In the 1996 grunge film documentary \"Hype!\", Beezer demonstrated on guitar the difference between punk and grunge. First he played the riff from \"Rockaway Beach\" by the Ramones that ascends the neck of the guitar, then \"Come On Down\" by Green River that descends the neck. The two pieces are only a few notes apart but sound unalike. He took the same rhythm with the same chord, however descending the neck made it sound darker, and therefore grunge. Early grunge bands would also copy a riff from metal and slow it down, play it backwards, distort it and bury it in feedback, then shout lyrics with little melody over the top of it.\nGrunge fuses elements of punk rock (specifically American hardcore punk such as Black Flag) and heavy metal (especially traditional, earlier heavy metal groups such as Black Sabbath), although some bands performed with more emphasis on one or the other. Alex DiBlasi feels that indie rock was a third key source, with the most important influence coming from Sonic Youth's \"free-form\" noise. Grunge shares with punk a raw, lo fi sound and similar lyrical concerns, and it also used punk's haphazard and untrained approach to playing and performing. However, grunge was \"deeper and darker\"-sounding than punk rock and it decreased the \"adrenaline\"-fueled tempos of punk to a slow, \"sludgy\" speed, and used more dissonant harmonies. Seattle music journalist Charles R. Cross defines \"grunge\" as distortion-filled, down-tuned and riff-based rock that uses loud electric guitar feedback and heavy, \"ponderous\" basslines to support its song melodies. Robert Loss calls grunge a melding of \"violence and speed, muscularity and melody\", where there is space for all people, including women musicians. VH1 writer Dan Tucker feels that different grunge bands were influenced by different genres; that while Nirvana drew on punk, Pearl Jam was influenced by classic rock, and that \"sludgy, dark, heavy bands\" such as Soundgarden and Alice in Chains had a sinister metal tone.\nGrunge music has what has been called an \"ugly\" aesthetic, both in the roar of the distorted electric guitars and in the darker lyrical topics. This approach was chosen both to counter the \"slick\" elegant sound of the then-predominant mainstream rock and because grunge artists wanted to mirror the \"ugliness\" they saw around them and shine a light on unseen \"depths and depravity\" of the real world. Some key individuals in the development of the grunge sound, including Sub Pop producer Jack Endino and the Melvins, described grunge's incorporation of heavy rock influences such as Kiss as \"musical provocation\". Grunge artists considered these bands \"cheesy\" but nonetheless enjoyed them; Buzz Osborne of the Melvins described it as an attempt to see what ridiculous things bands could do and get away with. In the early-1990s, Nirvana's signature \"stop-start\" song format and alternating between soft and loud sections became a genre convention.\nIn the book \"Accidental Revolution: The Story of Grunge\", Kyle Anderson wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The twelve songs on \"Sixteen Stone\" sound \"exactly\" like what grunge is supposed to sound like, while the whole point of grunge was that it didn't really sound like \"anything\", including itself. Just consider how many different bands and styles of music have been shoved under the \"grunge\" header in this discography alone, and you realize that grunge is probably the most ill-defined genre of music in history.\nInstrumentation.\nElectric guitar.\nGrunge guitarists like Kurt Cobain often used \"offset\" guitars like the Fender Jaguar, Fender Jazzmaster, or Mustang. They used primarily offset guitars because at the time they were unpopular enough to offer a new image as opposed to more frequently seen Gibson Les Pauls or Fender Stratocaster and Telecaster used by mainstream pop &amp; rock bands. Being unpopular when grunge started, offset guitars also offered excellent value for money. \nGrunge is generally characterized by a sludgy electric guitar sound with a thick middle register and rolled-off treble tone and a high level of distortion and fuzz, typically created with small 1970s-style stompbox pedals, with some guitarists chaining several fuzz pedals together and plugging them into a tube amplifier and speaker cabinet. Grunge guitarists use very loud Marshall guitar amplifiers and some used powerful Mesa-Boogie amplifiers, including Kurt Cobain and Dave Grohl (the latter in early, grunge-oriented Foo Fighters songs). Grunge has been called the rock genre with the most \"lugubrious sound\"; the use of heavy distortion and loud amps has been compared to a massive \"buildup of sonic fog\". or even dismissed as \"noise\" by one critic. As with metal and punk, a key part of grunge's sound is very distorted power chords played on the electric guitar.\nWhereas metal guitarists' overdriven sound generally comes from a combination of overdriven amplifiers and distortion pedals, grunge guitarists typically got all of their \"dirty\" sound from overdrive and fuzz pedals, with the amp just used to make the sound louder. Grunge guitarists tended to use the Fender Twin Reverb and the Fender Champion 100 combo amps (Cobain used both of these amps). The use of pedals by grunge guitarists was a move away from the expensive, studio-grade rackmount effects units used in other rock genres. The positive way that grunge bands viewed stompbox pedals can be seen in Mudhoney's use of the name of two overdrive pedals, the Univox Super-Fuzz and the Big Muff, in the title of their debut EP \"Superfuzz Bigmuff\". In the song \"Mudride\", the band's guitars were said to have \"growled malevolently\" through its \"Cro-magnon slog\".\nOther key pedals used by grunge bands included four brands of distortion pedals (the Big Muff, DOD, and Boss DS-2 and Boss DS-1 distortion pedals) and the Small Clone chorus effect, used by Kurt Cobain on \"Come As You Are\" and by the Screaming Trees on \"Nearly Lost You\". The DS-1 (later DS-2) distortion pedal played a key role in Cobain's switching from quiet to loud and back to quiet approach to songwriting. The use of small pedals by grunge guitarists helped to start off the revival of interest in boutique, hand-soldered, 1970s-style analog pedals. The other effect that grunge guitarists used was one of the most low-tech effects devices, the wah-wah pedal. Both \"[Kim] Thayil and Alice in Chains' Jerry Cantrell ... were great advocates of the wah wah pedal.\" Wah was also used by the Screaming Trees, Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, Mudhoney and Dinosaur Jr.\nGrunge guitarists played loud, with Kurt Cobain's early guitar sound coming from an unusual set-up of four 800 watt PA system power amplifiers. Guitar feedback effects, in which a highly amplified electric guitar is held in front of its speaker, were used to create high-pitched, sustained sounds that are not possible with regular guitar technique. Grunge guitarists were influenced by the raw, primitive sound of punk, and they favored \"... energy and lack of finesse over technique and precision\"; key guitar influences included the Sex Pistols, the Dead Boys, Celtic Frost, King's X, Voivod, Neil Young (\"Rust Never Sleeps\", side two), the Replacements, H\u00fcsker D\u00fc, Black Flag, and the Melvins. Grunge guitarists often downtuned their instruments for a lower, heavier sound. Soundgarden's guitarist, Kim Thayil, did not use a regular guitar amplifier; instead, he used a bass combo amp equipped with a 15-inch speaker as he played low riffs, and the bass amp gave him a deeper tone.\nGuitar solos.\nGrunge guitarists \"flatly rejected\" the virtuoso \"shredding\" guitar solos that had become the centerpiece of heavy metal songs, instead opting for melodic, blues-inspired solos \u2013 focusing \"on the song, not the guitar solo\". Jerry Cantrell of Alice in Chains stated that solos should be to serve the song, rather than to show off a guitarist's technical skill. In place of the strutting guitar heroes of metal, grunge had \"guitar anti-heroes\" like Cobain, who showed little interest in mastering the instrument.\nIn Will Byers' article \"Grunge committed a crime against music\u2014it killed the guitar solo\" in \"The Guardian\", he states that while the guitar solo managed to survive through the punk rock era, it was weakened by grunge. He also states that when Kurt Cobain played guitar solos that were a restatement of the main vocal melody, fans realized that they did not need to be a Jimi Hendrix-level virtuoso to play the instrument; he then says this approach helped to make music feel accessible by fans in a way not seen since the 1960s folk music movement. The producer of Nirvana's \"Nevermind\", Butch Vig, stated that this album and Nirvana \"killed the guitar solo\". Soundgarden guitarist Kim Thayil stated he feels in part to be responsible for the \"death of the guitar solo\"; he said that his punk rocker aspects made him feel that he did not want to solo, so in the 1980s, he preferred to make noise and do feedback during the guitar solo. Baeble Music calls the grunge guitar solos of the 1990s \"raw\", \"sloppy\", and \"basic\".\nNot all sources support the \"grunge killed the guitar solo\" argument. Sean Gonzalez states that Pearl Jam has plentiful examples of guitar solos. Michael Azerrad praises the guitar playing of Mudhoney's Steve Turner, calling him the \"Eric Clapton of grunge\", a reference to the British blues guitarist who \"Time\" magazine has named as number five in their list of \"The 10 Best Electric Guitar Players\". Pearl Jam guitarist Mike McCready has been praised for his blues-influenced, rapid licks. The Smashing Pumpkins' guitarist Billy Corgan has been called the \"arena rock genius of the '90s\" for pioneering guitar playing techniques and showing through his playing skill that grunge guitarists do not have to be sloppy players to rebel against mainstream music. Thayil stated that when other major grunge bands, such as Nirvana, were reducing their guitar solos, Soundgarden responded by bringing back the solos.\nBass guitar.\nThe early Seattle grunge album \"Skin Yard\" recorded in 1987 by the band of the same name included fuzz bass (overdriven bass guitar) played by Jack Endino and Daniel House. Some grunge bassists, such as Ben Shepherd, layered power chords with distorted low-end density by adding a fifth and an octave-higher note to a bass note.\nAn example of the powerful, loud bass amplifier systems used in grunge is Alice in Chains bassist Mike Inez's setup. He uses four powerful Ampeg SVT-2 PRO tube amplifier heads, two of them plugged into four 1\u00d718\" subwoofer cabinets for the low register, and the other two plugged into two 8\u00d710\" cabinets. Krist Novoselic and Jeff Ament are also known for using Ampeg SVT tube amplifiers. Ben Shepherd uses a 300 watt all-tube Ampeg SVT-VR amp and a 600 watt Mesa/Boogie Carbine M6 amplifier. Ament uses four 6\u00d710\" speaker cabinets.\nDrums.\nIn contrast to the \"massive drum kits\" used in 1980s pop metal, grunge drummers used relatively smaller drum kits. One example is the drumkit used by Soundgarden drummer Matt Cameron's set-up. He uses a six-piece kit (this way of describing drumkits counts only the wooden drums, and does not count the cymbals), including a \"12\u00d78-inch rack tom; 13\u00d79-inch rack tom; 16\u00d714-inch floor tom; 18\u00d716-inch floor tom; 24\u00d714-inch bass drum\" and a snare drum and, for cymbals, Zildjian instruments, including \"... 14-inch K Light [Hi-]hats; 17-inch K Custom Dark crash [cymbal] and 18-inch K Crash Ride; 19-inch Projection crash; a 20-inch Rezo crash; ... and a ... 22-inch A Medium ride [cymbal]\".\nA second example is Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl's set-up during 1990 and 1991. He used a four-piece Tama drumset, with an 8\" \u00d7 14\" birch snare drum, a 14\" \u00d7 15\" rack tom, a 16\" \u00d7 18\" floor tom, and a 16\" \u00d7 24\" bass drum (this kit \"was demolished at the Cabaret Metro, Chicago, 10/12/91\"). Like Matt Cameron, Dave Grohl used Zildjian cymbals. Grohl used the company's A Series Medium cymbals, including an 18\" and a 20\" crash cymbal, a 22\" ride cymbal, and a pair of 15\" hi-hat cymbals.\nOther instruments.\nAlthough other instruments are generally not included in grunge, Seattle band Gorilla created controversy by breaking the \"guitars only\" approach and using a 1960s-style Vox organ in their group.\nIn 2002, Pearl Jam added a keyboard player, Kenneth \"Boom\" Gaspar, who played piano, Hammond organ, and other keyboards; the addition of a keyboardist to the band would have been \"inconceivable\" in the band's \"grungy\" early years, but it shows how a group's sound can change over time.\nVocals.\nThe grunge singing style was similar to the \"outburst\" of loud, heavily distorted electric guitar in tone and delivery; Kurt Cobain used a \"gruff, slurred articulation and gritty timbre\" and Eddie Vedder of Pearl Jam made use of a \"wide, powerful vibrato\" to show his \"depth of expression.\" Layne Staley voiced lyrics with a \"heaviness\" and tremolo. In general, grunge singers used a \"deeper vocal style\" which matched the lower-sounding, downtuned guitars and the darker-themed lyrical messages used in the style. Grunge singers used \"gravelly, raspy\" vocals, \"... growls, moans, screams and mumbles\" and \"plaintive groans\"; this range of singing styles was used to communicate the \"varied emotions\" of the lyrics. Cobain's reaction to the \"bad times\" and discontent of the era was that he screamed his lyrics. In general, grunge songs were sung \"simply, often somewhat unintelligibly\"; the virtuoso \"operatics of hair-metal were shunned.\" Grunge singing has been characterized as \"borderline out-of-tune vocals\".\nLyrics and themes.\nGrunge lyrics are typically dark, nihilistic, wretched, angst-filled and anguished, often addressing themes such as social alienation, self-doubt, abuse, assault, neglect, betrayal, social isolation/emotional isolation, psychological trauma, and a desire for freedom.\nAn article by MIT states that grunge \"lyrics [were] obsessed with disenfranchisement\" and described a mood of \"resigned despair\". Catherine Strong, in her book \"Grunge: Music and Memory,\" states that grunge songs were usually about \"negative experiences or feelings\", with the main themes being alienation and depression, but with an \"ironic sneer.\" Grunge artists expressed \"strong feelings\" in their lyrics about \"societal ills\", including a \"desire to 'crucify the insincere'\", an approach which fans appreciated for its authenticity. Grunge lyrics have been criticized as \"violent and often obscene.\" In 1996, conservative columnist Rich Lowry wrote an essay criticizing grunge, entitled \"Our Hero, Heroin\"; he called it a music that is mostly \"... shorn of ideals and the impulse for political action\".\nA number of factors influenced the focus on such subject matter. Many grunge musicians displayed a general disenchantment with the state of society, as well as a discomfort with social prejudices. Grunge lyrics contained \"explicit political messages and ... questioning about ... society and how it might be changed.\" While grunge lyrics were less overtly political than punk songs, grunge songs still indicated a concern for social issues, particularly those affecting young people. The main themes in grunge were \"tolerance of difference\", \"support of women\", \"mistrust of authority\" and \"cynicism towards big corporations.\" Grunge song themes bear similarities to those addressed by punk rock musicians. In 1992, music critic Simon Reynolds said that \"there's a feeling of burnout in the culture at large. Kids are depressed about the future\". The topics of grunge lyrics\u2013homelessness, suicide, rape, \"broken homes, drug addiction and self-loathing\"\u2013contrasted sharply to the glam metal lyrics of bands like Poison, which described \"life in the fast lane\", partying, and hedonism.\nGrunge lyrics developed as part of \"Generation X malaise\", reflecting that demographic's feelings of \"disillusionment and uselessness\". Grunge songs about love were usually about \"failed, boring, doomed or destructive relationships\" (e.g., \"Black\" by Pearl Jam). The Alice in Chains songs \"Sickman\", \"Junkhead\", \"God Smack\", and \"Hate to Feel\" have references to heroin. Grunge lyrics tended to be more introspective and aimed to enable the listener to see into \"hidden\" personal issues and examine the \"depravity\" of the world. This approach can be seen in Mudhoney's song \"Touch Me I'm Sick\", which includes lyrics with \"deranged imagery\" which depict a \"broken world and a fragmented self-image\"; the song includes the lines \"I feel bad, and I've felt worse\" and \"I won't live long and I'm full of rot\". Nirvana's song \"Lithium\", from their 1991 album \"Nevermind\", is about a \"man who finds faith after his girlfriend's suicide\"; it depicts \"irony and ugliness\" as a way of dealing with these \"dark issues\".\nRecording production.\nLike punk, grunge's sound came from a lo fi (low fidelity) recording and production approach. Before the arrival of major labels, early grunge albums were recorded using low-budget analogue studios: \"Nirvana's first album \"Bleach\", was recorded for $606.17 in 1989.\" Sub Pop recorded most of their music at a \"low-rent studio named Reciprocal\", where producer Jack Endino created the grunge genre's aesthetic, a \"raw and unpolished sound with distortion, but usually without any added studio effects\". Endino is known for his stripped-down recording practices and his dislike of 'over-producing' music with effects and remastering. His work on Soundgarden's \"Screaming Life\" and Nirvana's \"Bleach\" as well as for the bands Green River, Screaming Trees, L7, the Gits, Hole, 7 Year Bitch, and TAD helped to define the grunge sound. An example of the lower cost production approach is Mudhoney; even after the band signed to Warner Music, \"[t]rue to [the band's] indie roots ... [they are] ... probably one of the few bands that would have to fight [their label] to record for a lower budget rather than a higher one.\"\nSteve Albini was another important influence on the grunge sound. Albini preferred to be called a \"recording engineer\", because he believed that putting record producers in charge of recording sessions often destroys the band's real sound, while the role of the recording engineer is to capture the actual sound of the musicians, not to threaten the artists' control over their creative product. Albini's recordings have been analyzed by writers such as Michael Azerrad, who stated that Albini's \"recordings were both very basic and very exacting: like Endino, Albini used few special effects; got an aggressive, often violent guitar sound; and made sure the rhythm section slammed as one.\"\nNirvana's \"In Utero\" is a typical example of Albini's recording approach. He preferred to have the entire band play live in the studio, rather than use mainstream rock's approach of recording each instrument on a separate track at different times, and then mixing them using multi-track recording. While multitracking results in a more polished product, it does not capture the \"live\" sound of the band playing together. Albini used a range of different microphones for the vocals and instruments. Like most metal and punk recording engineers, he mics the guitar amp speakers and bass amp speakers to capture each performer's unique tone.\nConcerts.\nGrunge concerts were known for being straightforward, high-energy performances. Grunge shows were \"celebrations, parties [and] carnivals\", where the audience expressed its spirit by stagediving, moshing and thrashing. Simon Reynolds states that in \"... some of the most masculine forms of rock\u2014thrash metal, grunge, moshing becomes a form of surrogate combat\" in which \"male bodies\" can contact in the \"sweat-and-bloodbath\" of the moshpit. As with punk shows, grunge \"performances were about frontmen who screamed and jumped around on stage and musicians who thrashed wildly on their instruments.\" While grunge lyrical themes focused on \"angst and rage\", the audience at shows were positive and created a \"life-affirming\" attitude. Grunge bands rejected the complex and high budget presentations of many mainstream musical genres, including the use of complex digitally controlled light arrays, pyrotechnics, and other visual effects then popular in \"hair metal\" shows. Grunge performers viewed these elements unrelated to playing the music. Stage acting and \"onstage theatrics\" were generally avoided.\nInstead the bands presented themselves as no different from minor local bands. Jack Endino said in \"Hype!\" that Seattle bands were inconsistent live performers, since their primary objective was not to be entertainers, but simply to \"rock out\". Grunge bands gave enthusiastic performances; they would thrash their long hair during shows as \"a symbolic weapon\" for releasing \"pent-up aggression\" (Dave Grohl was particularly noted for his \"head flips\"). Dave Rimmer writes that with the revival of punk ideals of stripped-down music in the early 1990s, \"for Cobain, and lots of kids like him, rock &amp; roll ... threw down a dare: Can you be pure enough, day after day, year after year, to prove your authenticity, to live up to the music ... And if you can't, can you live with being a poseur, a phony, a sellout?\"\nClothing and fashion.\n1980s\u20131990s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Clothing commonly worn by grunge musicians in Washington were a \"mundane everyday style\", in which they would wear the same clothes on stage that they wore at home. This Pacific Northwest \"slacker style\" or \"slouch look\" contrasted sharply with the \"wild\" mohawks, leather jackets and chains worn by punks. This everyday clothing approach was used by grunge musicians because authenticity was a key principle in the Seattle scene. The grunge look typically consisted of second-hand clothes or thrift store items and the typical outdoor clothing (most notably flannel shirts) of the region, as well as a generally unkempt appearance and long hair. For grunge singers, long hair was used \"as a mask to conceal the face\" so they can \"expres[s their] innermost thoughts\"; Cobain is a notable example. Male grunge musicians were \"... unkempt ... [and] ... unshaven [,] with ... tousled hair\" that was often unwashed, greasy and \"... matted [into a] sheep-dog mop\".\nThe lumberjack attire was a common sight in the thrift stores near Seattle for the low prices that musicians could afford. Grunge style consisted of ripped jeans, thermal underwear, Doc Martens boots or combat boots (often unlaced), band T-shirts, oversized knit sweaters, long and droopy skirts, ripped tights, Birkenstocks, hiking boots, and eco-friendly clothing made from recycled textiles or fair trade organic cotton. As well, since women in the grunge scene wore the \"... same plaid [shirt]s, boots, and short cropped heads as their male counterparts\", women showed \"... that they are not defined by their sex appeal.\"\n\"Grunge ... became an anti-consumerist movement where the less you spent on clothes, the more 'coolness' you had.\" The style did not evolve out of a conscious attempt to create an appealing fashion; music journalist Charles R. Cross said, \"[Nirvana frontman] Kurt Cobain was just too lazy to shampoo\", and Sub Pop's Jonathan Poneman said, \"This [clothing] is cheap, it's durable, and it's kind of timeless. It also runs against the grain of the whole flashy aesthetic that existed in the 80s.\" The flannel and \"... cracked leatherette coats\" in the grunge scene were part of the Pacific Northwest's thrift-shop aesthetic. Grunge fashion was very much an anti-fashion response and a non-conformist move against the \"manufactured image\", often pushing musicians to dress in authentic ways and to not glamorize themselves. At the same time, Sub-Pop utilized the 'grunge look' in their marketing of their bands. In an interview with VH1, photographer Charles Peterson commented that members from grunge band Tad \"were given blue collar identities that weren't entirely earned. Bruce (Pavitt) really got him to dress up in flannel and a real chain saw and really play up this image of a mountain man and it worked.\"\n\"Dazed\" magazine called Courtney Love one of \"ten women who defined the 1990s\" from a style perspective: the \"... image of Courtney Love's too-short baby doll dress, tattered fur coat and shock of platinum hair\", a look dubbed \"kinderwhore\", \"... topped with a tiara, of course \u2013 is seared on the memory of anyone who lived through the decade.\" The kinderwhore look consisted of torn, ripped tight or low-cut babydoll and Peter-Pan-collared dresses, slips, heavy makeup with dark eyeliner, barrettes, and leather boots or Mary\u2013Jane shoes. Kat Bjelland of Babes in Toyland was the first to define it, while Courtney Love of Hole was the first to popularize it. Love has claimed that she took the style from Divinyls frontwoman Chrissy Amphlett. The look became very popular in 1994.\n\"Vogue\" stated in 2014 that \"Cobain pulled liberally from both ends of a woman's and a man's wardrobe, and his Seattle thrift-store look ran the gamut of masculine lumberjack workwear and 40s-by-way-of-70s feminine dresses. It was completely counter to the shellacked, flashy aesthetic of the 1980s in every way. In disheveled jeans and floral frocks, he softened the tough exterior of the archetypal rebel from the inside out, and set the ball in motion for a radical, millennial idea of androgyny.\" Cobain's way of dressing \"was the antithesis of the macho American man\", because he \"... made it cooler to look slouchy and loose, no matter if you were a boy or a girl.\" Music and culture writer Julianne Escobedo Shepherd wrote that with Cobain's style of dress \"Not only did he make it okay to be a freak, he made it desirable.\"\nAdoption by mainstream.\nGrunge music hit the mainstream in the early 1990s with bands such as Soundgarden, Alice in Chains, Pearl Jam, and Nirvana being signed to major record labels. Grunge fashion began to break into mainstream fashion in mid-1992 for both sexes and peaked in late 1993 and early 1994. As it picked up momentum, the grunge tag was being used by shops selling expensive flannelette shirts to cash in on the trend. Ironically, the non-conformist look suddenly became a mainstream trend. In the fashion world, Marc Jacobs presented a show for Perry Ellis in 1992 (the Spring 1993 Collection,) featuring grunge-inspired clothing mixed with high-end fabrics. Jacobs found inspiration in the \"realism\" of grunge streetwear; he mixed it with the luxury of fashion by sending models down the catwalk in beanies, floral dresses and silk flannel shirts. This did, however, not sit well with the brand owners and Jacobs was dismissed. Other designers like Anna Sui, also drew inspiration from grunge during the spring/summer 1993 season.\nIn the same year, \"Vogue\" did a spread called \"Grunge &amp; Glory\" with fashion photographer Steven Meisel who shot supermodels Kristen McMenamy, Naomi Campbell, and Nadja Auermann in a savanna landscape wearing grunge-styled clothing. This shoot made McMenamy the face for grunge, as she had her eyebrows shaved and her hair cropped short. Designers like Christian Lacroix, Donna Karen and Karl Lagerfeld incorporated the grunge influence into their looks. In 1993, James Truman, editor of \"Details\", said: \"to me the thing about grunge is it's not anti-fashion, it's unfashion. Punk was anti-fashion. It made a statement. Grunge is about not making a statement, which is why it's crazy for it to become a fashion statement.\" The unkempt fashion sense defined the look of the \"slacker generation\", who \"skipped school, smoked pot ... [and] cigarettes and listened to music\" hoping to become a rock star one day.\n2000s\u20132010s.\nEven though grunge fashion had declined in popularity by the late 1990s, designers have continued to occasionally draw inspiration from the movement. Grunge appeared as a trend again in 2008, and for Fall/Winter 2013, Hedi Slimane at Yves Saint Laurent brought back grunge to the runway. With Courtney Love as his muse for the collection, she reportedly loved the collection. \"No offense to MJ [Marc Jacobs] but he never got it right,\" Courtney said. \"This is what it really was. Hedi knows his shit. He got it accurate, and MJ and Anna [Sui] did not.\" Both Cobain and Love apparently burnt the Perry Ellis collection they received from Marc Jacobs back in 1993. In 2016, grunge inspired an upscale \"reinvention\" of the style by A$AP Rocky, Rihanna and Kanye West. However, \"dressing grunge is no longer a badge of authenticity, though: the signifiers of rebellion (Dr Martens boots, tartan shirts) are omnipotent on the high street\", says Lynette Nylander, deputy editor of \"i-D magazine\".\nAlcohol and drugs.\nMany music subcultures are associated with particular drugs, such as the hippie counterculture and reggae, both of which are associated with marijuana and psychedelics. In the 1990s, the media focused on the use of heroin by musicians in the Seattle grunge scene, with a 1992 \"New York Times\" article listing the city's \"three principal drugs\" as \"espresso, beer and heroin\" and a 1996 article calling Seattle's grunge scene the \"... subculture that has most strongly embraced heroin\". Tim Jonze from \"The Guardian\" states that \"... heroin had blighted the [grunge] scene ever since its inception in the mid-80s\" and he argues that the \"... involvement of heroin mirrors the self-hating, nihilistic aspect to the music\"; in addition to the heroin deaths, Jonze points out that Stone Temple Pilots' Scott Weiland, as well as Courtney Love, Mark Lanegan, Jimmy Chamberlin and Evan Dando \"... all had their run-ins with the drug, but lived to tell the tale.\" A 2014 book stated that whereas in the 1980s, people used the \"stimulant\" cocaine to socialize and \"... celebrate good times\", in the 1990s grunge scene, the \"depressant\" heroin was used to \"retreat\" into a \"cocoon\" and be \"... sheltered from a harsh and unforgiving world which offered ... few prospects for ... change or hope.\" Justin Henderson states that all of the \"downer\" opiates, including \"heroin, morphine, etorphine, codeine, opium, [and] hydrocodone ... seemed to be the habit of choice for many a grunger\".\nThe title of Nirvana's debut album \"Bleach\" was inspired by a harm reduction poster aimed at heroin injection users, which stated \"Bleach your works [e.g., syringe and needle] before you get stoned\". The poster was released by the U.S. State Health Department which was trying to reduce AIDS transmission caused through sharing used needles. Alice in Chains' song \"God Smack\" includes the line \"stick your arm for some real fun\", a reference to injecting heroin. Seattle musicians known to use heroin included Cobain, who was using \"heroin when he shot himself in the head\"; \"Andrew Wood of Mother Love Bone [who] overdosed on heroin in 1990\"; \"Stefanie Sargent of 7 Year Bitch [who] died of an overdose of the same opiate in 1992 ... [and] Layne Staley of Alice in Chains [who] publicly detailed his battles with heroin ...\". Mike Starr of Alice in Chains and Jonathan Melvoin from the Smashing Pumpkins also died from heroin. After Cobain's death, his \"... widow, singer Courtney Love, characterized Seattle as a drug mecca, where heroin is easier to get than in San Francisco or Los Angeles.\"\nHowever, Daniel House, who owned C/Z Records, disputed these perceptions in 1994. House stated that there was \"... no more (heroin) here [in Seattle] than anyplace else\"; he stated that the \"heroin is not a big part of the [Seattle music] culture\", and that \"marijuana and alcohol ... are far more prevalent\". Jeff Gilbert, one of the editors of \"Guitar World\" magazine, stated in 1994 that the media association of the Seattle grunge scene with heroin was \"really overblown\"; instead, he says that Seattle musicians were \"... all a bunch of potheads.\" Gil Troy's history of America in the 1990s states that in the Seattle grunge scene, the \"... drug of choice switched from upscale cocaine [of the 1980s] to blue-collar marijuana.\" \"Rolling Stone\" magazine reported that members of Seattle's grunge scene were \"coffee-crazed\" by day on espresso and \"... by night, they quaff[ed] oceans of beer \u2013 jolted by Java and looped with liquor, no wonder the [grunge] music sounds like it does.\" \"Some [Seattle] scene veterans maintain that MDA\", a drug related to Ecstasy, \"was a vital contributor to grunge\", because it gave users a \"body high\" (in contrast to marijuana's \"head high\") that made them appreciate \"bass-heavy grooves\". Pat Long's \" History of the NME\" states that scene members involved with the Sub Pop label would have multi-day MDMA parties in the woods, which shows that what Long calls Ecstasy's \"warm glow\" had an impact even in the wet, grey and isolated Pacific Northwest region.\nGraphic design.\nRegarding graphic design and images, a common feature of grunge bands was the use of \"lo-fi\" (low fidelity) and deliberately unconventional album covers, for example presenting intentionally murky or miscolored photography, collage or distressed lettering. Early grunge \"[a]lbum covers and concert flyers appeared Xeroxed not in allegiance to some DIY aesthetic\" but because of \"economic necessity\", as \"bands had so little money\". This was already a common feature of punk rock design, but could be extended in the grunge period due to the increasing use of Macintosh computers for desktop publishing and digital image processing. The style was sometimes called 'grunge typography' when used outside music. A famous example of 'grunge'-style experimental design was \"Ray Gun\" magazine, art directed by David Carson.\nCarson developed a technique of \"ripping, shredding and remaking letters\" and using \"overprinted, disharmonious letters\" and experimental design approaches, including \"deliberate 'mistakes' in alignment\". Carson's art used \"messy and chaotic design\" and he did not \"respect any rule of composition\", using an \"experimental, personal and intuitive\" approach. Another \"grunge graphic designer\" was Elliott Earls, who used \"distorted ... older typefaces\" and \"aggressively illegible\" type which adopted the \"unkempt expressiveness\" of the \"grunge [music] aesthetic\"; this radical, anti-establishment approach in graphic design was influenced by the 1910s-era avant-garde Dada movement. Hat Nguyen's Droplet, Harriet Goren's Morire and Eric Lin's Tema Canante were all \"signature grunge fonts.\" Sven Lennartz states that grunge design images have a \"realistic, genuine look\" which is created by adding simulated torn paper, dog-eared corners, creases, yellowed scotch tape, coffee cup stains, hand-drawn images and handwritten words, typically over a \"dirty\" background texture which is done with dull, subdued colors.\nA key figure in creating the \"look\" of the grunge scene for outsiders was music photographer Charles Peterson. Peterson's black and white, uncropped, and sometimes blurry shots of the underground Pacific Northwest music scene's members playing and jamming, wearing their characteristic everyday clothes, were used by Sub Pop to promote its Seattle bands.\nLiterature.\nZines.\nFollowing the tradition in the 1980s US punk subculture of amateur, fan-produced zines, members of the grunge scene also produced DIY publications which were \"distributed at gigs or by mail order\". The zines were typically photocopied and contained handwritten, \"hand-colored pages\", \"typing errors and grammatical mistakes, misspellings and jumbled pagination\", all proof of their amateur nature. \"Backlash\" was a zine that was published from 1987 to 1991 by Dawn Anderson, covering the \"dirtier, heavier, more underground and rock side of Seattle's music scene\", including \"punk, metal, underground rock, grunge before it was called grunge and even some local hip-hop.\" \"Grunge Gerl #1\" was one early 1990s grunge zine; the publication was written by and for riot grrrls in the Los Angeles area. It stated that \"we're girls, we're angry, we're powerful.\"\nLocal newspapers.\nIn 1992, \"Rolling Stone\" music critic Michael Azerrad called \"The Rocket\" the Seattle music \"scene's [most] respected commentator\". \"The Rocket\" was a free newspaper about the Pacific Northwest music scene which was launched in 1979. Edited by Charles R. Cross, the paper covered \"fairly obscure alternative bands\" in the local area, such as the Fartz and others. In the mid-1980s, the paper had stories on Slayer, Wild Dogs, Queensr\u00ffche, and Metal Church. By 1988, the metal scene had faded, and \"The Rocket\"'s focus shifted to covering the pre-grunge local alternative rock bands. Dawn Anderson states that in 1988, long before any other publication took notice of them, Soundgarden and Nirvana were \"Rocket\" cover stars. In 1991, \"The Rocket\" expanded to include a Portland, Oregon edition.\nFiction.\nGrunge lit is an Australian literary genre of fictional or semi-autobiographical writing in the early 1990s about young adults living in an \"inner cit[y]\" \"... world of disintegrating futures where the only relief from ... boredom was through a nihilistic pursuit of sex, violence, drugs and alcohol\". Often the central characters are disfranchised, alienated, and lacking drive and determination beyond the desire to satisfy their basic needs. It was typically written by \"new, young authors\" who examined \"gritty, dirty, real existences\" of everyday characters. It has been described as both a sub-set of dirty realism and an offshoot of Generation X literature. Stuart Glover states that the term \"grunge lit\" takes the term \"grunge\" from the \"late '80s and early '90s\u2014 ... Seattle [grunge] bands\". Glover states that the term \"grunge lit\" was mainly a marketing term used by publishing companies; he states that most of the authors who have been categorized as \"grunge lit\" writers reject the label. The Australian fiction authors McGahan, McGregor and Tsiolkas criticized the \"homogenizing effect\" of conflating such a different group of writers. Tsiolkas called the \"grunge lit\" term a \"media creation\".\nRole of women.\nMany all-female or woman-led bands are associated with grunge including L7, Lunachicks, Dickless, 7 Year Bitch, the Gits, Courtney Love's band Hole, and Babes in Toyland. VH1 writer Dan Tucker described L7 as an \"all-female grunge band [that] emanated from the fertile L.A. underground scene and [which] had strong ties with ... Black Flag and could match any male band in attitude and volume.\" Grunge was also closely linked with Riot Grrrl, an underground feminist punk movement. \nRiot Grrrl pioneer and Bikini Kill frontwoman Kathleen Hanna was the source for the name of Nirvana's 1991 breakthrough single, \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\", a reference to a deodorant marketed specifically to young women. The inclusion of women instrumentalists in grunge is notable, because professional women instrumentalists are uncommon in most rock genres.\nBam Bam, formed in Seattle in 1983, was fronted by an African American woman named Tina Bell, breaking the norm of what was predominantly a White dominated scene. Bam Bam also included future Soundgarden and Pearl Jam drummer Matt Cameron. Kurt Cobain was a roadie for Bam Bam before he was famous; he was also a fan of the band. Bell died in 2012. Observers have speculated that the lack of recognition in her lifetime as one of the progenitors of grunge music was due to sexism and racism.\nWomen also played active non-musician roles in the underground grunge scene, such as riot grrrls who produced zines about grunge bands and indie record labels (e.g., \"Grunge Gerl #1\") and writer Dawn Anderson of the Seattle fanzine \"Backlash\" which supported many local bands before they achieved greater fame. Tina Casale was the co-founder of C/Z Records in the 1980s (along with Chris Hanzsek), a Seattle indie label that released the seminal grunge compilation \"Deep Six\" in 1986.\nSusan Silver was the first female manager of the Seattle music scene. She started her career in 1983 and managed several bands such as the U-Men, Soundgarden, Alice in Chains and Screaming Trees. In 1991, \"The Seattle Times\" called Silver \"the most powerful figure in local rock management\". Silver was also an advisor for Nirvana. Kurt Cobain and bassist Krist Novoselic consulted Silver for advice when they were not satisfied with Sub Pop's lack of promotion for their debut album, \"Bleach\". Silver looked at their contract with the label and told them they needed a lawyer. Silver then introduced them to agent Don Muller and music business attorney Alan Mintz, who started sending out Nirvana's demo tape to major labels looking for deals. The band ended up choosing DGC and the label released their breakthrough album \"Nevermind\" in 1991. When Nirvana was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2014, Novoselic thanked Silver during his speech for \"introducing them to the music industry properly\".\nHistory.\n1965\u20131985: Roots, predecessors, and influences.\nThe term proto-grunge has been used to describe artists as having elements of grunge well before the genre appeared in the mid- to late-1980s. Perhaps the earliest proto-grunge album is \"Here Are the Sonics\", released in 1965 by the Sonics. Neil Young's albums \"Rust Never Sleeps\" (1979) and \"Ragged Glory\" (1990) have been proclaimed examples of proto-grunge and grunge music. Additionally, he has been cited as an influence by Pearl Jam, which led to them backing Young for the \"Mirror Ball\" album, released in 1995. Other acts described as proto-grunge include Wipers and their album \"Youth of America\" (1981), Elvis Costello and his \"Blood &amp; Chocolate\" album which Will Birch hailed as \"6 or 8 years ahead of its time\" (1986), and the Stooges and their album \"Fun House\" (1970).\nGrunge's sound partly resulted from Seattle's isolation from other music scenes. As Sub Pop's Jonathan Poneman noted, \"Seattle was a perfect example of a secondary city with an active music scene that was completely ignored by an American media fixated on Los Angeles and New York [City].\" Mark Arm claimed that the isolation meant, \"this one corner of the map was being really inbred and ripping off each other's ideas\". Seattle \"was a remote and provincial city\" in the 1980s; Bruce Pavitt states that the city was \"very working class\", a place of deprivation, and so the scene's \"whole aesthetic \u2013 work clothes, thriftstore truckers' hats, pawnshop guitars\" was not just a style, it was done because Seattle \"was very poor.\" Indeed, when \"\"Nevermind\" reached number one in the U.S. charts, Cobain was living in a car.\"\nBands began to mix metal and punk in the Seattle music scene around 1984, with much of the credit for this fusion going to the U-Men. However, some critics have noted that in spite of the U-Men's canonical place as original grunge progenitors, that their sound was less indebted to heavy metal and much more akin to post-punk. However the idiosyncrasy of the band may have been the bigger inspiration, more than the aesthetics themselves. Soon Seattle had a growing and \"varied music scene\" and \"diverse urban personality\" expressed by local \"post-punk garage bands\". Grunge evolved from the local punk rock scene, and was inspired by bands such as the Fartz, the U-Men, 10 Minute Warning, the Acc\u00fcsed, and the Fastbacks. Additionally, the slow, heavy, and sludgy style of the Melvins was a significant influence on the grunge sound. Roy Shuker states that grunge's success built on the \"foundations ... laid throughout the 1980s by earlier alternative music scenes.\" Shuker states that music critics \"... emphasized the perceived purity and authenticity of the Seattle scene. \nOutside the Pacific Northwest, a number of artists and music scenes influenced grunge. Alternative rock bands from the Northeastern United States, including Sonic Youth, Pixies, and Dinosaur Jr., are important influences on the genre. Through their patronage of Seattle bands, Sonic Youth \"inadvertently nurtured\" the grunge scene, and reinforced the fiercely independent attitudes of its musicians. Nirvana introduced into the Seattle scene the noise-inflected influences of Scratch Acid and the Butthole Surfers.\nSeveral Australian bands, including the Scientists, Cosmic Psychos and Feedtime, are cited as precursors to grunge, their music influencing the Seattle scene through the college radio broadcasts of Sub Pop founder Jonathan Poneman and members of Mudhoney on . The influence of Pixies on Nirvana was noted by Kurt Cobain, who commented in a \"Rolling Stone\" interview, \"I connected with that band so heavily that I should have been in that band\u2014or at least a Pixies cover band. We used their sense of dynamics, being soft and quiet and then loud and hard.\" In August 1997, in an interview with \"Guitar World\", Dave Grohl said: \"From Kurt, Krist [Novoselic] and I liking the Knack, Bay City Rollers, Beatles and Abba just as much as we liked Flipper and Black Flag ... You listen to any Pixies record and it's all over there. Or even Black Sabbath's \"War Pigs\"\u2014it's there: the power of the dynamic. We just sort of abused it with pop songs and got sick with it.\"\nAside from the genre's punk and alternative rock roots, many grunge bands were equally influenced by heavy metal of the early 1970s. Clinton Heylin, author of \"Babylon's Burning: From Punk to Grunge\", cited Black Sabbath as \"perhaps the most ubiquitous pre-punk influence on the northwest scene\". Black Sabbath played a role in shaping the grunge sound, through their own records and the records they inspired. Musicologist Bob Gulla asserted that Black Sabbath's sound \"shows up in virtually all of grunge's most popular bands, including Nirvana, Soundgarden, and Alice in Chains\". Black Sabbath's 1971 album \"Master of Reality\" in particular has been noted as a key influence on grunge, largely in part due to the sound, as a result of guitarist Tony Iommi down-tuning his guitar a step and a half. The influence of Led Zeppelin is also evident, particularly in the work of Soundgarden, whom \"Q\" magazine noted were \"in thrall to '70s rock, but contemptuous of the genre's overt sexism and machismo\". Jon Wiederhorn of \"Guitar World\" wrote: \"So what exactly is grunge? ... Picture a supergroup made up of Creedence Clearwater Revival, Black Sabbath and the Stooges, and you're pretty close.\" Catherine Strong stated that grunge's strongest metal influence was thrash metal, which had a tradition of \"equality with the audience\", based on the notion that \"anyone could start a band\" (a way of thinking also shared by US hardcore punk, which Strong also cites as an influence on grunge) which was also taken up by grunge bands. Strong stated that grunge musicians were opposed to the then-popular \"hair metal\" bands.\nStrong stated that \"sections of what was [US] hardcore became known as grunge.\" Seattle songwriter Jeff Stetson states that \"[t]here is no real difference ... between Punk and Grunge.\" Like punk bands, grunge groups were \"embraced as back-to-basics rock 'n' roll bands which reminded the public that the music was supposed to be raw and raunchy\". One example of the influence of US hardcore on grunge is the impact that the Los Angeles hardcore punk band Black Flag had on grunge. Black Flag's 1984 record \"My War\", on which the band combined heavy metal with their traditional sound, made a strong impact in Seattle. Mudhoney's Steve Turner commented, \"A lot of other people around the country hated the fact that Black Flag slowed down ... but up here it was really great ... we were like 'Yay!' They were weird and fucked-up sounding.\" Turner explained grunge's integration of metal influences, noting, \"Hard rock and metal was never that much of an enemy of punk like it was for other scenes. Here, it was like, 'There's only twenty people here, you can't really find a group to hate.'\" Charles R. Cross stated that grunge was the \"culmination of twenty years of punk rock\" development. Cross states that the bands most representing the grunge genre were Seattle bands Blood Circus, Tad, and Mudhoney and Sub Pop's Denver band the Fluid; he states that Nirvana, with its pop influences and blend of Sonic Youth and Cheap Trick, was lighter-sounding than bands like Blood Circus.\nNeil Young played a few concerts with Pearl Jam and recorded the album \"Mirror Ball\". This was grounded not only in his work with his band Crazy Horse and his regular use of distorted guitar\u2014most notably on the album \"Rust Never Sleeps\"\u2014but also his dress and persona. A similarly influential yet often overlooked album is \"Neurotica\" by Redd Kross, about which Jonathan Poneman said, \"\"Neurotica\" was a life changer for me and for a lot of people in the Seattle music community.\"\nThe context for the development of the Seattle grunge scene was a \"golden age of failure, a time when a swath of American youth embraced the ... vices of indolence and lack of motivation\". The \"idlers of Generation X [were] trying to forestall the dread day of corporate enrollment\" and embrace the \"cult of the loser\"; indeed Nirvana's 1991 song \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" \"opens with Cobain intoning 'It's fun to lose.'\"\n1985\u20131991: Early development and rise in popularity.\nIn 1985, the band Green River released their debut EP \"Come on Down\", which is cited by many as being the first grunge record. Another seminal release in the development of grunge was the \"Deep Six\" compilation, released by C/Z Records in 1986. The record featured multiple tracks by six bands: Green River, Soundgarden, Melvins, Malfunkshun, Skin Yard, and the U-Men. For many of them it was their first appearance on record. The artists had \"a mostly heavy, aggressive sound that melded the slower tempos of heavy metal with the intensity of hardcore\". The recording process was low-budget; each band was given four hours of studio time. As Jack Endino recalled, \"People just said, 'Well, what kind of music is this? This isn't metal, it's not punk, What is it?' ... People went 'Eureka! These bands all have something in common.'\" Later that year Bruce Pavitt released the \"Sub Pop 100\" compilation and Green River's \"Dry As a Bone\" EP as part of his new label, Sub Pop. An early Sub Pop catalog described the Green River EP as \"ultra-loose GRUNGE that destroyed the morals of a generation\". Sub Pop's Bruce Pavitt and Jonathan Poneman, inspired by other regional music scenes in music history, worked to ensure that their label projected a \"Seattle sound\", reinforced by a similar style of production and album packaging. While music writer Michael Azerrad acknowledged that early grunge bands like Mudhoney, Soundgarden, and Tad had disparate sounds, he noted \"to the objective observer, there were some distinct similarities.\"\nEarly grunge concerts were sparsely attended (many by fewer than a dozen people) but Sub Pop photographer Charles Peterson's pictures helped create the impression that such concerts were major events. Mudhoney, which was formed by former members of Green River, served as the flagship band of Sub Pop during their entire time with the label and spearheaded the Seattle grunge movement. Other record labels in the Pacific Northwest that helped promote grunge included C/Z Records, Estrus Records, EMpTy Records and PopLlama Records. In 1988 Mudhoney released their debut album \"Superfuzz Bigmuff\", which Bruce Pavitt called \"the record that really put Sub Pop on the map,\" and of its impact said: \"It really announced to the world that there was a new style of rock and roll being made in this very obscure city that most people had never heard of.\" \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSoundgarden, Screaming Trees, Nirvana, Mudhoney, Mother Love Bone, Tad, Alice in Chains \u2013 the names of these bands may not mean much now, but they almost certainly will in the next few years. Just as cities far removed from the entertainment meccas of Los Angeles and New York (Minneapolis; Akron; Athens, Ga.; Austin, Tex.) helped define the sound of the '80s, Seattle is becoming a breeding ground for alternative rock in the '90s. \u2013 Greg Kot, writing for \"Chicago Tribune\" (1989)\nGrunge attracted media attention in the United Kingdom after Pavitt and Poneman asked journalist Everett True from the British magazine \"Melody Maker\" to write an article on the local music scene. This exposure helped to make grunge known outside of the local area during the late 1980s and drew more people to local shows. The appeal of grunge to the music press was that it \"promised the return to a notion of a regional, authorial vision for American rock\". Grunge's popularity in the underground music scene was such that bands began to move to Seattle and approximate the look and sound of the original grunge bands. Mudhoney's Steve Turner said, \"It was really bad. Pretend bands were popping up here, things weren't coming from where we were coming from.\" As a reaction, many grunge bands diversified their sound, with Nirvana and Tad in particular creating more melodic songs. Dawn Anderson of the Seattle fanzine \"Backlash\" recalled that by 1990 many locals had tired of the hype surrounding the Seattle scene and hoped that media exposure had dissipated. In a 1991 article, Mark Arm commented that \"It was pretty funny when all the Seattle hype started, because there had been really good bands in Seattle for a long time who couldn't put out albums because they didn't have an outlet for it. Bands like Malfunkshun and 10 Minute Warning, who were amazing.\"\nChris Dubrow from \"The Guardian\" states that in the late 1980s, Australia's \"sticky-floored ... alternative pub scene\" in seedy inner-city areas produced grunge bands with \"raw and awkward energy\" such as the Scientists, X, Beasts of Bourbon, feedtime, Cosmic Psychos and Lubricated Goat. Dubrow said \"Cobain ... admitted the Australian wave was a big influence\" on his music. Everett True states that \"[t]here's more of an argument to be had for grunge beginning in Australia with the Scientists and their scrawny punk ilk.\"\nGrunge bands had made inroads to the musical mainstream in the late 1980s. Soundgarden was the first grunge band to sign to a major label when they joined the roster of A&amp;M Records in 1988. Soundgarden, along with other major label signings Alice in Chains and Mother Love Bone, performed \"okay\" with their initial major label releases, according to Jack Endino. Nirvana, originally from Aberdeen, Washington, was also courted by major labels, while releasing its first album \"Bleach\" in 1989. Nirvana got signed by Geffen Records in 1990.\nAlice in Chains signed with Columbia Records in 1989, and their debut album, \"Facelift\", was released on August 21, 1990. The album's second single, \"Man in the Box\", was released in January 1991, spent 20 weeks on the Top 20 of Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart and its music video received heavy rotation on MTV. \"Facelift\" became the first album from the grunge movement to be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on September 11, 1991, for selling over 500,000 copies.\n1991\u20131997: Mainstream success.\nPeak of influence.\nIn September 1991, Nirvana released its major label debut, \"Nevermind\". The album was at best hoped to be a minor success on par with Sonic Youth's \"Goo\", which Geffen had released a year earlier. It was the release of the album's first single \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" that \"marked the instigation of the grunge music phenomenon\". Due to the constant airplay of the song's music video on MTV, \"Nevermind\" was selling 400,000 copies a week by Christmas 1991, and was certified gold on November 27, 1991. In January 1992, \"Nevermind\" replaced pop superstar Michael Jackson's \"Dangerous\" at number one on the \"Billboard\" 200. \"Nevermind\" was certified diamond by the RIAA in 1999.\nThe success of \"Nevermind\" surprised the music industry. \"Nevermind\" not only popularized grunge, but also established \"the cultural and commercial viability of alternative rock in general.\" Michael Azerrad asserted that \"Nevermind\" symbolized \"a sea-change in rock music\" in which the glam metal that had dominated rock music at that time fell out of favor in the face of music that was perceived as authentic and culturally relevant. Grunge made it possible for genres thought to be of a niche audience, no matter how radical, to prove their marketability and be co-opted by the mainstream, cementing the formation of an individualist, fragmented culture. Other grunge bands subsequently replicated Nirvana's success. Pearl Jam, which featured former Mother Love Bone members Jeff Ament and Stone Gossard, had released its debut album \"Ten\" in August 1991, a month before \"Nevermind\", but album sales only picked up the following year. By the second half of 1992 \"Ten\" had become a breakthrough success, being certified gold and reaching number two on the \"Billboard\" charts. \"Ten\" by Pearl Jam was certified 13\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA.\nThe band Soundgarden's album \"Badmotorfinger\" and the band Alice in Chains' album \"Dirt\", along with the band Temple of the Dog's self-titled album, a collaboration featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden, were also among the 100 top selling albums of 1992. The popular breakthrough of these grunge bands prompted \"Rolling Stone\" to nickname Seattle \"the new Liverpool\". Major record labels signed most of the prominent grunge bands in Seattle, while a second influx of bands moved to the city in hopes of success. The grunge scene was the backdrop in the 1992 Cameron Crowe film \"Singles\". There were several small roles, performances, and cameos in the film by popular Seattle grunge bands including Pearl Jam, Soundgarden, and Alice in Chains. Filmed in and around Seattle in 1991, the film was not released until 1992 during the height of grunge popularity.\nThe popularity of grunge resulted in a large interest in the Seattle music scene's perceived cultural traits. While the Seattle music scene in the late 1980s and early 1990s in actuality consisted of various styles and genres of music, its representation in the media \"served to depict Seattle as a music 'community' in which the focus was upon the ongoing exploration of one musical idiom, namely grunge\". The fashion industry marketed \"grunge fashion\" to consumers, charging premium prices for items such as knit ski hats and tartan shirts. Critics asserted that advertising was co-opting elements of grunge and turning it into a fad. \"Entertainment Weekly\" commented in a 1993 article, \"There hasn't been this kind of exploitation of a subculture since the media discovered hippies in the '60s\". Marketers used the \"grunge\" concept to sell grunge air freshener, grunge hair gel and even CDs of \"easy-listening music\" called \"grunge light\". \"The New York Times\" compared the \"grunging of America\" to the mass-marketing of punk rock, disco, and hip hop in previous years. Ironically, the \"New York Times\" was tricked into printing a fake list of slang terms that were supposedly used in the grunge scene; often referred to as the grunge speak hoax. This media hype surrounding grunge was documented in the 1996 documentary \"Hype!\". As mass media began to use the term \"grunge\" in any news story about the key bands, Seattle scene members began to refer to the term as \"the G-word\".\nA backlash against grunge began to develop in Seattle; in late 1992, Jonathan Poneman said that in the city, \"All things grunge are treated with the utmost cynicism and amusement [. . .] Because the whole thing is a fabricated movement and always has been.\" Grunge and grunge bands received criticism from musicians such as Blur's Damon Albarn, who was quoted saying \"fuck grunge\" and \"The Smashing Pumpkins can kiss my fucking ass\" while performing onstage. Many grunge artists were uncomfortable with their success and the resulting attention it brought. Nirvana's Kurt Cobain told Michael Azerrad, \"Famous is the last thing I wanted to be.\" Pearl Jam also felt the burden of success, with much of the attention falling on frontman Eddie Vedder.\nNirvana's follow-up album \"In Utero\" (1993) featured an intentionally abrasive album that Nirvana bassist Krist Novoselic described as a \"wild aggressive sound, a true alternative record\". Nevertheless, upon its release in September 1993, \"In Utero\" topped the \"Billboard\" charts. In 1996, \"In Utero\" was certified 5\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA. Pearl Jam also continued to perform well commercially with its second album, \"Vs.\" (1993). The album sold a record 950,378 copies in its first week of release, topped the \"Billboard\" charts, and outperformed all other entries in the top ten that week combined. In 1993, the rock band Candlebox released their self-titled album, which was certified 4\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA. In February 1994, Alice in Chains' EP, \"Jar of Flies\" peaked at number 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200 album chart. Soundgarden's album \"Superunknown\", which was also released in 1994, peaked at number 1 on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart, and was certified 5\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA. In 1995, Alice in Chains' self-titled album became their second number 1 album on the \"Billboard\" 200, and was certified 2\u00d7 platinum.\nIn the early-mid 1990s, the commercial success of grunge put record labels on a nationwide search for undiscovered talent to promote. This included San Diego, California\u2013based Stone Temple Pilots, Texas-based Tripping Daisy and Toadies, Paw, Chicago-based Veruca Salt, and Australian band Silverchair, bands whose early work continues to be identified broadly (if not in Seattle itself) as \"grunge\". In 2014, \"Paste\" ranked Veruca Salt's \"All Hail Me\" #39 and Silverchair's \"Tomorrow\" #45 on their list of the 50 best grunge songs of all time. \"Loudwire\" named Stone Temple Pilots one of the ten best grunge bands of all time. Grunge bands outside of the United States emerged in several countries. In Canada, Eric's Trip, the first Canadian band signed by the Sub Pop label, has been classified as grunge and Nickelback's debut album was considered to be grunge. Silverchair achieved mainstream success in the 1990s; the band's song \"Tomorrow\" went to number 22 on the Radio Songs chart in September 1995 and the band's debut album \"Frogstomp\", released in June 1995, was certified 2\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA in February 1996.\nDuring this period, grunge bands that were not from Seattle were often panned by critics, who accused them of being bandwagon-jumpers; Stone Temple Pilots and Bush in particular fell victim to this. In a January 1994 \"Rolling Stone\" poll, Stone Temple Pilots was simultaneously voted \"Best New Band\" by \"Rolling Stone\"'s readers and \"Worst New Band\" by the magazine's music critics, highlighting the disparity between critics and fans. Stone Temple Pilots became very popular; their album \"Core\" was certified 8\u00d7 platinum by RIAA and their album \"Purple\" was certified 6\u00d7 platinum by the RIAA. The British post-grunge band Bush released their debut album \"Sixteen Stone\" in 1994. In a review of their second album \"Razorblade Suitcase\", \"Rolling Stone\" criticized the album and called Bush \"the most successful and shameless mimics of Nirvana's music\". In the book \"Fargo Rock City: A Heavy Metal Odyssey in Rural North Dakota\", Chuck Klosterman wrote, \"Bush was a good band who just happened to signal the beginning of the end; ultimately, they would become the grunge Warrant\".\nDecline in popularity and end of subculture.\nA number of factors contributed to grunge's decline in prominence. Critics and historians do not agree on the exact point that grunge ended. Catherine Strong wrote that \"at the end of 1993 ... grunge had become unstable, and was entering the first stages of being killed off\"; she pointed out that the \"scene had become so successful\" and widely known that \"imitators had begun to enter the field\". \"Paste\" magazine states by 1994, grunge \"was fading fast\", with \"Pearl Jam retreating from the spotlight as fast as they could; Alice in Chains, Stone Temple Pilots and hordes of others were battling horrid drug addictions and struggling for survival.\" In \"Grunge: Seattle\", Justin Henderson stated that the \"downward spiral\" began in mid-1994, as the influx of major label money into the scene changed the culture and it had \"nowhere to go but down\"; he states the death of Hole bassist Kristen Pfaff on June 16, 1994, from a heroin overdose, was \"another nail in grunge's coffin.\"\nIn Jason Heller's 2013 article \"Did grunge really matter?\", in \"The A.V. Club\", he stated that Nirvana's \"In Utero\" (September 1993) was \"grunge's death knell. As soon as Cobain grumbled, 'Teenage angst has paid off well / Now I'm bored and old,' it was all over.\" Heller states that after Cobain's death in 1994, the \"hypocrisy\" in the grunge of the time \"became ... glaring\" and \"idealism became embarrassing\", with the result being that \"grunge became the new [mainstream] Aerosmith\". Heller states that \"grunge became an evolutionary dead end\", because \"it stood for nothing and was built on nothing, and that ethos of negation was all it was about.\"\nDuring the mid-1990s, many grunge bands broke up or became less visible. On April 8, 1994, Kurt Cobain was found dead in his Seattle home from an apparently self-inflicted gunshot wound; Nirvana summarily disbanded. After Cobain's death, Bruce Hardy wrote in \"Time\" magazine that he was \"the John Lennon of the swinging Northwest\", that he had struggled with a heroin addiction, and claimed that during the last weeks of his life there had been rumors in the music industry that Cobain had suffered a drug overdose and that Nirvana was breaking up. Cobain's suicide \"served as a catalyst for grunge's ... demise\", because it \"deflated the energy from grunge and provided the opening for saccharine and corporate-formulated music to regain\" its lost footing.\"\nThat same year Pearl Jam canceled its summer tour in protest of ticket vendor Ticketmaster's unfair business practices. Pearl Jam then began a boycott of the company; however, Pearl Jam's initiative to play only at non-Ticketmaster venues effectively, with a few exceptions, prevented the band from playing shows in the United States for the next three years. In 1996, Alice in Chains gave their final performances with their ailing and estranged lead singer, Layne Staley, who subsequently died from an overdose of cocaine and heroin in 2002. In 1996, Soundgarden and Screaming Trees released their final studio albums of the 1990s, \"Down on the Upside\" and \"Dust\", respectively. Strong states that Roy Shuker and Stout have written that the \"end of grunge\" can be seen as being \"as late as the breakup of Soundgarden in 1997\".\nEmergence of post-grunge.\nDuring the latter half of the 1990s, grunge was supplanted by post-grunge, which remained commercially viable into the start of the 21st century. Post-grunge \"... transformed the thick guitar sounds and candid lyrical themes of the Seattle bands into an accessible, often uplifting mainstream aesthetic\". These artists were seen as lacking the underground roots of grunge and were largely influenced by what grunge had become, described by AllMusic as \"a wildly popular form of inward-looking, serious-minded hard rock\". Post-grunge was a more commercially viable genre that tempered the distorted guitars of grunge with a studio sheen making it radio friendly.\nIn 1995, \"SPIN\" writer Charles Aaron stated that with grunge \"spent\", pop punk in a slump, Britpop a \"giddy memory\" and album-oriented rock over, the music industry turned to \"Corporate[-produced] Alternative\", which he calls \"soundalike fake grunge\" or \"scrunge\". Bands Aaron lists as \"scrunge\" groups include: Better Than Ezra; Bush; Collective Soul; Garbage; Hootie &amp; the Blowfish; Hum; Silverchair; Sponge; Tripping Daisy; Jennifer Trynin and Weezer; Aaron includes the Foo Fighters in his list, but states that Dave Grohl avoided becoming a \"scrunge fall gu[y]\" by combining 1980s hardcore punk with 1970s arena trash music in his post-Nirvana group. Bands described as grunge like Bush and Candlebox also have been largely categorized as These two bands became popular after 1992. Other bands categorized as post-grunge that emerged when Bush and Candlebox became popular include Live.\nReaction by Britpop.\nConversely, another rock genre, Britpop, emerged in part as a reaction against the dominance of grunge in the United Kingdom. In contrast to the dourness of grunge, Britpop was defined by \"youthful exuberance and desire for recognition\". The leading Britpop bands, \"Blur and Oasis existed as reactionary forces to [grunge's] eternal downcast glare.\" Britpop artists' new approach was inspired by Blur's tour of the United States in the spring of 1992. Justine Frischmann, formerly of Suede and leader of Elastica (and at the time in a relationship with Damon Albarn) explained, \"Damon and I felt like we were in the thick of it at that point ... it occurred to us that Nirvana were out there, and people were very interested in American music, and there should be some sort of manifesto for the return of Britishness.\"\nBritpop artists were vocal about their disdain for grunge. In a 1993 \"NME\" interview, Damon Albarn of Britpop band Blur agreed with interviewer John Harris' assertion that Blur was an \"anti-grunge band\", and said, \"Well, that's good. If punk was about getting rid of hippies, then I'm getting rid of grunge\" (ironically Kurt Cobain once cited Blur as his favorite band). Noel Gallagher of Oasis, while a fan of Nirvana, wrote music that refuted the pessimistic nature of grunge. Gallagher noted in 2006 that the 1994 Oasis single \"Live Forever\" \"was written in the middle of grunge and all that, and I remember Nirvana had a tune called 'I Hate Myself and I Want to Die,' and I was like ... 'Well, I'm not fucking having that.' As much as I fucking like him [Cobain] and all that shit, I'm not having that. I can't have people like that coming over here, on smack [heroin], fucking saying that they hate themselves and they wanna die. That's fucking rubbish.\" In an interview during Pinkpop Festival 2000, Oasis' Liam Gallagher attacked Pearl Jam, who were also performing, criticizing their depressing lyrical content and writing them off as \"rubbish\".\nSince 1997: Successors and revivals.\nSecond-wave post-grunge.\nFollowing the end of the original grunge movement, post-grunge increased in popularity in the late 1990s and early 2000s. Adam Steininger criticized the post-grunge bands' \"diluted ditties filled with watered-down lyrics, all seemingly revolving around suffering through romance.\" Criticizing many bands that have been described as post-grunge, Steininger panned Candlebox for their \"pop-filled\" sound, focus on \"love lyrics, and writing songs without \"versatility and creativity; Three Days Grace for their \"diluted\" and \"radio-friendly music\"; 3 Doors Down for focusing on \"snagging hit singles instead of creating quality albums\"; Finger Eleven for going in a \"pop rock\" direction; Bush's \"random phrasings of nonsense\"; Live's \"pseudo pop poetry\" that \"strangled the essence of grunge\", Puddle of Mudd's \"watered down post-grunge sound\"; Lifehouse, for tearing down \"grunge's sound and groundbreaking structure to appeal more to the masses\"; and Nickelback, which he calls the \"featherweight ... punching bags of post-grunge\" whose music is \"dull as dishwater\".\nGrunge revivals.\nMany major grunge bands continued recording and touring with success in the 2000s and 2010s. Perhaps the most notable grunge act of the 21st century has been Pearl Jam. In 2006, \"Rolling Stone\" writer Brian Hiatt described Pearl Jam as having \"spent much of the past decade deliberately tearing apart their own fame\", but noted the band had nevertheless developed a loyal concert following akin to that of the Grateful Dead. They saw a return to wide commercial success with 2006's \"Pearl Jam\", 2009's \"Backspacer\" and 2013's \"Lightning Bolt\". Alice In Chains reformed for a handful of reunion dates in 2005 with several different vocalists replacing Layne Staley. Eventually settling on William DuVall as Staley's replacement, in 2009 they released \"Black Gives Way to Blue,\" their first record in 14 years. The band's 2013 release, \"The Devil Put Dinosaurs Here\", reached number 2 on the \"Billboard\" 200. Soundgarden reformed in 2010 and released their album \"King Animal\" two years later which reached the top five of the national albums charts in Denmark, New Zealand, and the United States. Matt Cameron and Ben Shepherd joined Alain Johannes (Queens of the Stone Age, Eleven), Mark Lanegan (Screaming Trees, Queens of the Stone Age) and Dimitri Coats (Off!) to form side project Ten Commandos in 2016.\nDespite Kurt Cobain's death, the remaining members of Nirvana have continued to be successful posthumously. Due to the high sales for Kurt Cobain's \"Journals\" and the band's best-of compilation \"Nirvana\" upon their releases in 2002, \"The New York Times\" argued Nirvana \"are having more success now than at any point since Mr. Cobain's suicide in 1994.\" This trend has continued through the century's second decade, with the reissuing of the band's discography and release of the authorized documentary \"\". In 2012, the surviving members of Nirvana re-united, with Paul McCartney in place of Cobain, to record a track for the soundtrack Dave Grohl's documentary \"Sound City\" titled \"Cut Me Some Slack\".\nOne of the most successful rock groups of the 21st century, Queens of the Stone Age, has featured major contributions from various grunge musicians. Josh Homme had briefly played in Screaming Trees with off-and-on QOTSA member Mark Lanegan, before forming the group. Nirvana's Dave Grohl and Eleven's Alain Johannes have also provided notable contributions. Homme and Grohl joined with Led Zeppelin's John Paul Jones to form the supergroup Them Crooked Vultures in 2009. Johannes also performed with the group as a touring member.\nIn the early 2000s, grunge would make multiple regionally based resurgences, albeit minor ones. In 2005, \"The Seattle Times\" made note of grunge-influenced groups returning in the Seattle scene. Similarly, \"The Guardian\" reported of grunge-influenced groups from Yorkshire, including Dinosaur Pile-Up, Pulled Apart by Horses, and Wonderswan. Also, in 2003, the \"New York Times\" noted a resurgence in grunge fashion.\nThe 2010s have birthed a number of bands influenced by grunge. Unlike their forebears, some of these acts ascribe the label to themselves willingly. Many acts have been noted for affiliating and/or collaborating with prominent figures from the original alternative rock era. Steve Albini has produced for or worked with members of bands such as Bully, Vomitface, and Shannon Wright, while Emma Ruth Rundle of Marriages has toured with Buzz Osborne of the Melvins. Other notable acts that have been labelled as grunge or as heavily influenced by the grunge era, include Courtney Barnett, Wolf Alice, Yuck, Speedy Ortiz, the Kut, Mitski, , False Advertising, Slothrust, Baby in Vain, Big Thief, Torres, Lullwater, and Red Sun Rising.\nMedia outlets also began referring to a revival of the grunge sound around the mid-2010s, with the label being given to bands such as Title Fight, InCrest, Fangclub, Code Orange, My Ticket Home, Citizen, Milk Teeth and Muskets, some of which have been described as merging the genre with emo.\nLegacy.\nIn 2011, music critic Dave Whitaker wrote, \"every generation since the beginning of recorded music has introduced a game-changing genre\", from swing music in the 1930s, rock and roll in the 1950s, punk rock in the 1970s, and then grunge in the 1990s. However, he states \"grunge was the last American musical revolution\", as no post-grunge generation has introduced a new genre which radically changed the music scene. He states that the \"digital revolution\" (online music, file sharing, etc.) has meant that there has not been a \"generation-defining genre since grunge\", because, for \"one genre to so completely saturate the market requires ... a music industry with immense control over the market\". In 2016, Rob Zombie stated that grunge caused the death of the \"rock star\"; he states that unlike previous stars like \"Alice Cooper and Gene Simmons and Elton John\", who \"might as well have been from another fuckin' planet\", with grunge the attitude was \"[we] need all our rock stars to look just like us.\"\nBob Batchelor states that the indie record mindset and values in Seattle which provided guidance for the development and emergence of Nirvana and Pearl Jam \"conflicted with the major recording label desire to sell millions of CDs.\" Batchelor also states that despite grunge musicians' discomfort with the major labels' commercial goals, and the resistance by some key bands to do the promotional activities required by the labels, including music videos, MTV's video programs \"played an instrumental role in making [grunge]\" become \"mainstream, since many music fans received their first exposure\" on MTV, rather than on local or \"niche radio.\" Gil Troy states that the \"grunge rebellion, like most others\" in America's \"consumerist\" culture, ended up being \"commodified, mass-produced, ritualized, and thus sanitized\" by major corporations.\nIn 2011, John Calvert stated that \"timing\" is the reason why a grunge revival did not happen; he says that the cultural mood of the late 1980s and early 1990s, which inspired the movement, were no longer present. Seattle songwriter Jeff Stetson states that people from the 2010s who are listening to grunge should learn about the \"context and history of how it all came to be\" and \"respect for what a truly amazing thing it was that happened here [in Seattle,] because you probably won't see anything like it again.\" \"Paste\" magazine's Michael Danaher states that the grunge \"movement changed the course of rock 'n' roll, bringing ... tales of abuse and depression\" and socially conscious issues\" into pop culture.\nCalvert stated that Nirvana's \"Smells Like Teen Spirit\" has an \"iconic place in history\" as it had \"generation-defining resonance\" for young people from its era\"; he states that \"no other band ... made the urge to self-destruct ... as listenable\", with \"authentic\" pain and \"disaffection\". Calvert also calls the record \"chart history's most ferocious, dark and intense\" music since early punk rock, and he says it was \"heavy when heavy was needed\" by young people of that era, \"jarr[ing] young America awake\" and giving them something to \"cling to\" in difficult times. A 2017 book stated that grunge \"forever changed the identity of rock music in a way analogous to punk\"; moreover, grunge added \"introspective\" lyrics about \"existential authenticity\" and \"what it means to be true to oneself\". Grunge's Kurt Cobain has been called the \"voice of Generation X\", playing the same role for this demographic as Bob Dylan played for 1960s youth and that John Lennon played for the 1970s generation. Bob Batchelor stated that Nirvana was \"as important as Elvis or the Beatles.\"\nIn 2008, Darragh McManus of \"The Guardian\" states that grunge was not simply a young person's trend or a musical fad; she states that grunge synthesized the key philosophies of the modern era, from \"Feminism, liberalism, irony, apathy, cynicism/idealism\u00a0... anti-authoritarianism, [to] wry post-modernism\". McManus states that grunge dealt with serious, \"weighty\" topics, which does not occur often in popular music. McManus stated that for Generation X, grunge was not just music, it was a key cultural influence. Marlen Komar stated that Nirvana's success popularized \"non-heterosexist\", non-binary ways of thinking about \"gender and sexuality\", emphasized how men and women were alike and promoted progressive political thinking.\nWhen asked about the '90s grunge movement in 2021, Mark Lanegan commented, \"It's not something that was contrived or cooked up around the campfire somewhere. It just happened organically. It's hard for me to comment, because there's always great new music and there probably always will be \u2013 as long as the sun keeps shining.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51581", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51581", "title": "Iridology", "text": "Alternative medicine technique\nIridology (also known as iridodiagnosis or iridiagnosis) is an alternative medicine technique whose proponents claim that patterns, colors, and other characteristics of the iris can be examined to determine information about a patient's systemic health. Practitioners match their observations to \"iris charts,\" which divide the iris into zones that correspond to specific parts of the human body. Iridologists see the eyes as \"windows\" into the body's state of health.\nIridologists claim they can use the charts to distinguish between healthy systems and organs in the body and those that are overactive, inflamed, or distressed. Iridologists claim this information demonstrates a patient's susceptibility towards certain illnesses, reflects past medical problems, or predicts later health problems.\nAs opposed to evidence-based medicine, iridology is not supported by quality research studies and is considered pseudoscience. The features of the iris are one of the most stable features on the human body throughout life. The stability of iris structures is the foundation of the biometric technology which uses iris recognition for identification purposes.\nHistory.\nMedical practitioners have been searching the eyes for signs of illness since at least 3,000 BCE.\nThe first \"explicit\" description of iridological principles, such as homolaterality (without using the word \"iridology\") are found in \"Chiromatica Medica\", a famous work published in 1665 and reprinted in 1670 and 1691 by Philippus Meyeus (Philip Meyen von Coburg).\nThe first use of the word \"Augendiagnostik\" (\"eye diagnosis\", loosely translated as \"iridology\") began with Ignaz von Peczely, a 19th-century Hungarian physician who is recognised as its founding father. The most common story is that he got the idea for this diagnostic tool after seeing similar streaks in the eyes of a man he was treating for a broken leg and the eyes of an owl whose leg von Peczely had broken many years before. At the First International Iridological Congress, Ignaz von Peczely's nephew, August von Peczely, dismissed this myth as apocryphal and maintained that such claims were irreproducible.\nThe second 'father' to iridology is thought to be Nils Liljequist from Sweden, who greatly suffered from the outgrowth of his lymph nodes. After a round of medication made from iodine and quinine, he observed many differences in the colour of his iris. This observation inspired him to create and publish an atlas in 1893, which contained 258 black and white illustrations and 12 colour illustrations of the iris, known as the Diagnosis of the Eye.\nIn Germany, Pastor Emanuel Felke developed a form of homeopathy for treating specific illnesses and described new \"iris signs\" in the early 1900s. However, Felke was subject to long and bitter litigation. The Felke Institute in Gerlingen, Germany, was established as a leading center of iridological research and training.\nIridology became better known in the United States in the 1950s, when Bernard Jensen, an American chiropractor, began giving classes in his method. This is in direct relationship with P. Johannes Thiel, Eduard Lahn (who became an American under the name of Edward Lane), and J Haskell Kritzer. Jensen emphasized the importance of the body's exposure to toxins, and the use of natural foods as detoxifiers. In 1979, in collaboration with two other iridologists, Jensen failed to establish the basis of their practice when they examined photographs of the eyes of 143 patients in an attempt to determine which ones had kidney impairments. Of the patients, 48 had been diagnosed with kidney disease, and the rest had normal kidney function. Based on their analysis of the patients' irises, the three iridologists could not detect which patients had kidney disease and which did not.\nCriticism.\nScientists dismiss iridology given that published studies have indicated a lack of success for its claims. No clinical study to date has demonstrated a correlation between illness in the body and coinciding observable changes in the iris. In controlled experiments, practitioners of iridology have performed statistically no better than chance in determining the presence of a disease or condition solely through observation of the iris. \nIridology is based on a premise that is at odds with the fact that the iris does not undergo substantial changes in an individual's life. Iris texture is a phenotypical feature that develops during gestation and remains unchanged after infancy. There is no evidence for changes in the iris pattern other than variations in pigmentation in the first years of life and variations caused by glaucoma treatment. The stability of iris structures is the foundation of the biometric technology, which uses iris recognition for identification purposes.\nJames Randi has argued that despite the lack of clinical efficacy, iridology remains unfalsifiable since iridologists do not provide a distinction between current physical defects and \"future\" defects; thus, iridiagnostic claims cannot be proven wrong.\nScientific research into iridology.\nWell-controlled scientific evaluation of iridology has shown negative results, with all rigorous double blind trials failing to find any statistical significance to its claims.\nIn 2015, the Australian Government's Department of Health published the results of a review of alternative therapies that sought to determine if any were suitable for being covered by health insurance. Iridology was one of 17 therapies evaluated for which no clear evidence of effectiveness was found.\nA German study from 1957, which took more than 4,000 iris photographs of more than 1,000 people, concluded that iridology was useless as a diagnostic tool.\nIn 1979, Bernard Jensen, a leading American iridologist, and two other iridology proponents failed to establish the basis of their practice when they examined photographs of the eyes of 143 patients in an attempt to determine which ones had kidney impairments. Of the patients, 48 had been diagnosed with kidney disease, and the rest had normal kidney function. Based on their analysis of the patients' irises, the three iridologists could not detect which patients had kidney disease and which did not. One iridologist, for example, decided that 88% of the normal patients had kidney disease, while another judged through his iris analysis that 74% of patients who needed artificial kidney treatment were normal.\nAnother study was published in the \"British Medical Journal\" which selected 39 patients who were due to have their gall bladder removed the following day, because of suspected gallstones. The study also selected a group of people who did not have diseased gallbladders to act as a control. A group of five iridologists examined a series of slides of both groups' irises. The iridologists could not correctly identify which patients had gallbladder problems and which had healthy gallbladders. For example, one of the iridologists diagnosed 49% of the patients with gallstones as having them and 51% as not having them. The author concluded: \"this study showed that iridology is not a useful diagnostic aid.\"\nEdzard Ernst raised the question in 2000:Does iridology work? ... This search strategy resulted in 77 publications on the subject of iridology. ... All of the uncontrolled studies and several of the unmasked experiments suggested that iridology was a valid diagnostic tool. The discussion that follows refers to the 4 controlled, masked evaluations of the diagnostic validity of iridology. ... In conclusion, few controlled studies with masked evaluation of diagnostic validity have been published. None have found any benefit from iridology.A 2005 study tested the usefulness of iridology in diagnosing common forms of cancer. An experienced iridology practitioner examined the eyes of 110 total subjects, of which 68 people had proven cancers of the breast, ovary, uterus, prostate, or colorectum, and 42 for whom there was no medical evidence of cancer. The practitioner, who was unaware of their gender or medical details, was asked to suggest a diagnosis for each person, and their results were then compared with each subject's known medical diagnosis. The study conclusion was that \"Iridology was of no value in diagnosing the cancers investigated in this study.\"\nMethods.\nIridologists generally use equipment such as a flashlight and magnifying glass, cameras, or slit-lamp microscopes to examine a patient's irises for tissue changes, as well as features such as specific pigment patterns and irregular stromal architecture. The markings and patterns are compared to an \"iris chart\" that correlates zones of the iris with parts of the body. Typical charts divide the iris into approximately 80\u201390 zones. For example, the zone corresponding to the kidney is in the lower part of the iris, just before 6 o'clock. There are minor variations between charts' associations between body parts and areas of the iris.\nAccording to iridologists, details in the iris reflect changes in the tissues of the corresponding body organs. One prominent practitioner, Bernard Jensen, described it thus: \"Nerve fibers in the iris respond to changes in body tissues by manifesting a reflex physiology that corresponds to specific tissue changes and locations.\" This would mean that a bodily condition translates to a noticeable change in the appearance of the iris, but this has been disproven through many studies. (See section on Scientific research.) For example, \"acute inflammatory\", \"chronic inflammatory\" and \"catarrhal\" signs may indicate involvement, maintenance, or healing of corresponding distant tissues, respectively. Other features that iridologists look for are \"contraction rings\" and \"Klumpenzellen\", which may indicate various other health conditions, as interpreted in context.\nIn Canada and the United States, iridology is not regulated or licensed by any governmental agency. Numerous organizations offer certification courses.\nPossible harms.\nMedical errors\u2014treatment for conditions diagnosed via this method that do not exist (false positive result) or a false sense of security when a serious condition is not diagnosed by this method (false negative result)\u2014could lead to improper or delayed treatment and even loss of life.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51582", "revid": "50711003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51582", "title": "Referendum", "text": "Direct vote on a specific proposal\nA referendum, plebiscite, or ballot measure is a direct vote by the electorate (rather than their representatives) on a proposal, law, or political issue. A referendum may be either \"binding\", resulting in the adoption of a new policy, or \"consultive\" (or \"advisory\"), functioning like a large opinion poll.\nEtymology.\n'Referendum' is the gerundive form of the Latin verb , literally \"to carry back\" (from the verb , \"to bear, bring, carry\" plus the inseparable prefix , here meaning \"back\"). As a gerundive is an adjective, not a noun, it cannot be used alone in Latin, and must be contained within a context attached to a noun such as , \"A proposal which must be carried back to the people\". The addition of the verb (3rd person singular, ) to a gerundive, denotes the idea of necessity or compulsion, that which \"must\" be done, rather than that which is \"fit for\" doing. Its use as a noun in English is not considered a strictly grammatical usage of a foreign word but is rather a newly coined English noun, which follows English grammatical usage, not Latin grammatical usage. This determines the form of the plural in English, which according to English grammar should be \"referendums\". The use of \"referenda\" as a plural form in English (treating it as a Latin word and attempting to apply to it the rules of Latin grammar) is unsupportable according to the rules of both Latin and English grammar. The use of \"referenda\" as a plural form is posited hypothetically as either a gerund or a gerundive by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", which rules out such usage in both cases as follows:\n\"Referendums\" is logically preferable as a plural form meaning 'ballots on one issue' (as a Latin gerund, referendum has no plural). The Latin plural gerundive 'referenda', meaning 'things to be referred', necessarily connotes a plurality of issues.\nIt is closely related to agenda, \"those matters which must be driven forward\", from , to impel or drive forwards; and memorandum, \"that matter which must be remembered\", from , to call to mind, corrigenda, from , to rule, make straight, those things which must be made straight (corrected), etc.\nThe term 'plebiscite' has a generally similar meaning in modern usage and comes from the Latin \"plebiscita\", which originally meant a decree of the \"Concilium Plebis\" (Plebeian Council), the popular assembly of the Roman Republic. Today, a referendum can also often be referred to as a plebiscite, but in some countries the two terms are used differently to refer to votes with differing types of legal consequences.\nIn Australia, a 'referendum' is often said to be a vote to change the federal constitution and 'plebiscite' a vote which does not affect the federal constitution. However, this is erroneous as not all federal referendums have been on constitutional matters (such as the 1916 Australian conscription referendum), and state votes that likewise do not affect either the federal or state constitution are frequently said to be referendums (such as the 2009 Western Australian daylight saving referendum). Historically, they are used by Australians interchangeably and a plebiscite was considered another name for a referendum.\nIn Ireland, 'plebiscite' referred to the vote to adopt its constitution, but a subsequent vote to amend the constitution is called a 'referendum', as is a poll of the electorate on a non-constitutional bill.\nHistory.\nThe name and use of the 'referendum' is thought to have originated in the Swiss canton of Graub\u00fcnden as early as the 16th century.\nAfter a reduction in the number of referendums in the mid-twentieth century, the referendum as a political tool has been increasing in popularity since the 1970s. This increase has been attributed to dealignment of the public with political parties, as specific policy issues became more important to the public than party identifiers.\nTypes.\nClassification.\nThe term \"referendum\" covers a variety of different meanings, and the terminology is different depending on the use. A referendum can be binding or advisory. In some countries, different names are used for these two types of referendum. Referendums can be further classified by who initiates them.\nDavid Altman proposes four dimensions that referendums can be classified by:\nMandatory referendums.\nA mandatory referendum is a class of referendum required to be voted on if certain conditions are met or for certain government actions to be taken. They do not require any signatures from the public. In areas that use referendums a mandatory referendum is commonly used as a legally required step for ratification for constitutional changes, ratifying international treaties and joining international organizations, and certain types of public spending.\nTypical types of mandatory referendums include:\nOptional referendum.\nAn optional referendum is a class of referendums that is put to the vote as a result of a demand. This may come from the executive branch, legislative branch, or a request from the people (often after meeting a signature requirement).\nTypes of optional referendums include:\nRationale.\nFrom a political-philosophical perspective, referendums are an expression of direct democracy, but today, most referendums need to be understood within the context of representative democracy. They tend to be used quite selectively, covering issues such as changes in voting systems, where currently elected officials may not have the legitimacy or inclination to implement such changes.\nBy country.\nSince the end of the 18th century, hundreds of national referendums have been organised in the world; almost 600 national votes have been held in Switzerland since its inauguration as a modern state in 1848. Italy ranks second with 78 national referendums: 72 popular referendums (51 of which were proposed by the Radical Party), 4 constitutional referendums, one institutional referendum and one advisory referendum.\nDesign and procedure.\nMultiple-choice referendums.\nA referendum usually offers the electorate a straight choice between accepting or rejecting a proposal. However some referendums give voters multiple choices, and some use transferable voting. This has also been called a preferendum when the choices given allow the voters to weight their support for a policy.\nIn Switzerland, for example, multiple choice referendums are common. Two multiple choice referendums were held in Sweden, in 1957 and in 1980, in which voters were offered three options. In 1977, a referendum held in Australia to determine a new national anthem was held, in which voters had four choices. In 1992, New Zealand held a five-option referendum on their electoral system. In 1982, Guam had a referendum that used six options, with an additional blank option for those wishing to (campaign and) vote for their own seventh option.\nA multiple choice referendum poses the question of how the result is to be determined. They may be set up so that if no single option receives the support of an absolute majority (more than half) of the votes, resort can be made to the two-round system or instant-runoff voting, which is also called IRV and PV.\nIn 2018 the Irish Citizens' Assembly considered the conduct of future referendums in Ireland, with 76 of the members in favour of allowing more than two options, and 52% favouring preferential voting in such cases. Other people regard a non-majoritarian methodology like the Modified Borda Count (MBC) as more inclusive and more accurate.\nSwiss referendums offer a separate vote on each of the multiple options as well as an additional decision about which of the multiple options should be preferred. In the Swedish case, in both referendums the 'winning' option was chosen by the Single Member Plurality (\"first past the post\") system. In other words, the winning option was deemed to be that supported by a plurality, rather than an absolute majority, of voters. In the 1977 Australian referendum, the winner was chosen by the system of preferential instant-runoff voting (IRV). Polls in Newfoundland (1949) and Guam (1982), for example, were counted under a form of the two-round system, and an unusual form of TRS was used in the 1992 New Zealand poll.\nAlthough California has not held multiple-choice referendums in the Swiss or Swedish sense (in which only one of several counter-propositions can be victorious, and the losing proposals are wholly null and void), it does have so many yes-or-no referendums at each election day that conflicts arise. The State's constitution provides a method for resolving conflicts when two or more inconsistent propositions are passed on the same day. This is a de facto form of approval voting\u2014i.e. the proposition with the most \"yes\" votes prevails over the others to the extent of any conflict.\nOther voting systems that could be used in multiple-choice referendum are Condorcet method and quadratic voting (including quadratic funding).\nParticipation quorum.\nParticipation quorum - the additional requirement that a certain minimum number of votes must be cast in order for a referendum to be legally valid - means that it is in the interests of a proposal\u2019s opponents to abstain rather than to vote against it, so that the quorum is not met. The opponents need only desert the ballot box in order to impose their viewpoint, even when they are very much in the minority. All others who are not voting for other reasons, including those with no opinion, are effectively also voting against the referendum.\nThe participation quorum requirement encourages a host of controversial election practices such as falsifing the turn-out rate, voter suppression and manipulating the date of the referendum to reduce turnout. It has been shown both empirically and mathematically that a participation quorum requirement reduces turnout to below the quorum theshold, which is known as the \"quorum paradox\" (a form of the no-show paradox).\nThe \"quorum paradox\" arises from the fact that, unlike in deliberative bodies such as parliaments\u2014where a vote can be postponed to a later meeting if a quorum is not reached\u2014referendums cannot be rescheduled.\nAn example of the participation quorum phenomenon is the 2005 Italian fertility laws referendum, in which the opposition to the proposed loosening of laws on research on embryos and on allowing in-vitro fertilization, campaigned for people to abstain from voting to drive down turnout. Although a majority of people voted yes for the changes in the law, the results were invalid because participation was low.\nThe European Commission for Democracy through Law (Venice Commission) recommends against any quorum requirements in its https://\nDisputes.\nImportant referendums are frequently challenged in courts. In pre-referendum disputes, plaintiffs have often tried to prevent the referendum to take place. In one such challenge, in 2017, the Spanish Constitutional Court suspended the Catalonia's independence referendum. In post-referendum disputes, they challenge the result. British courts dismissed post-referendum challenges of the Brexit referendum.\nInternational tribunals have traditionally not interfered with referendum disputes. In 2021, the European Court of Human Rights extended its jurisdiction to referendums in its judgment \"Toplak and Mrak v. Slovenia\", initiated by two disabled voters over polling place access.\nCriticisms.\nCriticism of populist aspect.\nIn Political Governance states that voters in a referendum are more likely to be driven by transient whims than by careful deliberation, or that they are not sufficiently informed to make decisions on complicated or technical issues. Also, voters might be swayed by media coverage, propaganda, strong personalities, intimidation, and expensive advertising campaigns. James Madison argued that direct democracy is the \"tyranny of the majority\".\nSome opposition to the referendum has arisen from its use by dictators such as Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini who, it is argued, used the plebiscite to disguise oppressive policies as populism. Dictators may also make use of referendums as well as show elections to further legitimize their authority such as Ant\u00f3nio de Oliveira Salazar in 1933; Benito Mussolini in 1934; Adolf Hitler in 1934, 1936; Francisco Franco in 1947; Park Chung Hee in 1972; and Ferdinand Marcos in 1973. Hitler's use of plebiscites is argued as the reason why, since World War II, there has been no provision in Germany for the holding of referendums at the federal level.\nIn recent years, referendums have been used strategically by several European governments trying to pursue political and electoral goals.\nIn 1995, John Bruton considered that &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All governments are unpopular. Given the chance, people would vote against them in a referendum. Therefore avoid referendums. Therefore don't raise questions which require them, such as the big versus the little states.\nClosed questions and the separability problem.\nSome critics of the referendum attack the use of closed questions. A difficulty called the separability problem can plague a referendum on two or more issues. If one issue is in fact, or in perception, related to another on the ballot, the imposed simultaneous voting of first preference on each issue can result in an outcome which is displeasing to most.\nUndue limitations on regular government power.\nSeveral commentators have noted that the use of citizens' initiatives to amend constitutions has so tied the government to a jumble of popular demands as to render the government unworkable. A 2009 article in \"The Economist\" argued that this had restricted the ability of the California state government to tax the people and pass the budget, and called for an entirely new Californian constitution.\nA similar problem also arises when elected governments accumulate excessive debts. That can severely reduce the effective margin for later governments.\nBoth these problems can be moderated by a combination of other measures as \nDisproportionate disruption.\nReferendums occur occasionally rather than periodically as elections are and they do not offer the same kind of formal opposition. Because referendums affect for a longer term than legislative deliberation, a turnout and supermajority requirement is necessary to maintain principles of majoritarianism. In republic polities, referendums could be used to bypass legislatures and representatives by the executive body. Zurcher argues that the use of the Nazi referendums was ending turnout requirements to advance intrinsic advantages in an otherwise slower and more demanding manner to constitutional and policy changes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51584", "revid": "50898995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51584", "title": "Eva Per\u00f3n", "text": "Argentine actress and politician (1919\u20131952)\nMar\u00eda Eva Duarte de Per\u00f3n (; n\u00e9e\u00a0Mar\u00eda Eva Duarte; 7 May 1919 \u2013 26 July 1952), better known as Eva Per\u00f3n or by the nickname Evita (), was an Argentine politician, activist, actress, and philanthropist who served as First Lady of Argentina from June 1946 until her death in July 1952, as the wife of Argentine President Juan Per\u00f3n. She was born in poverty in the rural village of Los Toldos, in the Pampas, as the youngest of five children. In 1934, at the age of 15, she moved to the nation's capital of Buenos Aires to pursue a career as a stage, radio, and film actress. She married Per\u00f3n in 1945, when he was still an army colonel, and was propelled onto the political stage when he became President in 1946. She became a central figure of Peronism and Argentine culture because of the Eva Per\u00f3n Foundation, a charitable organization perceived by many Argentinians as highly impactful.\nShe met Colonel Juan Per\u00f3n on 22 January 1944 during a charity event at the Luna Park Stadium to benefit the victims of an earthquake in San Juan, Argentina. The two were married the following year. Juan Per\u00f3n was elected President of Argentina in June 1946; during the next six years, Eva Per\u00f3n became powerful within the pro-Peronist trade unions, primarily for speaking on behalf of labor rights. She also ran the Ministries of Labor and Health, founded and ran the charitable Eva Per\u00f3n Foundation, championed women's suffrage in Argentina, and founded and ran the nation's first large-scale female political party, the Female Peronist Party.\nIn 1951, Eva Per\u00f3n announced her candidacy for the Peronist nomination for the office of Vice President of Argentina, receiving great support from the Peronist political base, low-income and working-class Argentines who were referred to as \"descamisados\" or \"shirtless ones\" (similar to the term \"sans-culottes\" during the French Revolution). Opposition from the nation's military and bourgeoisie, coupled with her declining health, ultimately forced her to withdraw her candidacy. In 1952, shortly before her death from cancer at 33, Eva Per\u00f3n was given the title of \"Spiritual Leader of the Nation of Argentina\" by the Argentine Congress. She was given a state funeral upon her death, a prerogative generally reserved for heads of state.\nEva Per\u00f3n has become a part of international popular culture, most famously as the subject of the musical \"Evita\" (1976). Cristina \u00c1lvarez Rodr\u00edguez has said that Eva Per\u00f3n has never left the collective consciousness of Argentines. Cristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner, the second female president of Argentina (after Juan Per\u00f3n's third wife Isabel Per\u00f3n), claims that women of her generation owe a debt to Eva Per\u00f3n for \"her example of passion and combativeness\".\nEarly life.\nEarly childhood.\nEva Per\u00f3n's 1951 biography, \"La Raz\u00f3n de mi Vida\", contains no dates or references to childhood occurrences, and does not list the location of her birth or her name at birth. According to Jun\u00edn's civil registry, a birth certificate shows that one \"Mar\u00eda Eva Duarte\" was born on May 7, 1919. Her baptismal certificate lists the date of birth as May 7, 1919 under the name \"Eva Mar\u00eda Ibarguren\". It is thought that in 1945 the adult Eva Per\u00f3n created a forgery of her birth certificate for her marriage.\nEva Per\u00f3n spent her childhood in Jun\u00edn, Buenos Aires province. Her father, Juan Duarte Manechena Etchegoyen (1872\u20131926), was descended from French Basque immigrants. Her mother, Juana Ibarguren Nu\u00f1ez (1894\u20131971), was descended from Spanish Basque immigrants. Juan Duarte, a wealthy rancher from nearby Chivilcoy, already had a wife Adela D'Uhart and family there. At that time in rural Argentina, it was not uncommon for a wealthy man to have several families.\nWhen Per\u00f3n was a year old, Duarte returned permanently to his legal family, leaving Juana Ibarguren and her children in abject poverty. They were forced to move to the poorest area of Jun\u00edn. Los Toldos was a village in the dusty region of Las Pampas, with a reputation as a desolate place of poverty. To support herself and her children, Ibarguren sewed clothes for neighbors. The family was stigmatized by the abandonment of the father and by the illegitimate status of the children under Argentine law, and was consequently somewhat isolated. A desire to expunge this part of her life might have been a motivation for Per\u00f3n to arrange the destruction of her original birth certificate in 1945.\nWhen Duarte suddenly died, and Ibarguren and their children sought to attend his funeral, there was conflict. Although Ibarguren and the children were permitted to enter and pay their respects, they were promptly directed out of the church. Duarte's widow did not want her late husband's mistress and children at the funeral. As she was the legitimate wife, her orders were respected.\nJun\u00edn.\nBefore abandoning Juana Ibarguren, Juan Duarte had been her sole means of support. Biographer John Barnes writes that, after this abandonment, all Duarte left to the family was a document declaring that the children were his, thus enabling them to use the Duarte surname. Soon after, Juana moved her children to a one-room apartment in Jun\u00edn. To pay the rent on their single-roomed home, mother and daughters took up jobs as cooks in the houses of the local estancias.\nEventually, owing to Eva's older brother's financial help, the family moved into a bigger house, which they later transformed into a boarding house. During this time, young Eva often participated in school plays and concerts. One of her favorite pastimes was the cinema. Though Eva's mother wanted to marry her off to one of the local bachelors, Eva dreamed of becoming a famous actress. Eva's love for acting was reinforced in October 1933, when she played a small role in a school play called \"Arriba Estudiantes\" (Students Arise), which Barnes describes as \"an emotional, patriotic, flag-waving melodrama\". After the play, Eva was determined to become an actress.\nMove to Buenos Aires.\nIn her autobiography, Eva explained that all the people from her town who had been to the big cities described them as \"marvelous places, where nothing was given but wealth\". In 1934, at 15, Eva escaped her poverty-stricken village when she ran off with a young musician to the nation's capital of Buenos Aires. The young couple's relationship ended quickly, but Eva remained in Buenos Aires. She began to pursue jobs on the stage and the radio, and she eventually became a film actress. She bleached her naturally black hair blonde, a look she maintained for the rest of her life.\nIt is often reported that Eva traveled to Buenos Aires by train with tango singer Agust\u00edn Magaldi. However, there is no record of the married Magaldi performing in Jun\u00edn in 1934 (and, even if he had done so, he usually traveled with his wife). Eva's sisters maintain that Eva traveled to Buenos Aires with their mother. The sisters also claim that Do\u00f1a Juana accompanied her daughter to an audition at a radio station and arranged for Eva to live with the Bustamante family, who were friends of the Duarte family. While the method of Eva's escape from her bleak provincial surroundings is debated, she did begin a new life in Buenos Aires.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Buenos Aires in the 1930s was known as the \"Paris of South America\". The center of the city had many caf\u00e9s, restaurants, theaters, movie houses, shops, and bustling crowds. In direct contrast, the 1930s were also years of great unemployment, poverty, and hunger in the capital, and many new arrivals from the interior were forced to live in tenements, boardinghouses and in outlying shanties that became known as \"villas miserias\".\nUpon arrival in Buenos Aires, Eva Duarte was faced with the difficulties of surviving without formal education or connections. The city was especially overcrowded during this period because of the migrations caused by the Great Depression. On 28 March 1935, she made her professional debut in the play \"Mrs. Perez\" (\"la Se\u00f1ora de P\u00e9rez\"), at the Comedias Theater.\nIn 1936, Eva toured nationally with a theater company, worked as a model, and was cast in a few B-grade movie melodramas. In 1942, she experienced some economic stability when a company called \"Candilejas\" (sponsored by a soap manufacturer) hired her for a daily role in one of their radio dramas called \"Muy Bien\", which aired on \"Radio El Mundo\" (World Radio), the most important radio station in the country at that time. Later that year, she signed a five-year contract with \"Radio Belgrano\", which assured her a role in a popular historical-drama program called \"Great Women of History\", in which she played Elizabeth I of England, Sarah Bernhardt, and Alexandra Feodorovna, the last Tsarina of Russia. Eventually, Eva Duarte came to co-own the radio company. By 1943, she was earning five or six thousand pesos a month, making her one of the highest-paid radio actresses in the nation. Pablo Raccioppi, who jointly ran \"Radio El Mundo\" with Eva Duarte, is said to have not liked her, but to have noted that she was \"thoroughly dependable\". Eva also had a short-lived film career during the Golden Age of Argentine cinema, but none of the films in which she appeared were hugely successful. In one of her last films, \"La cabalgata del circo\" (\"The Circus Cavalcade\"), Eva played a young country girl who rivaled an older woman, the movie's star, Libertad Lamarque.\nAs a result of her success with radio dramas and the films, Eva achieved some financial stability. In 1942, she was able to move into an apartment in the exclusive neighborhood of Recoleta, on 1557 Calle Posadas (currently the site of the Hotel Melia Recoleta Plaza). The next year, Eva began her career in politics, as one of the founders of the Argentine Radio Syndicate (ARA).\nEarly relationship with Juan Per\u00f3n.\nOn 15 January 1944, an earthquake occurred in the town of San Juan, Argentina, killing ten thousand people. In response, Juan Per\u00f3n, who was then the Secretary of Labor, established a fund to raise money to aid the victims. He devised a plan to have an \"artistic festival\" as a fundraiser, and invited radio and film actors to participate. After a week of fundraising, all participants met at a gala held at Luna Park Stadium in Buenos Aires on 22 January 1944, to benefit earthquake victims.\nAt this gala, Eva Duarte first met Colonel Juan Per\u00f3n. Eva promptly became Per\u00f3n's girlfriend. She referred to the day she met him as her \"marvelous day\". Juan Per\u00f3n and Eva left the gala together at around two in the morning. (Per\u00f3n's first wife, Aurelia Tiz\u00f3n, had died of uterine cancer in 1938.)\nEva Duarte had no knowledge of or interest in politics prior to meeting Juan Per\u00f3n; therefore, she never argued with Per\u00f3n or any of his inner circle, but merely absorbed what she heard. Juan Per\u00f3n later claimed in his memoir that he purposefully selected Eva as his pupil, and set out to create in her a \"second I\". Juan Per\u00f3n may have allowed Eva Duarte such intimate exposure and knowledge of his inner circle because of his age: he was 48 and she was 24 when they met. He had come to politics late in life, and was therefore free of preconceived ideas of how his political career should be conducted, and he was willing to accept whatever aid she offered him.\nIn May 1944, it was announced that broadcast performers must organize themselves into a union, and that this union would be the only one permitted to operate in Argentina. Shortly after the formation of the union, Eva Duarte was elected its president. Juan Per\u00f3n had made the suggestion that performers create a union, and the other performers likely felt it was good politics to elect his mistress. Shortly after her election as president of the union, Eva Duarte began a daily program called \"Toward a Better Future\", which dramatized, in soap opera form, the accomplishments of Juan Per\u00f3n. Often, Per\u00f3n's own speeches were played during the program. When she spoke, Eva Duarte spoke in ordinary language as a regular woman, perhaps because she wanted listeners to believe what she herself believed about Juan Per\u00f3n.\nRise to power.\nJuan Per\u00f3n's arrest.\nBy the early 1940s, a group of Army officers called the GOU for \"Grupo de Oficiales Unidos\" (United Officers' Group), nicknamed \"The Colonels\", had gained considerable influence within the Argentine government. President Pedro Pablo Ram\u00edrez became wary of Juan Per\u00f3n's growing power within the government and was unable to curb that power. On 24 February 1944, Ram\u00edrez signed his own resignation paper, which was drafted by Juan Per\u00f3n himself; Edelmiro Juli\u00e1n Farrell, a friend of Juan Per\u00f3n, became president, and Juan Per\u00f3n returned to his job as Labor Minister, at which point he was the most powerful man in the Argentine government. On 9 October 1945 Juan Per\u00f3n was arrested by his opponents within the government who feared that, with the strong support of his base, largely unskilled unionized workers that had recently moved from rural areas to industrialized urban centers and several allied trade unions, Per\u00f3n would attempt a power grab.\nSix days later, between 250,000 and 350,000 people gathered in front of the Casa Rosada, Argentina's government house, to demand Juan Per\u00f3n's release. At 11 pm, Juan Per\u00f3n stepped onto the balcony of the Casa Rosada and addressed the crowd. Biographer Robert D. Crassweller claims that this moment was particularly powerful because it dramatically recalled important aspects of Argentine history. Crassweller writes that Juan Per\u00f3n enacted the role of a \"caudillo\" addressing his people in the tradition of Argentine leaders Rosas and Yrigoyen. Crassweller also claims that the evening contained \"mystic overtones\" of a \"quasi-religious\" nature.\nAfter Per\u00f3n won the elections of 1946, his administration started circulating a highly fictionalized version of the 17 October demonstration where Eva Per\u00f3n was portrayed as knocking on every door in Buenos Aires in order to bring out people to the street. This version of events was popularized in the movie version of the Lloyd Webber musical; historians agree that this version of events is false. At the time of Per\u00f3n's imprisonment, Eva Per\u00f3n was solely an actress; she had no political influence with any of the various labor unions, and she was not well liked within Per\u00f3n's inner circle, nor was she particularly popular within the film and radio business. The rally that freed Per\u00f3n from prison was organized by various unions, particularly the CGT, which was Per\u00f3n's main base.\nOn 18 October 1945, a day after he was released, Per\u00f3n married Eva discreetly in a civil ceremony in Jun\u00edn. A church wedding was held on 9 December 1945 in La Plata. In the modern day, 17 October is still celebrated as a holiday by the Justicialist Party (celebrated as \"D\u00eda de la Lealtad\", or \"Loyalty Day\").\n1946 presidential election.\nAfter his release from prison, Juan Per\u00f3n decided to campaign for the presidency of the nation, which he won with 54%. Eva Per\u00f3n campaigned heavily for her husband during his 1946 presidential bid. Using her weekly radio show, she delivered speeches with heavy populist rhetoric urging the poor to align themselves with Juan Per\u00f3n's movement.\nEuropean tour.\nIn 1947, Eva embarked on a much-publicized \"Rainbow Tour\" of Europe, meeting with numerous dignitaries and heads of state, such as Francisco Franco and Pope Pius XII. The tour had its genesis in an invitation that the Spanish leader had extended to Juan Per\u00f3n; Eva decided that if Juan Per\u00f3n would not accept Franco's invitation for a state visit to Spain, then she would. Argentina had only recently emerged from its \"wartime quarantine\", thus taking its place in the United Nations and improving relations with the United States. Therefore, a visit to Franco, with Ant\u00f3nio Salazar of Portugal, the last remaining Western European authoritarian leaders in power, was diplomatically frowned upon internationally. Advisers then decided that Eva should also visit other European countries in addition to Spain. This would make it seem that Eva's sympathies were not specifically with Francoist Spain. The tour was billed not as a political tour but as a non-political \"goodwill\" tour.\nEva was well received in Spain, where she visited the tombs of Spanish monarchs Ferdinand and Isabella in the Capilla Real de Granada. Francoist Spain had not recovered from the Spanish Civil War (the autarkic economy and the UN embargo meant that the country could not feed its people). During her visit to Spain, Eva handed out 100-peseta notes to many poor children she met on her journey. She also received from Franco the highest award given by the Spanish government, the Order of Isabella the Catholic.\nEva then visited Rome, where the reception was not as warm as it had been in Spain. Though Pope Pius XII did not give her a Papal decoration, she was allowed the time usually allotted to queens and was given a rosary. \nHer next stop was France where she met with Charles de Gaulle. She promised France two shipments of wheat.\nWhile in France, Eva received word that George VI would not receive her when she planned to visit Britain, regardless of what his Foreign Office might advise, and that her visit would not be viewed as a state visit. Eva regarded the royal family's refusal to meet her as a snub, and canceled the trip to the UK. Eva gave \"exhaustion\" as the official reason for not going on to Britain.\nEva also visited Switzerland during her European tour, a visit that has been viewed as the worst part of the trip. According to the book \"Evita: A Biography\" by John Barnes, while she travelled down a street with many people crowding her car, someone threw two stones and smashed the windshield. She threw her hands up in shock, but was not injured. Later, as she sat with the Foreign Minister, protesters threw tomatoes at her. The tomatoes hit the Foreign Minister and splattered on Eva's dress. After these two events, Eva decided to conclude the two-month tour and returned to Argentina.\nMembers of the Peronist opposition speculated that the true purpose of the European tour was to deposit funds in a Swiss bank account, although the tour was not an unusual practice and \"there are many more convenient and less conspicuous ways of depositing money in Swiss accounts than meeting the Swiss Foreign Minister and being shown around a watch factory\". It was unlikely that a Swiss bank account existed.\nDuring her tour to Europe, Eva Per\u00f3n was featured in a cover story for \"Time\" magazine. The cover's caption \u2013 \"Eva Per\u00f3n: Between two worlds, an Argentine rainbow\" \u2013 was a reference to the name given to Eva's European tour, The Rainbow Tour. This was the only time in the periodical's history that a South American first lady appeared alone on its cover. (In 1951, Eva appeared again, but with Juan Per\u00f3n.) The 1947 cover story was also the first publication to mention that Eva had been born out of wedlock. In retaliation, the periodical was banned from Argentina for several months.\nAfter returning to Argentina from Europe, Evita never again appeared in public with the complicated hairdos of her movie-star days. The bright blonde color she dyed her hair became more subdued in tone, and she began to style her hair pulled back into a heavy braided chignon. Her extravagant clothing became more refined after the tour, no longer wearing the elaborate hats and form-fitting dresses of Argentine designers. Instead, Eva adopted simpler and more fashionable Parisian couture, and became particularly attached to the fashions of Christian Dior and the jewelry of Cartier. In an attempt to cultivate a more serious political persona, Eva began to appear in public wearing conservative though stylish \"tailleurs\" (a business-like combination of skirts and jackets), which also were made by Dior and other Paris couture houses.\nCharitable and feminist activities.\nEva Foundation.\nThe \"Sociedad de Beneficencia de Buenos Aires\" (Society of Beneficence), a charitable organization made up of 87 society ladies, was responsible for most works of charity in Buenos Aires prior to the election of Juan Per\u00f3n. At one point, the \"Sociedad\" had cared heavily for orphans and homeless women, but had slowed these activities by the time of the first term of Juan Per\u00f3n. In the 1800s, the \"Sociedad\" had been supported by private contributions, largely those of the husbands of the society ladies, but by the 1940s, the \"Sociedad\" was supported by the government.\nIt had been the tradition of the \"Sociedad\" to elect the First Lady of Argentina as president of the charity. However, the ladies of the \"Sociedad\" did not approve of Eva Per\u00f3n's impoverished background, lack of formal education, and former career as an actress. Afraid that Per\u00f3n would set a bad example for the orphans, the society ladies did not extend to Per\u00f3n the position of president of their organization. It has often been said that Eva Per\u00f3n had the government funding for the \"Sociedad\" cut off in retaliation. This version of events has been called into question, however, the government funding that had previously supported the \"Sociedad\" then went to support Eva Per\u00f3n's own foundation. The Eva Per\u00f3n Foundation began with 10,000 pesos provided by Per\u00f3n herself.\nIn \"The Woman with the Whip\", the first English-language biography of Eva Per\u00f3n, author Mary Main writes that no account records were kept for the foundation, because it was merely a means of funneling government money into private Swiss bank accounts controlled by the Per\u00f3ns. Fraser and Navarro counter these claims, writing that Ram\u00f3n Cereijo, the Minister of Finance, did keep records, and that the foundation \"began as the simplest response to the poverty [Per\u00f3n] encountered each day in her office\" and to \"the appalling backwardness of social services\u2014or charity, as it was still called\u2014in Argentina\". Crassweller writes that the foundation was supported by donations of cash and goods from the Peronist unions and private businesses, and that the General Confederation of Labour donated three man-days (later reduced to two) of salary for every worker per year. Tax on lottery and movie tickets also helped to support the foundation, as did a levy on casinos and revenue from horse races. Crassweller also notes that there were some cases of businesses being pressured to donate to the foundation, with negative repercussions resulting if requests for donations were not met.\nWithin a few years, the foundation's assets in cash and goods exceeded three billion pesos, or over $200 million at the exchange rate of the late 1940s. It employed 14,000 workers, of whom 6,000 were construction workers and 26 were priests. It purchased and distributed annually 400,000 pairs of shoes, 500,000 sewing machines, and 200,000 cooking pots. The foundation also gave scholarships, built homes, hospitals, and other charitable institutions. Every aspect of the foundation was under Eva Per\u00f3n's supervision. The foundation also built entire communities, such as Evita City, which still exists today. Due to the works and health services of the foundation, Argentine health care became significantly more equal.\nToward the end of her life, Evita was working as many as 20 to 22 hours per day in her foundation, often ignoring Juan Per\u00f3n's request that she cut back on her workload and take the weekends off. As she worked with the poor in her foundation, she developed a more outraged attitude toward the existence of poverty, saying, \"Sometimes I have wished my insults were slaps or lashes. I've wanted to hit people in the face to make them see, if only for a day, what I see each day I help the people.\" Crassweller writes that Per\u00f3n became fanatical about her work in the foundation, and felt as though she were on a crusade against the very concept and existence of poverty and social ills. \"It is not surprising\", writes Crassweller, \"that as her public crusades and her private adorations took on a narrowing intensity after 1946, they simultaneously veered toward the transcendental.\" Crassweller compares Per\u00f3n to Ignatius Loyola, saying she came to be akin to a one-woman Jesuit Order.\nFemale Peronist Party and women's suffrage.\nEva Per\u00f3n has often been credited with gaining the right to vote for Argentine women. While Eva did make radio addresses in support of women's suffrage and also published articles in her \"Democracia\" newspaper asking male Peronists to support women's right to vote, ultimately the ability to grant to women the right to vote was beyond Eva's powers. Eva's actions were limited to supporting a bill introduced by one of her supporters, Eduardo Colom, a bill that was eventually dropped.\nA new women's suffrage bill was introduced, which the Senate of Argentina sanctioned on 21 August 1946. It was necessary to wait more than a year before the House of Representatives sanctioned it on 9 September 1947. Law 13,010 established the equality of political rights between men and women and universal suffrage in Argentina. Finally, Law 13,010 was approved unanimously. In a public celebration and ceremony, Juan Per\u00f3n signed the law granting women the right to vote, and then he handed the bill to Eva, symbolically making it hers.\nEva Per\u00f3n then created the Female Peronist Party, the first large female political party in the nation. By 1951, the party had 500,000 members and 3,600 headquarters across the country. While Eva Per\u00f3n did not consider herself a feminist, her impact on the political life of women was decisive. Thousands of previously apolitical women entered politics because of Eva Per\u00f3n. They were the first women active in Argentine politics. The combination of female suffrage and the organization of the Female Peronist Party granted Juan Per\u00f3n a large majority (63 percent) of the vote in the 1951 presidential elections.\n1952 presidential election.\nVice-presidential nomination.\nIn 1951, Eva Per\u00f3n was chosen by Juan Per\u00f3n as a candidate for vice-president. This move was not welcomed by some of Juan Per\u00f3n's more conservative allies, to whom the possibility of Eva Per\u00f3n becoming president in the event of Juan Per\u00f3n's death was not acceptable.\nEva was immensely popular, particularly among working-class women. The intensity of the support she drew from the people is said to have surprised Juan Per\u00f3n. The wide support Eva Per\u00f3n's proposed candidacy generated indicated to him that Eva Per\u00f3n had become as important a figure of the Peronist party as Juan Per\u00f3n himself was.\nOn 22 August 1951, the aligned labor unions held a massive rally that they called the \"Cabildo Abierto\", a reference to the first local government of the May Revolution of 1810. The Per\u00f3ns addressed the crowd from the balcony of a large scaffolding set up on the Avenida 9 de Julio, several blocks away from the Casa Rosada, the official government house of Argentina. Overhead were two large portraits of Eva and Juan Per\u00f3n. It has been claimed that \"Cabildo Abierto\" was the largest public display of support in history for a female political figure.\nShe declined the invitation to run for vice-president. She said that her only ambition was that in the large chapter of history to be written about her husband, the footnotes would mention a woman who brought the \"hopes and dreams of the people to the president\", a woman who eventually turned those hopes and dreams into \"glorious reality\". In Peronist rhetoric, this event has come to be referred to as \"The Renunciation\", portraying Evita as having been a selfless woman in line with the Hispanic myth of \"marianismo\".\nRe-election and Spiritual Leader of the Nation.\nOn 7 May 1952, Evita's 33rd birthday, she was given the title of \"Spiritual Leader of the Nation\" by her husband.\nOn 4 June 1952, Evita rode with Juan Per\u00f3n in a parade through Buenos Aires in celebration of his re-election as President of Argentina. Evita was by this point so ill that she was unable to stand without support. Underneath her oversized fur coat was a frame made of plaster and wire that allowed her to stand. She took a triple dose of pain medication before the parade and took another two doses when she returned home.\nDeath and aftermath.\nDeclining health.\nOn 9 January 1950, Per\u00f3n fainted in public and underwent surgery three days later. Although it was reported that she had undergone an appendectomy, she was actually found to have advanced cervical cancer. Fainting episodes continued through 1951 (including the evening after the \"Cabildo abierto\"), with extreme weakness and severe vaginal bleeding. By 1951, it had become evident that her health was rapidly deteriorating. Although she withheld her diagnosis from Juan Per\u00f3n, he knew she was not well, and a bid for the vice-presidency was not practical. A few months after \"the Renunciation\", Per\u00f3n secretly underwent a radical hysterectomy, performed by the American surgeon George T. Pack\nat the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, in an attempt to remove the cervical tumor. In 2011, a Yale neurosurgeon, Daniel E. Nijensohn, studied Evita's skull X-rays and photographic evidence and said that Per\u00f3n may have been given a prefrontal lobotomy in the last months of her life \"to relieve the pain, agitation and anxiety she suffered in the final months of her illness\".\nP\u00e9ron's cervical cancer had metastasized and returned rapidly, despite the hysterectomy. She was the first Argentine to undergo chemotherapy\u00a0\u2013 a novel treatment at that time. She became emaciated, weighing only by June 1952.\nDeath.\nEva died at 8:25\u00a0p.m. on Saturday, 26 July 1952 at the Unzue Palace. Radio broadcasts throughout the country were interrupted with the announcement that \"the Press Secretary's Office of the Presidency of the Nation fulfills its very sad duty to inform the people of the Republic that at 20:25 hours, Mrs. Eva Per\u00f3n, Spiritual Leader of the Nation, died.\"\nMourning.\nImmediately after Per\u00f3n's death, the government suspended all official activities for several days and ordered that all flags be flown at half-staff for 10 days. Business across the country was put to a halt, as movies were stopped and patrons were asked to leave restaurants. Popular grief was overwhelming. The crowd outside of the presidential residence, where Per\u00f3n died, grew dense, congesting the streets for ten blocks in each direction.\nThe morning after her death, while Per\u00f3n's body was being moved to the Ministry of Labor Building, eight people were crushed to death in the throngs. In the following 24 hours, over 2,000 people were treated in city hospitals for injuries sustained in the rush to be near Per\u00f3n as her body was being transported, and thousands more were treated on the spot. For the following two weeks, lines of people stretched for several city blocks, with mourners waiting hours to see Per\u00f3n's body at the Ministry of Labor.\nThe streets of Buenos Aires were filled with flowers. Within a day of Per\u00f3n's death, all flower shops in Buenos Aires had run out of stock. Flowers were flown in from all over the country, and as far away as Chile. Despite the fact that Per\u00f3n never held a political office, she was eventually given a state funeral, usually reserved for a head of state, along with a full Catholic Requiem Mass. A memorial was held in Helsinki for the Argentine team to attend during the 1952 Summer Olympics due to Per\u00f3n's death happening during those games.\nOn Saturday, 9 August, the body was transferred to the Congress Building for an additional day of public viewing, and a memorial service was attended by the entire Argentine legislative body. The next day, after a final Mass, the coffin was laid on a gun carriage pulled by CGT officials. It was followed by Juan Per\u00f3n, his cabinet, Eva Per\u00f3n's family and friends, and the delegates and representatives of the Female Peronist Party\u2014then workers, nurses and students of the Eva Peron Foundation. Flowers were thrown from balconies and windows.\nThere were different interpretations of the popular mourning of Per\u00f3n's death. Some reporters viewed the mourning as authentic, while others saw a public succumbing to another of the \"passion plays\" of the Peronist regime. \"Time\" reported that the Peronist government enforced the observance of a daily period of five minutes of mourning following a daily radio announcement.\nUpon her death, the Argentine public was told that Per\u00f3n was only 30. The discrepancy was meant to dovetail with Per\u00f3n's earlier tampering with her birth certificate. After becoming the first lady in 1946, Evita had her birth records altered to read that she had been born to married parents, and placed her birth date three years later, making herself younger.\nDuring Per\u00f3n's time, children born to unmarried parents did not have the same legal rights as those born to married parents. Biographer Julie M. Taylor, professor of anthropology at Rice University, has said that Per\u00f3n was aware of the pain of being born \"illegitimate\". Taylor speculates that Per\u00f3n's awareness of this may have influenced her decision to have the law changed so that \"illegitimate\" children would henceforth be referred to as \"natural\" children.\nMemorial.\nShortly after Per\u00f3n's death, Pedro Ara, who was well known for his embalming skill, was approached to embalm the body. It is doubtful that Per\u00f3n ever expressed a wish to be embalmed, which suggests that it was most likely Juan Per\u00f3n's decision. Ara replaced the subject's blood with glycerine in order to preserve the organs and lend an appearance of \"artistically rendered sleep\".\nDisappearance and return of body.\nShortly after Per\u00f3n's death, plans were made to construct a memorial in her honour. The monument, which was to be a statue of a man representing the \"descamisados\", was projected to be larger than the Statue of Liberty. Per\u00f3n's body was to be stored in the base of the monument and, in the tradition of Lenin's corpse, to be displayed for the public. While the monument was being constructed, Per\u00f3n's embalmed body was displayed in her former office at the CGT building for almost two years. Before the monument to Per\u00f3n was completed, Juan Per\u00f3n was overthrown in a military coup, the Revoluci\u00f3n Libertadora, in 1955. Juan Per\u00f3n hastily fled the country and was unable to make arrangements to secure Eva Per\u00f3n's body.\nFollowing his flight, a military dictatorship took power. The new authorities removed Per\u00f3n's body from display, and its whereabouts were unknown for 16 years. From 1955 until 1971, the military dictatorship of Argentina maintained a ban on Peronism. In 1971, the military found that Per\u00f3n's body was buried in a crypt in Milan, Italy, under the name \"Mar\u00eda Maggi de Magistris\". It appeared that her body had been damaged during its transport and storage, including compressions to her face and disfigurement of one of her feet due to the body having been left in an upright position.\nIn 1995, Tom\u00e1s Eloy Mart\u00ednez published \"Santa Evita\", a fictionalised work propounding many new stories about the escapades of the corpse. Allegations that her body was the object of sexual abuse are derived from his description of an 'emotional necrophilia' by embalmers Colonel Koenig and his assistant Arancibia. Many primary and secondary references to his novel have inaccurately stated that her body was sexually abused, resulting in the widespread belief in this myth. Also included are allegations that many wax copies had been made, that the corpse had been damaged with a hammer, and that one of the wax copies was the object of an officer's sexual attentions.\nFinal resting place.\nIn 1971, Per\u00f3n's body was exhumed and flown to Spain, where Juan Per\u00f3n maintained the corpse in his home. Juan Per\u00f3n and his third wife, Isabel, decided to keep the corpse in their dining room on a platform near the table. In 1973, Juan Per\u00f3n came out of exile and returned to Argentina, where he became president for the third time. Per\u00f3n died in office in 1974. That year, the group Montoneros stole the corpse of Pedro Eugenio Aramburu, whom they had also previously kidnapped and assassinated. Montoneros then used the body of Aramburu to bargain for the repatriation of Eva Per\u00f3n's body. Juan Per\u00f3n's third wife, Isabel Per\u00f3n, who had been elected vice-president, succeeded him, and had Eva Per\u00f3n's body returned to Argentina to be displayed beside Juan Per\u00f3n's body. Once Eva Per\u00f3n's body had arrived in Argentina, Montoneros left Aramburu's corpse on a street in Buenos Aires. Eva Per\u00f3n's body was later buried in the Duarte family tomb in La Recoleta Cemetery, Buenos Aires.\nLater Argentine governments took elaborate measures to make Eva Per\u00f3n's tomb secure. The tomb's marble floor has a trap door that leads to a compartment containing two coffins. Under that compartment is a second trap door and a second compartment, where Eva Per\u00f3n's coffin rests.\nLegacy and criticism.\nArgentina and Latin America.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In all of Latin America, only one other woman has aroused an emotion, devotion, and faith comparable to those awakened by the Virgin of Guadalupe. In many homes, the image of Evita is on the wall next to the Virgin.\u2014\u200a\nIn his essay titled \"Latin America\" published in \"The Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity\", John McManners claims that the appeal and success of Eva Per\u00f3n are related to Latin American mythology and concepts of divinity. McManners claims that Eva Per\u00f3n consciously incorporated aspects of the theology of the Virgin and of Mary Magdalene into her public persona. Historian Hubert Herring has described Eva Per\u00f3n as \"perhaps the shrewdest woman yet to appear in public life in Latin America\".\nIn a 1996 interview, Tom\u00e1s Eloy Mart\u00ednez referred to Eva Per\u00f3n as \"the Cinderella of the tango and the Sleeping Beauty of Latin America\". Mart\u00ednez suggested she has remained an important cultural icon for the same reasons as fellow Argentine Che Guevara:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Latin American myths are more resistant than they seem to be. Not even the mass exodus of the Cuban raft people or the rapid decomposition and isolation of Fidel Castro's regime have eroded the triumphal myth of Che Guevara, which remains alive in the dreams of thousands of young people in Latin America, Africa and Europe. Che as well as Evita symbolize certain naive, but effective, beliefs: the hope for a better world; a life sacrificed on the altar of the disinherited, the humiliated, the poor of the earth. They are myths which somehow reproduce the image of Christ.\nAlthough not a government holiday, the anniversary of Eva Per\u00f3n's death is marked by many Argentines each year. Additionally, Eva Per\u00f3n has been featured on Argentine coins, and a form of Argentine currency called \"Evitas\" was named in her honour. Ciudad Evita (Evita City), which was established by the Eva Per\u00f3n Foundation in 1947, is located just outside Buenos Aires. \nCristina Fern\u00e1ndez de Kirchner, the first elected female president in Argentine history, is a Peronist who has occasionally been referred to as \"The New Evita\". Kirchner says she does not want to compare herself to Eva Per\u00f3n, claiming she was a unique phenomenon in Argentine history. Kirchner also says that women of her generation, who came of age in the 1970s during the military dictatorships in Argentina, owe a debt to Eva Per\u00f3n for offering an example of passion and combativeness. On 26 July 2002, the 50th anniversary of Eva Per\u00f3n's death, a museum opened in her honour, the Museo Evita. The museum, created by her great-niece Cristina Alvarez Rodriguez, houses many of Eva Per\u00f3n's clothes, portraits, and artistic renderings of her life, and has become a popular tourist attraction. The museum was opened in a building that was once used by the Eva Per\u00f3n Foundation.\nIn the book \"Eva Per\u00f3n: The Myths of a Woman\", cultural anthropologist Julie M. Taylor claims that Eva Per\u00f3n has remained important in Argentina due to the combination of three unique factors:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTaylor argues that the fourth factor in Eva Per\u00f3n's continued importance in Argentina relates to her status as a dead woman and the power that death holds over the public imagination. Taylor suggests that Per\u00f3n's embalmed corpse is analogous to the incorruptibility of various Catholic saints, such as Bernadette Soubirous, and has powerful symbolism within the largely Catholic cultures of Latin America:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To some extent her continuing importance and popularity may be attributed not only to her power as a woman but also to the power of the dead. However a society's vision of the afterlife may be structured, death by its nature remains a mystery, and, until society formally allays the commotion it causes, a source of disturbance and disorder. Women and the dead\u2014death and womanhood\u2014stand in similar relation to structured social forms: outside public institutions, unlimited by official rules, and beyond formal categories. As a female corpse reiterating the symbolic themes of both woman and martyr, Eva Per\u00f3n perhaps lays double claim to spiritual leadership.\nJohn Balfour was the British ambassador in Argentina during the Per\u00f3n regime, and describes Eva Per\u00f3n's popularity:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn 2011, two giant murals of Eva Per\u00f3n were unveiled on the building facades of the current Ministry of Social Development, located on 9 de Julio Avenue. The works were painted by Argentine artist Alejandro Marmo. On 26 July 2012, to commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of Eva Per\u00f3n's death, notes were issued in a value of 100 pesos. The controversial effigy of Julio Argentino Roca was replaced by that of Eva Per\u00f3n, making her the first woman to be featured on the currency of Argentina. The image in the notes is based on a 1952 design, whose sketch was found in the Mint, made by the engraver Sergio Pilosio with artist Roger Pfund. The printing totals 20 million notes; it is not clear whether the government will replace the notes that feature Roca and the Conquest of the Desert.\nAllegations of fascism and antisemitism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Fewer antisemitic incidences took place in Argentina during Per\u00f3n's rule than during any other period in the 20th century.\u00a0... Upon reading the numerous speeches that [Juan] Per\u00f3n pronounced against antisemitism during his first two presidencies, it immediately becomes clear that no other president before Per\u00f3n had rejected discrimination against Jews so clearly and unambiguously. The same goes for Eva Duarte de Per\u00f3n. In many of her speeches, Evita argued that it was the country's oligarchy that upheld antisemitic attitudes, but that Peronism did not.\nFrom the start, Juan Per\u00f3n's opponents accused him of being a fascist. Spruille Braden, a diplomat from the United States who was greatly supported by Juan Per\u00f3n's opponents, campaigned against Juan Per\u00f3n's first candidacy on the platform that Juan Per\u00f3n was a fascist and a Nazi. The perception that the Per\u00f3ns were fascists may have been enhanced during Evita's 1947 European tour, during which, she was a guest of honor of Francisco Franco. By 1947, Franco had become politically isolated because he was one of the few remaining right-wing authoritarian leaders who was able to retain his power. Franco, therefore, was in desperate need of a political ally. With nearly a third of Argentina's population of Spanish descent, it seemed natural for Argentina to have diplomatic relations with Spain. Commenting on the international perception of Evita during her 1947 European tour, Fraser and Navarro write, \"It was inevitable that Evita be viewed in a fascist context. Therefore, both Evita and Per\u00f3n were seen to represent an ideology which had run its course in Europe, only to re-emerge in an exotic, theatrical, even farcical form in a faraway country.\"\nLaurence Levine, the former president of the U.S.-Argentine Chamber of Commerce, writes that in contrast to Nazi ideology, the Per\u00f3ns were not anti-Semitic. In the book \"Inside Argentina from Per\u00f3n to Menem: 1950\u20132000 from an American Point of View\", Levine writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The American government demonstrated no knowledge of Per\u00f3n's deep admiration for Italy (and his distaste for Germany, whose culture he found too rigid). Nor did they appreciate that although anti-Semitism existed in Argentina, Per\u00f3n's own views and his political associations were not anti-Semitic. They paid no attention to the fact that Per\u00f3n sought out the Jewish community in Argentina to assist in developing his policies and that one of his most important allies in organizing the industrial sector was Jos\u00e9 Ber Gelbard, a Jewish immigrant from Poland.\nBiographer Robert D. Crassweller writes, \"Peronism was not fascism\", and \"Peronism was not Nazism.\" Crassweller also refers to the comments of U.S. Ambassador George S. Messersmith. While visiting Argentina in 1947, Messersmith made the following statement: \"There is not as much social discrimination against Jews here as there is right in New York or in most places at home.\"\n\"Time\" magazine published an article by Tom\u00e1s Eloy Mart\u00ednez\u2014Argentine writer, journalist, and former director of the Latin American program at Rutgers University\u2014titled \"The Woman Behind the Fantasy: Prostitute, Fascist, Profligate\u2014Eva Peron Was Much Maligned, Mostly Unfairly\". In this article, Mart\u00ednez writes that the accusations that Eva Per\u00f3n was a fascist, a Nazi, and a thief had been made against her for decades. He wrote that the allegations were untrue:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She was not a fascist\u2014ignorant, perhaps, of what that ideology meant. And she was not greedy. Though she liked jewelry, furs and Dior dresses, she could own as many as she desired without the need to rob others.\u00a0... In 1964 Jorge Luis Borges stated that \"the mother of that woman [Evita]\" was \"the madam of a whorehouse in Jun\u00edn.\" He repeated the calumny so often that some still believe it or, more commonly, think Evita herself, whose lack of sex appeal is mentioned by all who knew her, apprenticed in that imaginary brothel. Around 1955 the pamphleteer Silvano Santander employed the same strategy to concoct letters in which Evita figures as an accomplice of the Nazis. It is true that (Juan) Per\u00f3n facilitated the entrance of Nazi criminals to Argentina in 1947 and 1948, thereby hoping to acquire advanced technology developed by the Germans during the war. But Evita played no part.\nThe governments that preceded Juan Per\u00f3n's government were anti-Semitic but his government was not. Juan Per\u00f3n \"eagerly and enthusiastically\" attempted to recruit the Jewish community into his government and set up a branch of the Peronist party for Jewish members, known as the Organizaci\u00f3n Israelita Argentina (OIA). Per\u00f3n's government was the first to court the Argentine Jewish community and the first to appoint Jewish citizens to public office. The Peronist regime has been accused of being fascist, but it has been argued that what passed for fascism under Per\u00f3n never took hold in Latin America; additionally, because the Peronist regime allowed rival political parties to exist, it cannot be described as totalitarian.\nInternational popular culture.\nBy the late 20th century, Eva Per\u00f3n had become the subject of numerous articles, books, stage plays, and musicals, ranging from the 1952 biography \"The Woman with the Whip\" to a 1981 TV movie titled \"Evita Per\u00f3n\" starring Faye Dunaway in the title role. The most successful rendering of Eva Per\u00f3n's life has been the musical production \"Evita\". The musical began as a concept album which was co-produced by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice in 1976, with Julie Covington in the title role. Elaine Paige was later cast in the title role when the concept album was adapted into a musical stage production in London's West End and it won the 1978 Olivier Award for Best Performance in a Musical. In 1980, Patti LuPone won the Tony Award for Best Leading Actress in a Musical for her performance as the title character in the Broadway production. The Broadway production also won the Tony Award for Best Musical. Nicholas Fraser claims that to date, \"the musical stage production has been performed on every continent except Antarctica and it has generated over $2 billion in revenue.\". The musical had also been brought to the West End in 2025 at the London Palladium for a limited run, directed by Jamie Lloyd and starring Rachel Zegler.\nAs early as 1978, the musical was considered as the basis for a movie. After a nearly 20-year production delay, Madonna was cast in the title role for the 1996 film version and she won the Golden Globe Award for \"Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy\". In response to the American film, and in an alleged attempt to offer a more politically accurate depiction of Eva Per\u00f3n's life, an Argentine film company released \"\". The production starred actress Esther Goris in the title role. This movie was the 1996 Argentine submission for the Oscar in the category of \"Best Foreign Language Film,\" but was not accepted as a nominee.\nNicholas Fraser writes that Eva Per\u00f3n is the perfect popular culture icon for our times, because her career foreshadowed what, by the late 20th century, had become common. During Per\u00f3n's time, it was considered scandalous for a former entertainer to take part in public political life. Her detractors in Argentina had frequently accused her of turning public political life into show business. But by the late 20th century, Fraser claims, the public had become engrossed in the cult of celebrity and public political life had become insignificant. In this regard, Eva Per\u00f3n was perhaps ahead of her time. Fraser also writes that Per\u00f3n's story is appealing to our celebrity-obsessed age because her story confirms one of Hollywood's oldest clich\u00e9s, the rags to riches story. Reflecting on Eva Per\u00f3n's popularity more than half a century after her death, Alma Guillermoprieto writes that, \"Evita's life has evidently just begun.\"\nEva Per\u00f3n appears on the 100 peso note first issued in 2012 commemorating the anniversary of her death. She is also featured on a new 100 peso note, issued in 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51585", "revid": "13791031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51585", "title": "New Delhi", "text": "Capital city of India\nNew Delhi is the capital of India and a part of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT). New Delhi is the seat of all three branches of the Government of India, hosting the Rashtrapati Bhavan (Presidential Palace), Sansad Bhavan (Parliament House), and the Supreme Court. New Delhi is a municipality within the NCT, administered by the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC), which covers mostly Lutyens' Delhi and a few adjacent areas. The municipal area is part of a larger administrative district, the New Delhi district.\nAlthough colloquially \"Delhi\" and \"New Delhi\" are used interchangeably to refer to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, both are distinct entities, with the municipality and the New Delhi district forming a relatively small part within the megacity of Delhi. The National Capital Region is an even larger entity, comprising the entire NCT along with adjoining districts in the two neighbouring states forming a continuously built-up area with it, including Ghaziabad, Noida, Greater Noida, Meerut, YEIDA City, Gurgaon, and Faridabad.\nThe foundation stone of New Delhi, south of central Delhi, was laid by George V during the Delhi Durbar of 1911. It was designed by British architects Edwin Lutyens and Herbert Baker. The new capital was inaugurated on 13 February 1931, by Viceroy and Governor-General Irwin.\nHistory.\nEstablishment.\nUntil December 1911, Calcutta was the capital of India during British rule. However, it had become the centre of the nationalist movements since the late nineteenth century, which led to the partition of Bengal by Viceroy Curzon. This created a massive upsurge in political and religious activity including political assassinations of British officials in Calcutta. The anti-colonial sentiments among the public led to a complete boycott of British goods, which forced the colonial government to reunite Bengal and immediately shift the capital to New Delhi.\nOld Delhi had served as the political centre of several empires of medieval India and the Delhi Sultanate, most notably of the Mughal Empire from 1649 to 1857. During the early 1900s, a proposal was made to the British administration to shift the capital of the British Indian Empire, as India was officially named, from Calcutta on the east coast, to Delhi. The Government of British India felt that it would be logistically easier to administer India from Delhi, which is in the centre of northern India. The land for building the new city of Delhi was acquired under the Land Acquisition Act 1894.\nDuring the Delhi Durbar on 12 December 1911, George V while laying the foundation stone for the viceroy's residence in the Coronation Park, Kingsway Camp, declared that the capital of the Raj would be shifted from Calcutta to Delhi. Three days later, George V and his consort, Mary, laid the foundation stone of New Delhi at Kingsway Camp. Large parts of New Delhi were planned by Edwin Lutyens, who first visited Delhi in 1912, and Herbert Baker, both leading 20th-century British architects. The contract was given to Sobha Singh. The original plan called for its construction in Tughlaqabad, inside the Tughlaqabad Fort, but this was given up because of the Delhi-Calcutta trunk line that passed through the fort. Construction really began after World War I and was completed by 1931. The gardening and planning of plantations was led by A.E.P. Griessen, and later William Mustoe. The city that was later dubbed \"Lutyens' Delhi\" was inaugurated in ceremonies beginning on 10 February 1931 by Viceroy Irwin. Lutyens designed the central administrative area of the city as a testament to Britain's imperial aspirations.\nSoon Lutyens started considering other places. Indeed, the Delhi Town Planning Committee, set up to plan the new imperial capital, with George Swinton as chairman, and John A. Brodie and Lutyens as members, submitted reports for both north and south sites. However, it was rejected by the Viceroy when the cost of acquiring the necessary properties was found to be too high. The central axis of New Delhi, which today faces east at India Gate, was previously meant to be a north\u2013south axis linking the Viceroy's House at one end with Paharganj at the other. Eventually, owing to space constraints and the presence of a large number of heritage sites on the north side, the committee settled on the south site. A site atop the Raisina Hill, formerly Raisina Village\n, was chosen for the Rashtrapati Bhavan, then known as the Viceroy's House. The reason for this choice was that the hill lay directly opposite the Dinapanah citadel, which was also considered the site of Indraprastha, the ancient region of Delhi. Subsequently, the foundation stone was shifted from the site of Delhi Durbar of 1911\u20131912, where the Coronation Pillar stood, and embedded in the walls of the forecourt of the Secretariat. The Rajpath, also known as King's Way, stretched from the India Gate to the Rashtrapati Bhavan. The Secretariat building, the two blocks of which flank the Rashtrapati Bhavan and houses ministries of the government of India, and the Parliament House, both designed by Baker, are located at the Sansad Marg and run parallel to the Rajpath.\nIn the south, land up to Safdarjung's Tomb was acquired to create what is today known as Lutyens' Bungalow Zone. Before construction could begin on the rocky ridge of Raisina Hill, a circular railway line around the Council House (now Parliament House), called the \"Imperial Delhi Railway\", was built to transport construction material and workers for the next twenty years. The last stumbling block was the Agra-Delhi railway line that cut right through the site earmarked for the hexagonal All-India War Memorial (India Gate) and Kingsway (Rajpath), which was a problem because the Old Delhi Railway Station served the entire city at that time. The line was shifted to run along the Yamuna River, and it began operating in 1924. The New Delhi Railway Station opened in 1926, with a single platform at Ajmeri Gate near Paharganj, and was completed in time for the city's inauguration in 1931. As construction of the Viceroy's House (the present Rashtrapati Bhavan), Central Secretariat, Parliament House, and All-India War Memorial (India Gate) was winding down, the building of a shopping district and a new plaza, Connaught Place, began in 1929, and was completed by 1933. Named after Prince Arthur, 1st Duke of Connaught (1850\u20131942), it was designed by Robert Tor Russell, chief architect to the Public Works Department (PWD).\nAfter the capital of India moved to Delhi, a temporary secretariat building was constructed in a few months in 1912 in North Delhi. Most of the government offices of the new capital moved here from the 'Old secretariat' in Old Delhi (the building now houses the Delhi Legislative Assembly), a decade before the new capital was inaugurated in 1931. Many employees were brought into the new capital from distant parts of India, including the Bengal Presidency and Madras Presidency. Subsequently, housing for them has developed around Gole Market area in the 1920s. Built in the 1940s, to house government employees, with bungalows for senior officials in the nearby Lodi Estate area, Lodi Colony near historic Lodi Gardens, was the last residential areas built by the British Raj.\nPost-independence.\nAfter India gained independence in 1947, limited autonomy was conferred to New Delhi and was administered by a Chief Commissioner appointed by the Government of India. In 1966, Delhi was converted into a union territory and eventually the Chief Commissioner was replaced by a Lieutenant Governor. The Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991 declared the Union Territory of Delhi to be formally known as the National Capital Territory of Delhi. A system was introduced under which the elected government was given wide powers, excluding law and order which remained with the Central Government. The actual enforcement of the legislation came in 1993.\nThe first major extension of New Delhi outside of Lutyens' Delhi came in the 1950s when the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) developed a large area of land southwest of Lutyens' Delhi to create the diplomatic enclave of Chanakyapuri, where land was allotted for embassies, chanceries, high commissions and residences of ambassadors, around a wide central vista, \"Shanti Path\".\nGeography.\nWith a total area of , the municipality of New Delhi forms a small part of the Delhi metropolitan area. Since the city is located on the Indo-Gangetic Plain, there is little difference in elevation across the city. New Delhi and surrounding areas were once a part of the Aravali Range; all that is left of those mountains is the Delhi Ridge, which is also called the Lungs of Delhi. While New Delhi lies on the floodplains of the Yamuna River, it is essentially a landlocked city. East of the river is the urban area of Shahdara.\nSeismology.\nNew Delhi falls under the seismic zone-IV, making it vulnerable to earthquakes. It lies on several fault lines and thus experiences frequent earthquakes, most of them of mild intensity. There was a spike in the number of earthquakes between 2011 and 2015, most notable being a 5.4 magnitude earthquake in 2015 with its epicentre in Nepal, a 4.7-magnitude earthquake on 25 November 2007, a 4.2-magnitude earthquake on 7 September 2011, a 5.2-magnitude earthquake on 5 March 2012, and a swarm of twelve earthquakes, including four of magnitudes 2.5, 2.8, 3.1, and 3.3, on 12 November 2013.\nClimate.\nDelhi features a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen \"Cwa\"), with hot summers accompanied by frequent thunderstorms locally known as andhi, and cool winters that are characterized by dense fog. The city's rainfall pattern is heavily influenced by the summer monsoon entering in late June and continuing till mid-September. Summers are long, extending from mid April to late September, with the monsoon season occurring in the middle of the summer. Winter starts in November and peaks in January. Winters are very mild. The annual mean temperature is around ; monthly daily mean temperatures range from approximately . New Delhi's highest temperature ever recorded is on 28 May 2024 at Met Delhi Mungeshpur while the lowest temperature ever recorded is on 11 January 1967 at Indira Gandhi International Airport (formerly known as Palam Airport). The average annual rainfall is and monsoon rainfall from June to September is about , most of which is during the monsoons in July and August.\nAir quality.\nIn Mercer's 2015 annual quality-of-living survey, New Delhi ranks at number 154 out of 230 cities due to bad air quality and pollution. The World Health Organization ranked New Delhi as the world's worst polluted city in 2014 among about 1,600 cities the organisation tracked around the world. In 2016, United States Environmental Protection Agency listed New Delhi as the most polluted city on Earth and IQAir listed New Delhi as the world's most polluted capital city for the second straight year in year 2019.\nIn an attempt to lessen air pollution in New Delhi, which gets worse during the winter, a temporary alternate-day travel scheme for cars using the odd- and even-numbered licence plates system was announced by Delhi government in December 2015. In addition, trucks were to be allowed to enter India's capital only after 11\u00a0pm, two hours later than the existing restriction. The driving restriction scheme was planned to be implemented as a trial from 1 January 2016 for an initial period of 15 days. The restriction was in force between 8\u00a0am and 8\u00a0pm, and traffic was not restricted on Sundays. Public transportation service was increased during the restriction period.\nOn 16 December 2015, the Supreme Court of India mandated several restrictions on Delhi's transportation system to curb pollution. Among the measures, the court ordered to stop registrations of diesel cars and sport utility vehicles with an engine capacity of 2,000 cc and over until 31 March 2016. The court also ordered all taxis in the Delhi region to switch to compressed natural gas by 1 March 2016. Transportation vehicles that are more than 10 years old were banned from entering the capital.\nAnalysing real-time vehicle speed data from Uber Delhi revealed that during the odd-even program, average speeds went up by a statistically significant 5.4 per cent (2.8 standard deviations from normal). This means vehicles have less idling time in traffic and vehicle engines would run closer to minimum fuel consumption. In bordering areas, PM 2.5 levels were recorded more than 400 (ug/m3) while in inner areas in Delhi, they were recorded between 150 and 210 on an average. However, the sub-city of Dwarka, located in the southwest district, has a substantially low level of air pollution. At NSUT, located in Sector 3, Dwarka, pollution levels were as low as 93 PPM.\nOn 7 November 2017, the Indian Medical Association declared a public health emergency due to high pollution levels. The highest being in the Punjabi Bagh district with an air quality index of 999 and in the RK Puram district with an index of 852. The lowest index recorded was in the Anand Vihar district with an index of 319. Levels of PM2.5 were recorded at 710\u00a0\u03bcg/m3, more than 11 times the World Health Organization's safe limit.\nIn a 2018 study, New Delhi was found to be the most polluted capital out of 61 capital cities around the world. In December 2019, IIT Bombay, in partnership with the McKelvey School of Engineering of Washington University in St. Louis, launched the Aerosol and Air Quality Research Facility to study air pollution in New Delhi, among other Indian cities. During the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in India, the water quality of the Yamuna and Ganges river basins have improved as industries are closed due to the lockdown. The air quality has also significantly improved during the lockdown.\nOn 5 November 2020, New Delhi recorded its most toxic day in a year, as the concentration of poisonous PM2.5 particles was recorded at 14 times the WHO's safe limit.\nTypically, November is the month with the worst air quality.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2011, the New Delhi Municipal Council area has a population of 249,998. Hindi is the most widely spoken language in New Delhi and the lingua franca of the city. English is primarily used as the formal language by business and government institutes. New Delhi has a literacy rate of 89.38% according to 2011 census, which is the highest in Delhi.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReligion.\nAccording to 2011 census, Hinduism is the religion of 89.8% of New Delhi's population. There are also communities of Muslims (4.5%), Christians (2.9%), Sikhs (2.0%), Jains (0.4%). Other religious groups include Parsis, Buddhists, and Jews.\nGovernment.\nThe national capital of India, New Delhi is jointly administered by both the Central Government of India and the local Government of Delhi, it is also the capital of the National Capital Territory (NCT) of Delhi.\nNew Delhi is administered through a municipal government, known as the New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC). The other urban areas of the metropolis of Delhi are administered by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Delhi Cantonment Board. As of 2015[ [update]], the government structure of the New Delhi Municipal Council includes a chairperson, three members of New Delhi's Legislative Assembly, two members nominated by the Chief Minister of the NCT of Delhi and five members nominated by the central government.\nThe districts of the NCT were redrawn in 2012 and include a district called New Delhi, albeit with different borders than the municipality. The New Delhi district includes not only the area of the municipality of the same name but also encompasses the Delhi Cantonment and parts of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi area.\nEconomy.\nNew Delhi is the largest commercial city in northern India. It has an estimated net State Domestic Product (FY 2010) of () in nominal terms and ~ () in PPP terms. As of 2013[ [update]], the per capita income of Delhi was Rs. 230000, second highest in India after Goa. GSDP in Delhi at the prices for 2012\u201313 is estimated at Rs 3.88\u00a0trillion (short scale) against Rs 3.11\u00a0trillion (short scale) in 2011\u201312.\nConnaught Place, one of North India's largest commercial and financial centres, is located in the northern part of New Delhi. Adjoining areas such as Barakhamba Road, ITO are also major commercial centres. The government and quasi-government sector was the primary employer in New Delhi. The city's service sector has expanded due in part to the large skilled English-speaking workforce that has attracted many multinational companies. Key service industries include information technology, telecommunications, hotels, banking, media, and tourism.\nThe 2011 World Wealth Report ranks economic activity in New Delhi at 39, but overall the capital is ranked at 37, above cities like Jakarta and Johannesburg. New Delhi, with Beijing, shares the top position as the most targeted emerging markets retail destination among Asia-Pacific markets.\nThe government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi does not release any economic figures specifically for New Delhi but publishes an official economic report on the whole of Delhi annually. According to the \"Economic Survey of Delhi\", the metropolis has a net State Domestic Product (SDP) of Rs. 830.85\u00a0billion (for the year 2004\u201305) and a per capita income of Rs. 53,976 ($1,200). In the year 2008\u201309 New Delhi had a per capita Income of Rs. ($2,595). It grew by 16.2% to reach Rs. ($3,018) in 2009\u201310 fiscal. New Delhi's per capita GDP (at PPP) was at $6,860 during 2009\u201310 fiscal, making it one of the richest cities in India. The tertiary sector contributes 78.4% of Delhi's gross SDP followed by secondary and primary sectors with 20.2% and 1.4% contribution respectively.\nThe gross state domestic product (GSDP) of Delhi at prices for the year 2011\u201312 has been estimated at Rs 3.13\u00a0trillion (short scale), which is an increase of 18.7 per cent over the previous fiscal.\nCulture.\nNew Delhi is a cosmopolitan city due to the multi-ethnic and multi-cultural presence of the vast Indian bureaucracy and political system. The city's capital status has amplified the importance of national events and holidays. National events such as Republic Day, Independence Day and \"Gandhi Jayanti\" (Gandhi's birthday) are celebrated with great enthusiasm in New Delhi and the rest of India. On India's Independence Day (15 August), the prime minister of India addresses the nation from the Red Fort. Most Delhiites celebrate the day by flying kites, which are considered a symbol of freedom. The Republic Day Parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing India's cultural diversity and military might.\nReligious festivals include Diwali (the festival of light), Maha Shivaratri, Teej, Durga Puja, Chhath Puja, Mahavir Jayanti, Guru Nanak Jayanti, Holi, Lohri, Eid ul-Fitr, Eid ul-Adha, Easter, Raksha Bandhan, and Christmas. The Qutub Festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over India are showcased at night, with the Qutub Minar as the chosen backdrop of the event. Other events such as Kite Flying Festival, International Mango Festival and \"Vasant Panchami\" (the Spring Festival) are held every year in Delhi.\nIn 2007, the Japanese Buddhist organisation Nipponzan Myohoji decided to build a Peace Pagoda in the city containing Buddha relics. It was inaugurated by the Dalai Lama.\nHistoric sites, museums and gardens.\nNew Delhi is home to several historic sites and museums. The National Museum, which began with an exhibition of Indian art and artefacts at the Royal Academy in London in the winter of 1947\u201348, was later at the end was shown at the Rashtrapati Bhavan in 1949. Later it was to form a permanent National Museum. On 15 August 1949, the National Museum was formally inaugurated and has 200,000 works of art, both of Indian and foreign origin, covering over 5,000 years.\nThe India Gate, which was built in 1931, was inspired by the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. It is the national monument of India commemorating the 90,000 soldiers of the Indian Army who died while fighting for the British Raj in World War I and the Third Anglo-Afghan War. The monument is barricaded now with entry to the inside arch restricted.\nThe Rajpath, which was built similar to the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris, is the ceremonial boulevard for the Republic of India, located in New Delhi. The annual Republic Day parade takes place here on 26 January. The Beating retreat takes place here two days later.\nGandhi Smriti in New Delhi is the location where Mahatma Gandhi spent the last 144 days of his life and was assassinated on 30 January 1948. Rajghat is the place where Gandhi was cremated on 31 January 1948 after his assassination and his ashes were buried and make it a final resting place beside the sanctity of the Yamuna River. The Raj Ghat in the shape of the large square platform with black marble was designed by architect Vanu Bhuta.\nJantar Mantar located in Connaught Place was built by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur. It consists of 13 architectural astronomy instruments. The primary purpose of the observatory was to compile astronomical tables, and to predict the times and movements of the sun, moon and planets.\nNew Delhi is home to Indira Gandhi Memorial Museum, National Gallery of Modern Art, National Museum of Natural History, National Rail Museum, National Handicrafts and Handlooms Museum, National Philatelic Museum, Nehru Planetarium, Shankar's International Dolls Museum. and Supreme Court of India Museum,\nIn the coming years, a new National War Memorial and Museum will be constructed in New Delhi for million ().\nNew Delhi is particularly renowned for its beautifully landscaped gardens that can look quite stunning in spring. The largest of these include Buddha Jayanti Park and the historic Lodi Gardens. In addition, there are the gardens in the Presidential Estate, the gardens along the Rajpath and India Gate, the gardens along Shanti Path, the Rose Garden, Nehru Park and the Railway Garden in Chanakya Puri. Also of note is the garden adjacent to the Jangpura Metro Station near the Defence Colony Flyover, as are the roundabout and neighbourhood gardens throughout the city.\nThe New Delhi Municipal Council (NDMC) area was declared the cleanest in North India, based on solid waste management, access to sanitation and other parameters of cleanliness, under the zone-wise Swachh Survekshan 2017.\nCityscape.\nMuch of New Delhi, planned by the leading 20th-century British architect Edwin Lutyens, was laid out to be the central administrative area of the city as a testament to Britain's imperial ambitions. New Delhi is structured around two central promenades called the Rajpath and the Janpath. The Rajpath, or King's Way, stretches from the Rashtrapati Bhavan to the India Gate. The Janpath (), formerly Queen's Way, begins at Connaught Circus and cuts the Rajpath at right angles. Nineteen foreign embassies are located on the nearby Shantipath (), making it the largest diplomatic enclave in India.\nAt the heart of the city is the Rashtrapati Bhavan (formerly known as Viceroy's House) which sits atop Raisina Hill. The Secretariat, which houses ministries of the government of India, flanks out of the Rashtrapati Bhavan. The Parliament House, designed by Herbert Baker, is located at the Sansad Marg, which runs parallel to the Rajpath. Connaught Place is a large, circular commercial area in New Delhi, modelled after the Royal Crescent in England. Twelve separate roads lead out of the outer ring of Connaught Place, one of them being the Janpath.\nArchitecture.\nThe New Delhi town plan, like its architecture, was chosen with one single chief consideration: to be a symbol of British power and supremacy. All other decisions were subordinate to this, and it was this framework that dictated the choice and application of symbology and influences from both Hindu and Islamic architecture.\nIt took about 20 years to build the city from 1911. Many elements of New Delhi architecture borrow from indigenous sources; however, they fit into a British Classical/Palladian tradition. The fact that there were any indigenous features in the design was due to the persistence and urging of both the Viceroy Hardinge and historians like E.B. Havell.\nIn the year 2019, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs and Government of India introduced the Central Vista redevelopment project proposing the redevelopment of over , costing \u20b9 crore ().\nTransport.\nAir.\nIndira Gandhi International Airport, situated to the southwest of Delhi, is the main gateway for the city's domestic and international civilian air traffic. In 2012\u201313, the airport was used by more than 35\u00a0million passengers, making it one of the busiest airports in South Asia. Terminal 3, which cost () to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37\u00a0million passengers annually.\nThe Delhi Flying Club, established in 1928 with two de Havilland Moth aircraft named \"Delhi\" and \"Roshanara\", was based at \"Safdarjung Airport\" which started operations in 1929, when it was the Delhi's only airport and the second in India. The airport functioned until 2001; however, in January 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the New York attacks in September 2001. Since then, the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses, and is used for helicopter rides to Indira Gandhi International Airport for VIP including the president and the prime minister.\nIn 2010, Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA) was conferred the fourth best airport award in the world in the 15\u201325\u00a0million category, and \"Best Improved Airport\" in the Asia-Pacific Region by Airports Council International. The airport was rated as the \"Best airport in the world\" in the 25\u201340\u00a0million passengers category in 2015, by Airports Council International. Delhi Airport also bags two awards for \"The Best Airport in Central Asia/India\" and \"Best Airport Staff in Central Asia/India\" at the Skytrax World Airport Awards 2015.\nA second airport, Noida International Airport, is currently being built in Jewar.\nRoad.\nNew Delhi has one of India's largest bus transport systems. Buses are operated by the state-owned Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC), which owns the largest fleet of compressed natural gas (CNG)-fueled buses in the world and Delhi Transit. Personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on New Delhi roads. New Delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in India. Taxis and Auto Rickshaws also ply on New Delhi roads in large numbers. New Delhi has one of the highest road density in India and average vehicle speed is around in peak hours in the city.\nSome roads and expressways serve as important pillars of New Delhi's road infrastructure:\nNational Highways.\nNew Delhi is connected by road to the rest of India through National highways:\nRailway.\nNew Delhi is a major junction in the Indian railway network and is the headquarters of the Northern Railway. The five main railway stations are New Delhi railway station, Delhi Junction, Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station, Anand Vihar Terminal and Sarai Rohilla. The Delhi Ring Railway, a circular railway network in Delhi that runs parallel to the Ring Road, is a part of Delhi's suburban railway services.\nMetro.\nThe Delhi Metro is a rapid transit system serving Delhi, Faridabad, Ghaziabad, Gurgaon and Noida in the National Capital Region of India. Delhi Metro is the world's 12th largest metro system in terms of length. Delhi Metro was India's first modern public transportation system, which had revolutionised travel by providing a fast, reliable, safe, and comfortable means of transport. Presently, the network consists of 10 colour-coded lines serving 255 stations with a total length of . The network has now crossed the boundaries of Delhi to reach Ghaziabad and Noida in Uttar Pradesh, and Faridabad and Gurgaon in Haryana. All stations have escalators, elevators, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains. It has a combination of elevated, at-grade, and underground lines, and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock. Four types of rolling stock are used: Mitsubishi-ROTEM Broad gauge, Bombardier MOVIA, Mitsubishi-ROTEM Standard gauge, and CAF Beasain Standard gauge. According to a study, Delhi Metro has helped in removing about 390,000 vehicles from the streets of Delhi.\nDelhi Metro is being built and operated by the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited (DMRC), a state-owned company with equal equity participation from the Government of India and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. However, the organisation is under administrative control of the Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. Besides the construction and operation of the Delhi metro, DMRC is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail and high-speed rail projects in India and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad. The Delhi Metro project was spearheaded by E. Sreedharan, the managing director of DMRC and popularly known as the \"Metro Man\" of India. He famously resigned from DMRC, taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse which took five lives. Sreedharan was awarded with the Legion of Honour by the French government for his contribution to Delhi Metro.\nSports.\nThe city hosted the 2010 Commonwealth Games and annually hosts Delhi Half Marathon foot-race. The city has previously hosted the 1951 Asian Games and the 1982 Asian Games. New Delhi was interested in bidding for the 2019 Asian Games but was turned down by the government on 2 August 2010 amid allegations of corruption in 2010 Commonwealth Games. The city also had a bid to host the 1992 Summer Olympics, but withdrew in March 1986, seven months before the host selection.\nMajor sporting venues in New Delhi include the Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Ambedkar Stadium, Indira Gandhi Indoor Stadium, Arun Jaitley Stadium, R.K. Khanna Tennis Complex, Dhyan Chand National Stadium and Siri Fort Sports Complex. \nInternational relations and organisations.\nThe city is home to numerous international organisations. The Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology of the UNESCAP servicing the Asia-Pacific region is headquartered in New Delhi. New Delhi is home to most UN regional offices in India namely the UNDP, UNODC, UNESCO, UNICEF, WFP, UNV, UNCTAD, FAO, UNFPA, WHO, World Bank, ILO, IMF, UNIFEM, IFC and UNAIDS. UNHCR Representation in India is also located in the city.\nNew Delhi hosts 145 foreign embassies and high commissions.\nSummits, conferences and conventions.\nUnited Nations Conference on Trade and Development hosted its second meeting conference in the year 1968 at New Delhi.\nNew Delhi hosted the 7th NAM Summit in 1983, 4th BRICS Summit in 2012, IBSA Summit in 2015, and 5th Global Conference on CyberSpace in 2017. India has also host the G20 summit in 2023 in New Delhi.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51586", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51586", "title": "Evita Per\u00f3n", "text": ""}
{"id": "51587", "revid": "46591300", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51587", "title": "Sevastopol", "text": "City on the Crimean peninsula\nSevastopol ( ), sometimes written Sebastopol, is the largest city in Crimea and a major port on the Black Sea. Due to its strategic location and the navigability of the city's harbours, Sevastopol has been an important port and naval base throughout its history. Since the city's founding in 1783, it has been a major base for Russia's Black Sea Fleet. During the Cold War of the 20th century, it was a closed city. The total administrative area is and includes a significant amount of rural land. The urban population, largely concentrated around Sevastopol Bay, is 479,394, and the total population is 547,820.\nSevastopol, along with the rest of Crimea, is internationally recognised as part of Ukraine, and under the Ukrainian legal framework, it is administratively one of two cities with special status (the other being Kyiv). However, it has been occupied by Russia since 27 February 2014, before Russia annexed Crimea on 18 March 2014 and gave it the status of a federal city of Russia. Both Ukraine and Russia consider the city administratively separate from the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Republic of Crimea, respectively. The city's population has an ethnic Russian majority and a substantial minority of Ukrainians and Crimean Tatars.\nSevastopol's unique naval and maritime features have been the basis for a robust economy. The city enjoys mild winters and moderately warm summers, characteristics that help make it a popular seaside resort and tourist destination, mainly for visitors from the former Soviet republics. The city is also an important centre for marine biology research. In particular, the military has studied and trained dolphins in the city for military use since the 1960s.\nEtymology.\nThe name of Sevastopolis was originally chosen following the same etymological trend as other cities in the Crimean peninsula; it was intended to express its ancient Greek origins. It is a compound of the Greek adjective, (\"sebast\u00f3s\", ; 'venerable') and the noun (\"p\u00f3lis\", 'city'). is the traditional Greek equivalent (see Sebastian) of the Roman honorific \"Augustus\", originally given to the first emperor of the Roman Empire, Augustus and later awarded as a title to his successors.\nThe city was probably named after Empress (\"Augusta\") Catherine II of the Russian Empire who founded Sevastopol in 1783. She visited the city in 1787, accompanied by Joseph II, the Emperor of Austria, and other foreign dignitaries.\nIn the west of the city, there are well-preserved ruins of the ancient Greek port city of Chersonesos, founded in the 5th century BC by settlers from Heraclea Pontica. This name means \"peninsula\", reflecting its immediate location. It is not related to the ancient Greek name for the Crimean Peninsula as a whole: \"Cherson\u0113sos Taurik\u0113\" (\"the Taurian Peninsula\").\nThe name of the city is spelled as:\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n&lt;poem&gt;\nChersonesus founded in 6th century BC\nHellenic Colonies 6th century BC \u2013 480 BC\nBosporan Kingdom 480 BC \u2013 107 BC\nKingdom of Pontus 107 BC \u2013 63 BC\nRoman Republic 63 BC \u2013 27 BC\nRoman Empire 27 BC \u2013 330\nByzantine Empire 330 \u2013 1204\nEmpire of Trebizond 1204 \u2013 1461\nPrincipality of Theodoro 1461 \u2013 1475\nCrimean Khanate 1475 \u2013 1783 (Ottoman vassal from 1478 to 1774)\nRussian Empire 1783 \u2013 1917\nFounded as Sevastopol in 1783\nRussian Republic 1917\nRussian SFSR (Soviet Union from 1922) 1917 \u2013 1942\nNazi Germany 1942 \u2013 1944 (\"de facto\")\nRussian SFSR (Soviet Union) 1944 \u2013 1954\nUkrainian SSR (Soviet Union) 1954 \u2013 1991\nUkraine 1991 \u2013 2014 (\"de facto\"; \"de jure\" \u2013 1991\u2013present)\nRussian Federation 2014 \u2013 present (\"de facto\")\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nAncient Chersonesus.\nIn the 6th century BC, a Greek colony was established in the area of the modern-day city. The Greek city of Chersonesus existed for almost two thousand years, first as an independent democracy and later as part of the Bosporan Kingdom. In the 13th and 14th centuries, it was sacked by the Golden Horde several times and was finally totally abandoned. The modern day city of Sevastopol has no connection to the ancient and medieval Greek city other than geographical location, but the ruins are a popular tourist attraction located on the outskirts of the city.\nPart of the Russian Empire.\nSevastopol was founded in June 1783 as a base for a naval squadron under the name Akhtiar (\"White Cliff\"), by Rear Admiral Thomas MacKenzie (\"Foma Fomich Makenzi\"), a native Scot in Russian service; soon after, the Russian Empire annexed the Crimean Khanate. Five years earlier, Alexander Suvorov had ordered that earthworks be erected along the harbour and Russian troops be placed there. The Crimean Tatar version of this name is now written \"Aqyar\".\nIn February 1784, Catherine the Great ordered Grigory Potyomkin to build a fortress there and call it Sevastopol. The realisation of the initial building plans fell to Captain Fyodor Ushakov who in 1788 was named commander of the port and of the Black Sea squadron. The city was established on the western shore of Southern Bay which branches away from the bigger Sevastopol Bay. The ruins of ancient Chersonesus were situated to the west. The newly built settlement became an important naval base and later a commercial seaport. In 1797, under an edict issued by Emperor Paul I, the military stronghold was again renamed Akhtiar. Finally, on 29 April (10 May), 1826, the Senate returned the city's name to Sevastopol. In 1803 to 1864 along with Mykolaiv the city was part of Nikolayev\u2013Sevastopol Military Governorate. The town had 3,000 inhabitants by the 1840s.\nCrimean War.\nFrom 1853 to 1856, the Crimean peninsula's strategic position in controlling the Black Sea caused it to be the site of the principal engagements of the Crimean War, where Russia lost to a French-led alliance.\nAfter a minor skirmish at K\u00f6stence (now Constan\u021ba), the allied commanders decided to attack Sevastopol as Russia's main naval base in the Black Sea. After extended preparations, allied forces landed on the peninsula in September 1854 and marched to a point south of Sevastopol after winning the Battle of the Alma on 20 September. The Russians counterattacked on 25 October in what became the Battle of Balaclava and were repulsed, but the British Army's forces were seriously depleted as a result. A second Russian counterattack, at Inkerman in November, ended in a stalemate as well. The front settled into the siege of Sevastopol, involving brutal conditions for troops on both sides.\nSevastopol finally fell after eleven months, after the French had assaulted Fort Malakoff. Isolated and facing a bleak prospect of invasion by the West if the war continued, Russia sued for peace in March 1856. France and Britain welcomed the development, owing to the conflict's domestic unpopularity. The Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 March 1856, ended the war and forbade Russia from basing warships in the Black Sea. This hampered the Russians during the Russo-Turkish War of 1877\u201378 and in the aftermath of that conflict, Russia moved to reconstitute its naval strength and fortifications in the Black Sea.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, Sevastopol withstood intensive bombardment by the Germans in 1941\u201342, supported by their Italian and Romanian allies during the Battle of Sevastopol. German forces used railway artillery\u2014including history's largest-ever calibre railway artillery piece in battle, the 80-cm calibre \"Schwerer Gustav\"\u2014and specialised mobile heavy mortars to destroy Sevastopol's extremely heavy fortifications, such as the Maxim Gorky Fortresses. After fierce fighting, which lasted for 250 days, the fortress city finally fell to Axis forces in July 1942. It was intended to be renamed to \"Theodorichshafen\" (in reference to Theodoric the Great and the fact that Crimea had been home to Germanic Goths until the 18th or 19th century) in the event of a German victory against the Soviet Union, and like the rest of Crimea was designated for future colonisation by the Third Reich. It was liberated by the Red Army on 9 May 1944 and was awarded the Hero City title a year later.\nPart of the Ukrainian SSR.\nDuring the Soviet era, Sevastopol became a so-called \"closed city\". This meant that any non-residents had to apply to the authorities for a temporary permit to visit the city.\nOn 29 October 1948, the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Russian SFSR issued an \"ukaz\" (order) which confirmed the special status of the city. Soviet academic publications since 1954, including the \"Great Soviet Encyclopedia\", indicated that Sevastopol, Crimean Oblast was part of the Ukrainian SSR.\nIn 1954, under Nikita Khrushchev, both Sevastopol and the remainder of the Crimean peninsula were administratively transferred from being territories within the Russian SFSR to being territories administered by the Ukrainian SSR. Administratively, Sevastopol was a municipality excluded from the adjacent Crimean Oblast. The territory of the municipality was 863.5\u00a0km2 and it was further subdivided into four raions (districts). Besides the City of Sevastopol proper, it also included two towns\u2014Balaklava (having had no status until 1957), Inkerman, urban-type settlement Kacha, and 29 villages.\nFor the 1955 Ukrainian parliamentary elections on 27 February, Sevastopol was split into two electoral districts, Stalinsky and Korabelny (initially requested three Stalinsky, Korabelny, and Nakhimovsky). Eventually, Sevastopol received two people's deputies of the Ukrainian SSR elected to the Verkhovna Rada, A. Korovchenko and M. Kulakov.\nIn 1957, the town of Balaklava was incorporated into Sevastopol.\nPart of Ukraine.\nFollowing Ukraine's declaration of independence from the USSR in 1991, Sevastopol became the principal base of the Ukrainian navy. As the key naval base of the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet, it was a source of tensions for Russia\u2013Ukraine relations until a set-term lease agreement was signed in 1997.\nOn 10 July 1993, the Russian parliament passed a resolution declaring Sevastopol to be \"a federal Russian city\". At the time, many supporters of President Boris Yeltsin had ceased taking part in the parliament's work. On 20 July 1993, the United Nations Security Council denounced the decision of the Russian parliament. According to Anatoliy Zlenko, it was the first time that the council had to review and qualify actions of a legislative body.\nOn 14 April 1993, the Presidium of the Crimean Parliament called for the creation of the presidential post of the Crimean Republic. A week later, the Russian deputy, Valentin Agafonov, said that Russia was ready to supervise a referendum on Crimean independence and include the republic as a separate entity in the CIS. On 28 July 1993, one of the leaders of the Russian Society of Crimea, Viktor Prusakov, said that his organisation was ready for an armed mutiny and the establishment of Russian administration of Sevastopol.\nIn September, the commander of the joint Russian-Ukrainian Black Sea Fleet, Eduard Baltin, accused Ukraine of converting some of his fleet and conducting an armed assault on his personnel and threatened to take countermeasures placing the fleet on alert. (In June 1992, the Russian president Yeltsin and the Ukrainian president Leonid Kravchuk had agreed to divide the former Soviet Black Sea Fleet between Russia and Ukraine. Eduard Baltin had been appointed commander of the Black Sea Fleet by Yeltsin and Kravchuk on 15 January 1993.)\nThe Moscow mayor Yury Luzhkov to claim the city, and in December 1996, the Russian Federation Council officially endorsed the claim, threatening negotiations. In response, Ukraine proposed a \"special partnership\" with NATO in January 1997.\nIn May 1997, Russia and Ukraine signed the Russian\u2013Ukrainian Friendship Treaty, ruling out Moscow's territorial claims to Ukraine. This was followed by the Partition Treaty on the Status and Conditions of the Black Sea Fleet on 28 May 1997. A separate agreement established the terms of a long-term lease of land, facilities, and resources in Sevastopol and the Crimea by Russia. Russia kept its naval base, with around 15,000 troops stationed in Sevastopol.\nThe ex-Soviet Black Sea Fleet and its facilities were divided between Russia's Black Sea Fleet and the Ukrainian Naval Forces. The two navies co-used some of the city's harbours and piers, while others were demilitarised or used by either country. Sevastopol remained the location of the Russian Black Sea Fleet headquarters, and the Ukrainian Naval Forces Headquarters were also located in the city. A judicial row periodically continued over the naval hydrographic infrastructure both in Sevastopol and on the Crimean coast (especially lighthouses historically maintained by the Soviet and Russian Navy and also used for civil navigation support).\nAs in the rest of Crimea, Russian remained the predominant language of the city, although following the independence of Ukraine there were some attempts at Ukrainisation, with very little success. Russian society in general and even some outspoken government representatives never accepted the loss of Sevastopol and tended to regard it as temporarily separated from Russia.\nIn July 2009, the chairman of the Sevastopol City Council, Valeriy Saratov (Party of Regions), said that Ukraine should increase the amount of compensation it is paying to the city of Sevastopol for hosting the foreign Russian Black Sea Fleet, instead of requesting such compensation from the Russian government and the Russian Ministry of Defense in particular.\nOn 27 April 2010, Russia and Ukraine ratified the Russian Ukrainian Naval Base for Gas treaty, which extended the Russian Navy's lease of the Crimean facilities for 25 years after 2017 (through 2042) with the option to prolong the lease in five-year extensions. The ratification process in the Ukrainian parliament encountered stiff opposition and even resulted in a brawl in the parliament chamber. Eventually, the treaty was ratified by a 52% majority vote\u2014236 of 450. The Russian Duma ratified the treaty by a 98% majority.\nOccupation and annexation by Russia.\nOn 23 February 2014, a pro-Russian rally took place in Nakhimov Square declaring allegiance to Russia and protesting against the new government in Kyiv following the overthrow of the president, Viktor Yanukovych. On 27 February, pro-Russian militia, including Russian troops, seized control of government buildings in Crimea, and by 28 February, controlled other strategic locations such as the military airport in Sevastopol.\nOn 16 March 2014, an internationally unrecognised referendum was held in Sevastopol with official results claiming an 89.51% turnout and 95.6% of voters choosing to join Russia. Ukraine and almost all other countries of the United Nations General Assembly consider the referendum illegal and illegitimate.\nOn 18 March, Russia annexed Crimea, incorporating the Republic of Crimea and federal city of Sevastopol as federal subjects of Russia. However, the annexation remains internationally unrecognised, with most countries recognizing Sevastopol as a city with special status within Ukraine. While Russia has taken \"de facto\" control of Sevastopol and Crimea, the international community considers the area as part of Ukraine.\nGeography.\nThe city of Sevastopol is located at the southwestern tip of the Crimean peninsula in a headland known as Heracles peninsula on a coast of the Black Sea. The city is designated a special city-region of Ukraine which besides the city itself includes several of its outlying settlements. The city itself is concentrated mostly in the western portion of the region and around the long Bay of Sevastopol. This bay is a ria, a river canyon drowned by Holocene sea-level rise, and the outlet of Chorna River. Away in a remote location southeast of Sevastopol is located the former city of Balaklava (since 1957 incorporated within Sevastopol), the bay of which in the Soviet era served as a main port for the Soviet diesel-powered submarines.\nThe coastline of the region is mostly rocky, in a series of smaller bays, a great number of which are located within the Bay of Sevastopol. The biggest of them are Southern Bay (within the Bay of Sevastopol), Archer Bay, a gulf complex that consists of Deergrass Bay, the Bay of Cossack, Salty Bay, and many others. There are over thirty bays in the immediate region.\nThree rivers flow through the region: the Belbek, Chorna, and Kacha. All three mountain chains of the Crimean mountains are represented in Sevastopol, the southern chain by the Balaklava Highlands, the inner chain by the Mekenziev Mountains, and the outer chain by the Kara-Tau Upland (Black Mountain).\nClimate.\nSevastopol has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfa\"). Due to the summer mean straddling it borders on a four-season oceanic climate, with cold winters and warm summers.\nThe average yearly temperature is during the day and around at night. In the coldest months, January and February, the average temperature is during the day and around at night. In the warmest months, July and August, the average temperature is around during the day and around at night. Generally, the summer/holiday season lasts 5 months, from around mid-May and into September, with the temperature often reaching or more in the first half of October.\nThe average annual temperature of the sea is , ranging from in February to in August. From June to September, the average sea temperature is greater than . In the second half of May and the first half of October; the average sea temperature is about . The average rainfall is about per year. There are about 2,345 hours of sunshine duration per year.\nPolitics and government.\nUkrainian administration.\nAccording to the Constitution of Ukraine, Sevastopol is administered as a City with special status. Executive power in Sevastopol is exercised by the Sevastopol City State Administration, led by a chairman (also known as mayor) appointed by the Ukrainian president. The Sevastopol City Council is the legislature of Sevastopol.\nSevastopol is administratively divided into four districts:\nRussian occupation.\nOn 18 March 2014, Russia claimed to have annexed Crimea with Sevastopol being administered as a federal city of Russia, the others being Moscow and St. Petersburg.\nThe head of the executive branch in the city is the Governor of Sevastopol. According to the city charter, amended on 29 November 2016, the governor is elected in a direct election for a term of five years and no more than two consecutive terms. The current governor is Mikhail Razvozhayev.\nDuring the annexation of Ukrainian Crimea by Russia, the pro-Russian Sevastopol City Council threw its support behind Russian citizen Alexei Chaly as a \"people's mayor\" and said it would not recognise orders from Kyiv. After Russia annexed Crimea, the Legislative Assembly of Sevastopol replaced the City Council.\nWithin the Russian municipal framework, the territory of the federal city of Sevastopol is divided into nine municipal okrugs and the town of Inkerman. While individual municipal divisions are contained within the borders of the administrative districts, they are not otherwise related to the administrative districts.\nEconomy.\nApart from navy-related civil facilities, Sevastopol hosts some other notable industries. An example is Stroitel, a major plastic manufacturer.\nInfrastructure.\nThere are different types of transport in Sevastopol:\nSevastopol Shipyard comprises three facilities that together repair, modernise, and re-equip Russian Naval ships and submarines. The Sevastopol International Airport is used as a military aerodrome at the moment and being reconstructed to be used by international airlines.\nSevastopol maintains a large port facility in the Bay of Sevastopol and in smaller bays around the Heracles peninsula. The port handles traffic from passengers (local transportation and cruise), cargo, and commercial fishing. The port infrastructure is fully integrated with the city of Sevastopol and the naval bases of the Black Sea Fleet.\nTourism.\nDue to its military history, most streets in the city are named after Russian and Soviet military heroes. There are hundreds of monuments and plaques in various parts of Sevastopol commemorating its military past.\nAttractions include:\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The population of Sevastopol is 509,992, consisting of 479,394 urban residents and 30,598 rural (January 2021), making it the most populous city of the Crimean Peninsula.\nThe city has retained an ethnic Russian majority throughout its history. In 1989 the proportion of Russians living in the city was 74.4%, and by the time of the Ukrainian National Census, 2001, the ethnic groups of Sevastopol included Russians (71.6%), Ukrainians (22.4%), Belarusians (1.6%), Tatars (0.7%), Crimean Tatars (0.5%), Armenians (0.3%), Jews (0.3%), Moldovans (0.2%), and Azerbaijanis (0.2%).\nVital statistics for 2015:\nLife expectancy.\nIn 2015, Sevastopol had the largest decrease in life expectancy at birth among all regions of Russia.In 2020, after beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Sevastopol became the only region of Russia where there was increase of life expectancy.In 2021, average life expectancy at birth in Sevastopol was 72.25 years (67.87 for males and 76.43 for females).\nCulture.\nThere are many historical buildings in the central and eastern parts of the city and Balaklava, some of which are architectural monuments. The Western districts have modern architecture. More recently, numerous skyscrapers have been built. Balaklava Bayfront Plaza (on hold), currently under construction, will be one of the tallest buildings in Ukraine, at with 43 floors.\nAfter the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea the city's monument to Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny was removed and handed over to Kharkiv.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51588", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51588", "title": "Evita Peron", "text": ""}
{"id": "51590", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51590", "title": "Umbria", "text": "Region of Italy\nUmbria ( ; ) is a region of central Italy. It includes Lake Trasimeno and Marmore Falls, and is crossed by the Tiber. It is the only landlocked region on the Apennine Peninsula. The capital is Perugia. The region has 851,954 inhabitants as of 2025.\nThe region is characterized by hills, mountains, thick forests, valleys and historical towns such as the university centre of Perugia, Assisi (a World Heritage Site associated with St. Francis of Assisi), Terni, Norcia, Citt\u00e0 di Castello, Gubbio, Spoleto, Orvieto, Todi, Castiglione del Lago, Narni, Amelia, Spello and other small cities.\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nThe region is named for the Umbri people, an Italic people which was absorbed by the expansion of the Romans. The Umbri, unlike the Etruscans, with few exceptions did not live in an urban society, but occupied small dwellings located in the Apennines. Pliny the Elder recounted a fanciful derivation for the tribal name from the Greek \u1f44\u03bc\u03b2\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 (\"ombros\", \"a shower\"), which led to the idea that they had survived the Deluge familiar from Greek mythology, allowing them to claim to be the most ancient race in Italy. In fact, they belonged to a broader family of neighbouring peoples with similar roots. Their language was Umbrian, one of the Italic languages, related to Latin and Oscan. The town of Gubbio houses today the longest and most important document of any of the Osco-Umbrian group of languages, the Iguvine Tablets, written in Umbrian at the turn of the 2nd and 1st centuries BC. The northern part of the region was occupied by Gallic tribes.\nThe Umbri probably sprang, like neighbouring peoples, from the creators of the Terramara, and Proto-Villanovan culture in northern and central Italy, who entered north-eastern Italy at the beginning of the Bronze Age.\nThe Etruscans were the chief enemies of the Umbri. The Etruscan invasion extended from the western seaboard towards the north and east from about 700 to 500 BC. They eventually drove the Umbrians towards the Apennine uplands and captured 300 Umbrian towns. Nevertheless, the Umbrian population does not seem to have been eradicated in the conquered districts. The border between Etruria and Umbria was the Tiber river, as testified by the ancient name of Todi, \"Tular\" (\"border\").\nAfter the downfall of the Etruscans, Umbrians aided the Samnites in their struggle against Rome (308 BC). Later communications with Samnium were impeded by the Roman fortress of Narnia (founded 229 BC on the place of the umbrian \"Nequinum\", conquered in 299 BC). Romans defeated the Samnites and their Gallic allies in the battle of Sentinum (295 BC). Allied Umbrians and Etruscans had to return home and defend each of their territories against simultaneous Roman attacks, leaving the Samnites without their help at Sentinum.\nThe Roman victory at Sentinum initiated a period of integration under the Roman rulers, who established some colonies, such as Spoletium, and built the via Flaminia (219 BC). The via Flaminia became a principal vector for Roman development in Umbria. During Hannibal's invasion during the Second Punic War, the battle of Lake Trasimene was fought inside the borders of today's Umbria, but the local people did not aid the invader.\nDuring the Roman Civil War between Mark Antony and Octavian (40 BC), the city of Perugia supported Antony and was almost completely destroyed by Octavian. In Pliny the Elder's time, 49 independent communities still existed in Umbria, and the abundance of inscriptions and the high proportion of recruits in the imperial army attest to its population. Under Augustus, Umbria became the Regio VI of Roman Italy.\nModern Umbria is different from Roman Umbria. Roman Umbria extended through most of what is now the northern Marche to Ravenna, but excluded the west bank of the Tiber, which belonged to Etruria. Thus Perugia was an Etruscan city and the area around Norcia was in the Sabine territory.\nAfter the collapse of the Roman Empire, Ostrogoths and Byzantines struggled for supremacy in the region, and the decisive battle of the war between these two peoples took place near modern Gualdo Tadino.\nMiddle Ages.\nSoon after the end of the Gothic war, the Lombards invaded Italy and founded the duchy of Spoleto, covering much of today's southern Umbria, but the Byzantine were able to keep in the region a corridor along the Via Flaminia linking Rome with the Exarchate of Ravenna and the Pentapolis. The Lombard king controlled also the northern part of the region ruled directly by Pavia. When Charlemagne conquered most of the Lombard kingdoms, some Umbrian territories were given to the Pope, who established temporal power over them. Some cities acquired a form of autonomy named \"comune\". These cities were frequently at war with each other, often in a context of more general conflicts, either between the Papacy and the Holy Roman Empire or between the Guelphs and the Ghibellines.\nIn the early 14th century, the \"signorie\" arose and the most important of them were those of the Vitelli in Citt\u00e0 di Castello, of the Baglioni in Perugia and of the Trinci in Foligno, but the region was subsumed by the middle of the same century into the Papal States by Cardinal Albornoz, who in this way prepared the return of the pope from Avignon to Rome. Citt\u00e0 di Castello was subsumed later into the Papal States by Cesare Borgia. During the 15th century Renaissance spread in the northern part of the region. It was in this period that humanists started to use again the ancient denomination of \"Umbria\" to name the area, which until then had been named \"Ducato\", after the Duchy of Spoleto in the southern part of it. The supremacy of the pope on Umbria was reinforced in 16th century through the erection of a fortress in Perugia by Pope Paul III, named after him \"Rocca Paolina\". The papacy ruled the region uncontested until the end of the 18th century.\nModern history.\nAfter the French Revolution and the French conquest of Italy, Umbria became part of the ephemeral Roman Republic (1798\u20131799) and later, part of the Napoleonic Empire (1809\u20131814) under the name of department of Trasim\u00e8ne.\nAfter Napoleon's defeat, the Pope regained Umbria and ruled it until 1860. In that year, during Italian Risorgimento, Umbria with Marche and part of Emilia Romagna were annexed by Piedmontese King Victor Emmanuel II, and the people of Perugia destroyed in the same year the Rocca Paolina, symbol of the papal oppression. The region of Umbria, with capital Perugia, became part of the Kingdom of Italy in the following year. The region, whose economy was mainly based on agriculture, experienced a dramatic economic shift at the end of the 19th century with the founding of the \"Acciaierie di Terni\", a major steelwork placed in Terni because of its abundance of electric power due to the Marmore waterfall and its secluded position.\nThe region of Umbria at the time was somewhat larger than today, comprising Rieti to the south, now part of Lazio. Rieti was detached and added to the province of Rome (Lazio) in 1923. In 1927, the region of Umbria was divided into the provinces of Perugia and Terni.\nDuring WWII, the industrial centers of the region like Terni and Foligno were heavily bombed and in 1944 became a battlefield between the allied forces and the Germans retreating towards the Gothic Line. In 1946, Umbria was incorporated into the Italian Republic as a region, comprising the two provinces of Perugia and Terni.\nGeography.\nUmbria is bordered by Tuscany to the west and the north, Marche to the east and Lazio to the south. Partly hilly and mountainous, and partly flat and fertile owing to the valley of the Tiber, its topography includes part of the central Apennines, with the highest point in the region at Monte Vettore on the border of Marche, at ; the lowest point is Attigliano, . It is the only Italian region having neither a coastline nor a common border with other countries. The \"comune\" of Citt\u00e0 di Castello has an exclave named \"Monte Ruperto\" within Marche. Contained within Umbria is the hamlet of Cospaia, which was a tiny republic from 1440 to 1826, created by accident.\nUmbria is crossed by two valleys: the Umbrian valley (\"Valle Umbra\"), stretching from Perugia to Spoleto, and the Tiber Valley (\"Val Tiberina\"), north and west of the first one, from Citt\u00e0 di Castello to the border with Lazio. The Tiber River forms the approximate border with Lazio, although its source is just over the Tuscan border. The Tiber's three principal tributaries flow southward through Umbria. The Chiascio basin is relatively uninhabited as far as Bastia Umbra. About farther on, it joins the Tiber at Torgiano. The Topino, cleaving the Apennines with passes that the Via Flaminia and successor roads follow, makes a sharp turn at Foligno to flow NW for a few kilometres before joining the Chiascio below Bettona. The third river is the Nera, flowing into the Tiber further south, at Terni; its valley is called the \"Valnerina\". The upper Nera cuts ravines in the mountains; the lower, in the Tiber basin, has created a wide floodplain.\nIn antiquity, the plain was covered by a pair of shallow, interlocking lakes, the Lacus Clitorius and the Lacus Umber. They were drained by the Romans over several hundred years. An earthquake in the 4th\u00a0century and the political collapse of the Roman Empire resulted in the refilling of the basin. It was drained a second time, almost a thousand years later, during a 500-year period: Benedictine monks started the process in the 13th century, and the draining was completed in the 18th century.\nThe eastern part of the region, being crossed by many faults, has been often hit by earthquakes: the last ones have been that of 1997 (which hit Nocera Umbra, Gualdo Tadino, Assisi and Foligno) and those of August and October 2016 (which struck Norcia and the Valnerina).\nIn literature, Umbria is referred to as \"Il cuore verde d'Italia\" or \"The green heart of Italy\". The phrase is taken from a poem by Giosu\u00e8 Carducci, the subject of which is the source of the Clitunno River in Umbria.\nGovernment.\nUmbria was a former stronghold of the Italian Communist Party, forming with Tuscany, Emilia-Romagna and Marche what was then known as Italy's \"Red Regions\". Umbria was considered a stronghold of the Democratic Party and left-leaning parties for over 50 years, however in 2019 the candidate of the centre-right coalition Donatella Tesei won the region's presidential election against her centre-left rival Vincenzo Bianconi, garnering 57.5% of the vote.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUmbria is divided into two provinces:\nPerugia \nTerni \nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2025, the region has 90,587 foreigners, about 10.6% of the total population of 851,954.\nEconomy.\nThe present economic structure emerged from a series of transformations which took place mainly in the 1970s and 1980s. During this period, there was rapid expansion among small and medium-sized firms and a gradual retrenchment among the large firms which had hitherto characterised the region's industrial base. This process of structural adjustment is still going on.\nEconomically the most important region is the upper Tiber valley with Citt\u00e0 di Castello. Terni steelworks (stainless steel, titanium, alloy steel) and processing companies (automotive, stainless steel tubes, industrial food facility) account for 20 to 25% of Umbria's GDP. In Terni there are also many multinational companies in the fields of chemistry, hydroelectric power, renewable sources of energy, and textiles (Alcantara, Cashmere). In the rest of the region the ornamental ceramics industry is much esteemed.\nUmbrian agriculture is noted for its tobacco, olive oil and vineyards, which produce wines. Regional varietals include the white Orvieto, which draws agri-tourists to the vineyards in the area surrounding the medieval town of the same name. A notable wine is the Grechetto of Todi. Other noted wines produced in Umbria are Torgiano and Rosso di Montefalco. The Umbrian wineries are at the center of the \"Cantine Aperte\" or \"Open Cellars\" event, when local wine makers open their wineries to the public. Another typical Umbrian product is the black truffle found in Valnerina, an area that produces 45% of this product in Italy.\nThe food industry in Umbria produces processed pork-meats, confectionery, pasta and the traditional products of Valnerina in preserved form (truffles, lentils, cheese).\nThe unemployment rate stood at 8.2% in 2020.\nTourism.\nUmbria has many small and picturesque villages, 31 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.\nUmber.\nUmbria is the region where the Umber pigment was originally extracted. The name comes from \"terra d'ombra\", or earth of Umbria, the Italian name of the pigment. The word also may be related to the Latin word \"umbra\", meaning \"shadow\". Umber is a natural brown or reddish-brown earth pigment that contains iron oxide and manganese oxide.\nIn the 20th century, natural umber pigments began to be replaced by pigments made with synthetic iron oxide and manganese oxide. Natural umber pigments are still being made, with Cyprus as a prominent source.\nTransport.\nAir.\nThe region is served by Perugia San Francesco d'Assisi \u2013 Umbria International Airport which provides direct routes to other parts of Italy, UK and Europe. However, Rome Fiumicino Airport is often used by air travellers from the region as the airport provides more domestic and international destinations.\nCulture.\nMain artistic centres.\nIn the province of Perugia:\nIn the province of Terni:\nFestivals.\nOne of the most important festivals in Umbria is \"the festival of the Ceri (Candles)\", also known as Saint Ubaldo Day in Gubbio. The race has been held every year since 1160, on the 15th day of May. The festival is focused around a race consisting of three teams of \"cerioli\", carrying large symbolic \"candles\" topped by saints, including St. Ubald (the patron saint of Gubbio), S. Giorgio (St. George), and S. Antonio (Anthony the Great), and run through throngs of cheering supporters. The cerioli are clad in the distinctive colors of yellow, blue or black, according to the saint they support, with white trousers and red belts and neckbands. They travel up much of the mountain from the main square in front of the \"Palazzo dei Consoli\" to the basilica of St. Ubaldo, each team carrying a statue of their saint mounted on a wooden octagonal prism, similar to an hour-glass shape 4 metres tall and weighing about 280\u00a0kg (617\u00a0lb).\nThe race has strong devotional, civic, and historical overtones and is one of the best-known folklore manifestations in Italy, and therefore the Ceri were chosen as the heraldic emblem on the coat of arms of Umbria as a modern administrative region.\nUmbria is not only known for its historical recollections such as the festival of the Ceri, \"Calendimaggio\" in Assisi and the \"giostra della Quintana\" in Foligno, but also for one of the biggest jazz music festivals called \"Umbria Jazz\". \"Umbria Jazz\" was born as a festival in 1973 and since 2003 has been held in July in the Umbrian capital Perugia; it has become the fixed appointment of all jazz and good music lovers. Another important festival is the \"Festival dei Due Mondi\" (Festival of the Two Worlds), an annual summer music and opera festival which is held each June to early July in Spoleto.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51591", "revid": "50972087", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51591", "title": "Phnom Penh", "text": "Capital of Cambodia\nPhnom Penh is the capital and most populous city of Cambodia. It has been the national capital since 1865 and has grown to become the nation's primate city and its political, economic, industrial, and cultural centre. The city's name derives from Wat Phnom, a Buddhist temple, and Lady Penh, the city's founder. It sits at the confluence of the Tonl\u00e9 Sap and Mekong rivers, and is the start of the Bassac River. It is also the seat of Cambodia's monarchy, based at the Royal Palace.\nFounded in 1372, Phnom Penh succeeded Angkor Thom as the national capital in 1434 following the fall of Angkor, and remained so until 1497. It regained its capital status during the French colonial era. It underwent a period of investment and modernization during Cambodia's independence period, earning the nickname the \"Pearl of Asia\" for its colonial French, New Khmer and Art Deco architecture. The city's population swelled in the 1960s and 1970s as refugees fled from civil war and American bombing during the Vietnam War. Phnom Penh's entire population was forcibly evacuated in 1975 by the Khmer Rouge, and faced persecution, forced labour and genocide. Phnom Penh remained largely uninhabited during the Democratic Kampuchea era until Vietnam-backed forces took the city in 1979. The city was reconstructed and infrastructure improved in the modern era with the support of international investment and aid. By 2019, it was home to more than 2\u00a0million people, approximately 14% of the Cambodian population.\nThe Greater Phnom Penh area includes the nearby Ta Khmau city and some districts of Kandal province. The city formerly functioned as a processing center, with textiles, pharmaceuticals, machine manufacturing, and rice milling. It is also home to many prominent schools, colleges and universities. Its cultural institutions and events have made it a hub for domestic and international tourism.\nThe city has hosted numerous regional and international events, the most notable being the 2002, 2012, and 2022 ASEAN Summit, the 32nd Southeast Asian Games, and the 12th ASEAN Para Games. Phnom Penh will be the first Cambodian city and the second city in Southeast Asia to host the Asian Youth Games in 2031.\nEtymology.\nPhnom Penh (lit.\u2009'Penh's hill') takes its name from the present Wat Phnom (lit.\u2009'hill temple'), or from the ancient Funan Kingdom, which existed from the 1st to the 7th century AD in Southeast Asia and was the forerunner of the current Cambodian monarchy. Legend has it that in 1372, a wealthy widow named Penh found a Koki tree floating down the Tonl\u00e9 Sap River after a storm. Inside the tree were four bronze Buddha statues and a stone statue of Vishnu. Penh ordered villagers to raise the height of the hill northeast of her house and used the Koki wood to build a temple on the hill to house the four Buddha statues, and a shrine for the Vishnu image slightly lower down. The temple became known as Wat Phnom Daun Penh, which is now known as Wat Phnom, a small hill in height.\nPhnom Penh's former official name is Krong Chaktomuk Serei Mongkol (, lit. \"city of Brahma's faces\"), in its short form as Krong Chaktomuk (lit.\u2009'city of four faces'). \"Krong Chaktomuk\" is an abbreviation of the full name, given to it by King Ponhea Yat: \"Krong Chaktomuk Mongkol Sakal Kampuchea Thipadei Serei Theakreak Bavar Intabat Borei Roat Reach Seima Moha Nokor\" ( ). This loosely translates as \"the place of four rivers that gives the happiness and success of the Khmer Kingdom, the highest leader as well as impregnable city of the God Indra of the great kingdom\".\nHistory.\nThe initial settlement of Phnom Penh is believed to have been established since the 5th century AD, according to the discovery of ancient kiln site in Choeung Ek commune of Dangkao district, southern part of central Phnom Penh in the early 2000s. Choeung Ek archaeological site was one of the largest kiln pottery center in Cambodia and the earliest known kiln sites in Southeast Asia to produce the ceremonial vessels known as kendi from 5th to 13th century. Archaeologists stated that a large community is surrounded by a circular earthwork structure that is 740 metres in diameter and 4 metres high, built in the 11th century. In addition, there are remnants of other ancient village infrastructure, irrigation system, inscription, Shiva linga as well as an ancient brick temple foundation and its ornate remains which dated back to Funan era.\nFirst recorded a century after it is said to have taken place, the legend of the founding of Phnom Penh tells of a local woman, Penh (commonly referred to as \"Daun Penh\" (\"Lady Penh\" in Khmer), living at Chaktomuk, the future Phnom Penh. It was the late 14th century, and the Khmer capital was still at Angkor near Siem Reap to the north. Gathering firewood along the banks of the river, Lady Penh spied a floating koki tree in the river and fished it from the water. Inside the tree she found four Buddha statues and one of Vishnu.\nThe discovery was taken as a divine blessing, and to some a sign that the Khmer capital was to be brought to Phnom Penh from Angkor. To house the new-found sacred objects, Penh raised a small hill on the west bank of the Tonle Sap River and crowned it with a shrine, now known as Wat Phnom at the north end of central Phnom Penh. \"Phnom\" is Khmer for \"hill\" and Penh's hill took on the name of the founder, and the area around it became known after the hill.\nPhnom Penh first became the capital of Cambodia after Ponhea Yat (c. 1390 \u2013 1463), king of the Khmer Empire, moved the capital from Angkor Thom after it was captured and destroyed by Siam a few years earlier. There is a stupa behind Wat Phnom that houses the remains of Ponhea Yat and the royal family as well as the remaining Buddhist statues from the Angkorean era. In the 17th century, Japanese immigrants also settled on the outskirts of present-day Phnom Penh. A small Portuguese community survived in Phnom Penh until the 17th century, undertaking commercial and religious activity in the country.\nPhnom Penh remained the royal capital for 73 years, from 1432 to 1505. It was abandoned for 360 years (from 1505 to 1865) by subsequent kings due to internal fighting between the royal pretenders. Later kings moved the capital several times and established their royal capitals at various locations in Tuol Basan (Srey Santhor), Pursat, Longvek, Lavear Em and Oudong.\nFrom 1673 to 1674, Phnom Penh was the stronghold of rebel king Kaev Hua II. After the Cambodian revolt of 1812, king Ang Chan II began to reign in the area. The Vietnamese general L\u00ea V\u0103n Duy\u1ec7t built \"An Man Th\u00e0nh\", a fortress garrisoned by Vietnamese army. After the Siamese\u2013Vietnamese War (1833\u20131834), \u0110\u1ea1i Nam annexed Cambodia, the An Man garrison was renamed Nam Vang and the became the administrative center of the Vietnamese T\u00e2y Th\u00e0nh province. When Cambodian suzerainty was restored in 1847, the royal seat remained in Oudong.\nIt was not until 1866, under the reign of King Norodom I (1860\u20131904), the eldest son of King Ang Duong, who ruled on behalf of Siam, that Phnom Penh became the permanent seat of government and capital of Cambodia, and the Royal Palace was built. Beginning in 1870, the French colonial authorities turned a riverside village into a city where they built hotels, schools, prisons, barracks, banks, public works offices, telegraph offices, law courts, and health services buildings. In 1872, the first glimpse of a modern city took shape when King Norodom employed the services of French contractor Le Faucheur to construct 300 brick houses for sale and rental to Chinese traders.\nBy the 1920s, Phnom Penh was known as the \"Pearl of Asia\", and over the next four decades, Phnom Penh continued to experience rapid growth with the building of railways to Sihanoukville and Pochentong International Airport (now Phnom Penh International Airport). Phnom Penh's infrastructure saw major modernisation under the rule of Norodom Sihanouk.\nDuring the Vietnam War, Cambodia was used as a base by the People's Army of Vietnam and the Viet Cong, and thousands of refugees from across the country flooded the city to escape the fighting between their own government troops, the People's Army of Vietnam, the Viet Cong, the South Vietnamese and their allies, the Khmer Rouge, and American air strikes. By 1975, the population was 2\u20133\u00a0million, the bulk of whom were refugees from the fighting. The Khmer Rouge cut off supplies to the city for more than a year before it fell on 17 April 1975. Reports from journalists stated that the Khmer Rouge shelling \"tortured the capital almost continuously\", inflicting \"random death and mutilation\" on millions of trapped civilians. The Khmer Rouge forcibly evacuated the entire city after taking it, in what has been described as a death march: Fran\u00e7ois Ponchaud wrote that \"I shall never forget one cripple who had neither hands nor feet, writhing along the ground like a severed worm, or a weeping father carrying his ten-year old daughter wrapped in a sheet tied around his neck like a sling, or the man with his foot dangling at the end of a leg to which it was attached by nothing but skin\"; Jon Swain recalled that the Khmer Rouge were \"tipping out patients from the hospitals like garbage into the streets...In five years of war, this is the greatest caravan of human misery I have seen\". All of its residents, including the wealthy and educated, were evacuated from the city and forced to do difficult labour on rural farms as \"new people\". Tuol Sleng High School was taken over by Pol Pot's forces and was turned into the S-21 prison camp, where people were detained and tortured. Pol Pot sought a return to an agrarian economy and therefore killed many people perceived as educated, \"lazy\", spies, or political enemies. Many others starved to death as a result of failure of the agrarian society and the sale of Cambodia's rice to China in exchange for bullets and weaponry. The former high school is now the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum, where Khmer Rouge torture devices and photos of their victims are displayed. Choeung Ek (the Killing Fields), away, where the Khmer Rouge marched prisoners from Tuol Sleng to be murdered and buried in shallow pits, is also now a memorial to those who were killed by the regime.\nThe Khmer Rouge were driven out of Phnom Penh by the People's Army of Vietnam in 1979, and people began to return to the city. Vietnam is historically a state with which Cambodia has had many conflicts, therefore this liberation was and is viewed with mixed emotions by the Cambodians. A period of reconstruction began, spurred by the continuing stability of government, attracting new foreign investment and aid by countries including France, Australia, and Japan. Loans were made from the Asian Development Bank and the World Bank to reinstate a clean water supply, roads and other infrastructure. The 1998 Census put Phnom Penh's population at 862,000; and the 2008 census was 1.3\u00a0million. By 2019, its population reached over 2.2 million, based on general population census.\nOn 9 September 2025, Phnom Penh's new airport Techo International Airport opened its doors to the public, replacing the former airport as the main aviation hub for the capital city.\nGeography.\nPhnom Penh is in the south-central region of Cambodia, and is fully surrounded by the Kandal province. The municipality is on the banks of the Tonl\u00e9 Sap, Mekong, and Bassac Rivers. These rivers provide freshwater and other natural resources to the city. Phnom Penh and the surrounding areas consist of a typical flood plain area for Cambodia. Although Phnom Penh is at above the river, monsoon season flooding is a problem, and the river sometimes overflows its banks. Boeung Kak, Phnom Penh's largest freshwater lake, was controversially filled in 2010 to make way for property development.\nThe city covers an area of , with some in the municipality and of roads. The agricultural land in the municipality amounts to with some under irrigation.\nClimate.\nPhnom Penh has a tropical wet and dry climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Aw\"). The climate is hot year-round with only minor variations. Temperatures typically range from and weather is subject to the tropical monsoons. The southwest monsoon blows inland bringing moisture-laden winds from the Gulf of Thailand and Indian Ocean from May to November, sees high temperatures accompanied by high humidity. The dry season lasts from December to April; when overnight temperatures can drop to .\nAdministration.\nPhnom Penh is an autonomous municipality of area with a government status equal to that of the provinces. The autonomous municipality is subdivided into 14 administrative divisions called \"khans\" (sections). The district s are subdivided into 105 \"sangkats\" (quarters), and further subdivided into 953 \"phums\" (villages). All \"khans\" are under the governance of Phnom Penh. Dangkao, Meanchey, Porsenchey, Sen Sok and Russey Keo are considered the outskirts of the city.\nPhnom Penh is governed by the governor who acts as the top executive of the city as well as overseeing the Municipal Military Police, Municipal Police, and Bureau of Urban Affairs. Below the governor is the first vice governor and five vice governors. The chief of cabinet, who holds the same status as the vice governors, heads the cabinet consisting of eight deputy chiefs of cabinet who in turn are in charge of the 27 administrative departments. Every \"khans\" also has a chief.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of 2019[ [update]], Phnom Penh had a population of 2,129,371 people, with a total population density of 3,136 inhabitants per square kilometre in a city area. The population growth rate of the city is 3.92%. The city area has grown fourfold since 1979, and the metro area will continue to expand in order to support the city's growing population and economy.\nA survey by the National Institute of Statistics in 2017 showed that 95.3% of the population in Phnom Penh are Khmer, 4% Chams, and 0.7% others, predominantly Chinese, Vietnamese, and other small ethnic groups who are Thai, Budong, Mnong Preh, Kuy and Chong.\nThe official language is Khmer, but English and French are widely used in the city. The number of slum-inhabitants at the end of 2012 was 105,771, compared with 85,807 at the start of 2012.\n\"Note: As stated in the \"History\" paragraph (The 1998 Census put Phnom Penh's population at 862,000;\" \"and the 2008 census was 1.3\"\u00a0\"million.\") \"the information collides with the information provided in the \"Historical population\" table. Needs editing.\"\nReligion.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe state religion is Theravada Buddhism. More than 97.8% of the people in Phnom Penh are Buddhists. Chams, South Asians, and small minority of Khmers have been practicing Islam for hundreds of years. A small percentage follow Christianity. Mosques, Churches and Buddhist Temples can be found in the City.\nPolitics.\n \nPhnom Penh is allocated 12 seats in the National Assembly, making it the largest constituency.\nEconomy.\nPhnom Penh is Cambodia's economic centre as it accounts for a large portion of the Cambodian economy. Double-digit economic growth rates in recent years have triggered an economic boom in Phnom Penh, with new hotels, restaurants, schools, bars, high rises and residential buildings springing up in the city.\nThe economy is based on commercial interests such as garments, trading, and small and medium enterprises. In the past few years the property business has been booming, with rapidly increasing real estate prices. Tourism is also a major contributor in the capital as more shopping and commercial centres open, making Phnom Penh one of the major tourist destinations in South East Asia along with Siem Reap and Sihanoukville. According to the World Travel and Tourism Council, tourism made up 19.2 percent (US$2,053\u00a0million) of Cambodia's GDP in 2009 and accounts for 13.7 percent of total employment. One of the most popular areas in Phnom Penh for tourists is Sisowath Quay, alongside the Tonle Sap River. Sisowath Quay is a five kilometre strip of road that includes restaurants, bars, and hotels.\nThe US$ billion new urban development, Camko City, is meant to bolster the city landscape. The Bureau of Urban Affairs of Phnom Penh Municipality has plans to expand and construct new infrastructure to accommodate the growing population and economy. High rise buildings will be constructed at the entrance of the city and near the lakes and riverbanks. Furthermore, new roads, canals, and a railway system will be used to connect Camko City and Phnom Penh.\nOther projects include:\nWith booming economic growth seen since the 1990s, new shopping venues have opened, such as Sorya Center Point, Aeon Mall Phnom Penh, Aeon Mall Sen Sok City, Aeon Mall Mean Chey and Olympia Mall. Many international brands have opened such as Mango, Salvatore Ferragamo, Hugo Boss, Padini Concept Store, Lily, Timberland, Jimmy Choo, CC Double O, MO, Brands Outlet, Nike, Converse, Pony, Armani Exchange, and Super Dry.\nThe tallest skyscraper in Phnom Penh is Vattanac Capital Tower at a height of , dominating Phnom Penh's skyline with its neighbour skyscraper Canadia Tower (OCIC Tower). The tower was completed in December 2014. Modern high rises have been constructed all around the city, not concentrated in any one particular area.\nThe Central Market \"Phsar Thmei\" is a tourist attraction. The four wings of the yellow colored market are teeming with numerous stalls selling gold and silver jewelry, antique coins, clothing, clocks, flowers, food, fabrics and shoes. Phsar Thmei is undergoing under a major renovation, along with the creation of newer stalls.\nEducation.\nUniversities and colleges.\n \nSupplementary and extra schools.\nThe Japanese Supplementary School of Phnom Penh, formerly known in English as the Phnom Penh Japanese School, is a part-time Japanese School, operated by the Japanese Association of Cambodia (JACAM;\u30ab\u30f3\u30dc\u30b8\u30a2\u65e5\u672c\u4eba\u4f1a \"Kambojia Nihonjin-kai\"). It is in Sangkat Toek Thla in Sen Sok. It was established in 2002. It had 60 students in June 2011.\nCulture.\nPhnom Penh also has its own dialect of Khmer. Speakers of the Phnom Penh dialect often elide syllables, which has earned it a reputation for being lazy speech. Phnom Penh is also known for its influence on New Khmer Architecture. Phnom Penh is notable for Ka tieu Phnom Penh, its variation on rice noodle soup, a dish available in sit-down cafes as well as street cafes.\nThe city hosts a number of music events throughout the city. Indie bands have grown in number due also in part to the emergence of private music schools such as SoundsKool Music (also operating in the city of Siem Reap), and Music Arts School (registered as a non-governmental organization). The Cambodian fishing dance originated in Phnom Penh at the Royal University of Fine Arts in the 1960s.\nThe two most visited museums in the city are the National Museum, which is the country's leading historical and archaeological museum, and Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum, a former Khmer Rouge prison. The National Museum hosts celebrations of Cambodian dance and music, including a popular classic Apsara dance show of traditional folk dances as well as original creations.\nCambodian New Year.\nAt this time, Phnom Penh celebrates Cambodian New Year, an occasion increasingly popular with tourists. During this typically hottest part of the year, water gets thrown around adding to the party atmosphere along with dancing and music. The precise date changes year-by-year but this holiday lasts, at least, three days. This festival marks the turn of the year based on the ancient Khmer calendar and also marks the end of the prior year harvest.\nWater Festival.\nThe largest annual festival in Phnom Penh, this lively gathering celebrates the reversing of the flow of the Tonl\u00e9 Sap River. The holiday lasts three days as people flood into the city to enjoy the fireworks, boat races, live concerts, eating and partying. The boat racing dates back to ancient times marking the strengths of the Khmer marine forces during the Khmer Empire.\nOn 22 November 2010, at least 348 people were crushed to death in a bridge stampede at the festival.\nAncestors' Day.\nAncestors' Day, also called Pchum Ben, is a very important aspect of Cambodian culture. It may be translated as \"gathering together\" to make offerings and is a time of reunion, commemoration, express love and appreciation for one's ancestors. By offering food and good karma to those possibly trapped in the spirit world, living relatives help assuage their misery and guide them back into the cycle of reincarnation.\nVisak Bochea.\nVes\u0101kha is an annual holiday observed traditionally by Buddhists in Cambodia. Sometimes informally called \"Buddha's Birthday\", it actually encompasses the birth, enlightenment (nirv\u0101\u1e47a), and passing away (Parinirv\u0101na) of Gautama Buddha.\nCityscape and architecture.\nThe oldest structure is Wat Phnom from the founding days of the city, constructed in 1373. The main tourist attractions are the Royal Palace with the Silver Pagoda, and the National Museum, constructed during the French colonial era in the late-19th century in the classical Khmer style and hosting a vast collection of Khmer antiquities. The Independence Monument (Khmer: \"Vimean Akareach\"), although from the 1950s, is also constructed in the ancient Khmer style.\nThe French, who were the colonial masters from the 19th century to the 1940s, also left their mark, with various colonial villas, French churches, such as the Phnom Penh Cathedral which was destroyed during the communist rule in Cambodia, boulevards, and the Art Deco market Phsar Thom Thmei. A notable landmark of the colonial era is the Hotel Le Royal.\nStarting with independence from the French in the 1950s and lasting until the era of the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s, Phnom Penh underwent tremendous growth as the capital city of a newly independent country. King Sihanouk was eager to present a new style of architecture and thus invigorate the process of nation building. A new golden era of architecture took off, with various projects and young Khmer architects, often educated in France, given opportunities to design and construct. This new movement was called \"New Khmer Architecture\" and was often characterised by a fusion of Bauhaus, European post-modern architecture, and traditional elements from Angkor. The most prominent architect was Vann Molyvann, who was nominated chief national architect by the king himself in 1956. Molyvann created landmark buildings such as the Preah Suramarit National Theatre or the Vann Molyvann House. Other architects helped construct the newly founded Royal Khmer University, the Institute of Foreign Languages, and the National Sports Centre. With the growth of the upper and entrepreneurial middle classes, new suburbs were built in the 1950s and 1960s. Although these buildings survived the Khmer Rouge era and the civil war, today they are under threat due to economic development and financial speculation. Villas and gardens from that era are being destroyed and redeveloped to make place for bigger structures. The landmark National Theatre by Molyvann was razed in 2008. A movement is rising in Cambodia to preserve this modernist heritage. Old villas are sometimes being converted into boutique hotels, such as the \"Knai Bang Chatt\".\nMonuments and memorials to the genocide of the Khmer Rouge era in the 1970s are the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum (a former high school used as a concentration camp) and, on the outskirts of the city, the Choeung Ek Genocide Center. The Cambodia-Vietnam Friendship Monument was commissioned by the Vietnamese communists as symbol of Khmer-Vietnamese friendship during the late-1970s following the liberation of Cambodia from the Khmer Rouge.\nThe population, foreign investment, and urban development in Phnom Penh grew dramatically during the 1990s and early-2000s. The rapid growth resulted in the city's infrastructure distinctly lacking (the drainage system is particularly notorious, and Phnom Penh frequently floods during the wet season), and a need for both residential and commercial spaces. The simultaneous demand for residential and commercial housing and the increase of international investment has led to the planning, if not construction, of several satellite cities. The largest of these cities are: Grand Phnom Penh International City, CamKo City, Diamond Island City, Boeung Kak Town, and Chruy Cangva City.\nThai Boon Roong Twin Tower World Trade Center is a planned skyscraper complex in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, consisting of twin 133-storey skyscrapers with a height of 567\u00a0m (1,860\u00a0ft). The project is managed by the Cambodian company Thai Boon Roong Group, with the Macau-based Sun Kian Ip Group as co-developer. It is planned to be built on a 5 hectare property in the Doun Penh section, formerly occupied by the Dreamland amusement park, and was approved for construction in February 2016. In December of that year, the developers entered a $2.7 billion construction contract with Chinese firms Wuchang Shipbuilding Industry Group and Sino Great Wall International Engineering, who formed a joint venture for this purpose.\nIf built, the twin skyscrapers would be the second tallest buildings in the region\u2014after Merdeka 118, which is nearing completion in 2023 and has a height of 678.9\u00a0m (2,227\u00a0ft). Upon completion, the Thai Boon Roong Twin Towers would surpass the Petronas Towers as the world's tallest twin skyscraper (as of 2025).\nA groundbreaking ceremony was held on the site in 2018, however, later that year, Sino Great Wall International Engineering withdrew from the project due to concerns over financing and citing \"greater uncontrollable risks.\" As of 2022, the project has been \"failing to materialize\", according to Southeast Asia Globe, and, as of 2023, the Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat website lists the project's status as \"proposed\". The company has cited the COVID-19 pandemic as a reason for the delay.\nOn the outskirts of the city, farmland has been developed into garment factories and housing for lower economic classes and those displaced by the new development in the city center.\n2035 master plan.\nOriginally intended to be completed by 2020, the 2035 master plan is a French-funded project for the development of Phnom Penh. Although the plan was approved by the Ministry of Land Management, Urban Planning and Construction in 2005, it has yet to be ratified by the Cabinet of Cambodia. The original plan details five edge-city projects connected to the historical city centre by waterways and tree-lined corridors.\nSport.\nThe martial arts of Bokator, Pradal Serey (Khmer kick boxing) and Khmer traditional wrestling have venues in Phnom Penh watched by dedicated spectators. Cambodia has increasingly become involved in modern sports over the last 30 years. As with the rest of the country, football and the martial arts are particularly popular. Ultimate fighting and freestyle boxing have also become more common in recent years.\nThe most prominent sporting venues in the city are the Morodok Techo National Stadium with a capacity of 60,000, which opened in 2021 as the home to the Cambodia national football team and the Phnom Penh National Olympic Stadium with a capacity of 30,000 \u2014 although the country never hosted the Olympic Games due to disruption by the civil war and the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s, which built in 1964 as the co-home to the Cambodia national football team. On completion, the stadium was one of the largest in Asia. Volleyball, basketball, and Tai-Kwon-Do games are often hosted at the stadium. The stadium closed in 2000, but was redeveloped and reopened.\nIn soccer ventures, Phnom Penh is formally represented by Phnom Penh Crown FC despite being home to numerous soccer teams who plays in the Cambodian League. Including Visakha, Nagaworld, Boeungket and the aforementioned Phnom Penh Crown, amongst many others. The National Sports Centre of Cambodia hosts swimming, boxing, and volleyball competitions. Noted local football clubs include Phnom Penh Empire, Khemara Keila FC and Military Police. The city hosted the 2023 Southeast Asian Games and the 2023 ASEAN Para Games, this marked the first time that Cambodia has hosted a multi-sport event. The city will host the 2029 Asian Youth Games.\nTransport.\nTecho International Airport, which opened on the 9th of September 2025, is the largest and busiest airport in Cambodia. It is located 20\u00a0km south of Phnom Penh. It replaced Phnom Penh International Airport as the city's main aviation hub. The airport is connected to the city center by taxi, train, and shuttle bus. Cambodia's national flag carrier, Cambodia Angkor Air (later rebranched as Air Cambodia in 2025), launched in 2009, is headquartered in Phnom Penh and has its main hub there, with an additional hub at the Siem Reap\u2013Angkor International Airport. Air France used to serve Phnom Penh from Paris-Charles de Gaulle but this service has since stopped. Qatar Airways now flies to and from Phnom Penh, via Saigon. Taxis, pick-ups, and minibuses leave the city for destinations all over the country, but are fast losing ground to cheaper and more comfortable buses. Phnom Penh also has a rail service. There are numerous bus companies, including Phnom Penh Public Transport and GST Express, running services to most provincial capitals, including Sihanoukville, Kampong Chhnang, Oudong and Tak\u00e9o. Phnom Penh Sorya Transport Co. offers bus service to several provincial destinations along the National Routes and to Saigon. Giant Ibis is another bus company based in Phnom Penh, which travels to Sihanoukville, Kampot, Siem Reap and Saigon, and has free Wi-Fi, air conditioning and modest pricing.\nThe city is Cambodia's main freshwater port, a major port on the Mekong River. It is linked to the South China Sea, 290 kilometres distant, via a channel of the Mekong in Vietnam.\nPublic transport.\nPhnom Penh is served by air conditioned public buses. Initial attempts by the Japanese government to develop a Phnom Penh bus service began in 2001. An update of the JICA urban transport master plan for Phnom Penh was completed and implemented in 2014. The city is now served by 21 bus lines, operated by the Phnom Penh municipal government. Private transportation within the city include the cycle rickshaw, known in Khmer as \"cyclo\", the motorcycle taxi known in Khmer as \"moto\", the auto rickshaw known locally as \"tuk-tuk\", the trailer attached to a motorcycle taxi known in Khmer as \"remorque\", and the standard automobile taxicab known in Khmer as \"taxi\". Private forms of transportation used by locals include bicycles, motorbikes, and cars.\nRailway.\nPhnom Penh railway station is a railway station in Phnom Penh. It is located next to the University of Health Sciences and the National University of Management as well as the Canadian embassy. This station was renovated and formally reopened October 22, 2010.\nScheduled passenger train services between Phnom Penh and Sihanoukville resumed in May 2016 after having been suspended for 14 years. After that, many passenger train service continue to resume. As of May 2021, there is scheduled train service between Phnom Penh to Krong Pursat, Krong Battambang, Krong Sisophon, and Poipet at the Border to Thailand.\nHighways.\nAs the capital of Cambodia, a number of national highways connect the city with various parts of the country:\nIn 2023, a new expressway linking Phnom Penh with Sihanoukville came into operation.29 The expressway was built by China, which has a major role in infrastructure development in Cambodia through the Belt and Road Initiative.29\nWater supply.\nWater supply in Phnom Penh has improved dramatically in terms of access, service quality, efficiency, cost recovery and governance between 1993 and 2006. The number of customers has increased ninefold, service quality has improved from intermittent to continuous supply, water losses have been cut dramatically and the city's water utility went from being bankrupt to making a modest profit. These achievements were recognized through international awards such as the 2006 Ramon Magsaysay Award and the 2010 Stockholm Industry Water Award. The city's water utility is the Phnom Penh Water Supply Authority (PPWSA). Its main water sources are the Mekong River, the Tonle Sap river and the Tonle Bassac river.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPhnom Penh is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotable people.\n \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51592", "revid": "3632083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51592", "title": "Nouakchott", "text": "Capital and the largest city of Mauritania\nNouakchott ( ) is the capital and largest city of Mauritania. Located in the southwestern part of the country, it is one of the largest cities in the Sahara. The city also serves as the administrative and economic center of Mauritania.\nOnce a mid-sized coastal village, Nouakchott was selected as the capital for the nascent nation of Mauritania, with construction beginning in 1958. It was originally designed to accommodate a population of 15,000, but experienced significant population growth in the 1970s when many Mauritanians fled their home villages due to drought and increasing desertification. Many of the newcomers settled in slum areas of the city that were poorly maintained and extremely overcrowded. By the mid-1980s, Nouakchott's population was estimated to be between 400,000 and 500,000.\nAs of 2023[ [update]], the city had a population of nearly 1.5 million people and serves as the hub of the Mauritanian economy. It is home to a deepwater port and Nouakchott\u2013Oumtounsy International Airport, one of the country's two international airports. It also hosts the University of Nouakchott and several other more specialized institutions of higher learning.\nHistory.\nNot too long ago, Nouakchott was a small fishing town, having been a fortified fishing village (\"ksar\") in pre-colonial times and under French rule. As Mauritania prepared for independence, it lacked a capital city. The area of present-day Nouakchott was chosen by Moktar Ould Daddah, the first President of Mauritania, and his advisors. Ould Daddah desired the new capital to symbolize modernity and national unity, which ruled out existing cities or towns in the interior. The village was selected as the capital city for its central location between Saint-Louis, Senegal, the city from which the colony of Mauritania was governed, and Nouadhibou. The village of Nouakchott was originally inhabited by the tribe of Bouhoubainy who are of Amazigh origin and are native to it. They have since been moved to different settlements notably Aknodert which is situated between Nouakchott and the International Airport. One of the intentions of choosing this location was to avoid the sensitive issue of whether the capital was built in an area dominated by the Arabs and Amazigh (Berbers) or Sub-Saharan Africans.\nConstruction began in March 1958 to enlarge the village to house a population of 15,000, in 1959 Nouakchott started with its founding by indigenous people from the surrounding region, and the basics were completed by the time that the French granted independence on 28 November 1960. Nouakchott was planned with the expectation that commerce and other economic activities would not take place in the city. Nouakchott's central business district was planned with broad streets and a grid-like structure; the new \"Cinqui\u00e8me Quartier\" (Fifth District) was located close to this area and became the location of a large open-air market and residential area within a few years. During the 1960s, the city obtained its own local government. By the 1970s, these new areas had grown so much that they replaced the old \"ksar\" in terms of importance, as they also hosted the governmental buildings and state enterprises.\nThe city was attacked twice in 1976 by the Polisario Front during the Western Sahara conflict, but the guerrillas caused little damage. The city has had massive and unconstrained growth, driven by the North African drought, since the beginning of the 1970s; hundreds of thousands moved there in search of a better life. The official censuses showed 134,000 residents in 1977 and 393,325 in 1988, although both figures were probably smaller than reality. The population is now estimated to consist of at least one third of the country's population of 3.3 million, and the 2013 census showed a population of 958,399.\nGeography.\nLocated on the Atlantic coast of the Sahara Desert, it lies on the west coast of Africa. With the exception of Friendship Port and a small fishing port, the coastal strip is mostly left empty and allowed to flood. The coastline includes shifting sandbanks and sandy beaches. There are areas of quicksand close to the harbor. Nouakchott is largely flat, and some of the city lies below sea level. It is threatened by the sand dunes advancing from its eastern side which pose a daily problem. There have been efforts to save particular areas, including work by Jean Meunier. Owing to the rapid build-up, the city is quite spread out, with few tall buildings. Most buildings are one-story.\nNouakchott is built around a large tree-lined street, Avenue Gamal Abdel Nasser, which runs northeast through the city centre from the airport. It divides the city into two, with the residential areas in the north and the medina quarter, along with the \"kebbe\", a shanty town formed due to the displacement of people from other areas by the desert. Other major streets are named (in French) for notable Mauritanian or international figures of the 1960s: Avenue Gamal Abdel Nasser, Avenue Charles de Gaulle, Avenue Kennedy, and Avenue Lumumba, for example.\nThe \"kebbe\" consists of cement buildings that are built overnight and made to look permanent to avoid destruction by the authorities. In 1999, it was estimated that more than half of the city's inhabitants lived in tents and shacks, which were used for residential as well as business purposes. The city is broken into nine \"arrondissements\", sub-divided into alphabetized \"\u00celots\". These are Teyarett, Ksar, Tevragh-Ze\u00efna, Toujounine, Sebkha, El Mina, Dar-Na\u00efm, Arafat and Riad. The Sebkha (Cinqui\u00e8me) Arrondissement is home to a large shopping area.\nClimate.\nNouakchott features a hot desert climate (K\u00f6ppen: BWh) with hot temperatures throughout the year but cool winter night temperatures. Due to the city's oceanside location, Nouakchott is generally not quite as hot as other cities with the same climate. Still, the city can experience sweltering days. While average high temperatures are relatively constant at around , average low temperatures can range from during the fall months (in this city fall is hotter than summer, with September and October being the hottest months) to during the winter months. Minimum temperatures can be as low as during winter nights in Nouakchott. Average rainfall in the city is a year.\nClimate change.\nA 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a \"moderate\" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~ by 2100, the climate of Nouakchott in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Khartoum. The annual temperature would increase by , and the temperature of the warmest month by , while the temperature of the coldest month would decrease by . According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with , which closely matches RCP 4.5.\nSustainability.\nResponding to a 450% projected increase in electricity demand between 2010 and 2030, Nouakchott's Sheikh Zayed solar power plant was completed in 2012 and is considered the largest solar power plant in Africa. The desert climate causes dust accumulation, which negatively impacts the performance of photovoltaic solar panels.\nGovernment.\nNouakchott is divided into three administrative regions (\"wilayat\") led by governors appointed by the central government, each of which contains three departments (\"moughataa\"):\nSeparate from the \"wilayat\", a directly elected regional council was established in Nouakchott in 2018, which took over the roles of promoting social and economic development from the Urban Community that it replaced. Fatimatou Abdel Malick was elected Council president in September 2018, and re-elected in May 2023.\nNouakchott was initially divided into four departments in 1973. In 1986 the current nine departments were created.\nFormerly a district, in 1990 Nouakchott became a region of Mauritania. On 25 November 2014, it was split into the three current regions, with the previous governor of Nouakchott Mahi Ould Hamed becoming the first governor of Nouakchott-Nord.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFor comparison, its population was only 20,000 in 1969. Part of the difficulty in estimating the city's population is that part of it is nomadic, setting up tents in suitable locations, then packing up when the need strikes. Some estimates put the 2008 population at over 2 million. The 2013 census gave the city's population as 958,399.\nSlum resettlement.\nIn 2009, the government of Mauritania announced that it would begin a process of clearing the slum on the outskirts of Nouakchott, as 24,000 families would eventually be relocated to planned housing in the city. The process was scheduled to begin with the relocation of 9,000 families from the outskirts into the poor Arafat department neighborhood of \"Kosovo\", popularly named for its high crime rate and poor services. The government planned to begin moving families in June 2009, despite concerns from aid agencies that needed infrastructure could not be put in place in the receiving neighborhood.\nIn 2013, it was reported that \"slums have been replaced by social dwellings for the poorest\" The World Bank reported that the plan met with substantial success; it resulted in access to improved services for 181,035 people in the slum areas. Now in 2023 the population is approximately 1.5M people.\nEconomy.\nNouakchott is the center of the Mauritanian economy, with three-quarters of service sector enterprises located in the city as of 1999[ [update]] with 90% of the city's economic activity consisting of informal transactions. The \"Capital\" downtown area is home to the headquarters of multiple major national banks and companies and the site of a cluster of open-air markets.\nThe city is the focus of many modernization and foreign investment projects, with two five-star hotels finishing construction in 2024.\nTransport.\nNouakchott has a Chinese-built deepwater port that opened in 1986. It was designed for a capacity of \u00a0tons deadweight (DWT) of cargo a year, but has been handling 1,500,000 tons (DWT) by 2009. China agreed in 2009 to invest US$282\u00a0million in the port, aiming to extend the main quay by over . As of 2011, the World Bank was investigating funding a new shipping container facility at the port.\nAir service is provided by Nouakchott\u2013Oumtounsy International Airport, which replaced the previous Nouakchott International Airport in June 2016.\nThe Cairo\u2013Dakar Highway leg from Nouakchott to Nouadhibou was paved in 2004, although the Nouakchott-Rosso leg was paved before independence. A road (\"Route de l'Espoir\" (Road of Hope)) connects the city with N\u00e9ma via Boutilimit and Kiffa. In the city, there is a public transport and commuter system, with vehicles serving major boulevards.\nIn July 2022, a tramway project was presented; it does not have a scheduled opening date.\nEducation.\nThe city is home to the University of Nouakchott Al Aasriya, the main university in Mauritania, opened in 1981. As of 1995, it had 70 professors and 2,800 students. Other higher education facilities include the Lebanese International University of Mauritania, the National School of Administration, the College of Science and Technology and the Higher Scientific Institute.\nPublic schools in Nouakchott are dispersed throughout the city, while private schools are concentrated in middle and upper-class districts. Among the most prominent international schools for citizens and expats alike are the American International School of Nouakchott, the Lyc\u00e9e Fran\u00e7ais Th\u00e9odore Monod, and TLC International School.\nCulture.\nAttractions in Nouakchott include the National Museum of Mauritania, the National Library, the Port de P\u00eache, and the National Archives. The city hosts several markets, including the Marocaine market and the beaches. One beach is devoted to fishing boats where fish can be bought fresh at the Fish market. Nouakchott is a principal selling place of native Saharan meteorites.\nPlaces of worship.\nNouakchott, like the rest of the country, is populated by a Sunni Muslim super-majority, and mosques are extremely common in neighborhoods. The Saudi Mosque and Masjid Ibn Abbas are the most notable, due to their grand architecture and size.\nThere are also few Christian churches and temples: the most well-known is the Cathedral of Saint Joseph in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Nouakchott (Catholic Church).\nSport.\nNouakchott hosts ten of the fourteen teams of the Mauritanian Super D1 as of the 2023\u20132024 season, including ACS Ksar, AS Douanes, AS Garde Nationale, ASAC Concorde, ASC Police, ASC Tidjikja, FC Gourel Sangue, FC Tevragh-Zeina, Kaedi FC, and Nouakchott Kings.\nTwin towns \u2013 Sister cities.\nNouakchott is twinned with: \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51593", "revid": "50110900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51593", "title": "Minsk", "text": "Capital and largest city of Belarus\nMinsk (, ; , ) is the capital and largest city of Belarus, located on the Svislach and the now subterranean Nyamiha rivers. As the capital, Minsk has a special administrative status in Belarus and is the administrative centre of Minsk region and Minsk district. As of 2024,[ [update]] it has a population of about two million, making Minsk the 11th-most populous city in Europe. Minsk is one of the administrative capitals of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU).\nFirst mentioned in 1067, Minsk became the capital of the Principality of Minsk, an appanage of the Principality of Polotsk, before being annexed by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1242. It received town privileges in 1499. From 1569, it was the capital of Minsk Voivodeship, an administrative division of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. It was part of the territories annexed by the Russian Empire in 1793, as a consequence of the Second Partition of Poland. From 1919 to 1991, after the Russian Revolution, Minsk was the capital of the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, which became a republic of the Soviet Union in 1922. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Minsk became the capital of the newly independent Republic of Belarus.\nEtymology and historical names.\nThe Old East Slavic name of the town was ( &lt; Early Proto-Slavic or Late Indo-European ), derived from a river name \"M\u011bn\" (&lt;\u00a0).\nThe resulting form of the name, \"Minsk\" (spelled either or ), was taken over both in Russian (modern spelling: ) and Polish (), and under the influence of Russian this form also became official in Belarusian. The direct continuation of the name in Belarusian is (, ), which some Belarusian-speakers continue to use as their preferred name for the city.\nWhen Belarus was under Polish rule, the names ('Minsk of Lithuania') and ('Minsk of Belarus') were used to differentiate this place name from 'Minsk in Mazovia'. In modern Polish, without an attribute usually refers to the city in Belarus, which is about 50 times bigger than Mi\u0144sk Mazowiecki; (compare Brest-Litovsk and Brze\u015b\u0107 Kujawski for a similar case).\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe Svislach River valley was the settlement boundary between two early East Slavic tribes\u00a0\u2013 the Krivichs and Dregoviches. By 980, the area was incorporated into the early medieval Principality of Polotsk, one of the earliest East Slavic principalities of Kievan Rus'. Minsk was first mentioned in the name form \"M\u011bnesk\u044a\" (\u041c\u0463\u043d\u0435\u0441\u043a\u044a) in the \"Primary Chronicle\" for the year 1067 in association with the Battle on the River Nemiga. 1067 is now widely accepted as the founding year of Minsk. City authorities consider the date of 3 March 1067 to be the exact founding date of the city, though the town (by then fortified by wooden walls) had certainly existed for some time by then. The origin of the name is unknown but there are several theories.\nIn the early 12th century, the Principality of Polotsk disintegrated into smaller fiefs. The Principality of Minsk was established by one of the Polotsk dynasty princes. In 1129, the Principality of Minsk was annexed by Kiev, the dominant principality of Kievan Rus'; however in 1146 the Polotsk dynasty regained control of the principality. By 1150, Minsk rivalled Polotsk as the major city in the former Principality of Polotsk. The princes of Minsk and Polotsk were engaged in years of struggle trying to unite all lands previously under the rule of Polotsk.\nLate Middle Ages.\nMinsk escaped the Mongol invasion of Rus in 1237\u20131239. In 1242, Minsk became a part of the expanding Grand Duchy of Lithuania. It joined peacefully and local elites enjoyed high rank in the society of the Grand Duchy. In 1413, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland entered into a union. Minsk became the centre of Minsk Voivodship (province). In 1441, as Grand Duke of Lithuania, Casimir IV included Minsk in a list of cities enjoying certain privileges, and in 1499, during the reign of his son, Alexander Jagiellon, Minsk received town privileges under Magdeburg law. In 1569, after the Union of Lublin, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland merged into a single state, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth.\nBy the middle of the 16th century, Minsk was an important economic and cultural centre in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. It was also an important centre for the Eastern Orthodox Church. Following the Union of Brest, both the Eastern Catholic Churches and the Roman Catholic Church increased in influence.\nIn 1655, Minsk was conquered by troops of Tsar Alexis of Russia. Russians governed the city until 1660 when it was regained by John II Casimir, Grand Duke of Lithuania and King of Poland. By the end of the Polish-Russian War, Minsk had only about 2,000 residents and just 300 houses. The second wave of devastation occurred during the Great Northern War, when Minsk was occupied in 1708 and 1709 by the army of Charles XII of Sweden and then by the army of Peter the Great. The last decades of the Polish rule involved decline or very slow development, since Minsk had become a small provincial town of little economic or military significance.\nRussian rule.\nMinsk was annexed by Russia in 1793 as a consequence of the Second Partition of Poland. In 1796, it became the centre of the Minsk Governorate. All of the initial street names were replaced by Russian names, though the spelling of the city's name remained unchanged. It was briefly occupied by the Grande Arm\u00e9e during French invasion of Russia in 1812.\nThroughout the 19th century, the city continued to grow and significantly improve. In the 1830s, major streets and squares of Minsk were cobbled and paved. A first public library was opened in 1836, and a fire brigade was put into operation in 1837. In 1838, the first local newspaper, \"Minskiye gubernskiye vedomosti\" (\"Minsk province news\") went into circulation. The first theatre was established in 1844. By 1860, Minsk was an important trading city with a population of 27,000. There was a construction boom that led to the building of two- and three-story brick and stone houses in \"Upper Town\".\nMinsk's development was boosted by improvements in transportation. In 1846, the Moscow-Warsaw road was laid through Minsk. In 1871, a railway link between Moscow and Warsaw ran via Minsk, and in 1873, a new railway from Romny in Ukraine to the Baltic Sea port of Libava (Liep\u0101ja) was also constructed. Thus Minsk became an important rail junction and a manufacturing hub. A municipal water supply was introduced in 1872, the telephone in 1890, the horse tram in 1892, and the first power generator in 1894. By 1900, Minsk had 58 factories employing 3,000 workers. The city also boasted theatres, cinemas, newspapers, schools and colleges, as well as numerous monasteries, churches, synagogues, and a mosque. According to the 1897 Russian census, the city had 91,494 inhabitants, with some 47,561 Jews constituting more than half of the city population.\n20th century.\nIn the early years of the 20th century, Minsk was a major centre for the worker's movement in Belarus. The 1st Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, the forerunner to the Bolsheviks and eventually the CPSU, was held there in 1898. It was also one of the major centres of the Belarusian national revival, alongside Vilnius. However, the First World War significantly affected the development of Minsk. By 1915, Minsk was a battlefront city. Some factories were closed down, and residents began evacuating to the east. Minsk became the headquarters of the Western Front of the Russian army and also housed military hospitals and military supply bases.The Russian Revolution had an immediate effect in Minsk. A Workers' Soviet was established in Minsk in October 1917, drawing much of its support from disaffected soldiers and workers. After the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, German forces occupied Minsk on 21 February 1918. On 25 March 1918, Minsk was proclaimed the capital of the Belarusian People's Republic. The republic was short-lived; in December 1918, Minsk was taken over by the Red Army. In January 1919 Minsk was proclaimed the capital of the Byelorussian SSR, though later in 1919 (see Operation Minsk) and again in 1920, the city was controlled by the Second Polish Republic during the course of the Polish-Bolshevik War between 8 August 1919 and 11 July 1920 and again between 14 October 1920 and 19 March 1921. Under the terms of the Treaty of Riga, Minsk was handed back to the Russian SFSR and became the capital of the Byelorussian SSR, one of the founding republics of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.\nA programme of reconstruction and development began in 1922. By 1924, there were 29 factories in operation; schools, museums, theatres and libraries were also established. Throughout the 1920s and the 1930s, Minsk saw rapid development with dozens of new factories being built and new schools, colleges, higher education establishments, hospitals, theatres and cinemas being opened. During this period, Minsk was also a centre for the development of Belarusian language and culture.\nBefore the Second World War, Minsk had a population of 300,000 people. The Germans captured Minsk in the Battle of Bia\u0142ystok\u2013Minsk, as part of Operation Barbarossa; after it had been devastated by the Luftwaffe. However, some factories, museums, and tens of thousands of civilians had been evacuated to the east. The Germans designated Minsk the administrative centre of \"Generalbezirk Wei\u00dfruthenien\". Communists and sympathisers were killed or imprisoned, both locally and after being transported to Germany. Homes were requisitioned to house invading German forces. Thousands starved as food was seized by the German Army and paid work was scarce. Minsk was the site of one of the largest Nazi-run ghettos in the Second World War, temporarily housing over 100,000 Jews (see Minsk Ghetto). The Germans operated the Dulag 126 and Dulag 127 transit camps for prisoners of war in Minsk in 1941, and then the Stalag 352 prisoner-of-war camp for Soviet and Italian POWs from 1941 to 1944. Some anti-Soviet residents of Minsk, who hoped that Belarus could regain independence, did support the Germans, especially at the beginning of the occupation, but by 1942, Minsk had become a major centre of the Soviet partisan resistance movement against the invasion, in what is known in some post-Soviet states as the \"Great Patriotic War\". For this role, Minsk was awarded the title \"Hero City\" in 1974.\nMinsk was recaptured by Soviet troops on 3 July 1944 in the Minsk offensive as part of Operation Bagration. The city was the centre of German resistance to the Soviet advance and saw heavy fighting during the first half of 1944. Factories, municipal buildings, power stations, bridges, most roads, and 80% of the houses were reduced to rubble. In 1944, Minsk's population was reduced to a mere 50,000.\nThe historical centre was replaced in the 1940s and 1950s by Stalinist architecture, which favoured grand buildings, broad avenues and wide squares. Subsequently, the city grew rapidly as a result of massive industrialisation. Since the 1960s Minsk's population has also grown apace, reaching 1\u00a0million in 1972 and 1.5\u00a0million in 1986.\nConstruction of Minsk Metro began on 16 June 1977, and the system was opened to the public on 30 June 1984, becoming the ninth metro system in the Soviet Union.\nThe rapid population growth was primarily driven by mass migration of young, unskilled workers from rural areas of Belarus, as well as by migration of skilled workers from other parts of the Soviet Union. To house the expanding population, Minsk spread beyond its historical boundaries. Its surrounding villages were absorbed and rebuilt as \"mikroraions\", districts of high-density apartment housing.\nRecent developments.\nThroughout the 1990s, after the fall of communism, the city continued to change. As the capital of a newly independent country, Minsk quickly acquired the attributes of a major city. Embassies were opened, and a number of Soviet administrative buildings became government centres. During the early and mid-1990s, Minsk was hit by an economic crisis and many development projects were halted, resulting in high unemployment and underemployment. Since the late 1990s, there have been improvements in transport and infrastructure, and a housing boom has been underway since 2002. On the outskirts of Minsk, new \"mikroraions\" of residential development have been built. Metro lines have been extended, and the road system (including the Minsk BeltWay) has been improved. In recent years Minsk has been continuously decentralizing, with a third line of the Minsk Metro opening in 2020. More development is planned for several areas outside the city centre, while the future of the older neighborhoods is still unclear.\nGeography.\nMinsk is located on the southeastern slope of the Minsk Hills, a region of rolling hills running from the southwest (upper reaches of the river Neman) to the northeast\u2013 that is, to Lukomskaye Lake in northwestern Belarus. The average altitude above sea level is . The physical geography of Minsk was shaped over the two most recent ice ages. The Svislach River, which flows across the city from the northwest to the southeast, is in the \"urstromtal\", an ancient river valley formed by water flowing from melting ice sheets at the end of the last Ice Age. There are six smaller rivers within the city limits, all part of the Black Sea basin.\nMinsk is in the area of mixed forests typical of most of Belarus. Pinewood and mixed forests border the edge of the city, especially in the north and east. Some of the forests were preserved as parks (for instance, the Chelyuskinites Park) as the city grew.\nThe city was initially built on the hills, which allowed for defensive fortifications, and the western parts of the city are the most hilly.\nOnly from the northwestern edge of city lies the large Zaslawskaye reservoir, often called the Minsk sea. It is the second largest reservoir in Belarus, constructed in 1956.\nClimate.\nMinsk has a warm summer humid continental climate (, Trewartha \"Dcbo\"), although its weather is oftentimes unpredictable, given its location between the strong influence of the moist air over the Atlantic Ocean and the dry air over the Eurasian landmass. Its weather is unstable and tends to change relatively often. The average January temperature is , while the average July temperature is . The lowest temperature was recorded on 17 January 1940, at and the warmest on 8 August 2015 at . Fog is frequent, especially in the autumn and spring. Minsk receives of precipitation annually, of which one-third falls during the cold period of the year (as snow or rain) and two-thirds during the warm period. Throughout the year, winds are generally westerly or northwesterly, bringing cool and moist air from the Atlantic.\nEcological situation.\nThe ecological situation is monitored by Republican Centre of Radioactive and Environmental Control.\nDuring 2003\u20132008 the overall weight of contaminants increased from 186,000 to 247,400 tons. The change from gas as industrial fuel to mazut for financial reasons has worsened the ecological situation. However, the majority of overall air pollution is produced by cars. Belarusian traffic police \"DAI\" every year hold operation \"Clean Air\" to prevent the use of cars with extremely polluting engines. Sometimes the maximum normative concentration of formaldehyde and ammonia in air is exceeded in Zavodski District. Other major contaminants are Chromium-VI and nitrogen dioxide. Zavodski, Partyzanski and Leninski districts, which are located in the southeastern part of Minsk, are the most polluted areas in the city.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;During its first centuries, Minsk was a city with a predominantly Early East Slavic population (the forefathers of modern-day Belarusians). \nAfter the 1569 Lublin Union, Minsk became part of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. With the religious Union of Brest, Minsk underwent religious and linguistic Polonization. This pressure intensified after the Russo-Polish War of 1654\u20131667, which led to the transfer of property to the Polish nobility due to the deaths of the previous owners. The period of Polish rule also led to a massive migration of Jews to Belarusian lands, with their share in cities growing from less than 10% to half.\nAfter the second partition of Poland in 1793, Minsk and its larger region became part of the Russian Empire. Despite the Imperial authorities' attempts to eradicate Polish influence by promoting Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality, Poles continued to dominate the city council and control most of the income-producing real estate in the early 20th century.\nAt the time of the 1897 census under the Russian Empire, Jews were the largest religious group in Minsk, accounting for 52% of the population, with 47,562 out of 90,912 residents. Russian was the mother tongue of 25.5% of the population, Polish \u2013 11.4%, and Belarusian \u2013 9.0%. Their respective literacy rates were 65.2%, 55.4%, and 34.4%. Among Jews, 46.2% were literate.\n80% of residents were born in Minsk Governorate.\nA small traditional community of Lipka Tatars had been living in Minsk for centuries.\nBetween the 1880s and 1930s, many Jews emigrated from the city to the United States as part of a Jewish diaspora.\nThe high mortality of the First World War and the Second World War affected the demographics of the city, particularly the destruction of Jews under the Nazi occupation of the Second World War. Working through local populations, Germans instituted deportation of Jewish citizens to concentration camps, murdering most of them there. The Jewish community of Minsk suffered catastrophic losses in the Holocaust. From more than half the population of the city, the percentage of Jews dropped to less than 10% more than ten years after the war. After its limited population peaked in the 1970s, continuing anti-Semitism under the Soviet Union and increasing nationalism in Belarus caused most Jews to emigrate to Israel and western countries in the 1980s; by 1999, less than 1% of the population of Minsk was Jewish.\nIn the first three decades of the post-war years, the most numerous new residents in Minsk were rural migrants from other parts of Belarus; the proportion of ethnic Belarusians increased markedly. Numerous skilled Russians and other migrants from other parts of the Soviet Union migrated for jobs in the growing manufacturing sector. In 1959 Belarusians made up 63.3% of the city's residents. Other ethnic groups included Russians (22.8%), Jews (7.8%), Ukrainians (3.6%), Poles (1.1%) and Tatars (0.4%). Continued migration from rural Belarus in the 1960s and 1970s changed the ethnic composition further. By 1979 Belarusians made up 68.4% of the city's residents. Other ethnic groups included Russians (22.2%), Jews (3.4%), Ukrainians (3.4%), Poles (1.2%) and Tatars (0.2%).\nAccording to the 1989 census, 83% of Minsk residents were born in Belarus, including 42% born in Minsk, 22% in the Minsk region, and 19% in other parts of Belarus (6% of whom were from Grodno and Brest regions). Those born in other republics accounted for 17% of Minsk residents, with 10% from the Soviet Russia and 3% from the Soviet Ukraine.\nAccording to the 1999 census, Belarusians made up 79.3% of the city's residents. Other ethnic groups included Russians (15.7%), Ukrainians (2.4%), Poles (1.1%) and Jews (0.6%). The Russian and Ukrainian populations of Minsk peaked in the late 1980s (at 325,000 and 55,000 respectively). Since Belarus's independence, many of them chose to move to their respective mother countries, although some families had been in Minsk for generations. Another factor in the shifting demographics of the city was the changing self-identification of Minsk residents of mixed ancestry \u2013 in independent Belarus they identify as Belarusians.\nThe Jewish population of Minsk peaked in the early 1970s at 50,000 according to official figures; independent estimates put the figure at between 100,000 and 120,000. Beginning in the 1980s, there has been mass-scale emigration to Israel, the US, and Germany. Today only about 10,000 Jews live in Minsk. The traditional minorities of Poles and Tatars have remained at much the same size (17,000 and 3,000 respectively). Rural Poles have migrated from the western part of Belarus to Minsk, and many Tatars have moved to Minsk from Tatarstan.\nSome more recent ethnic minority communities have developed as a result of immigration. The most prominent are immigrants from the Caucasus countries \u2013 Armenians, Azerbaijanis and Georgians each numbering about 2,000 to 5,000. They began migrating to Minsk in the 1970s, and more immigrants have joined them since. Many work in the retail trade in open-air markets. A small but prominent Arab community has developed in Minsk, primarily represented by recent economic immigrants from Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Algeria, etc. (In many cases, they are graduates of Minsk universities who decide to settle in Belarus and bring over their families). A small community of Romani, numbering about 2,000, are settled in suburbs of north-western and southern Minsk.\nLanguages.\nThroughout its history Minsk has been a city of many languages. Initially most of its residents spoke Ruthenian (which later developed into modern Belarusian). However, after 1569 the official language was Polish. In the 19th-century Russian became the official language and by the end of that century it had become the language of administration, schools and newspapers. The Belarusian national revival increased interest in the Belarusian language \u2013 its use has grown since the 1890s, especially among the intelligentsia. In the 1920s and early 1930s Belarusian was the major language of Minsk, including use for administration and education (both secondary and tertiary). However, since the late 1930s Russian again began gaining dominance.\nA short period of Belarusian national revival in the early 1990s saw a rise in the numbers of Belarusian speakers. However, in 1994 the newly elected president Alexander Lukashenko slowly reversed this trend. Most residents of Minsk now use Russian exclusively in their everyday lives at home and at work, although Belarusian is understood as well. Substantial numbers of recent migrants from the rural areas use Trasianka (a Russo-Belarusian mixed language) in their everyday lives.\nReligion.\nThere are no reliable statistics on the religious affiliations of those living in Minsk, or among the population of Belarus generally. The majority of Christians belong to the Belarusian Orthodox Church, which is the exarchate of the Russian Orthodox Church in Belarus. There is a significant minority of Roman Catholics.\nAs of 2006, there are approximately 30 religious communities of various denominations in Minsk. The only functioning monastery in the city is St Elisabeth Convent; its large complex of churches is open to visitors.\nCrime.\nMinsk has the highest crime rate in Belarus\u00a0\u2013 193.5 crimes per 10,000 citizens. 20\u201325% of all serious crimes in Belarus, 55% of bribes and 67% of mobile phone thefts are committed in Minsk. However, attorney general Grigory Vasilevich stated that the homicide rate in Minsk in 2008 was \"relatively fine\".\nThe crime rate grew significantly in 2009 and 2010: for example, the number of corruption crimes grew by 36% in 2009 alone. Crime detection level varies from 13% in burglary to 92% in homicide with an average 40.1%. Many citizens are concerned for their safety at night and the strongest concern was expressed by residents of Chizhovka and Shabany microdistricts (both in Zavodski District).\nThe SIZO-1 detention center, IK-1 general prison, and the KGB special jail called \"Amerikanka\" are all located in Minsk. Alexander Lukashenko's rivals in the 2010 presidential election were imprisoned in the KGB jail along with other prominent politicians and civil activists. Ales Michalevic, who was kept in this jail, accused the KGB of using torture.\nOn 15 November 2020, more than 1,000 protesters were arrested during an anti-government protest. Protesters took to the streets in the capital, Minsk, following the death of an opposition activist, Raman Bandarenka. The activist died after allegedly being beaten up by the security forces. The protesters put flowers at the site where he was detained before succumbing to his injuries.\nEconomy.\nMinsk is the economic capital of Belarus. It has developed industrial and services sectors which serve the needs not only of the city, but of the entire nation. Minsk's contributions form nearly 46% of Belarusian budget. According to 2010 results, Minsk paid 15\u00a0trillion BYR to state budget while the whole income from all other regions was 20\u00a0trillion BYR. In the period January 2013 to October 2013, 70.6% of taxes in the budget of Minsk were paid by non-state enterprises, 26.3% by state enterprises, and 1.8% by individual entrepreneurs. Among the top 10 taxpayers were five oil and gas companies (including two Gazprom's and one Lukoil's subsidiaries), two mobile network operators (MTS and A1), two companies producing alcoholic beverages (Minsk-Kristall and Minsk grape wines factory) and one producer of tobacco goods.\nIn 2012, Gross Regional Product of Minsk was formed mainly by industry (26.4%), wholesale (19.9%), transportation and communications (12.3%), retail (8.6%) and construction (5.8%).\nThe GRP of Minsk measured in Belarusian rubles was 55 billion (\u20ac20 billion) or around 1/3 of the GDP of Belarus.\nMinsk city has highest salaries in Belarus. As of December 2023 average gross salary in Minsk was 3,240 BYN per month (~ US$1,000).\nThere are more than 400 travel agencies in Minsk, about a quarter of them provide agent activity, and most of them are tour operators.\nIndustry.\nMinsk is the major industrial centre of Belarus. According to 2012 statistics, Minsk-based companies produced 21.5% of electricity, 76% of trucks, 15.9% of footwear, 89.3% of television sets, 99.3% of washing machines, 30% of chocolate, 27.7% of distilled alcoholic beverages and 19.7% of tobacco goods in Belarus.\nToday the city has over 250 factories and plants. Its industrial development started in the 1860s and was facilitated by the railways built in the 1870s. However, much of the industrial infrastructure was destroyed during World War I, especially during World War II. After the last war, the development of the city was linked to the development of industry, especially of R&amp;D-intensive sectors (heavy emphasis of R&amp;D intensive industries in urban development in the USSR is known in Western geography as 'Minsk phenomenon'). Minsk was turned into a major production site for trucks, tractors, gears, optical equipment, refrigerators, television sets and radios, bicycles, motorcycles, watches, and metal-processing equipment. Outside machine-building and electronics, Minsk also had textiles, construction materials, food processing, and printing industries. During the Soviet period, the development of the industries was linked to suppliers and markets within the USSR. The break-up of the union in 1991 led to a serious economic meltdown in 1991\u20131994.\nHowever, since the adoption of the neo-Keynesean policies under Alexander Lukashenko's government in 1995, much of the gross industrial production was regained. Unlike many other cities in the CIS and Eastern Europe, Minsk was not heavily de-industrialised in the 1990s. About 40% of the workforce is still employed in the manufacturing sector.\nMajor industrial employers include:\nUnemployment.\nIn 2011 official statistics quoted unemployment in Minsk at 0.3%. During the 2009 census 5.6% of Minsk residents of employable age called themselves unemployed.\nThe government effectively discourages official unemployment registration because of tiny unemployment benefits and obligatory public works. In 2015\u20132017 there was an attempt (cancelled in January 2018) to collect the 'free rider tax' taken from those who were unemployed unregistered for more than 6 months.\nGovernment and administrative divisions.\nMinsk is subdivided into nine \"raions\" (districts):\nIn addition, a number of residential neighbourhoods are recognised in Minsk, called microdistricts, with no separate administration.\nCulture.\nMinsk is the major cultural centre of Belarus. Its first theatres and libraries were established in the middle of the 19th century. It presently has 11 theatres and 16 museums, along with 20 cinemas and 139 libraries.\nTheatres.\nMajor theatres are:\nMuseums.\nMajor museums include:\nArt galleries include:\nSports.\nInternational sporting events.\nIn 2013, Minsk hosted the European Junior Rowing Championships at the Republican Center of Olympic Training for Rowing And Canoeing to the north-west of the city.\nMinsk hosted the 2014 IIHF World Championship at the Minsk Arena.\nIn January 2016, the 2016 European Speed Skating Championships were held in the Minsk Arena\u00a0\u2013 the only indoor speed skating rink in Belarus.\nMinsk hosted the 2019 European Games in June.\nThe 2019 European Figure Skating Championships were held in the Minsk Arena from 21 to 27 January.\nTransportation.\nLocal transport.\nMinsk has a high-developed public transport system. Passengers are served by 8 tramway lines, over 70 trolleybus lines, 3 subway lines and over 100 bus lines. Trams were the first public transport used in Minsk (since 1892\u00a0\u2013 the horse-tram, and since 1929\u00a0\u2013 the electric tram). Public buses have been used in Minsk since 1924, and trolleybuses since 1952.\nMost of public transport is operated by Minsktrans, a city-owned and -funded transport not-for-profit company. As of November 2021, Minsktrans used 1,322 buses (plus 93 electric buses), 744 trolleybuses and 135 tramway cars in Minsk.\nThe Minsk city government in 2003 decreed that local transport provision should be set at a minimum level of 1 vehicle (bus, trolleybus or tram) per 1,500 residents. The number of vehicles in use by Minsktrans is 2.2 times higher than the minimum level. \nPublic transport fares are controlled by the \"city's executive committee\" (city council). Single trip ticket for bus, trolleybus or tramway costs 0.75 BYN (\u2248\u00a0USD 0.3), 0.80 BYN for metro and 0.90 BYN for express buses. Monthly ticket for one kind of transport costs 33 BYN and 61 BYN for all five. Commercial marshrutka's prices varies from 1.5 to 2 BYN.\nRapid transit.\nMinsk is the only city in Belarus with an underground metro system. Construction of the metro began in 1977, soon after the city reached over a million people, and the first line with 8 stations was opened in 1984. Since then it has expanded into three lines: Masko\u016dskaja, Awtazavodskaya, and Zelenaluzhskaya which are long with 15, 14 and 4 stations, respectively. On 7 November 2012, three new stations on the Moskovskaya Line were opened and another on 3 June 2014.. Construction of the third line began in 2011 and the first stage opened in 2020. Some layout plans speculate on a possible fourth line running from Vyasnyanka to Serabranka micro-rayons.\nThe system uses Metrovagonmash and Stadler METRO trains. On a typical day Minsk metro is used by 800,000 passengers. In 2007 ridership of Minsk metro was 262.1\u00a0million passengers, in 2017 ridership of Minsk metro was 284,1\u00a0million passengers, making it the 5th busiest metro network in the former USSR (behind Moscow, St. Petersburg, Kyiv, and Kharkiv). During peak hours trains run each 2\u20132.5 minutes. The metro network employs 3,435 staff.\nMost of the urban transport is being renovated to modern standards. For instance, all metro stations built since 2001 have passenger lifts from platform to street level, thus enabling the use of the newer stations by disabled passengers.\nRailway and intercity bus.\nMinsk is the largest transport hub in Belarus. Minsk is located at the junction of the Warsaw-Moscow railway (built in 1871) running from the southwest to the northeast of the city and the Liep\u0101ja\u2013Romny railway (built in 1873) running from the northwest to the south. The first railway connects Russia with Poland and Germany; the second connects Ukraine with Lithuania and Latvia. They cross at the Minsk-\"Pasa\u017eyrski\" railway station, the main railway station of Minsk. The station was built in 1873 as Vilenski Vazkal. The initial wooden building was demolished in 1890 and rebuilt in stone. During World War II the Minsk railway station was completely destroyed. It was rebuilt in 1945 and 1946 and served until 1991. \nThe new building of the Minsk-\"Pasa\u017eyrski\" railway station was built during 1991\u20132002. Its construction was delayed due to financial difficulties. There were plans to move all suburban rail traffic from Minsk-\"Pasa\u017eyrski\" to the smaller stations, Minsk-\"Uschodni\" (East), Minsk-\"Pa\u016ddniovy\" (South) and Minsk-\"Pa\u016dno\u010dny\" (North), by 2020. However, those plans were scrapped in favour of developing a more integrated system of suburban rail (branded as City Lines, operated by Belarusian Railways). The system currently consists of 3 routes (to Zaslawye, \u010cyrvony \u015aciah, and Rudziensk) all terminating at the central train station and is being served by 6 Stadler FLIRT train sets.\nThere is an intercity bus station that links Minsk with the nearby airport, with the suburbs and other cities in Belarus and the neighboring countries. There are frequent services to Moscow, Smolensk, Vilnius, Riga and Warsaw.\nCycling.\nAccording to a 2019 survey of 1,934 people, Minsk had around 811,000 adult bicycles and 232,000 child and adolescent bicycles. In Minsk there is one bike for every 1.9 people. The total number of bicycles in Minsk exceeds the total number of cars (770,000 personal automobiles). 39% of Minsk residents have a personal bike. 43% of Minsk residents ride a bicycle once a month or more. As of 2017, the level of bicycle use is about 1% of all transport movements (for comparison: 12% in Berlin, 50% in Copenhagen).\nSince 2015, an annual bicycle parade / bicycle carnival is held in Minsk, during which vehicles are blocked for several hours along Pobediteley (Peramohi) Avenue. The number of participants in 2019 was more than 20,000 and the number of registrations was about 12,000. In 2017, the European Union funded the project \"Urban cycling in Belarus\" at a cost of \u20ac560,000, within the framework of which the public association Minsk Cycling Society together with the Council of Ministers created the regulatory document National Concept for the Development of Cycling in Belarus. In 2020, Minsk entered the top 3 most cycling cities in the CIS \u2013 after Moscow and Saint Petersburg.\nAirports.\nMinsk National Airport is located to the east of the city. It opened in 1982 and the current railway station opened in 1987. It is an international airport with flights to Europe and the Middle East.\nThe former Minsk-1 Airport closed in 2015.\nMinsk Borovaya Airfield (UMMB) is located in a suburb north-east of the city, next to Zaliony Luh Forest Park, housing Aero Club Minsk and Minsk Aviation Museum.\nEducation.\nMinsk has about 451 kindergartens, 241 schools, 22 further education colleges, and 29 higher education institutions, including 12 major national universities. \nHonors.\nA minor planet, 3012 Minsk, was discovered by Soviet astronomer Nikolai Chernykh in 1979 and is named after the city.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nMinsk is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51594", "revid": "50867308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51594", "title": "Perugia", "text": "Comune in Umbria, Italy\nPerugia ( , ; ; ) is the capital city of Umbria in central Italy, crossed by the River Tiber. The city is located about north of Rome and southeast of Florence. It covers a high hilltop and part of the valleys around the area. It has 162,467 inhabitants as of 2025.\nThe history of Perugia goes back to the Etruscan period; Perugia was one of the main Etruscan cities.\nThe city is also known as a university town, with the University of Perugia founded in 1308, the University for Foreigners, and some smaller colleges such as the Academy of Fine Arts \"Pietro Vannucci\" () public athenaeum founded in 1573, the Perugia University Institute of Linguistic Mediation for translators and interpreters, the Music Conservatory of Perugia, founded in 1788, and other institutes.\nPerugia is also a well-known cultural and artistic centre of Italy. The city hosts multiple annual festivals and events, e.g., former Eurochocolate Festival (October), now in Bastia Umbra, the Umbria Jazz Festival (July), and the International Journalism Festival (in April), and is associated with multiple notable people in the arts.\nPainter Pietro Vannucci, nicknamed Perugino, was a native of Citt\u00e0 della Pieve, near Perugia. He decorated the local \"Sala del Cambio\" with a series of frescoes; eight of his pictures can also be seen in the National Gallery of Umbria.\nPerugino may have been the teacher of Raphael, the great Renaissance artist who produced five paintings in Perugia (today no longer in the city) and one fresco. Another painter, Pinturicchio, lived in Perugia. Galeazzo Alessi is the most famous architect from Perugia.\nThe city's symbol is the griffin, which can be seen in the form of plaques and statues on buildings around the city. It is also the symbol of the local football club A.C. Perugia, who have previously played in the Serie A. Having never been Italian champions, the club went unbeaten in the 1978\u201379 season in spite of finishing second in the championship.\nHistory.\nUmbrians and Etruscans.\nPerugia was an Umbrian settlement but first appears in written history as \"Perusia\", one of the 12 confederate cities of Etruria; it was first mentioned in Q. Fabius Pictor's account, used by Livy, of the expedition carried out against the Etruscan League by Fabius Maximus Rullianus in 310 or 309 BC. At that time a thirty-year \"indutiae\" (truce) was agreed upon; however, in 295 Perusia took part in the Third Samnite War and was forced, with Volsinii and Arretium (Arezzo), to sue for peace in the following year.\nRoman period.\nIn 216 and 205 BC, it assisted Rome in the Second Punic War, but afterwards it is not mentioned until 41\u201340 BC, when Lucius Antonius took refuge there, and was defeated by Octavian after a long siege, and its senators sent to their deaths. A number of lead bullets used by slingers have been found in and around the city. The city was burnt, we are told, with the exception of the temples of Vulcan and Juno\u2014the massive Etruscan terrace-walls, naturally, can hardly have suffered at all\u2014and the town, with the territory for a mile round, was allowed to be occupied by whoever chose. It must have been rebuilt almost at once, for several bases for statues exist, inscribed \"Augusto sacr(um) Perusia restituta\"; but it did not become a \"colonia\", until 251\u2013253 AD, when it was resettled as \"Colonia Vibia Augusta Perusia\", under the emperor Trebonianus Gallus.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nIt is hardly mentioned except by the geographers until it was the only city in Umbria to resist Totila and the Ostrogoths, who captured it and laid the city waste in 547, after a long siege, apparently after the city's Byzantine garrison evacuated. Negotiations with the besieging forces fell to the city's bishop, Herculanus, as representative of the townspeople. Totila is said to have ordered the bishop to be flayed and beheaded. St. Herculanus (Sant'Ercolano) later became the city's patron saint.\nMiddle Ages.\nIn the Lombard period, Perugia is spoken of as one of the principal cities of Tuscia. In the 9th century, with the consent of Charlemagne and Louis the Pious, it passed under the popes; but by the 11th century, its commune was asserting itself, and for many centuries the city continued to maintain an independent life, warring against many of the neighbouring lands and cities\u2014 Foligno, Assisi, Spoleto, Todi, Siena, Arezzo, etc. In 1186, Henry VI, \"rex romanorum\" and future emperor, granted diplomatic recognition to the consular government of the city; afterward, Pope Innocent III, whose major aim was to give state dignity to the dominions having been constituting the patrimony of St. Peter, acknowledged the validity of the imperial statement and recognised the established civic practices as having the force of law.On various occasions, the popes found asylum from the tumults of Rome within its walls, and it was the meetingplace of five conclaves (Perugia Papacy), including those that elected Honorius III (1216), Clement IV (1265), Celestine V (1294), and Clement V (1305); the papal presence was characterised by a pacificatory rule between the internal rivalries. But Perugia had no mind simply to subserve the papal interests and never accepted papal sovereignty; the city used to exercise a jurisdiction over the members of the clergy, moreover in 1282, Perugia was excommunicated due to a new military offensive against the Ghibellines regardless of a papal prohibition. On the other hand, side by side with the 13th-century bronze griffin of Perugia above the door of the Palazzo dei Priori stands, as a Guelphic emblem, the lion, and Perugia remained loyal for the most part to the Guelph party in the struggles of Guelphs and Ghibellines, but this dominant tendency was rather an anti-Germanic and Italian political strategy. The Angevin presence in Italy appeared to offer a counterpoise to papal powers; in 1319, Perugia declared the Angevin Saint Louis of Toulouse \"Protector of the city's sovereignty and of the Palazzo of its Priors\" and set his figure among the other patron saints above the rich doorway of the Palazzo dei Priori. Midway through the 14th century Bartholus of Sassoferrato, who was a renowned jurist, asserted that Perugia was dependent upon neither imperial nor papal support. In 1347, at the time of Rienzi's unfortunate enterprise in reviving the Roman republic, Perugia sent 10 ambassadors to pay him honour, and when papal legates sought to coerce it by foreign soldiers, or to exact contributions, they met with vigorous resistance, which broke into open warfare with Pope Urban V in 1369; in 1370, the noble party reached an agreement signing the treaty of Bologna, and Perugia was forced to accept a papal legate; however. the vicar-general of the Papal States, G\u00e9rard du Puy, Abbot of Marmoutier and nephew of Gregory IX, was expelled by a popular uprising in 1375, and his fortification of Porta Sole was razed to the ground.\nThe lordships of Perugia.\nBiordo Michelotti (1393\u20131398).\nOn August 5, 1393, the condottiero (mercenary captain) Biordo Michelotti, a member of the popular faction known as the Raspanti, made his triumphant entry into Perugia, and the general council appointed him as the \"knight of the people\" of Perugia and the \"general captain\" of the militias. A special commission of twenty-five citizens was tasked with banishing one hundred and fifty noblemen, while Biordo decided the return of noble individuals who were not considered guilty of sedition. Among the exiled noblemen was Braccio da Montone, one of the most skilled military leaders of the time, who vowed not to seek \"any pact or agreement with the Raspanti of Perugia.\"\nIt was precisely against the exiled nobles, especially Braccio da Montone, the soul and leader of the noble movement in exile, that the government of the Raspanti directed its efforts after the turmoil of 1393. Holding virtually all power, Biordo was recognized as the first \"lord of Perugia,\" even though during his short rule (1393\u20131398), he left intact the priory and all existing communal institutions, focusing solely on extending his dominion beyond Perugia. After the splendid marriage with Giovanna Orsini, Biordo and his bride took residence in the Porta Sole palace, but on March 10, 1398, Biordo fell victim to a conspiracy orchestrated by Francesco Guidalotti, abbot of San Pietro. In their new residence, Michelotti was stabbed by Giovanni and Annibaldo, brothers of the abbot of San Pietro.\nGian Galeazzo Visconti (1400\u20131402).\nThe death of Michelotti removed an important point of reference, and factions threatened the stability within and outside the walls. Meanwhile, the twenty-five worked diligently to find an institution that could protect the city and alleviate a very high debt. The people's demands for independence were no longer as urgent, and in the 15th century, the common belief was that they had to accept a ruler or master capable of providing the minimum requirements for survival. The choice fell on the Duchy of Milan, and on January 21, 1400, Gian Galeazzo Visconti was proclaimed the lord of Perugia by the voluntary submission of the city. In response to the delegation of the ten representatives that Perugia had sent him, he canceled the debt of the Perugians. His lordship was short-lived, and on October 3, 1402, Visconti passed away.\nBraccio da Montone (1416\u20131424).\nIn 1408, Ladislao D'Angi\u00f2 Durazzo, the King of Naples, successfully captured Perugia and intended to have it administered by Braccio Fortebracci. However, Braccio vehemently opposed this idea and declined the offer. Nonetheless, in 1411, Perugia surrendered to the King of Naples, opting to be ruled by a foreigner rather than a nobleman. Braccio viewed this as a profound betrayal by his fellow citizens and fled. In November 1410, Braccio besieged Perugia but failed to capture it due to the city's resistance. He defeated pursuing troops and terrorized surrounding towns. In April 1416, he returned with a large army and attacked Perugia. After a victory in July, Perugia surrendered, marking the end of the Raspanti government. Braccio ruled moderately. In 1417, he entered Rome and proclaimed himself Defender of the City, later returning to Umbria. After conflicts and military successes, he was appointed Vicar by the Pope. Upon returning to Perugia, he undertook public works. He left for Bologna, returned, and went to Calabria. When denied entry to L'Aquila, he laid siege but faced opposition from the Pope and Queen. A league attacked him near Pescara in 1424, leading to his death. His son later buried him in Perugia with honors. During the rule of Braccio Fortebracci da Montone, significant public works were undertaken, such as Braccio's residence in the square, of which only the loggias remain, or the \"Sopramuro,\" to which Braccio had another series of supporting structures built: the \"briglie di Braccio.\"\nThe Renaissance.\nBaglioni family (1438\u20131540).\nDuring the period 1438\u20131479, the Baglioni family held a covert lordship over Perugia, which was not characterized by complete control of civic powers. Braccio I Baglioni, leveraging his position as captain of the militias of the Holy See and being the nephew of Braccio da Montone, the previous Lord of the City, exerted an influence over Perugia that quickly established its supremacy. During those years, the Umbrian center experienced a period of flourishing growth as the Baglioni implemented a policy of expansion and beautification of the city, including the construction of new roads and palaces.Between 1429 and 1433, the Palazzo dei Priori was expanded and new churches and private chapels were built. The patronage of the Baglioni attracted artists such as Piero della Francesca, Pinturicchio, and Raphael, making Perugia an important artistic center.\nDuring this time, Perugia became a significant hub of the Umbrian Renaissance, marked by the production of the eight panels depicting the life of Saint Bernardino, a collaborative effort probably involving Pinturicchio, Piermatteo d'Amelia, and the young Perugino, among others, commonly referred to as the \"1473 workshop.\" Pietro \"Perugino\" Vannucci created numerous works in the city, including a cycle of frescoes in the Hall of Audiences of the Collegio del Cambio.\nAdditionally, the Baglioni family commissioned the construction of an imposing aristocratic palace as their private residence, of which only the part incorporated into the Rocca Paolina remains today. The palace was decorated by Domenico Veneziano with a painting cycle depicting noble Perugian families and great military leaders of the past.\nFollowing mutual atrocities of the Oddi and the Baglioni families, power was at last concentrated in the Baglioni, who though they had no legal position, defied all other authority, though their bloody internal squabbles culminated in the Red Wedding massacre, 14 July 1500. Gian Paolo Baglioni was lured to Rome in 1520 and beheaded by Leo X; and in 1540, Rodolfo, who had slain a papal legate, was defeated by Pier Luigi Farnese, and the city, captured and plundered by his soldiery, was deprived of its privileges. \nA citadel known as the Rocca Paolina, after the name of Pope Paul III, was built, to designs of Antonio da Sangallo the Younger \"\"ad coercendam Perusinorum audaciam\".\"\nIn 1797, the city was conquered by French troops. On 4 February 1798, the \"Tiberina Republic\" was formed, with Perugia as capital, and the French tricolour as flag. In 1799, the Tiberina Republic merged to the Roman Republic.\nIn 1832, 1838, and 1854, Perugia was hit by earthquakes. Following the collapse of the Roman republic of 1848\u201349, when the Rocca was in part demolished, it was seized in May 1849 by the Austrians. In June 1859, the inhabitants rebelled against the temporal authority of the pope and established a provisional government, but the insurrection was quashed bloodily by Pius IX's troops. In September 1860, the city was united finally, along with the rest of Umbria, as part of the Kingdom of Italy. During World War II, the city suffered only some damage and was liberated by the British 8th army on 20 June 1944.\nEconomy.\nPerugia has become famous for chocolate, mostly because of a single firm, Perugina, whose \"Baci\" (\"kisses\" in English) are widely exported. Perugian chocolate is popular in Italy. The company's plant located in San Sisto (Perugia) is the largest of Nestl\u00e9's nine sites in Italy. According to the Nestl\u00e9 USA official website, today Baci is the most famous chocolate brand in Italy.\nThe city hosts a chocolate festival, EuroChocolate, every October.\nGeography.\nPerugia is the capital city of the region of Umbria. Cities' distances from Perugia: Assisi , Siena , Florence , Rome .\nClimate.\nThough Perugia is located in the central part of Italy, the city experiences a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\") similar to much of Northern Italy due to its inland location and the diverse, hilly topography of Umbria. Typically, summers are warm to hot and humid, while winters are cold with occasional snowfall. The climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, with adequate rainfall year-round.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;In 2007, there were 163,287 people residing in the urban area of Perugia, located in the province of Perugia, Umbria, of whom 47.7% were male and 52.3% were female. Minors (children ages 18 and younger) totalled 16.41% of the population compared to pensioners who number 21.51%. This compares with the Italian average of 18.06% (minors) and 19.94% (pensioners). The average age of Perugia residents is 44 compared to the Italian average of 42. In the five years between 2002 and 2007, the population of Perugia grew by 7.86%, while Italy as a whole grew by 3.85%.\nAs of 2006[ [update]], 90.84% of the population was Italian. The largest immigrant group came from other European countries (particularly from Albania and Romania): 3.93%, the Americas: 2.01%, and North African: 1.3%. The majority of inhabitants are Roman Catholic.\nEducation.\nPerugia today hosts two main universities, the ancient Universit\u00e0 degli Studi (University of Perugia) and the Foreigners University (\"Universit\u00e0 per Stranieri\"). \"Stranieri\" serves as an Italian language and culture school for students from all over the world. Other educational institutions are the Perugia Fine Arts Academy \"Pietro Vannucci\" (founded in 1573), the Perugia Music Conservatory for the study of classical music, and the RAI Public Broadcasting School of Radio-Television Journalism. The city is also host to the Umbra Institute, an accredited university program for American students studying abroad. The \"Universit\u00e0 dei Sapori\" (University of Tastes), a National centre for Vocational Education and Training in Food, is located in the city as well.\nMunicipalities.\nPerugia's municipalities () include the villages and hamlets () of:\nOther localities are Boneggio, Canneto, Colle della Trinit\u00e0, Monte Pulito, Montevile, Pieve di Campo, Montemalbe and Monte Morcino.\nCollestrada, in the territory of the suburb of Ponte San Giovanni, saw a battle between the inhabitants of Perugia and Assisi in 1202.\nMain sights.\nArt.\nPerugia has had a rich tradition of art and artists. The Early Renaissance painter Pietro Perugino created some of his masterpieces in the Perugia area. The High Renaissance master Raphael was also active in Perugia and painted his famous Oddi Altar there in 1502\u201304.\nToday, the Galleria Nazionale dell'Umbria in Perugia houses a number of masterpieces, including the \"Madonna with Child and six Angels\", which represents the Renaissance Marian art of Duccio. And the private Art collection of Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Perugia has two separate locations.\nThe Collegio del Cambio is an extremely well preserved representation of a Renaissance building and houses a magnificent Pietro Perugino fresco. The newly re-opened Academy of Fine Arts has a small but impressive plaster casts gallery and Perugian paintings and drawings from the 16th century on.\nSport.\nAC Perugia Calcio is the main football club in the city, playing in Italy's third-highest division Serie C. The club plays at the 28,000-seat Stadio Renato Curi, named after a former player who died during a match. From 1983 to 2001, the stadium held four matches for the Italy national football team.\nPerugia has two water polo teams: L.R.N. Perugia and Gryphus. The team of LRN Perugia is currently in SERIE B (second-highest division) and the Gryphus team is in the SERIE C (the third highest) division. The L.R.N Perugia has also a women's water polo team which is also playing in the division of SERIE B.\nSir Safety Umbria Volley, in English Sir Sicoma Colussi Perugia, is an Italian volleyball club, playing at the top level of the Italian Volleyball League. They won their first Italian championship in 2018. Notable players include Luciano de Cecco of Argentina, Aleksandar Atanasijevi\u0107 of Serbia, and Wilfredo Leon of Poland.\nThe martial arts in Perugia have been present since the sixties with Chinese techniques, followed by judo. Later there were karate contact (later called kickboxing), karate, taijiquan, j\u016bjutsu, kendo, aikido, taekwondo and, in recent years, krav maga has also arrived.\nIn 2014 Jessica Scricciolo, under the Ju-Jitsu Sports Group Perugia, won the title of World Champion in the Fighting System speciality, 55\u00a0kg. In March 2015 at the World Championship of Greece (J.J.I.F.) Andrea Calzon' (Ju-Jitsu Sports Group Perugia) won the gold medal in the Ne-Waza (U21.56\u00a0kg) and a bronze medal in the Fighting System.\nTransport.\nAn electric tramway operated in Perugia from 1901 until 1940. It was decommissioned in favour of buses, and since 1943 trolley buses \u2013 the latter were in service until 1975.\nTwo elevators were established since 1971:\nThis was followed by public escalators:\nSince 1971 Perugia has taken several measures against car traffic, when the first traffic restriction zone was implemented. These zones were expanded over time and at certain hours of the day driving is forbidden in the city centre. Large parking lots are provided in the lower town, from where the city can be reached via public transport.\nSince 2008, an automated people mover called Minimetr\u00f2 has also been in operation. It has seven stations, with one terminal at a large parking lot, and the other in the city centre.\nPerugia railway station, also known as Perugia Fontivegge, was opened in 1866. It forms part of the Foligno\u2013Terontola railway, which also links Florence with Rome. The station is situated at Piazza Vittorio Veneto, in the heavily populated district of Fontivegge, about southwest of the city centre.\nPerugia San Francesco d'Assisi \u2013 Umbria International Airport is located outside the city.\nFrom the bus station there has been a daily connection of ITA Airways from 1 December 2022, by bus, to and from Rome Fiumicino Airport, allowing a connection with the airline's hub.\nInternational relations.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPerugia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51596", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51596", "title": "Inositol trisphosphate", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nInositol trisphosphate or inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate abbreviated InsP3 or Ins3P or IP3 is an inositol phosphate signaling molecule. It is made by hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), a phospholipid that is located in the plasma membrane, by phospholipase C (PLC).\nTogether with diacylglycerol (DAG), IP3 is a second messenger molecule used in signal transduction in biological cells. While DAG stays inside the membrane, IP3 is soluble and diffuses through the cell, where it binds to its receptor, which is a calcium channel located in the endoplasmic reticulum. When IP3 binds its receptor, calcium is released into the cytosol, thereby activating various calcium regulated intracellular signals.\nProperties.\nChemical formula and molecular weight.\nIP3 is an organic molecule with a molecular mass of 420.10 g/mol. Its empirical formula is C6H15O15P3. It is composed of an inositol ring with three phosphate groups bound at the 1, 4, and 5 carbon positions, and three hydroxyl groups bound at positions 2, 3, and 6.\nChemical properties.\nPhosphate groups can exist in three different forms depending on a solution's pH. Phosphorus atoms can bind three oxygen atoms with single bonds and a fourth oxygen atom using a double/dative bond. The pH of the solution, and thus the form of the phosphate group determines its ability to bind to other molecules. The binding of phosphate groups to the inositol ring is accomplished by phosphor-ester binding (see phosphoric acids and phosphates). This bond involves combining a hydroxyl group from the inositol ring and a free phosphate group through a dehydration reaction. Considering that the average physiological pH is approximately 7.4, the main form of the phosphate groups bound to the inositol ring in vivo is PO42\u2212. This gives IP3 a net negative charge, which is important in allowing it to dock to its receptor, through binding of the phosphate groups to positively charged residues on the receptor. IP3 has three hydrogen bond donors in the form of its three hydroxyl groups. The hydroxyl group on the 6th carbon atom in the inositol ring is also involved in IP3 docking.\nBinding to its receptor.\nThe docking of IP3 to its receptor, which is called the inositol trisphosphate receptor (InsP3R), was first studied using deletion mutagenesis in the early 1990s. Studies focused on the N-terminus side of the IP3 receptor. In 1997 researchers localized the region of the IP3 receptor involved with binding of IP3 to between amino acid residues 226 and 578 in 1997. Considering that IP3 is a negatively charged molecule, positively charged amino acids such as arginine and lysine were believed to be involved. Two arginine residues at position 265 and 511 and one lysine residue at position 508 were found to be key in IP3 docking. Using a modified form of IP3, it was discovered that all three phosphate groups interact with the receptor, but not equally. Phosphates at the 4th and 5th positions interact more extensively than the phosphate at the 1st position and the hydroxyl group at the 6th position of the inositol ring.\nDiscovery.\nThe discovery that a hormone can influence phosphoinositide metabolism was made by Mabel R. Hokin (1924\u20132003) and her husband Lowell E. Hokin in 1953, when they discovered that radioactive 32P phosphate was incorporated into the phosphatidylinositol of pancreas slices when stimulated with acetylcholine. Up until then phospholipids were believed to be inert structures only used by cells as building blocks for construction of the plasma membrane.\nOver the next 20 years, little was discovered about the importance of PIP2 metabolism in terms of cell signaling, until the mid-1970s when Robert H. Michell hypothesized a connection between the catabolism of PIP2 and increases in intracellular calcium (Ca2+) levels. He hypothesized that receptor-activated hydrolysis of PIP2 produced a molecule that caused increases in intracellular calcium mobilization. This idea was researched extensively by Michell and his colleagues, who in 1981 were able to show that PIP2 is hydrolyzed into DAG and IP3 by a then unknown phosphodiesterase. In 1984 it was discovered that IP3 acts as a secondary messenger that is capable of traveling through the cytoplasm to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it stimulates the release of calcium into the cytoplasm.\nFurther research provided valuable information on the IP3 pathway, such as the discovery in 1986 that one of the many roles of the calcium released by IP3 is to work with DAG to activate protein kinase C (PKC). It was discovered in 1989 that phospholipase C (PLC) is the phosphodiesterase responsible for hydrolyzing PIP2 into DAG and IP3. Today the IP3 signaling pathway is well mapped out, and is known to be important in regulating a variety of calcium-dependent cell signaling pathways.\nSignaling pathway.\nIncreases in the intracellular Ca2+ concentrations are often a result of IP3 activation. When a ligand binds to a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is coupled to a Gq heterotrimeric G protein, the \u03b1-subunit of Gq can bind to and induce activity in the PLC isozyme PLC-\u03b2, which results in the cleavage of PIP2 into IP3 and DAG.\nIf a receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) is involved in activating the pathway, the isozyme PLC-\u03b3 has tyrosine residues that can become phosphorylated upon activation of an RTK, and this will activate PLC-\u03b3 and allow it to cleave PIP2 into DAG and IP3. This occurs in cells that are capable of responding to growth factors such as insulin, because the growth factors are the ligands responsible for activating the RTK.\nIP3 (also abbreviated Ins(1,4,5)P3 is a soluble molecule and is capable of diffusing through the cytoplasm to the ER, or the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) in the case of muscle cells, once it has been produced by the action of PLC. Once at the ER, IP3 is able to bind to the Ins(1,4,5)P3 receptor Ins(1,4,5)P3R which is a ligand-gated Ca2+ channel that is found on the surface of the ER. The binding of IP3 (the ligand in this case) to Ins(1,4,5)P3R triggers the opening of the Ca2+ channel, and thus release of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm. In heart muscle cells this increase in Ca2+ activates the ryanodine receptor-operated channel on the SR, results in further increases in Ca2+ through a process known as calcium-induced calcium release. IP3 may also activate Ca2+ channels on the cell membrane indirectly, by increasing the intracellular Ca2+ concentration.\nFunction.\nHuman.\nIP3's main functions are to mobilize Ca2+ from storage organelles and to regulate cell proliferation and other cellular reactions that require free calcium. In smooth muscle cells, for example, an increase in concentration of cytoplasmic Ca2+ results in the contraction of the muscle cell.\nIn the nervous system, IP3 serves as a second messenger, with the cerebellum containing the highest concentration of IP3 receptors. There is evidence that IP3 receptors play an important role in the induction of plasticity in cerebellar Purkinje cells.\nSea urchin eggs.\nThe slow block to polyspermy in the sea urchin is mediated by the PIP2 secondary messenger system. Activation of the binding receptors activates PLC, which cleaves PIP2 in the egg plasma membrane, releasing IP3 into the egg cell cytoplasm. IP3 diffuses to the ER, where it opens Ca2+ channels.\nResearch.\nHuntington's disease.\nHuntington's disease occurs when the cytosolic protein Huntingtin (Htt) has an additional 35 glutamine residues added to its amino terminal region. This modified form of Htt is called Httexp. Httexp makes Type 1 IP3 receptors more sensitive to IP3, which leads to the release of too much Ca2+ from the ER. The release of Ca2+ from the ER causes an increase in the cytosolic and mitochondrial concentrations of Ca2+. This increase in Ca2+ is thought to be the cause of GABAergic MSN degradation.\nAlzheimer's disease.\nAlzheimer's disease involves the progressive degeneration of the brain, severely impacting mental faculties. Since the Ca2+ hypothesis of Alzheimer's was proposed in 1994, several studies have shown that disruptions in Ca2+ signaling are the primary cause of Alzheimer's disease. Familial Alzheimer's disease has been strongly linked to mutations in the presenilin 1 (PS1), presenilin 2 (PS2), and amyloid precursor protein (APP) genes. All of the mutated forms of these genes observed to date have been found to cause abnormal Ca2+ signaling in the ER. Mutations in PS1 have been shown to increase IP3-mediated Ca2+ release from the ER in several animal models. Calcium channel blockers have been used to treat Alzheimer's disease with some success, and the use of lithium to decrease IP3 turnover has also been suggested as a possible method of treatment.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51599", "revid": "1398", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51599", "title": "William Hartnell", "text": "English actor (1908\u20131975)\nWilliam Henry Hartnell (; 8 January 1908 \u2013 23 April 1975) was an English actor, who is best known for portraying the first incarnation of the Doctor, in the long-running British science-fiction television series \"Doctor Who\" from 1963 to 1966; he reprised the role in 1972\u20131973. In film, Hartnell notably appeared in \"Brighton Rock\" (1949), \"The Mouse That Roared\" (1959) and \"This Sporting Life\" (1963). He was associated with military roles, playing Company Sergeant Major Percy Bullimore in the ITV sitcom \"The Army Game\" (1957, 1961) and Sergeant Grimshaw, the title character in the first \"Carry On\" film \"Carry On Sergeant\" (1958).\nEarly life.\nWilliam Henry Hartnell was born on 8 January 1908 in the slums of the district of St Pancras, London, England, the only child of Lucy Hartnell, an unmarried mother. Hartnell never discovered the identity of his father, whose particulars were left blank on his birth certificate, despite his efforts to trace him. In various interviews, he stated that he was born in Seaton, Devon, and that his father was a dairy farmer, but later said he was a soldier turned stockbroker.\nHartnell was brought up partly by a foster mother, and also spent many holidays in Devon with his mother's family of farmers, from whom he learned to ride horses. Reportedly, Hartnell had a fall and was kicked by a horse. Disinfectant was applied to the open wound to cleanse it. However, the disinfectant was of a type unsuitable for first aid purposes and caused blisters. The result was a more serious wound than what would have otherwise occurred. Hartnell was left with a large scar on his temple, which is visible in some of his stills shots even though it was covered with make-up during filming. He was a second cousin of the fashion designer Norman Hartnell.\nHartnell left school without prospects and dabbled in petty crime. At the age of 16, he met the art collector Hugh Blaker, who later became his unofficial guardian, arranged for him to train as a jockey, and helped him to enter the Italia Conti Academy. Theatre being a passion of Blaker's, he paid for Hartnell to receive some \"polish\" at the Imperial Service College, though Hartnell found the strictures too much and ran away. When Hartnell married, he and his wife continued to live in one of Blaker's adjacent properties at Isleworth and their daughter was born there in 1929.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nHartnell entered the theatre in 1925 working under Frank Benson as a general stagehand. He appeared in numerous Shakespearian plays, including \"The Merchant of Venice\", \"Julius Caesar\", \"As You Like It\", \"Hamlet\", \"The Tempest\" and \"Macbeth\" (all 1926). He also appeared in \"She Stoops to Conquer\", \"The School for Scandal\" (both 1926) and \"Good Morning, Bill\" (1927), before performing in \"Miss Elizabeth's Prisoner\" (1928). This play was written by Robert Neilson Stephens and E. Lyall Swete. It featured the actress Heather McIntyre, whom he married during the following year. His first of more than 60 film appearances was in \"Say It With Music\" (1932).\nRadio work also featured in his career, with his earliest known performance \u2013 in a production of \"Chinese Moon Party\" \u2013 being broadcast by the BBC on 11 May 1931.\nFrom the outbreak of the Second World War, Hartnell attempted to volunteer for the RAF. He served in the British Army in the Tank Corps, but he was invalided out after 18 months as the result of a nervous breakdown and returned to acting. In 1942, he was cast as Albert Fosdike in No\u00ebl Coward's film \"In Which We Serve\". He turned up late for his first day of shooting, and Coward berated him in front of the cast and crew for his unprofessionalism, made him personally apologise to everyone and then sacked him. Michael Anderson, who was the first assistant director, took over the part (and was credited as \"Mickey Anderson\").\nHartnell continued to play comic characters until he was cast in the robust role of Sergeant Ned Fletcher in \"The Way Ahead\" (1944). From then on, his career was defined by playing mainly policemen, soldiers and thugs. This typecasting bothered him, for even when he was cast in comedies he found he invariably played the \"heavy\". In 1947 he was cast in a major role in the Boulting brothers classic gangster film noir Brighton Rock, playing the tough gang underboss, Dallow. In 1957 he appeared in Hell Drivers as a ruthless and hard-nosed transport yard manager, Cartley. In 1958, he played the sergeant in the first Carry On comedy film, \"Carry On Sergeant\". He appeared as serjeant-at-arms of Grand Fenwick Will Buckley, another military character, in the film \"The Mouse That Roared\" (1959), which starred Peter Sellers, and he played a town councillor in the Boulting brothers' film \"Heavens Above!\" (1963), again with Sellers.\nHis first regular role on television was as Sergeant Major Percy Bullimore in \"The Army Game\" in 1957. He left after the first season and returned for the final season in 1961. Again, although it was a comedy series, he found himself cast in a \"tough guy\" role. He also appeared in a supporting role in the film version of \"This Sporting Life\" (1963), giving a sensitive performance as an ageing rugby league talent scout known as \"Dad\".\nHartnell described himself as \"a legitimate character actor of the theatre and film\".\n\"Doctor Who\".\nHartnell's performance in \"This Sporting Life\" was liked by Verity Lambert, the producer who was setting up a new science-fiction television series for the BBC entitled \"Doctor Who\"; mainly on the strength of that performance, Lambert offered him the title role. Although Hartnell was initially uncertain about accepting a part in what was pitched to him as a children's series, in part due to his success in films, Lambert and director Waris Hussein convinced him to take the part, and it became the character for which he gained the highest profile and is now most remembered. Hartnell later revealed that he took the role because it led him away from the gruff, military parts in which he had become typecast, and, having two grandchildren of his own, he came to relish particularly the attention and affection that playing the character brought him from children. An obituary would state how delighted Hartnell was to get the role of the Doctor at the age of 55 after a career of \"playing what he called bastards.\" His first episode of \"Doctor Who\" aired on 23 November 1963.\n\"Doctor Who\" earned Hartnell a regular salary of \u00a3315 an episode by 1966 (in the era of 48 weeks per year production on the series), . By comparison, in 1966 his co-stars Anneke Wills and Michael Craze were earning \u00a368 and \u00a352 per episode at the same time, respectively. Throughout his tenure as the Doctor, Hartnell wore a wig when playing the part, as the character had long hair.\nHartnell described his character the Doctor as \"a wizard\", and \"a cross between the Wizard of Oz and Father Christmas\". According to William Russell, Hartnell deliberately became occasionally tongue-tied and stumbled over words.\nAccording to some of his colleagues on \"Doctor Who\", Hartnell could be a difficult person to work with; among the more caustic accounts, Nicholas Courtney and Wills described Hartnell as being racist and antisemitic. Hussein stated that Hartnell was homophobic, but also said \"I never allowed him to think of me as anything other than a director\". They enjoyed a good working relationship and Hussein developed a \"great affection\" for Hartnell; Hussein said Hartnell was upset when Hussein left the show. Hartnell's granddaughter, Jessica Carney, wrote that Hartnell was very bigoted and often made xenophobic comments but that \"all those loudly expressed opinions were contradicted by his behaviour on a personal level\". Val Speyer said that while Hartnell claimed not to like foreigners, \"as one of his greatest friends on the show was half Greek and half Maltese, I didn't see how this could figure. However, if he liked someone, they weren't a foreigner, they were a friend!\"\nHartnell's deteriorating health (undiagnosed arteriosclerosis) began to affect his ability to learn his lines, with the problem increasing as his time on the series progressed. In addition, he had a poor relationship with Lambert's successor John Wiles, who resigned from the role after barely six months. The producer role was then given to Innes Lloyd who, with new story editor Gerry Davis, developed the idea that since the Doctor was an alien, he could transform himself physically, enabling the production to recast the lead role. Hartnell left \"Doctor Who\" in 1966. Hartnell himself suggested his successor; \"There's only one man in England who can take over, and that's Patrick Troughton.\" Hartnell departed the show in the serial \"The Tenth Planet\" where the First Doctor regenerates into Troughton's Second Doctor.\nHartnell reprised the role in the tenth anniversary story \"The Three Doctors\", broadcast from December 1972 to January 1973. When Hartnell's wife Heather found out about his planned involvement, she informed the show's crew that his failing memory and weakening health would prevent him from starring in the special. An agreement was made between the crew and Heather that Hartnell would sit down during the shoot and read his lines from cue cards. His appearance in the story was his final piece of work as an actor due to his declining health.\nAs a result of the then-standard practice of discarding old recordings in order to make room for newer ones, 44 of Hartnell's 134 episodes are missing from the archives, although audio recordings exist of all episodes.\nPersonal life.\nHartnell was married to Heather McIntyre from 9 May 1929 until his death. They had a daughter, Heather Anne, and two grandchildren. After living at 51 Church Street, Isleworth, next door to Hugh Blaker, the Hartnells lived on Thames Ditton Island. Then in the 1960s they moved to a cottage in Mayfield, Sussex. They lived in later life at Sheephurst Lane in Marden, Kent. Heather Hartnell died in 1984.\nAsked about his religious beliefs in an interview for \"The Sunday Times\" in 1966, Hartnell claimed to \"have a natural belief there is something or someone great that exists beyond [his] comprehension\", further stating that he did not believe that going to church should be a duty and that he himself preferred to visit church in solitude.\nLater life and death.\nHartnell's health had worsened during the early 1970s and, in December 1974, he was admitted to hospital indefinitely. In early 1975, he suffered a series of strokes, brought on by cerebrovascular disease, and he died in his sleep in hospital in Marden, Kent, from heart failure on 23 April 1975, at the age of 67.\nLegacy.\nHartnell's granddaughter, Judith \"Jessica\" Carney, published a biography entitled \"Who's There? The Life and Career of William Hartnell\", first published in 1996 by Virgin Publishing. To mark the 50th anniversary of \"Doctor Who\" Carney, with Fantom Publishing, revised and republished the book in 2013.\nFor the 50th anniversary of \"Doctor Who\" in 2013, the BBC broadcast \"An Adventure in Space and Time\", a dramatisation of the events surrounding the creation of the series, which had David Bradley portraying Hartnell.\nA blue plaque marking Hartnell's work in film and television was unveiled at Ealing Studios by Carney on 14 October 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51601", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51601", "title": "Jon Pertwee", "text": "English actor (1919\u20131996)\nJohn Devon Roland Pertwee (; 7 July 1919 \u2013 20 May 1996), known professionally as Jon Pertwee, was an English actor. Born into a theatrical family, he became known as a comedy actor, playing Chief Petty Officer Pertwee (and three other roles) in the BBC Radio sitcom \"The Navy Lark\" (1959\u20131977) and appearing in four films in the \"Carry On\" series (1964\u20131992).\nOn television, Pertwee starred as the third incarnation of the Doctor in the long-running science fiction series \"Doctor Who\" (1970\u20131974), hosted the game show \"Whodunnit?\" (1974\u20131978), and played the title character in \"Worzel Gummidge\" (1979\u20131981 and 1987\u20131989). Towards the end of his life he maintained a close association with \"Doctor Who\" by appearing at many fan conventions related to the series and giving interviews.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn in Chelsea, London, and, having French Huguenot ancestry, his surname was an Anglicisation of \"Perthuis\", the origins of his surname being \"de Perthuis de Laillevault\", the family being counts descended from Charlemagne. Jon was the son of screenwriter and actor Roland Pertwee and distant cousin of actor Bill Pertwee. Pertwee's mother, Avice Scholtz, separated from his father Roland when Pertwee was young. His father remarried, and his mother found a new partner, Louis Auguste De La Garde, with whom Pertwee did not build a relationship; she died in 1951, leaving Pertwee's elder brother Michael as her executor. Avice's sister Daphne married Captain Philip Cecil Clowes and became the mother of Pertwee's cousin, the writer St John Legh Clowes (1907\u20131951). Actor Henry Ainley, a close friend of his father, was his godfather. Coincidentally, Ainley's son Anthony appeared as the Master \u2013 a renegade Time Lord who was the Doctor's greatest enemy \u2013 alongside Pertwee in the \"Doctor Who\" anniversary story \"The Five Doctors\" (1983).\nPertwee was educated at Frensham Heights School, an independent school in Rowledge, near Farnham in Surrey, at Sherborne School in Dorset, and at some other schools from which he was expelled. After school, he applied to the Central School of Speech and Drama, but was denied admittance because of his lisp. He was admitted to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) but later expelled, allegedly because he wrote rude remarks on the lavatory walls and the principal considered him talentless. Another account for his expulsion is that he refused to play a Greek wind in a play.\nEarly career.\nWhile still at school, Pertwee worked as a circus performer riding the Wall of Death on a motorcycle with a toothless lion in the sidecar. He then worked in repertory theatre before being contracted with the BBC at 18 as an actor.\nDuring the Second World War, Pertwee spent six years in the Royal Navy. He was a crew member of and was transferred off the ship for officer training shortly before she was sunk by the German battleship \"Bismarck\", losing all but three men in May 1941.\nLater, he was attached to the top secret Naval Intelligence Division, working alongside future James Bond author Ian Fleming, and reporting directly to Prime Minister Winston Churchill and Deputy Prime Minister Clement Attlee. In an interview conducted in 1994 and published in 2013, he said, \"I did all sorts. Teaching commandos how to use escapology equipment, compasses in brass buttons, secret maps in white cotton handkerchiefs, pipes you could smoke that also fired a .22 bullet. All sorts of incredible things.\"\nIn 1942, as a Sub Lieutenant, Pertwee was posted to HMS \"Valkyrie\". Whilst stationed on the Isle of Man he was actively engaged in amateur variety shows appearing in character sketches. It was during this time that Pertwee became one of the founding members of the Service Players, a drama society which remains active to this day.\nDuring his time in the Navy, Pertwee woke up one morning after a drunken night out while in port to find a tattoo of a cobra on his right arm.\nAfter the war, Pertwee worked as a stage comedian, which included performing at the Glasgow Empire Theatre and sharing a bill with Max Wall and Jimmy James. He began to work as a comedy actor on radio, becoming known for being able to do a variety of comedic voices and accents. He featured \"Waterlogged Spa\", alongside Eric Barker, and \"Puffney Post Office\" in which he played a hapless old postman with the catch-phrase \"It doesn't matter what you do, as long as you tears them up.\"\nOn 15 November 1948, at the Wood Green Empire, he was billed as \"The Most Versatile Voice in Radio \u2013 Jon ('Tear 'em Up') Pertwee from the Radio Shows \"Merry-go-Round\" and \"Up the Pole\"\". From 1959 to 1977, he performed the role of the conniving Chief Petty Officer Pertwee in \"The Navy Lark\" on BBC Radio. The fictional ship in the series HMS \"Troutbridge\" almost shared its name with the real HMS \"Troubridge\" whose commanding officer at one point was a relative of Pertwee's, who wrote to the BBC to provide details of comic incidents on the ship which were then used in \" The Navy Lark's\" scripts. After Ronnie Barker left the series, Pertwee took on various additional roles, including a villainous character called the Master, whose voice Pertwee said was an impression of Herbert Beerbohm Tree.\nPertwee did not appear in the 1959 film version of \"The Navy Lark\". In his 1996 memoir he attributed this to producer Herbert Wilcox refusing to employ his co-star Dennis Price on the grounds that \"he was gay\", a decision Pertwee made clear that he thought \"was ridiculous\". Shortly after voicing his support of Price he found out he had been dropped from the film's cast and replaced by Ronald Shiner.\nPertwee was known as a Danny Kaye look-alike, and his impersonation of Kaye can be seen in the crime film \"Murder at the Windmill\" (1949). He played Charlie Sterling in the comedy film \"Will Any Gentleman...?\" (1953), which also featured future First Doctor actor William Hartnell playing Inspector Martin.\nOn stage, he played the part of Lycus in the 1963 London production of \"A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum\" with Frankie Howerd and appeared in the smaller role of Crassus in the 1966 film version. He appeared as Sidney Tait in the comedy film \"Ladies Who Do\" (1963). In 1966, Pertwee starred alongside Donald Sinden in the original West End production of the long-running comedy \"There's a Girl in My Soup\". In this period he appeared in three \"Carry On\" films: \"Carry On Cleo\" (1964) as the soothsayer; \"Carry On Cowboy\" (1965) as Sheriff Earp; and \"Carry On Screaming!\" (1966) as Dr. Fettle. In a lost interview from 1986, which was rediscovered and published in 2008, he said he had not wanted to appear in more \"Carry On\" films because he believed the series had adversely affected the careers of other regular actors such as Kenneth Williams, Sid James and Joan Sims. In 1967 Pertwee was chosen by \"Dad's Army\" producer David Croft for the role of Captain George Mainwaring, but he turned it down \u2013 possibly because he preferred to extend his role on Broadway in \"There's a Girl in My Soup\".\nHis television career had started off with small parts in children's shows featuring Richard Hearne's Mr Pastry character. Later he made an appearance in \"The Avengers\" episode \"From Venus With Love\" (1967) as Brigadier Whitehead, and later, he guest-starred as a vicar in \"The Goodies\"' episode \"Wacky Wales\" (1975).\n\"Doctor Who\".\nIn 1969, shortly before leaving the series, producer Peter Bryant cast Pertwee as the Third Doctor in \"Doctor Who\". Pertwee had asked his agent to apply for the role for him and was surprised to find he was already on the shortlist. He was the second choice for the role; Ron Moody was the first but was unavailable.\nIn a departure from the Doctor's first two incarnations, Pertwee's era was influenced by the James Bond film series. His interpretation of the Doctor was described as \"a man of action, supremely confident, articulate, yet also warmly reassuring\". This incarnation was credited with being more scientifically minded than early versions of the Doctor. He played the character as an active crusader with a penchant for fancy clothes, while exiled to Earth by the Time Lords for much of his tenure and serving as the scientific adviser to Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart and UNIT. He played the Doctor for five seasons from early 1970 to mid-1974, a longer stint than either of his predecessors in the role, although he ultimately appeared in fewer episodes than William Hartnell as the BBC had reduced the production schedule.\nPertwee credited his performance as the Doctor with helping him work out exactly who he really was when he was not resorting to comedic disguises or voices. This was because the BBC's Head of Drama, Shaun Sutton, had advised him to act the Doctor as himself: in effect, to \"play Jon Pertwee\". In \"The Making of Doctor Who\", Pertwee himself said \"Doctor Who is me \u2013 or I am Doctor Who. I play him straight from me.\"\nOn 14 April 1971, Pertwee was the subject of Thames Television's \"This Is Your Life\".\nDuring his tenure as the Doctor, Pertwee appeared in the Amicus horror anthology \"The House That Dripped Blood\" (1971), which was filmed in the summer of 1970 between his first and second \"Doctor Who\" seasons. Pertwee played the lead in the last segment of the film as Paul Henderson, an arrogant horror film star who meets his doom thanks to a genuine vampire cloak. In 1973, Pertwee endorsed the Co-op's \"Baking Your Cake and Eating It\", a recipe book written by Sarah Charles. It has been given the unofficial title of \"The Jon Pertwee Recipe Book\".\nIn early 1974, Pertwee announced he would step down as the Doctor to resume his stage career in \"The Bedwinner\", also citing potential typecasting in the role as the reason for leaving, though he later said that the catalyst for his departure was the death of his good friend and co-star Roger Delgado (the Master) and the departures of co-star Katy Manning, producer Barry Letts and script editor Terrance Dicks. According to Elisabeth Sladen in an interview on the DVD release of \"Invasion of the Dinosaurs,\" Pertwee asked for a substantially increased fee for another year on the series. The request was rejected, and he subsequently resigned from the role. Pertwee was also dealing with chronic back pain at the time, and was becoming less interested in the character of the Doctor. His last full-time appearance in the series was in the story \"Planet of the Spiders\" in June 1974, which finished with Tom Baker replacing him in the role.\nPertwee later reprised the role in the 20th anniversary story \"The Five Doctors\" and the \"Children in Need\" story \"Dimensions in Time\", in two radio adventures and on stage in \"Doctor Who \u2013 The Ultimate Adventure\".\n\"Worzel Gummidge\".\nAfter a stint between 1974 and 1978 as the host of the Thames Television murder-mystery game show \"Whodunnit?\", Pertwee took the starring role in \"Worzel Gummidge\", based on the books written by Barbara Euphan Todd. Produced by ITV Southern Television in the initial run, it was first transmitted on ITV from 1979. Pertwee had first been approached to play the part of Worzel Gummidge in a film to be written by Keith Waterhouse and Willis Hall. When this project fell through, Pertwee encouraged the writers to create a television pilot instead, and via his agent pitched the idea to the BBC, which turned it down, and then Thames Television, which likewise rejected the project. Pertwee later admitted that he \"began to lose faith in the project\", until Southern Television's Lewis Rudd heard about it and enthusiastically agreed that the company would make the series.\nThe series saw Pertwee as a scarecrow, as well as using several comedic voices. The show was an immediate hit, with Pertwee describing it as \"becoming something of a cult\" after only four episodes had been broadcast. Press interest in the series was high, and it ran on the channel until 1981. Keen to continue beyond this, Pertwee campaigned for the series and it was picked up by a New Zealand network, TVNZ, in 1987. \"Worzel Gummidge Down Under\" aired for the next two years and was screened in the UK on Channel 4. In 1995, Pertwee played the role one last time in a one-off special for ITV, which celebrated 40 years of the channel. Pertwee played the title character in \"Worzel Gummidge, the Musical\", book and lyrics by Keith Waterhouse and Willis Hall, music by Denis King, which opened at London's Cambridge Theatre in December 1981, co-starring Una Stubbs and Geoffrey Bayldon. Pertwee also recorded an album, \"Worzel Gummidge Sings\", as well as a Christmas single.\nOther roles.\nPertwee played the role of the Colonel in the Disney children's film \"One of Our Dinosaurs Is Missing\" (1975). The following year, he voiced and appeared in the television advertisement that promoted the Green Cross Code by use of the mnemonic \"SPLINK\". Also in 1976, Pertwee starred with Australian singer Julie Anthony in a West End production of the musical \"Irene\" (originally 1919, revived Broadway 1973), playing the camp fashion-designer Madame Lucy (originally Liam O'Dougherty). The production opened at the Adelphi Theatre, London, and enjoyed a run of more than 900 performances: Pertwee features on the cast recording album, produced by Norman Newell for EMI Records (EMC3139). He also voiced the character of \"Spotty\" in the cartoon series \"SuperTed\" (1983\u201386) and, in 1985, starred in \"Do You Know The Milkyway?\", a television adaptation of Karl Wittlinger's stage play in which Pertwee played Dr. Neuross and another nine characters. In 1992 he made an appearance in the final film in the \"Carry On\" series, \"Carry On Columbus\", as the Duke of Costa Brava. In 1995, he had the key voice of Death and other voice characterisations in the PC and PlayStation renditions of \"Discworld\". Also in 1995, he played General Von Kramer in the \"Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\" episode \"Attack of the Hawkmen\".\nWriting shortly before his death in 1996, Pertwee stated that while he enjoyed his association with \"Doctor Who\", he had perhaps spent too long in the title role. He believed that this led to the \"ridiculous situation of people turning me down for parts because, they say, I am too well known as the Doctor.\" He observed that after he left the show he only ever worked in a BBC drama on one occasion, which was the role of \"an aging Basque arsonist and pornographer\" in an episode of the 1992 series \"Virtual Murder\", titled \"A Torch for Silverado\". He considered this to be one of \"the best things I've ever done\".\nLater life.\nPertwee returned to the role of the Doctor in 1983 for the 20th-anniversary television special \"The Five Doctors\" and in the 1993 charity special \"Dimensions in Time\" for Children in Need. He also portrayed the Doctor in the stage play \"Doctor Who \u2013 The Ultimate Adventure\" which toured theatres in the United Kingdom from March to June 1989. During the 1990s, he made a guest appearance in the \"Lords and Ladies\" episode of the BBC Radio 4 comedy series \"Harry Hill's Fruit Corner\", playing a Time Lord and also spoofed the role in the Radio 4 comedy \"The Skivers\". He also presented the \"Doctor Who\" video releases \"The Troughton Years\" (1991), showcasing selected surviving episodes of otherwise lost stories, and \"The Pertwee Years\" (1992), the latter a look back at his time on the show, with three selected episodes.\nIn 1993, Pertwee was featured in the unofficial 30th anniversary VHS release entitled \"30 Years of Time Travel and Beyond\". When asked in an interview for this documentary if the show should be brought back he simply replied with \"No, no\", but believed if it did come back a lot more money would need to be spent on the series, along with a new production team. Pertwee would continue to act in films and television as well as make appearances worldwide in support of \"Doctor Who\". Ultimately, Pertwee was successful in seeing the Third Doctor return to the airwaves with two audio productions for BBC Radio, \"The Paradise of Death\" and \"The Ghosts of N-Space\".\nIn April 1995, he appeared in \"Devious\", an amateur video drama set between the second Doctor's trial at the end of \"The War Games\" and before the start of \"Spearhead from Space\". It shows an interim Doctor (between second and third), played by Tony Garner, being told he was \"never meant to be the Doctor\" and that the third will complete him. Pertwee's scenes in that role were among the first pieces of the video that were released (on the DVD of \"The War Games\"). In the same year, he starred in a one-man show called \"Who Is Jon Pertwee?\".\nPertwee's final film role was in a short film entitled \"Cloud Cuckoo\" for Scottish Screen, released on 18 June 1994. His last formal television appearance was on Cilla Black's \"Surprise, Surprise\", broadcast on 21 April 1996, in which he appeared as the Third Doctor. At the time of his death, Pertwee was regularly being seen in the closing moments of a UK TV advert for mobile phone operator Vodafone, dressed in the style of his version of the Doctor. This character walked wordlessly across Pilgrim Street, Liverpool, entering a garage marked 'Doctor on Call' evidently containing some kind of time machine.\nPersonal life.\nPertwee married twice. His first marriage was in 1955, to Jean Marsh, whom he divorced in 1960; later that year he married Ingeborg Rhoesa (born 1935). Together they had two children, both of whom became actors: a daughter, Dariel, in 1961, and a son, Sean, in 1964.\nPertwee wrote two autobiographies: \"Moon Boots and Dinner Suits\" (published in 1984), which primarily covers his life and career prior to \"Doctor Who\", and the posthumously published \"Doctor Who: I Am the Doctor \u2013 Jon Pertwee\u2019s Final Memoir\", (, published in November 1996 by Virgin Publishing Ltd. under the \"Doctor Who Books\" imprint and co-written with David J. Howe), which covered his life during and after the series. In 2000, \"Jon Pertwee: The Biography\" by Bernard Bale () was published by Andr\u00e9 Deutsch, and it included a few chapters by Pertwee's widow Ingeborg.\nDeath.\nPertwee continued on the \"Doctor Who\" convention circuit, and with his voice and television acting, until his death. He died in his sleep from a heart attack in Connecticut on 20 May 1996, at the age of 76. His successor in the starring role of \"Doctor Who\", Tom Baker, paid tribute, saying: \"I am very sorry to hear the news. I was a great admirer of such a stylish actor.\" Another of his successors in the role, Colin Baker, said: \"He was a man of such presence and stature. I can't believe he has gone \u2013 it is a great shock. Of all of the interpretations of the Doctors his was the most straight in terms of avoiding comedy.\" His body was cremated, at Putney Vale crematorium, with a toy Worzel Gummidge affixed to the coffin, following the instructions in his will.\nHis death came six days after the American broadcast of the \"Doctor Who\" television film, which used in its opening credits a logo based on that from his era of the television series. The BBC broadcast of the film, on 27 May 1996, featured a dedication to Pertwee at its end.\nLegacy.\nPertwee's last association with \"Doctor Who\" was posthumous. With the approval of his widow, Ingeborg, his voice was used as part of the plot of the Big Finish Productions' 40th Anniversary audio drama, \"Zagreus\", appearing as messages from the Doctor's TARDIS as it attempted to help the currently corrupted Eighth Doctor (voiced by Paul McGann). Pertwee's voice was culled from the fan-produced \"Doctor Who\" film \"Devious\".\nArchival footage of Pertwee has been used several times in the revived \"Doctor Who\". Footage appears in \"The Next Doctor\" when the Tenth Doctor shows Jackson Lake an infostamp about himself, and in \"The Eleventh Hour\" when the Eleventh Doctor rhetorically asks the Atraxi how previous alien invasion attempts were stopped. Footage of Pertwee was used in \"The Name of the Doctor\" to depict his Doctor interacting with a version of Clara Oswald, in \"The Lodger\" in a montage of bits from the Doctor's past, and in \"The Day of the Doctor\" to depict the Third Doctor assisting his other incarnations in sending Gallifrey to a pocket universe to protect it from the Daleks.\nIn 2016, his work was honoured with a blue plaque at the New Wimbledon Theatre, which was arranged by the \"Doctor Who\" Appreciation Society.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51602", "revid": "14419815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51602", "title": "Round the Horne", "text": "1960s BBC radio comedy\nRound the Horne is a BBC Radio comedy programme starring Kenneth Horne, first transmitted in four series of weekly episodes from 1965 until 1968. The show was created by Barry Took and Marty Feldman, who wrote the first three series. The fourth was written by Took, Johnnie Mortimer, Brian Cooke and Donald Webster.\nHorne's supporting cast comprised Kenneth Williams, Hugh Paddick, Betty Marsden and, in the first three series, Bill Pertwee. The announcer was Douglas Smith, who also took part in the sketches. All except the last series featured music by Edwin Braden, played by the band \"the Hornblowers\", with a song in the middle of each show performed by the close-harmony singing group the Fraser Hayes Four; in the fourth series, the music was by Max Harris with a smaller group of players than the earlier series.\nThe show was the successor to \"Beyond Our Ken\", which had run from 1958 to 1964 with largely the same cast. By the time the new series began, television had become the dominant broadcasting medium in Britain, and \"Round the Horne\", which built up a regular audience of 15 million, was the last radio show to reach so many listeners. Horne was surrounded by larger-than-life characters including the camp pair Julian and Sandy, the disreputable eccentric J.Peasmold Gruntfuttock, and the singer of dubious folk songs, Rambling Syd Rumpo, who all became nationally familiar. The show encountered periodic scrutiny from the BBC management for its double entendres, but consistently received the backing of the director-general of the BBC, Sir Hugh Greene. Horne died suddenly in 1969; the BBC decided that \"Round the Horne\" could not continue without its star and they cancelled plans for a fifth series that year.\nOver the following decades \"Round the Horne\" has been re-broadcast continually, and all 67 shows have been published on CD. In 2019, in a poll run by \"Radio Times\", \"Round the Horne\" was voted the BBC's third-best radio show of any genre, and the best radio comedy series of all.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nBackground.\nIn 1957 the radio presenter and comedian Kenneth Horne was the compere on the popular Saturday evening comedy and music radio show \"Variety Playhouse\". The programme's writers were Eric Merriman and Barry Took, and when the series came to an end, they prepared a script for a pilot episode of a new show, \"Beyond Our Ken\". The show, in which Horne was joined by Kenneth Williams, Ron Moody, Hugh Paddick and Betty Marsden, was broadcast in October 1957. The series was due to begin in April 1958, but in February Horne suffered a debilitating stroke; he was temporarily paralysed down his left-hand side and lost the power of speech. The BBC postponed the series. After physiotherapy Horne was able to begin recording \"Beyond Our Ken\" in June, in preparation for the broadcast of the first series between July and November.\n\"Beyond Our Ken\" was written around the imperturbable establishment figure of Horne, while the other performers played a \"spectrum of characters never before heard on the radio\", including the exaggeratedly upper class Rodney and Charles (Williams and Paddick), the genteel, dotty pensioners Ambrose and Felicity (Williams and Marsden), the hoarse-voiced cook Fanny Haddock \u2013 a parody of the television cook Fanny Cradock (Marsden), the earthy gardening guru Arthur Fallowfield (Williams), the semi-articulate rock and roll singer Ricky Livid (Paddick) and Hankie Flowered, a parody of the comedian Frankie Howerd (Bill Pertwee). The first episode was not well received by a sample audience, but the BBC decided to back Horne and his team, and the initial six-week contract was extended to 21 weeks. Before the series came to an end, a second had been commissioned to run the following year. After the first series Moody was succeeded by Pertwee; Took left after the second series, leaving Merriman to write the remaining programmes on his own.\nAfter the seventh series of \"Beyond Our Ken\" ended Horne was scheduled to appear in a number of other BBC programmes; Eric Merriman objected, contending that he had made Horne into a star, and that \"no other comedy series should be allowed to use him\", according to Horne's biographer, Barry Johnston. When the BBC refused to withdraw Horne from the programme \"Down with Women\", Merriman resigned from writing \"Beyond Our Ken\" and the show came to an end. After some pressure from Horne to keep the remainder of the team together, the BBC commissioned \"Round the Horne\" as a replacement on similar lines. They turned to Took, as one of the original writers of \"Beyond Our Ken\", and his new writing partner, Marty Feldman. The name of the programme came from a pun on Horne's name, combined with the naval term \"round the Horn\", meaning to navigate the waters at the southern tip of South America, Cape Horn. The pair aimed to write what they described as \"down-market material in an upmarket way\". The scripts they produced led to a faster-paced programme than \"Beyond Our Ken\", including more allusions to contemporary events, including politics and films.\nFormat.\n\"Round the Horne\" was based on a revue format, and contained parody and satire. The programme would include an introduction from Horne, who would sometimes give answers to a supposed quiz from the previous week, and then lead into sketches that would include a set-piece based on a film or novel, such as \"The Man with the Golden Thunderball\", and \"The Three Musketeers\". Martin Dibbs, in his history of the BBC Variety Department, writes that \"the show was characterised by incessant innuendo and camp representation to an extent never before tolerated within the BBC.\"\nAs in \"Beyond Our Ken\", there was a cast of recurring characters. Took and Feldman developed new characters for Williams, Paddick, Marsden and Pertwee, whose ability to change between personas produced a programme described by the radio historians Andy Foster and Steve Furst as \"a cast of thousands played by the same four accomplished actors\". Horne's role was described in \"The Daily Telegraph\" as providing \"the perfect foil to the inspired lunacy happening all around him\". The media analysts Frank Krutnik and Steve Neale consider that as such, Horne's role was similar to that of Jack Benny, Fred Allen and Tommy Handley, \"as a 'stooge' rather than a joke-wielder, frequently switching roles between announcer and in-sketch performer\".\nBroadcasts.\n1965\u20131966: Series 1 and 2.\nThe first episode of \"Round the Horne\" was broadcast on the Light Programme on 7 March 1965. It was described in \"Radio Times\" as \"Five characters in search of the authors\". The series consisted of 16 episodes and ran to 20 June 1965. The programme was produced by John Simmonds and included music from the Fraser Hayes Four and the studio orchestra, \"the Hornblowers\", conducted by Paul Fenoulhet; from episode six, Fenoulhet was replaced by Edwin Braden. Douglas Smith, an announcer and newsreader on the Home Service and the Third Programme, was used as the programme's announcer, but was given a larger role as the series progressed; he ended up advertising spoof products and giving human sound effects in addition to his normal role.\nOne of the early episodes included a sketch by Horne, a monologue based on \"the centenary of the birth of the crumpet\", including a huge crumpet built for Queen Victoria.\nAs an added novelty he hollowed out the centre and a Gaiety Girl was secreted inside. When the loyal toast was drunk, she leapt out, wearing pink combs and waving a Union Jack \u2013 either that or the other way round, I don't remember. In any event the whole affair was a great success and, as many people commented afterwards 'it was a smashing bit of crumpet'.\nThe sketch angered the strongly-conservative Member of Parliament Sir Cyril Black, who wrote to the BBC to complain. Frank Gillard, the BBC's director of radio, wrote to Dennis Morris, the chief of the Light Programme, asking \"Round the Horne\" to \"watch its step, particularly over the next few weeks and keep itself within reasonable bounds\". Instead, Took and Feldman wrote a riposte that Horne read at the end of the following programme, addressed to the \"minority of killjoys\" who complained:\nLet me say to them that our scripts are whiter than white, as is the face of the producer when he reads them. You see, evil is in the eye of the beholder \u2013 and we believe you can make anything sound as if it has a double meaning \u2013 if you know how. So cheerio, see you next week.\nFurther complaints about the programme were received and Sir Hugh Greene, the director-general of the BBC, asked to see the scripts before broadcasting. All were returned with the words \"I see nothing to object to in this\" written on them. The complaints continued from Black, and from Mary Whitehouse \u2013 a campaigner against social liberalism \u2013 about the cast putting emphasis on certain words. Took replied that \"When Laurence Olivier plays Hamlet \"he\" puts emphasis on certain words \u2013 it's called acting\".\nA second series was commissioned, and ran for thirteen weeks, from Sunday 13 March to 5 June 1966. The programme was recorded in front of a studio audience, and Williams would play up to them with physical humour, causing hilarity in the studio. Simmonds spoke to the cast, telling them that the radio audience were hearing unexplained laughter, and to try to keep the visual pranks to a minimum. At the end of the series Roy Rich, the head of BBC Light Entertainments for radio, spoke to Took, Feldman, Horne and Williams and discussed possible changes to the programme, including the removal of the Fraser Hayes Four, and the possible changing of Pertwee and Marsden. No changes were made before the next series was commissioned.\nOn 7 October 1966, at the age of 59, Horne suffered a severe heart attack. He was much weakened, and was unfit to work for three months. As a result, he did not appear in the \"Round the Horne\" Christmas special, which was recorded on 28 November. He returned to work in January 1967 to record the third series.\n1967\u20131968: Series 3 and 4.\nThe third series ran for 21 episodes from 5 February to 25 June 1967. After recording the first episode, Williams wrote in his diary that \"the script was singularly uninspired I think \u2013 no innovations or bright ideas for the beginning of a new series\u00a0... For the first time I am beginning to feel that this show is rather dated and tired\". The BBC hierarchy also thought the first show was slightly lacking and Williams was also downbeat after the second recording, writing that \"I think the show is quite dead artistically and the format has completely atrophied itself \u2013 it is moribund now. I think I will withdraw after this series\". Trying to turn the show around, Took and Feldman wrote out the popular camp Julian and Sandy characters (played by Paddick and Williams) from the third episode, but the cast and Simmonds all insisted they were put back, so the writers duly obliged. After a few weeks the show had settled down and Williams recorded in his diary that the recording \"went v. well. Script was v. good indeed and the audience splendid \u2013 a great deal of affection there, one felt\".\nFeldman became increasingly successful on television, particularly with \"At Last the 1948 Show\" (1967); he decided to concentrate on writing and performing on the screen and left the series. Took agreed to stay, and he was joined by Johnnie Mortimer, Brian Cooke and \u2013 for the first six episodes of the next series \u2013 Donald Webster. In September 1967 BBC radio was radically reorganised. The Home Service, Third Programme and Light Programme were abolished and replaced by four new national channels \u2013 Radio 1, 2, 3 and 4; \"Round the Horne\" moved from the Light Programme to Radio 2. The change came with reduced budgets. The Fraser Hayes Four and Edwin Braden and the Hornblowers were replaced with a small instrumental group led by Max Harris, and Pertwee was dropped from the programme. The cost fell from \u00a3601 a show in series 3 to \u00a3486 in series 4. That year's Christmas special was broadcast with the new line-up and writers.\nThe fourth series began on 25 February 1968 and ran for 16 episodes to 9 June. After the first episode Williams was unimpressed with the new material, and wrote in his diary \"Now there are 4 writers on it! It is unbelievable really. Four! For half an hour of old crap with not a memorable line anywhere\u00a0... of course one goes on and flogs it gutless and the rubbish gets by\". Without Feldman, Took was enjoying the show less than he had previously. He also felt the humour was becoming more obviously dirty and complained to Williams that \"We might as well write a series called \"Get Your Cock Out\"\".\nHorne died of a heart attack on 14 February 1969, while hosting the annual Guild of Television Producers' and Directors' Awards at the Dorchester hotel in London. An award had gone to Took and Feldman for their television series \"Marty\", and Horne had just urged viewers to tune into the fifth series of \"Round the Horne\" \u2013 which was due to start on 16 March \u2013 when he fell from the podium. By 24 February 1969 it had been decided that \"Round the Horne\" could not continue without its star. As a result, the scripts for series five \u2013 which Horne had jokingly suggested should be subtitled \"The First All-Nude Radio Show\" \u2013 were hastily adapted into a new series for Williams called \"Stop Messing About\", which ran for two series before it was dropped from the schedule in 1970.\nMain regular characters.\nKenneth Horne.\nThe persona adopted by the writers for Horne was not greatly different from his real-life one, and largely the same as that of his \"Beyond Our Ken\" character: the urbane, unflappable, tolerant but sometimes surprised central figure, around whom the other characters revolved. \"The Times\" called Horne the \"master of the scandalous double-meaning delivered with shining innocence\", and in \"Round the Horne\" he combined the role of straight man to the flamboyant Julian and Sandy, Rambling Syd Rumpo and J.Peasmold Gruntfuttock with that of genial host of the show. Feldman called him \"the best straight man I had ever seen\", who nonetheless had \"a lot of funny lines\"; Jonathan Rigby, who played Horne in a stage show, \"Round the Horne\u00a0... Revisited\", thought him \"a stand-up comedian with a posh accent\u00a0... part of his genius was that he was able to be himself\".\nHorne introduced some programmes by reading out the answers to last week's (non-existent) questions:\nThe answer to question one: complete the first lines of the following songs \u2013 \"If I Were a Blackbird I'd\u00a0...\" The answer is I'd Whistle and Sing, and I positively will not accept any other suggestion. The second song was \"There's a Rainbow Round My\u00a0...\" Now we got an amazing number of replies to this. We haven't had so many since we asked you to complete \"Over My Shoulder Goes\u00a0...\" Really, it makes it very difficult for us to keep up the high reputation for sophisticated comedy we've never had.\nAt other times he would give a short lecture on justly forgotten figures from history, such as Robert Capability Lackwind, allegedly the inventor of Toad in the Hole, or Nemesis Fothergill, known to ornithologists \u2013 and the police \u2013 as the Birdman of Potter's Bar. In many episodes his opening slot was announcing the day's forthcoming events, such as International free style gnome fingering at the five-minute Hippo Wash Brompton Oratory, Swan Upping at Downham and Swan Downing at Upham, and the two-man Rabbi bob sled championship down the escalators at Leicester Square tube station. He would close the programmes by commenting on the final sketch, or announcing a competition to complete a limerick with two fecund opening lines (\"A young market gardener from Bude, Developed a cactus quite lewd\u00a0...\") or with a public service announcement such as this police message:\nIf any passer-by in Lisle Street last Saturday night witnessed a middle-aged man stagger out of the Peeperama strip club and get knocked down by a passing cyclist, would you please keep quiet about it as my wife thinks I was in Folkestone. Goodbye. See you next week.\nDouglas Smith.\nAt the start of the first series of \"Round the Horne\" Douglas Smith took the traditional role of a BBC announcer on comedy shows, introducing the programme and its component parts and reading the credits at the end. As the show developed, the writers gave him more to do. In the second series Smith continually interrupts the programme to promote \"Dobbiroids Magic Rejuvenators\" (from \"the makers of Dobbins Medical Cummerbunds for horses\") and Dobbimist horse deodorant for UFO (\"under fetlock odour\"). In the third and fourth series he is included in the movie spoofs, playing a range of roles including a rumbling volcano:\nHorne: ... And see there \u2013 dominating the island, the sacred volcano of Gonga \u2013 played by Douglas Smith with a hole in his head and steam coming out of his ears.\nPaddick: What an awesome sight \u2013 snow mantling his mighty summit and lava oozing down his sides.\nSmith: That's porridge, actually. I had a hurried breakfast this morning.\nHorne: Shut up, Smith, you're a volcano. You just loom over us and rumble ominously.\nSmith: Yes, I told you. I had a hurried breakfast.\nHorne: Shut up, Smith.\nSmith: Rumble rumble.\nHorne: That's better.\nHis other roles include a telephone box, an inflatable rubber boat, a drophead Bentley and a cow:\nSmith: Moo Moo \u2013 Splosh!\nHorne: \"Splosh?\"\nSmith: I kicked over the milk pail.\nBy the fourth series Smith has risen to the heights of playing the World (\"You've just gone through my Khyber Pass travelling on a camel\"), and in one programme he gets a solo singing spot, barracked by Paddick and Williams (\"Letting an announcer sing! It's a disgrace!\") performing \"Nobody Loves a Fairy When she's Forty\".\nBeatrice, Lady Counterblast, \"n\u00e9e\" Clissold.\nThe first of the new characters was an elderly ex-Gaiety Girl (played by Marsden) known as Bea Clissold in her theatrical heyday, when she was \"the pure brass of the music hall\", and subsequently an aristocratic widow. She has been much married and much divorced, and has retired to live in seclusion at Chattering Parva, waited on and complained about by her octogenarian butler, Spasm (Williams). Horne interviews her each week in the early programmes, when she reminisces about her life and husbands. In a commentary on the show's characters published in 1974 Took wrote, \"Her anecdotes of past marriages combine the lurid with the turgid as the narrative flashes back on leaden wings to the turn of the century and the exploits of the young Bea Clissold\". She appeared in the first programme of the series, and was a major feature of its early episodes. After she ceased to be one of the central characters she continually popped up with her catch phrase, \"Many times, many, many times\", originally referring to the number of times she was married, and later an all-purpose innuendo.\nJulian and Sandy.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFrom \"Bona Bijou Tourettes\":\nSandy: Jule had a nasty experience in M\u00e1laga\n... he got badly stung.\nHorne: Portuguese man o' war?\nJulian: I never saw him in uniform.\nThe camp pair Julian and Sandy (played by Paddick and Williams) made their debuts in the fourth programme of the first series and rapidly established themselves as a permanent fixture throughout the run of \"Round the Horne\". They are out of work actors whom Horne encounters each week in new temporary jobs. The writers' original idea was that the characters should be elderly and dignified Shakespearean actors filling in as domestic cleaners while \"resting\" (i.e. unemployed), but the producer, John Simmonds, thought they seemed rather sad, and at his suggestion Took and Feldman turned the characters into chorus boys. In a typical sketch Horne looks in at a new establishment, usually in Chelsea, with a title such as \"Bona Tours\", \"Bona Books\", \"Bona Antiques\" or \"Bona Caterers\", and is greeted with, \"Oh hello, I'm Julian and this is my friend Sandy\". The latter adds, using the gay and theatrical slang, palare, \"How bona to vada your dolly old eek again\", or \"What brings you trolling in here?\" Having first appeared as house cleaners, they are later shown working in a variety of implausible jobs. Took summed them up: \"From working as part time domestics while 'resting' they progressed to running almost every trendy activity going from fox-hunting in Carnaby Street to the gents' outfitting department of MI5\".\nThe use of palare enabled the writers to give Julian and Sandy some double entendres that survived BBC censorship because the authorities either did not know or did not admit to knowing their gay meaning. In one episode, Sandy tells Horne that Julian is a brilliant pianist: \"a miracle of dexterity at the cottage upright\", which to those familiar with gay slang could either refer to pianistic excellence or to \u2013 illegal \u2013 sexual activity in a public lavatory. At the time of the first three series, gay male sex was a criminal offence in Britain. Julian and Sandy became nationally popular characters and are widely credited with contributing a little to the public acceptance of homosexuality that led to the gradual repeal of the anti-gay laws, beginning in 1967.\nJ. Peasmold Gruntfuttock.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGruntfuttock is guided by \"voices\" and one can only hope that one day they'll guide him into the Grand Union Canal.\nBarry Took.\nA week after the debut of Julian and Sandy came the first appearance of J. Peasmold Gruntfuttock, first broadcast on 5 April 1965. Played by Williams, Gruntfuttock is described by the writers as \"the walking slum\". In his first appearance he is a job applicant at the BBC, inspired by voices in his head, and keen to get on close terms with one of the female presenters. In later programmes he is first the king and then dictator of Peasmoldia, a small enclave in the East End, and subsequently Brother Gruntfuttock, member of an obscure religious community. He writes in regularly with incorrect and sometimes physically implausible answers to last week's questions:\nFinally, we had \"I get a kick out of\u00a0...\". Well, Mr Gruntfuttock of Hoxton, I think we \"all\" know what you get a kick out of. And on looking at the list you sent me it's my considered opinion that you are running a severe risk of doing yourself a permanent injury.\nIn the fourth series he is a persistent caller of the spoof phone-in, the \"Round the Horne\" Forum of the Air, airing his peculiar personal obsessions in between bouts of heavy breathing. He was Feldman's favourite \"Round the Horne\" character; the two authors wrote of Gruntfuttock, \"He married beneath him\u00a0\u2013 which gives you some idea what his wife Buttercup (Betty Marsden) must be like. All in all not a couple one would wish to meet on a dark night or indeed at any time.\"\nCharles and Fiona.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhat would London's West End Theatre be without these ineffable thespians? How can one describe them without invoking the law of libel? They're earthquakingly, mind-bendingly, stomach-turningly, heart-stoppingly, knee-tremblingly awful.\nBarry Took.\nCharles and Fiona are supposedly characters played by an extremely theatrical actor and actress: \"ageing juvenile Binkie Huckaback\" (Paddick) and Dame Celia Molestrangler (Marsden). The two, originally based on the theatre stars Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne, were introduced in the eighth programme of the first series, and quickly became a fixture. They appeared in parodies of \"stiff-upper-lip\" dramas by No\u00ebl Coward and others; their fictitious plays had titles such as \"Present Encounter\" and \"Bitter Laughter\". Their agonised love affairs are punctuated by brittle, staccato dialogue, in which they talk of their emotions in tortuous sentences:\nFiona: All I could think of back here was you out there thinking of me back here thinking of you out there \u2013 back here. Needing you, wanting you, wanting to need you, needing to want you.\nCharles: I don't have the words for it.\nFiona: I know.\nCharles: I know you know.\nFiona: I know you know I know.\nCharles: Yes, I know.\nTheir sketches customarily end with an unexpected twist, such as the revelation that they are living in a telephone box, or are dining at the Ritz in the nude, or trysting in a refrigerator. Barry Took wrote that they were his own favourite \"Round the Horne\" characters. During the second series they were dropped in favour of a new feature, \"The Seamus Android Show\" (see below) but were quickly brought back.\nChou En Ginsberg and Lotus Blossom.\nIn the ninth show of the first series Chou En Ginsberg (Williams) appeared for the first time. He is a parody of the stereotypical far-Eastern villain Fu Manchu. The first part of his name was borrowed from Chou En-Lai, the then Chinese premier; for comic contrast the writers wanted an incongruous second name and experimented with \"Chou En Murphy\" and \"Chou En McWhirter\" before settling on \"Ginsberg\". He always announces himself as \"Dr Chou En Ginsberg, MA (Failed)\". He appears regularly in the James Bond parodies, \"Kenneth Horne, Master Spy\", plotting a fiendish international crime, luring Horne into his clutches but then being outwitted.\nChou was joined in the next show by his concubine, Lotus Blossom (Paddick) who is, in the words of her master, common as muck. A drawing of the two by William Hewison in Took and Feldman's 1974 book \"Round the Horne\" shows a diminutive Chou alongside a large, looming and graceless Lotus Blossom bulging out of her cheongsam. Her attempts to entertain Special Agent Horne with her songs and dances cause him more distress than Chou's threats of death.\nRambling Syd Rumpo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAh, the agony of the artist, and here is an artist who's been responsible for more agony than almost anyone alive: Rambling Syd Rumpo\nHorne, introducing him.\nFirst heard in the tenth show of the first series, and a fixture thereafter, Rambling Syd (Williams) is an itinerant folk singer. The writers describe him as \"one of the last of the breed of wandering minstrels who are fast dying out \u2013 thank heavens\". Often misappropriating the tunes of genuine folk songs, Rambling Syd's lyrics consist of dubious-sounding nonsense words such as these, from the \"Runcorn Splod Cobbler's Song\":\nI sing as I cobble and hammer my splod\nTho' my trumice glows hot and my trade be odd\nI sit as I gorble and pillock my splee\nFor a cobbler's life is the life for me.\nOr, to the tune of \"Foggy Dew\":\nWhen I was a young man\nI nadgered my splod\nAs I nurked at the wogglers' trade.\nWhen suddenly I thought\nWhile trussing up my groats,\nI'd whirdle with a fair young maid.\nTook said of the character that his \"bogus ethnic patter and totally meaningless songs\" created the illusion of \"something terribly naughty going on\" \u2013 but that any naughtiness was in fact in the listener's mind.\nDaphne Whitethigh.\nThe character was loosely based on the television cook Fanny Cradock. Described by Took and Feldman as \"fashion reporter, TV cook, agony aunt, pain in the neck\", Daphne Whitethigh (Marsden) is a hoarse-voiced pundit, \"whose advice on the placing of the bosom or the way to prepare Hippo in its shell is an absolute must for all those trendy moderns who want to look and feel frightful\". Among her helpful cooking tips are that although rhinoceros is not very appetising you do get \"marvellous\" crackling; her recipes for yak include yak \u00e0 l'orange, yak in its jacket, and coupe yak. She advises followers of female fashion that bosoms are still out, but may be on the way back (Horne says he will keep a light burning in the window) and her other useful pointers include how to use cold cream to remove those baboon claw marks from one's hip, and how to avoid crow's feet round the eyes: refrain from sleeping in trees.\nSeamus Android.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHello. All right, well now \u2013 ha ha. All right. Well I mustn't let my tongue run away with me. Now I know you can't wait to and neither can I, so I won't, and with that \u2013 goodnight\nSeamus Android.\nDescribed by Took as \"an unskilled television labourer whose gift of the blarney and wistful Irish charm could empty any theatre in three minutes\", Seamus Android is a parody of the broadcaster Eamonn Andrews, whose weekly television chat show was broadcast live on Sunday evenings. Took and Feldman had appeared on Andrews's show and been astonished by \"the \"non-sequiturs\" and other nonsense he came out with\". Seamus Android was the only regular character played by Pertwee, who was otherwise cast as what Took called \"the odds and ends\" \u2013 the minor characters and straight parts. Android's interviewees include the much married actress Zsa-Zsa Poltergeist, the Hollywood producer Daryll F. Klaphanger, and the star of \"The Ipswich File\", Michael Bane; promised appearances by such as Lord Ghenghiz Wilkinson, the dancing cloakroom attendant, Nemesis Poston, the juggling monk, and Anthony Wormwood-Nibblo, the Hoxton cat thief and heiress fail to materialise. As Pertwee was not in the cast for the last series, Android was dropped.\nDentures.\nPlayed by Paddick, this is the only regular \"Round the Horne\" character who had in all essentials already appeared in \"Beyond Our Ken\", where he was named Stanley Birkinshaw. In \"Round the Horne\" he has no regular name, and appears in various capacities. He is a man with ill-fitting false teeth; his diction distorts all sibilants, and sprays saliva in all directions. Dentures often opens the show in the style of a toastmaster (\"My lordsh, ladiesh and gentlemen,\" etc). In the second series he appears as \"The Great Omipaloni, the world's fastest illusionist \u2013 and also the dampest\". In the third series he is Buffalo Sidney Goosecreature, adversary of the Palone Ranger, and in the fourth he is Angus McSpray (\"Rishe againsht the Shasshenachsh\") to Williams's Bonnie Prince Charlie.\nJulie Coolibah.\nThe invention of Mortimer and Cooke, Julie Coolibah (Marsden) appears in the fourth season. She is an Australian visiting London, deeply suspicious of British men (\"I know you Pommies are sex mad\"). Every time she talks to Horne she interprets his innocent remarks as sexual overtures:\nHorne: Good to have you back.\nJulie: What do you mean by that?\nHorne: Nothing, just extending the hand of friendship.\nJulie: Yeah? With what purpose in mind, might I ask?\nWhen Julie manages to find work in London she has constant difficulties coping with the men. As a bus conductress she is outraged when a passenger gives her fourpence and asks \"How far can I go for that?\" She tells Horne, \"I cracked him with my cash-bag and put him off\".\nCritical reception.\n\"Round the Horne\" is described by Foster and Furst as \"one of the seminal comedies to come out of the BBC\". The programme continued the comedy vein of \"The Goon Show\" and provided an influential link, through \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", to the work of the Monty Python writers and performers; at one point Monty Python was given the working title \"Barry Took's Flying Circus\" by the BBC. \"Round the Horne\" helped change the way the BBC dealt with broadcasting humour: \"The ebullience of the\u00a0... comedy \u2013 not to mention the filth of the innuendos \u2013 swept away decades of insipid and paternalistic inhibition at the BBC\", according to Richard Morrison, the chief arts correspondent of \"The Times\".\nSix years after the last series was first broadcast, \"The Daily Mirror\" called \"Round the Horne\" \"the last great radio show\". In 2002 \"The Spectator\" described it as \"one of the great radio successes\"; the following year William Cook wrote in \"The Guardian\" that the show \"boasted a wonderful writing team\" and \"bestrode the airwaves like a colossus, reaching an audience of 15 million \u2013 the sort of ratings most current comedies can only dream about.\" In 2005 \"The Sunday Times\" referred to it as \"One of the best-loved shows of all time.\" \"Punch\" commented that the series was probably the last comedy show on radio to have a huge following. According to Took, \"Round the Horne\" was broadcast when radio was considered to be on the wane when compared to television; such was the show's popularity, many thought radio would continue to be a leading form of entertainment.\nAlthough \"Round the Horne\" attracted some adverse comments from Black, Whitehouse and others of similar views, the show was well received by the press. In 1967 \"The Times\" called it \"half an hour of the purest impure entertainment\", and as the third series came to an end the paper called for a Christmas special and a further series in the new year. \"No-one, but no-one at all has yet presented those elegant queens, those touchily vulnerable bona-boys, those fashion fetichists so deftly, so pointedly, and, in the final accounting, so purely\". In 1969 the paper commented that the show was \"a success with lovers of the sophisticated pun\" as well as appealing to \"those who like a good belly laugh\", with \"obvious jokes\u00a0... mixed with clever word juggling\".\nIn 1995, looking back at British radio comedy, \"The Guardian\" placed \"Round the Horne\" first in its list of the five greatest shows. In 2019, in a poll run by \"Radio Times\", \"Round the Horne\" was voted the third best radio show of any kind, and the best comedy.\nLegacy.\nRecordings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHere are the answers to last week's questions. First, the \"\"Where Do You Find It\"?\" question. The answer came in several parts, as follows: wound round a sailor's leg, on top of the wardrobe, floating in the bath, under a prize bull, and in a lay-by on the Watford Bypass. At least, I found one there, but I couldn't use it, because it was covered in verdigris.\nHorne, series 3, programme 1.\nRecordings of all the episodes have been issued on CD by the BBC in its \"Audiobooks\" publications (2002):\nIn 2005, to mark the 40th anniversary of the show, the BBC published a boxed set containing all episodes, on 35 CDs, with an accompanying 3-hour, 3-disc set \"Round The Horne: The Complete and Utter History\", written and narrated by Took: \nBy 2006 over half a million copies of tapes and CDs of \"Round the Horne\" had been sold by the BBC. Editions of \"Round the Horne\" are regularly broadcast on the digital radio service BBC Radio 4 Extra.\nScripts.\nSome scripts from all four series have been published. Those printed in two different books listed below are not always identical. Some print the scripts as written and others as finally broadcast. The scripts have been published in five books:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"The Bona Book of Julian and Sandy\" by Took and Feldman was published in 1976 and dedicated, \"For David Attenborough, who ought to know better\". It contains the scripts of thirteen Julian and Sandy sketches:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSource: \"The Bona Book of Julian and Sandy\".\nSpin off.\nThree weeks after the fourth series of \"Round the Horne\" finished, the first episode of \"Horne A'Plenty\" was broadcast on the ITV channel. In a sketch show format, and with Took as script editor (and later producer), this was an attempt to translate the spirit of \"Round the Horne\" to television, although with different actors supporting Horne: Graham Stark, for example, substituted for Williams and Sheila Steafel for Marsden. The first six-part series ran from 22 June to 27 July 1968, the second from 27 November to 1 January 1969.\nAdaptations.\n\"Round the Horne\u00a0... Revisited\".\nA stage version, \"Round the Horne\u00a0... Revisited\", was adapted from the original radio scripts by Brian Cooke, the last surviving writer of the series, and directed by Michael Kingsbury. It was first produced in October 2003 at the White Bear, a fringe theatre in south London, and opened in the West End at The Venue, Leicester Square in January 2004, running for more than a year. It featured Jonathan Rigby as Horne, Robin Sebastian as Williams, Nigel Harrison as Paddick, Kate Brown as Marsden and Charles Armstrong as Smith. A scene from the show featured in the 2004 Royal Variety Performance at the London Coliseum. Following the success of the London production, a second cast was assembled to tour the provinces. Stephen Critchlow played Horne, with Stephen Matthews, David Rumelle, Felicity Duncan and Oliver Beamish as Williams, Paddick, Marsden and Smith. The original show ran in London until December 2004, when it was replaced by a Christmas edition with an unchanged cast. A third edition, \"Round the Horne Revisited 2\", rounded off the London run from February to April 2005, and then made a provincial tour.\nThe original version of the stage play was filmed by the BBC; the television director was Nick Wood. The programme was first transmitted on BBC Four on 13 June 2004 and was repeated ten times on Four or BBC Two over the next four years.\nOther stage versions.\nIn 2008 Barry Took's former wife, Lyn, and the director Richard Baron prepared a new stage adaptation, \"Round the Horne \u2013 Unseen and Uncut\", which drew entirely on Took and Feldman material from series one to three. It toured in 2008 and 2009. The cast included, from the 2004 show, Rigby as Horne, Sebastian as Williams and Harrison as Paddick (later succeeded by David Delve), with Pertwee's characters \u2013 all omitted from the 2004 show \u2013 restored, played by Michael Shaw; Stephen Boswell played Smith. Unlike the 2004 production, it had a six-strong cast, augmented by a group of vocalists and musicians in the roles of the Hornblowers and the Fraser Hayes Four.\nIn 2015, to mark 50 years since the radio series began, Apollo Theatre Company produced a stage adaptation, \"Round the Horne: The 50th Anniversary Tour\", compiled from the original scripts and directed by Tim Astley. The cast comprised Julian Howard McDowell (Horne), Colin Elmer (Williams), Jonathan Hansler (Paddick), Eve Winters (Marsden) and Nick Wymer (Smith).\nDocumentaries.\nA 45-minute BBC radio documentary, \"Round and Round the Horne\", was broadcast on 18 September 1976. It was presented by Frank Bough and included interviews with Williams and Took. A 60-minute radio documentary, \"Horne A' Plenty,\" was broadcast on 14 February 1994. It was presented by Leslie Phillips and included new interviews with Marsden and Took and archive material featuring Horne. A three-hour radio special, \"Horne of Plenty\", was broadcast on 5 March 2005 for the 40th anniversary of the show. It was presented by Jonathan James-Moore and included interviews with Ron Moody, Pertwee, Merriman's son Andy, Cooke, Lyn Took, and extracts from Williams's diary read \"in character\" by David Benson. The special included the first and final episodes of \"Beyond Our Ken\" and \"Round the Horne\" in their entirety.\nContribution to British vocabulary.\n\"Round the Horne\" is cited as a source in 38 entries in \"The Oxford English Dictionary\". Rambling Syd is quoted in the entry for \"nadger\": \"In plural. The testicles. 'Now my dearios, I'll tether my nadgers to a grouting pole for the old grey mare is grunging in the meadow' \u2013 from a comedy monologue by the character 'Rambling Syd Rumpo' whose material is characterized by the use of nonsense words with a general air of sexual innuendo; the meaning is intentionally vague.\" Rambling Syd's surname is also cited: \"rumpo\", \"n. Brit. slang. = rumpy-pumpy n. Perhaps influenced by the name of 'Rambling Syd Rumpo', a character (played by Kenneth Williams) in the British radio series \"Round the Horne\" (1965\u20139 [\"sic\"]), whose songs, although largely consisting of nonsense words, often had an air of sexual innuendo.\"\nJulian and Sandy are cited among the sources for a range of palare words, including \"bona\" (Good, excellent; attractive), \"naff\" (Unfashionable, vulgar; lacking in style, inept; worthless, faulty), \"nante\" (Nothing), \"omee\" (Man \u2013 spelled \"omi\" by Took and Feldman) and \"palone\" (A young woman. Also: an effeminate man).\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51603", "revid": "1086625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51603", "title": "Patrick Troughton", "text": "English actor (1920\u20131987)\nPatrick George Troughton (; 25 March 1920 \u2013 28 March 1987) was an English actor. He became best known for his roles in television, most notably starring as the second incarnation of the Doctor in the long-running British science-fiction television series \"Doctor Who\" from 1966 to 1969; he reprised the role three times between 1972 and 1985. Classically trained, Troughton's early work included appearances in Laurence Olivier's films \"Hamlet\" (1948) and \"Richard III\" (1955), and he later appeared in films including \"Jason and the Argonauts\" (1963), \"The Gorgon\" (1964), \"Scars of Dracula\" (1970) and \"The Omen\" (1976), as well as the fantasy television series \"The Box of Delights\" (1984).\nEarly life.\nTroughton was born on 25 March, 1920 in Mill Hill, North London, England, to Alec George Troughton (1887\u20131953), a solicitor, and Dorothy Evelyn Offord (1886\u20131979), who married in 1914 in Edmonton. Patrick had an elder brother, Alec Robert (1915\u20131994), and a younger sister, Mary Edith (1923\u20132005). Troughton attended Mill Hill School and continued to live in Mill Hill for most of his life. While at Mill Hill School, he acted in a production of J. B. Priestley's \"Bees on the Boat Deck\" in March 1937.\nTroughton studied at the Embassy School of Acting at Swiss Cottage, being tutored by Eileen Thorndike. He was later awarded an acting scholarship at the Leighton Rallius Studios at the John Drew Memorial Theatre on Long Island, New York, in the United States.\nWhen the Second World War broke out, he abandoned his studies in the U.S. and returned to Great Britain to enlist. During the passage across the North Atlantic Ocean, the ship carrying him struck a sea mine off the coast of Britain, from which he escaped in a lifeboat as the vessel foundered. On arrival back in England, whilst waiting to join the Armed Forces, he briefly worked with the Tonbridge Repertory Company.\nIn 1940, Troughton enlisted with the Royal Navy, receiving a commission with the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve in November 1941. He was deployed on East Coast Convoy duty from February to August 1941, and then with Coastal Forces' Motor Gun Boats based at Great Yarmouth from November 1942 to 1945, operating in the North Sea and English Channel. During his service with the MGBs, he was on one occasion involved in an action against Kriegsmarine E-boats which resulted in one of the enemy craft being destroyed by ramming, whilst Troughton's boat and another destroyed two more with their gunfire. His decorations included the 1939\u201345 Star, the Atlantic Star, and he was mentioned in dispatches \"for outstanding courage, leadership and skill in many daring attacks on enemy shipping in hostile waters\". He used to wear a tea cosy on his head in cold weather in the North Sea.\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nAfter demobilisation, Troughton returned to the theatre. He worked with the Amersham Repertory Company, the Bristol Old Vic Company and the Pilgrim Players at the Mercury Theatre, Notting Hill Gate. He made his television debut in 1947. In 1948, Troughton made his cinema debut with small roles in Olivier's \"Hamlet\", the Joseph L. Mankiewicz directed \"Escape\" (one of the stars of which was First Doctor actor William Hartnell), and a minor role as a pirate in Disney's \"Treasure Island\" (1950), appearing only during the attack on the heroes' hut. Television, though, was his favourite medium. In 1953, he became the first actor to play the folk hero Robin Hood on television, starring in six half-hour episodes broadcast from 17 March to 21 April on the BBC, and titled simply \"Robin Hood\". Troughton would also make several appearances in \"The Adventures of Robin Hood\" starring Richard Greene. He appeared as the murderer Tyrrell in Olivier's film of \"Richard III\" (1955). He was also Olivier's stand-in on the film and appears in many long shots as Richard.\nTroughton's other notable film and television roles included Kettle in \"Chance of a Lifetime\" (1950), Sir Andrew Ffoulkes in \"The Scarlet Pimpernel\" (1955), Vickers in the episode entitled \"Strange Partners\" in \"The Invisible Man\" (1958, the series also featured one of his future \"Doctor Who\" co-stars, Deborah Watling, as Sally), Phineus in \"Jason and the Argonauts\" (1963), \"Paul of Tarsus\" (BBC 1960, title role), \"Dr. Finlay's Casebook\" (BBC 1962, semi-regular), and Quilp in \"The Old Curiosity Shop\" (1962\u201363). He voiced Winston Smith in a 1965 BBC Home Service radio adaptation of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". Prior to \"Doctor Who\" he appeared in numerous TV shows, including \"The Count of Monte Cristo\", \"Ivanhoe\", \"Dial 999\", \"Danger Man\", \"Maigret\", \"Compact\", \"The Third Man\", \"Crane\", \"Detective\", \"Sherlock Holmes\", \"No Hiding Place\", \"The Saint\", \"Armchair Theatre\", \"The Wednesday Play\", \"Z-Cars\", \"Adam Adamant Lives!\" and \"Softly, Softly\".\nTroughton was offered the part of Johnny Ringo in the \"Doctor Who\" story \"The Gunfighters\" but turned it down.\n\"Doctor Who\".\nIn 1966, \"Doctor Who\" producer Innes Lloyd looked for a replacement for William Hartnell in the series' lead role. The continued survival of the show depended on audiences accepting another actor in the role, despite the bold decision that the replacement would not be a Hartnell lookalike or soundalike. Lloyd later stated that Hartnell had approved of the choice, saying, \"There's only one man in England who can take over, and that's Patrick Troughton\". Lloyd chose Troughton because of his extensive and versatile experience as a character actor. After he was cast, Troughton considered various ways to approach the role, to differentiate his portrayal from Hartnell's amiable-yet-tetchy patriarch. Troughton's early thoughts about how he might play the Doctor included a \"tough sea captain\", and a piratical figure in blackface and turban. \"Doctor Who\" creator Sydney Newman suggested that the Doctor could be a \"cosmic hobo\" in the mould of Charlie Chaplin, and this was the interpretation eventually chosen. Troughton was the first Doctor to have his face appear in the opening titles of the show. In one serial, \"The Enemy of the World\", Troughton played two parts: as the protagonist (The Doctor) and the antagonist (Salamander).\nDuring his time on the series, Troughton tended to shun publicity and rarely gave interviews. He told one interviewer, \"I think acting is magic. If I tell you all about myself it will spoil it\". Years later, he told another interviewer that his greatest concern was that too much publicity would limit his opportunities as a character actor after he left the role.\nIn a rare interview with Ernest Thompson from \"Radio Times\", Troughton revealed that he \"always liked dressing up, and would have been happy as a school teacher as children keep one young\". Troughton was popular with both the production team and his co-stars. Producer Lloyd credited Troughton with a \"leading actor's temperament. He was a father figure to the whole company and hence could embrace it and sweep it along with him\". Troughton also gained a reputation on set as a practical joker.\nMany of the early episodes in which Troughton appeared were among those discarded by the BBC. Troughton found \"Doctor Who\"'s schedule (at the time, 40 to 44 episodes per year) gruelling, and decided to leave the series in 1969, after three years in the role. This decision was also motivated in part by fear of being typecast.\nTroughton returned to \"Doctor Who\" three times after formally leaving the programme. The first of these occasions was in \"The Three Doctors\", the 1972\u201373 serial opening the programme's 10th series. In 1983, Troughton overcame some reluctance to reprise his role and agreed to appear in the 20th-anniversary special \"The Five Doctors\" at the request of series producer John Nathan-Turner. He also agreed to attend \"Doctor Who\" conventions, including the show's 20th anniversary celebrations at Longleat in 1983. He also appeared around the world with Nathan-Turner. Troughton enjoyed the return to the programme so much that he readily agreed to appear one more time as the Second Doctor, with Colin Baker's Sixth Doctor in \"The Two Doctors\" (1985). Reportedly, he also advised Fifth Doctor actor Peter Davison to limit his time in the role to three series to avoid typecasting and the younger actor followed this advice.\nIn 2013, the BBC commissioned a docudrama about the early days of \"Doctor Who\", as part of the programme's fiftieth-anniversary celebrations. Troughton appears as a character in the production, called \"An Adventure in Space and Time\", portrayed by actor Reece Shearsmith.\nIn 2014's \"Robot of Sherwood\", a still image of Troughton from 1953 appears among the future depictions of Robin Hood displayed by the Twelfth Doctor to the outlaw.\nLater career.\nAfter Troughton left \"Doctor Who\" in 1969, he appeared in various films and television roles. Film roles included Clove in \"Scars of Dracula\" (1970), a bodysnatcher in \"Frankenstein and the Monster from Hell\" (1973), Father Brennan in \"The Omen\" (1976) and Melanthius in \"Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger\" (1977). Television roles included the recurring role of Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, in five of the six episodes of \"The Six Wives of Henry VIII\" (1970) (for which he commenced rehearsals just one week after completing his final studio recording on \"Doctor Who\"), the villainous Nasca in Thames Television's Aztec-themed drama \"The Feathered Serpent\" (1976\u201378), a guest-starring spot in the comedy series \"The Goodies\" in the episode \"The Baddies\", as well as episodes of \"Paul Temple\", \"Dr. Finlay's Casebook\", \"Doomwatch\", \"The Persuaders!\", \"A Family at War\", \"Coronation Street\", ', \"Colditz\", \"Play for Today\", \"Z-Cars\", \"Special Branch\", \"Sutherland's Law\", \"The Sweeney\", \"Jason King\", \"Survivors\", \"Crown Court\", \"Angels\", \"Warship\", \"Van der Valk\", ', \"The Onedin Line\", \"All Creatures Great and Small\", \"Only When I Laugh\" (Series 2 Episode 9), \"Nanny\" and \"Minder\" (in a March 1984 episode titled \"Windows\", Season 4 Episode 9). He also portrayed Cole Hawlings in a BBC Television dramatisation of the John Masefield children's book \"The Box of Delights\" (1984). In the same year he also appeared in a \"Two Ronnies\" Christmas Special playing a judge.\nTroughton's health was never completely robust due to heavy drinking and smoking (he had quit smoking in the 1960s, but the damage had already been done). Later in his life he refused to accept his doctor's advice after he had developed a serious heart condition through overwork and stress. He suffered two major heart attacks, one in 1979 and the other in 1984, both of which prevented him from working for several months afterwards. Following each of these attacks, his doctor's warnings were again ignored, as Troughton committed himself to a heavy TV and film schedule.\nTroughton featured in the 1974 11-part radio adaptation of Evelyn Waugh's \"Sword of Honour\". In 1986, he was a regular in the first series of the LWT sitcom \"The Two of Us\", and guested in an episode of \"Super Gran\" in May 1987, which was the last role he filmed. His final television appearance was in the autumn of the same year in \"Knights of God\", which had been filmed two years earlier. Troughton also appeared in the first episode of Central Independent Television's \"Inspector Morse\", entitled \"The Dead of Jericho\", which was originally transmitted on ITV on 6 January 1987.\nPersonal life.\nTroughton married his first wife, Margaret Dunlop, at the Union Church at Mill Hill on 3 September 1943.\nTroughton started living a double life when, just after the birth of his third child in 1955, he chose to leave Dunlop and their three children (then aged eight, five, and a few months) to live with girlfriend Ethel Margaret \"Bunny\" Nuens, with whom he also went on to have three children. Troughton maintained a deception of having stayed with his original family that was so successful that his own mother died unaware of the separation in 1979, 24 years after Troughton had left Dunlop. Because of the disastrous drama Troughton caused during his divorce from Dunlop, his first daughter, Joanna, vowed never to speak to her father again. Their differences remained unresolved at the time of his death in 1987. While Troughton never married Nuens, in 1976 he did marry Shelagh Holdup and acquired two stepchildren.\nTroughton's six children are:\nTroughton's grandchildren include:\nDeath.\nOn 27 March 1987, two days after his 67th birthday, Troughton was a guest at the Magnum Opus Con II science fiction convention in Columbus, Georgia, United States.\nAlthough he had been warned by his doctors before leaving the United Kingdom not to exert himself because of his heart condition, he appeared to be in good spirits and participated vigorously in the day's panels, and was looking forward to a belated birthday celebration which was planned for that evening, as well as screenings of all of his surviving complete \"Doctor Who\" stories, including \"The Dominators\", which he was particularly eager to see again. Troughton suffered a third and final heart attack at 7:25\u00a0am on 28 March, just after ordering breakfast from the hotel. According to the paramedics who attended the scene, he died instantly.\nTroughton was certified dead at the Medical Center (now Piedmont Columbus Regional) in Columbus, Georgia. After a local cremation, his ashes were flown back to England. During the passage to England, the ashes were mislaid temporarily. This delayed his funeral by a few weeks. His widow, Shelagh, later scattered them beneath a newly planted tree in Bushy Park, a favourite place of Troughton's near to his family home in Teddington.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51606", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51606", "title": "Causes of mental disorders", "text": "Etiology of psychopathology\nA mental disorder is an impairment of the mind disrupting normal thinking, feeling, mood, behavior, or social interactions, and accompanied by significant distress or dysfunction. The causes of mental disorders are very complex and vary depending on the particular disorder and the individual. Although the causes of most mental disorders are not fully understood, researchers have identified a variety of biological, psychological, and environmental factors that can contribute to the development or progression of mental disorders. Most mental disorders result in a combination of several different factors rather than just a single factor.\nResearch results.\nRisk factors for mental illness include psychological trauma, adverse childhood experiences, genetic predisposition, and personality traits. Correlations between mental disorders and substance use are also found to have a two way relationship, in that substance use can lead to the development of mental disorders and having mental disorders can lead to substance use/abuse. This effect is stronger and more reliable in some substance use than others, such as smoking.\nMental illnesses have risk factors, for instance including unequal parental treatment, adverse life events and drug use in depression, migration and discrimination, childhood trauma, loss or separation in families, and cannabis use in schizophrenia and psychosis, and parenting factors, child abuse, family history (e.g. of anxiety), and temperament and attitudes (e.g. pessimism) in anxiety. Many psychiatric disorders include problems with impulse and other emotional control.\nIn February 2013, a study found genetic links between five major psychiatric disorders: autism, ADHD, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and schizophrenia. Abnormal functioning of neurotransmitter systems is also responsible for some mental disorders, including serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine, and glutamate system's abnormal functioning. Differences have also been found in the size or activity of specific brain regions in some cases. Psychological mechanisms have also been implicated, such as cognitive (e.g. reasoning) biases, emotional influences, personality dynamics, temperament, and coping style. Studies have indicated that variation in genes can play an important role in the evolution of mental disorders, although the reliable identification of connections between specific genes and specific disorders has proven more difficult. Environmental events surrounding pregnancy (such as maternal hypertension, preeclampsia, or infection) and birth have also been implicated. Traumatic brain injury may increase the risk of developing certain mental disorders. Throughout the years, there have been inconsistent links found to certain viral infections, substance misuse, and general physical health that have been false.\nAdverse experiences affect a person's mental health, including abuse, neglect, bullying, social stress, traumatic events, and other overwhelming life experiences. The specific risks and pathways to particular disorders are less clear, however. Aspects of the wider community have also been implicated, including employment problems, socioeconomic inequality, lack of social cohesion, problems linked to migration, and features of particular societies and cultures. The loss of cultural connection can result in cultural bereavement. Mental stress is a common cause of mental illnesses, so finding a coping solution to cope with mental stress would be beneficial. Many solutions that have helped reduce stress are yoga, exercise, and some medications that may help.\nTheories.\nGeneral theories.\nSeveral theories or models seek to explain the causes (etiology) of mental disorders. These theories may differ in regards to how they explain the cause of the disorder, how to treat the disorder, and how they classify mental disorders. Theories also differ about the philosophy of mind they accept; that is, whether the mind and brain are identical or not. \nDuring most of the 20th century, mental illness was ascribable to problematic relationships between children and their parents. This view was held well into the late 1990s, in which people still believed this child-parent relationship was a large determinant of severe mental illness, such as depression and schizophrenia. In the 21st century, additional factors have been identified such as genetic contributions, though experience also plays a role. So, the perceived causes of mental illness have changed over time and will most likely continue to alter while more research develops throughout the years.\nOutside the West, community approaches remain a focus.\nA practical mixture of models will explain particular issues and disorders, although there may be difficulty defining boundaries for indistinct psychiatric syndromes.\nMedical or biomedical model.\nAn overall distinction is also commonly made between a \"medical model\" (also known as a biomedical or disease model) and a \"social model\" (also known as an empowerment or recovery model) of mental disorder and disability, with the former focusing on hypothesized disease processes and symptoms, along with latter focusing on hypothesized social constructionism and social contexts.\nBiological psychiatry has tended to follow a biomedical model focused on organic or \"hardware\" pathology of the brain, where many mental disorders are conceptualized as disorders of brain circuits shaped by a complex interplay of genetics and experience.\nThe social and medical models of mental disorders each work to identify and study distinct aspects, solutions, and potential therapies of disorders. The intersection and cross reference between the two models can further be used to develop more holistic models of mental disorders. Many criticisms historically of each model is the exclusivity of the other perspective. Therefore, intersectional research improved the impact and importance of future findings.\nBiopsychosocial model.\nThe primary model of contemporary mainstream Western psychiatry is the biopsychosocial model (BPS), which integrates biological, psychological, and social factors. The Biopsychosocial model was first conceptualised by George Engel in 1977, suggesting that to understand a person's medical condition it is not simply the biological factors to consider, but also the psychological and social factors . The biopsychosocial approach systematically considers biological, psychological, and social factors and their complex interactions in understanding health, illness, and health care delivery. Biological, psychological, and social factors exist along a continuum of natural systems. The factors within the model contain the following:\nThis model is commonly used for case conceptualization of psychological disorders as well as chronic pain, with the view that the pain is a psychophysiological behavior pattern that cannot be categorised into biological, psychological, or social factors alone.\nA related view, the diathesis-stress model, posits that mental disorders result from genetic dispositions and environmental stressors, combining to cause patterns of distress or dysfunction. The model is one way to explain why some individuals are more vulnerable to mental disorders than others. Additionally, it explains why some people may develop a mental disorder after exposure to stressful life events while others do not.\nPsychoanalytic theories.\nPsychoanalytic theories focus on unresolved internal and relational conflicts. These theories have been predicated as explanations of mental disorders. Many psychoanalytic groups are said to adhere to the biopsychosocial model and to accept an eclectic mix of subtypes of psychoanalysis. Sigmund Freud developed the psychoanalytic theory. This theory focuses on the impact of unconscious forces on human behavior. According to Freud, a personality has three parts: the id, ego, and superego. The id operates under the pleasure principle, the ego operates under the reality principle, and the superego is the \"conscience\" and incorporates what is and is not socially acceptable into a person's value system. According to the psychoanalytic theory, there are five stages of psychosexual development that everyone goes through the oral stage, anal stage, phallic stage, latency stage, and genital stage. Mental disorders can be caused by an individual receiving too little or too much gratification in one of the psychosexual developmental stages. When this happens, the individual is said to be in that developmental stage.\nAttachment theory.\nAttachment theory is a kind of evolutionary-psychological approach sometimes applied in the context of mental disorders, which focuses on the role of early caregiver-child relationships, responses to danger, and the search for a satisfying reproductive relationship in adulthood. According to this theory, a child's attachment is to a nurturing adult, the more likely that child will maintain healthy relationships with others in their life. As found by the Strange Situation experiment run by Mary Ainsworth based on the formulations of John Bowlby, there are four patterns of attachment: secure attachment, avoidant attachment, disorganized attachment, and ambivalent attachment. Later research found the fourth pattern of attachment is known as disorganized disoriented attachment. Secure attachments reflect trust in the child-caretaker relationship while insecure attachment reflects mistrust. The security of attachment in a child affects the child's emotional, cognitive, and social competence later in life.\nEvolutionary psychology.\nEvolutionary psychology and evolutionary psychiatry posit that mental disorders involve the dysfunctional operation of mental modules adapted to ancestral physical or social environments but not necessarily to modern ones. Behavioral abnormalities that resemble human mental illness have been found in related species (great apes).\nOther theories suggest that mental illness could have evolutionary \"advantages\" for the species, including enhancing creativity and stress to enhance survival by activating the flight-or-fight response in anticipation of danger.\nMania and depression could have benefited from seasonal changes by helping to increase energy levels during times of plenty and rejuvenating energy during times of scarcity. In this way, mania was set in motion during the spring and summer to facilitate energy for hunting; depression worked best during the winter, similar to how bears hibernate to recover their energy levels. This may explain the connection between circadian genes and Bipolar Disorder and explain the relationship between light and seasonal affective disorder.\nBiological factors.\nBiological factors consist of anything physical that can cause adverse effects on a person's mental health. Biological factors include genetics, prenatal damage, infections, exposure to toxins, brain defects or injuries, and substance abuse. Many professionals believe that the cause of mental disorders is the biology of the brain and the nervous system.\n\"Mind\" mentions genetic factors, long-term physical health conditions, and head injuries or epilepsy (affecting behavior and mood) as factors that may trigger an episode of mental illness.\nGenetics.\nSome rare mental disorders are caused only by genetics such as Huntington's disease.\nFamily linkage and some twin studies have indicated that genetic factors often play a role in the heritability of mental disorders. The reliable identification of specific genetic variation can cause indication of higher risk to particular disorders, through linkage, Genome Wide Association Scores or association studies, has proven difficult. This is due to the complexity of interactions between genes, environmental events, and early development or the need for new research strategies. No specific gene results in a complex trait disorder, but specific variations of alleles result in higher risk for a trait. The heritability of behavioral traits associated with a mental disorder may be in permissive than in restrictive environments, and susceptibility genes probably work through both \"within-the-skin\" (physiological) pathways and \"outside-the-skin\" (behavioral and social) pathways. Investigations increasingly focus on links between genes and endophenotypes because they are more specific traits. Some include neurophysiological, biochemical, endocrinological, neuroanatomical, cognitive, or neuropsychological, rather than disease categories. Concerning a well-known mental disorder, schizophrenia, it is said with certainty that alleles (forms of genes) were responsible for this disorder. Some research has indicated only multiple, rare mutations are thought to alter neurodevelopmental pathways that can ultimately contribute to schizophrenia; virtually every rare structural mutation was different in each individual.\nResearch has shown that many conditions are polygenic meaning there are multiple defective genes rather than only one that is responsible for a disorder, and these genes may also be pleiotropic meaning that they cause multiple disorders, not just one. Schizophrenia and Alzheimer's are both examples of hereditary mental disorders. When exonic genes encode for proteins, these proteins do not just affect one trait. The pathways that contribute to complex traits and phenotypes interact with multiple systems, even though proteins have specific functions. \nbrain plasticity (neuroplasticity) raises questions of whether some brain differences may be caused by mental illnesses or by pre-existing and then causing them.\nPrenatal damage.\nAny damage that occurs to a fetus while still in its mother's womb is considered prenatal damage. Mental disorders can develop if the pregnant mother uses drugs or alcohol or is exposed to illnesses or infections during pregnancy. \nEnvironmental events surrounding pregnancy and birth have increased the development of mental illness in the offspring. Some events may include maternal exposure to stress or trauma, conditions of famine, obstetric birth complications, infections, and gestational exposure to alcohol or cocaine. These factors have been hypothesized to affect areas of neurodevelopment, general development, and restrict neuroplasticity.\nInfection, disease and toxins.\nInfection.\nThere have been some findings of links between infection by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii and schizophrenia.\nAIDS has been linked to some mental disorders. Research shows that infections and exposure to toxins such as HIV and streptococcus cause dementia. This HIV infection that makes its way to the brain is called encephalopathy which spreads itself through the brain leading to dementia. The infections or toxins that trigger a change in the brain chemistry can develop into a mental disorder.\nDepression and emotional liability may be also be caused by babesiosis.\nThere is some evidence that there may be a relationship between BoDV-1 infection and psychiatric disease.\nThe research on Lyme disease caused by a deer tick and toxins is expanding the link between bacterial infections and mental illness.\nDisease.\nDepression, anxiety, mania, psychosis, vegetative symptoms, cognitive deficit and consciousness impairment may be caused by internal disease as well as endocrine and metabolic disorders, deficiency states and neurologic disorders.\nInjury and brain defects.\nAny damage to the brain can cause a mental disorder. The brain is the control system for the nervous system and the rest of the body. Without it, the body cannot function properly.\nIncreased mood swings, insane behavior, and substance abuse disorders are traumatic brain injury (TBI) examples. Findings on the relationship between TBI severity and prevalence of subsequent psychiatric disorders have been inconsistent, and occurrence relates to prior mental health problems. Direct neurophysiological effects in a complex interaction with personality, attitude, and social influences.\nHead trauma classifies as either open or closed head injury. In open head injury, the skull is punctured and the brain tissue is demolished. Closed head injury is more common, the skull is not punctured because there is an impact of the brain against the skull that creates permanent structural damage (subdural hematoma). With both types, symptoms may disappear or persist over time. Typically the longer the length of time spent unconscious and the length of post-traumatic amnesia the worse the prognosis for the individual. The cognitive residual symptoms of head trauma are associated with the type of injury (either an open head injury or closed head injury) and the amount of tissue destroyed. Closed injury head trauma symptoms include; Deficits in abstract reasoning ability, judgment, memory, and marked personality changes. Open injury head trauma symptoms tend to be the experience of classic neuropsychological syndromes like aphasia, visual-spatial disorders, and types of memory or perceptual disorders.\nBrain tumors are classified as either malignant and benign, and as intrinsic (directly infiltrate the parenchyma of the brain) or extrinsic (grows on the external surface of the brain and produces symptoms as a result of pressure on the brain tissue). Progressive cognitive changes associated with brain tumors may include confusion, poor comprehension, and even dementia. Symptoms tend to depend on the location of the tumor in the brain. For example, tumors on the frontal lobe tend to be associated with the sign of impairment of judgment, apathy, and loss of the ability to regulate/modulate behavior.\nFindings have indicated abnormal functioning of brainstem structures in individuals with mental disorders such as schizophrenia, and other disorders that have to do with impairments in maintaining sustained attention. Some abnormalities in the average size or shape of some regions of the brain have been found in some disorders, reflecting genes and experiences. Studies of schizophrenia have tended to find enlarged ventricles and sometimes reduced volume of the cerebrum and hippocampus, while studies of (psychotic) bipolar disorder have sometimes found increased amygdala volume. Findings differ over whether volumetric abnormalities are risk factors or are only found alongside the course of mental health problems, possibly reflecting neurocognitive or emotional stress processes and medication use or substance use. Some studies have also found reduced hippocampal volumes in major depression, possibly worsening with time depressed.\nNeurotransmitter systems.\nAbnormal levels of dopamine activity correspond with several disorders (reduced in ADHD and OCD, and increased in schizophrenia). The dysfunction in serotonin and other monoamine neurotransmitters (norepinephrine and dopamine) correspond with certain mental disorders and their associated neural networks. Some include major depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, phobias, post-traumatic stress disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder. Studies of depleted levels of monoamine neurotransmitters show an association with depression and other psychiatric disorders, but \"... it should be questioned whether 5-HT [serotonin] represents just one of the final and not the main, factors in the neurological chain of events underlying psychopathological symptoms...\"\nSimplistic \"chemical imbalance\" explanations for mental disorders have never received empirical support; and most prominent psychiatrists, neuroscientists, and psychologists have not espoused such ill-defined, facile etiological theories. Instead, neurotransmitter systems have been understood in the context of the diathesis-stress or biopsychosocial models. The following 1967 quote from renowned psychiatric and neuroscience researchers exemplifies this more sophisticated understanding (in contrast to the woolly \"chemical imbalance\" notion).\nWhereas specific genetic factors may be of importance in the etiology of some, and possibly all, depressions, it is equally conceivable that early experiences of the infant or child may cause enduring biochemical changes, that may predispose some individuals to depressions in adulthood. It is not likely that changes in the metabolism of the biogenic amines alone will account for the complex phenomena of normal or pathological affect.\nSubstance abuse.\nSubstance abuse, especially long-term abuse, can cause or exacerbate many mental disorders. Alcoholism is linked to depression while abuse of amphetamines and LSD can leave a person feeling paranoid and anxious.\nCorrelations of mental disorders with drug use include cannabis, alcohol, and caffeine. At more than 300\u00a0mg, caffeine may cause anxiety or worsen anxiety disorders. Illicit drugs can stimulate particular parts of the brain that can affect development in adolescence. Cannabis has also been found to worsen depression and lessen an individual's motivation. Alcohol has the potential to damage \"white matter\" in the brain that affects thinking and memory. Alcohol is a problem in many countries due to many people participating in excessive drinking or binge drinking.\nEnvironmental factors.\nThe term \"environment\" is very loosely defined in the context of mental illnesses. Unlike biological and psychological causes, environmental causes denote a wide range of stressors that individuals experience in everyday life. They are more psychologically than biologically based. Events that evoke feelings of loss are the most likely to cause a mental disorder to develop in an individual.\nEnvironmental factors include but are not limited to dysfunctional home life, poor interpersonal relationships, substance abuse, not meeting social expectations, low self-esteem, and poverty. The British charity organisation Mind lists childhood abuse, trauma, violence, neglect, social isolation, discrimination, grief, stress, homelessness, social disadvantage, debt, unemployment, caring for a family member or friend, and significant trauma as an adult (such as war, an accident, or being the victim of a violent crime) as possible triggers of an episode of mental illness.\nRepeating generational patterns, behaviors that are passed down through different familial generations, are also a risk factor for mental illness, especially in children.\nLife events and emotional stress.\nMistreatment in childhood or adulthood (including sexual-, physical-, and emotional abuse, domestic violence, and bullying) has been linked to the onset of mental disorders through an interaction of societal, familial, psychological, and biological factors. More generally, negative or stressful life events have been implicated in the development of a range of disorders, including mood and anxiety disorders.\nThe main risks appear to be from the accumulation of such experiences over time, although a single major trauma can sometimes lead to disorders, especially post-traumatic stress disorder. Resilience to such experiences varies; a person may be resistant to some stressors but not to others. The psychological resilience of an individual can be affected by genetics, temperamental characteristics, cognitive flexibility, coping strategies, and previous experiences. For example, in the case of bipolar disorder, stress is not a specific cause but does place genetically and biologically vulnerable people at risk for more severe forms of the illness.\nAdverse childhood experiences.\nThe Adverse Childhood Experiences Study has shown a strong dose\u2013response relationship between adverse childhood experiences or ACEs (such as physical and/or emotional neglect, abuse, poverty, malnutrition, and traumatic experiences) and numerous health, social, and behavioral problems including suicide attempts and the frequency of depressive episodes. Several such experiences can cause toxic stress.\nACEs may affect the structural and functional development of the brain and lead to abnormalities, and chronic trauma can disrupt immune responses and cause lasting dysregulated inflammatory response. A child's neurological development can be disrupted when chronically exposed to stressful events, and his/her cognitive functioning and/or ability to cope with negative emotions can diminish. Over time, the child may adopt various harmful coping strategies that contribute to later mental and physical problems. Findings have been mixed, but some studies suggest that cognitive deficit is more related to neglect than other forms of adversity.\nPoor parenting is a risk factor for depression and anxiety. Separation, grief in families, and other forms childhood trauma are risk factors for schizophrenia. Children are more susceptible to psychological harm from traumatic events than adults, but their reaction does vary by individual child, age, the type of event, and the length of exposure.\nNeglect is a form of mistreatment in which the responsible caretakers fail to provide the necessary age-appropriate care, supervision, and protection. It is different from abuse in that it is, in this context, not intentional in causing harms. The long-term effects of neglect can be reduced physical, emotional, and mental health throughout the victim's life.\nFamilial and close relationships.\nParental divorce, death, absence, or the lack of stability appears to increase the risk of mental disorders in a child. Early social privation, and the lack of \"ongoing, harmonious, secure, committed\" relationships have been implicated in the development of mental illnesses. Continuous conflict with friends, one's support system, and family can all increase the risk of developing a mental illness or can worsen one's mental health.\nDivorce is a factor that affects adults as well as children. Divorcees may have emotional adjustment problems due to a loss of intimacy and social connections; however, new statistics show that the negative effects of divorce have been overstated.\nSocial expectations and self-esteem.\nHaving both too low or too high self-esteem can be detrimental to an individual's mental health. Low self-esteem in particular can result in aggression, self-deprecating behavior, anxiety, and other mental disorders. Being perceived as someone who does not \"fit in\" can result in bullying and other types of emotional abuse, which can lead to the victim experiencing depression, anger, and loneliness.\nPoverty.\nStudies show that there is a direct correlation between poverty and mental illness: the lower the socioeconomic status of an individual, the higher the risk of mental illness. Impoverished people in England, defined as those who live in the lowest 20% income bracket, are two to three times more likely to develop mental illness than those of a higher economic class. This increased risk remains consistent for all poor individuals regardless of any in-group demographic differences, as all disadvantaged families experience economic stressors such as unemployment or lack of housing. A lower or more insecure educational, occupational, economic, or social position is generally linked to more mental disorders. Children from these backgrounds may have low levels of self-efficiency and self-worth. Studies have also shown a strong relationship between poverty and substance abuse, another risk factor in the onset of mental disorders.\nProblems in one's community or culture including poverty, unemployment or underemployment, a lack of social cohesion, and migration have been associated with the development of mental disorders. Personal resources, community factors, and interactions between individual and regional-level income levels have been implicated. Socioeconomic deprivation in neighborhoods can cause worsen mental health, even after accounting for genetic factors. According to a 2009 meta-analysis by Paul and Moser, countries with high income inequality and poor unemployment protections have worse mental health outcomes among the unemployed.\nThe effects of different socioeconomic factors varies by country. Minority ethnic groups, including first or second-generation immigrants, are at a greater risk of developing mental disorders. This has been attributed to the insecurities in their lives and their disadvantages, including racism. There have been alternate models, such as the drift hypothesis to account for the complex relationship between an individual's social status and mental health.\nPsychological and individual factors, including resilience.\nSome clinicians believe that psychological characteristics alone determine mental disorders. Others speculate that abnormal behavior can be explained by a mix of social and psychological factors. In many examples, environmental and psychological triggers complement one another resulting in emotional stress, which in turn activates a mental illness. Each person is unique in how they will react to psychological stressors. What may break one person may have little to no effect on another. Psychological stressors, which can trigger mental illness, are as follows: emotional, physical, or sexual abuse, loss of a significant loved one, neglect, and being unable to relate to others.\nThe inability to relate to others is also known as emotional detachment. Emotional detachment makes it difficult for an individual to empathize with others or to share their feelings. These individuals tend to stress the importance of their independence and tend to struggle relating to others. An emotionally detached person may try to rationalize or apply logic to a situation to which there is no logical explanation. Often, the inability to relate to others stems from a traumatic event.\nMental characteristics of individuals, as assessed by both neurological and psychological studies, have been linked to the development and maintenance of mental disorders. This includes cognitive or neurocognitive factors, such as the way a person perceives, thinks, or feels about certain things; or an individual's overall personality, temperament, or coping style or the extent of protective factors or \"positive illusions\" such as optimism, personal control and a sense of meaning.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51608", "revid": "47424798", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51608", "title": "Robert Fisk", "text": "English writer and journalist (1946\u20132020)\nRobert William Fisk (12 July 1946\u00a0\u2013 30 October 2020) was an English writer and journalist. He was critical of United States foreign policy in the Middle East, and the Israeli government's treatment of Palestinians.\nAs an international correspondent, he covered the civil wars in Lebanon, Algeria, and Syria, the Iran\u2013Iraq conflict, the wars in Bosnia and Kosovo, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, the Islamic revolution in Iran, Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait, and the U.S. invasion and occupation of Iraq. An Arabic speaker, he was among the few Western journalists to interview Osama bin Laden, which he did three times between 1993 and 1997.\nFisk began his journalistic career at the \"Newcastle Chronicle\" and then the \"Sunday Express\". From there, he went to work for \"The Times\" as a correspondent in Northern Ireland, Portugal, and the Middle East; in the last role, he based himself in Beirut intermittently from 1976. After 1989, he worked for \"The Independent\". Fisk received many British and international journalism awards, including the Press Awards Foreign Reporter of the Year seven times.\nFisk's books include \"The Point of No Return\" (1975), \"In Time of War\" (1985), \"\" (1990), \"The Great War for Civilisation: The Conquest of the Middle East\" (2005), and \"Syria: Descent Into the Abyss\" (2015).\nThe term fisking (meaning a line-by-line rebuttal) was named after him.\nEarly life and education.\nFisk was an only child, born in Maidstone, Kent, to William and Peggy Fisk. His father was Borough Treasurer at Maidstone Corporation and had fought in the First World War. His mother was an amateur painter who in later years became a Maidstone magistrate. At the end of the war Bill Fisk was punished for disobeying an order to execute another soldier; his son said, \"My father's refusal to kill another man was the only thing he did in his life which I would also have done.\" Though his father said little about his part in the war, it fascinated his son. After his father's death, he discovered that he had been the scribe of his battalion's war diaries from August 1918.\nFisk was educated at Yardley Court, a preparatory school, then at Sutton Valence School and Lancaster University, where he undertook his B.A. in Latin and Linguistics and contributed to the student magazine \"https://\". He gained a PhD in political science from Trinity College Dublin in 1983; the title of his doctoral thesis was \"A Condition of Limited Warfare: \u00c9ire's Neutrality and the Relationship between Dublin, Belfast and London, 1939\u20131945\". It was published as \"In Time of War: Ireland, Ulster and the Price of Neutrality 1939-1945\" (London: Andr\u00e9 Deutsch, 1983; reprinted in Dublin by Gill &amp; MacMillan, 1996). Reviewer F. I. Magee in 1984 wrote: \"This book presents a detailed and definitive account of Anglo-Irish relations during the Second World War...Fisk's excellent book highlights the ambivalence in relations between Britain, the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland and goes a long way towards explaining why the current situation is so intractable.\"\nCareer.\nNewspaper correspondent.\nFisk worked on the \"Sunday Express\" diary column before a disagreement with the editor, John Junor, prompted a move to \"The Times\". From 1972 to 1975, at the height of the Troubles, Fisk was the \"Times\" Belfast correspondent, before being posted to Portugal after the Carnation Revolution in 1974. He then was appointed Middle East correspondent (1976\u20131987). In addition to the Troubles and Portugal, he reported the Iranian revolution in 1979. When a story of his on Iran Air Flight 655 was spiked shortly after the paper's takeover by Rupert Murdoch, Fisk moved to \"The Independent\" in 1989. \"The New York Times\" called Fisk \"probably the most famous foreign correspondent in Britain\". \"The Economist\" called him \"one of the most influential correspondents in the Middle East since the Second World War.\"\nWar reporting.\nFisk lived in Beirut from 1976, remaining throughout the Lebanese Civil War. He was one of the first Western journalists to report on the Sabra and Shatila massacre in Lebanon, as well as the Hama Massacre in Syria. His book on the Lebanese conflict, \"\", was published in 1990.\nFisk also reported on the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, the Iran\u2013Iraq War, the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict, the Gulf War, the Kosovo War, the Algerian Civil War, the Bosnian War, the 2001 international intervention in Afghanistan, the invasion of Iraq in 2003, the Arab Spring in 2011, and the ongoing Syrian Civil War. During the Iran\u2013Iraq War, he suffered permanent partial hearing loss as a result of being close to Iraqi heavy artillery in the Shatt-al-Arab when covering the early stages of the conflict.\nAfter the United States and allies launched their intervention in Afghanistan, Fisk was for a time transferred to Pakistan to cover the conflict. While reporting from there, he was attacked and beaten by a group of Afghan refugees fleeing heavy bombing by the United States Air Force. In his graphic account of his almost being beaten to death until a local Muslim leader intervened, Fisk absolved the attackers of responsibility, writing that their \"brutality was entirely the product of others, of us\u2014of we who had armed their struggle against the Russians and ignored their pain and laughed at their civil war and then armed and paid them again for the 'War for Civilisation' just a few miles away and then bombed their homes and ripped up their families and called them 'collateral damage'.\" According to Richard Falk, Fisk said of his attacker: \"There is every reason to be angry. I've been an outspoken critic of the US actions myself. If I had been them, I would have attacked me.\"\nDuring the 2003 invasion of Iraq, Fisk was based in Baghdad and filed many eyewitness reports. He criticised other journalists based in Iraq for what he called their \"hotel journalism\": reporting from one's hotel room without interviews or firsthand experience of events. Fisk's criticism of the invasion was rejected by some other journalists. Fisk criticised the Coalition's handling of the sectarian violence in post-invasion Iraq and argued that the official narrative of sectarian conflict was not possible: \"The real question I ask myself is: who are these people who are trying to provoke the civil war? Now the Americans will say it's Al Qaeda, it's the Sunni insurgents. It is the death squads. Many of the death squads work for the Ministry of Interior. Who runs the Ministry of Interior in Baghdad? Who pays the Ministry of the Interior? Who pays the militiamen who make up the death squads? We do, the occupation authorities. ... We need to look at this story in a different light.\"\nHis 2005 work, \"The Great War for Civilisation\", was critical of Western and Israeli approaches to the Middle East. For \"The Independent on Sunday,\" Neal Ascherson wrote: \"This is a very long book, allowing Fisk to interleave political analysis, recent history and his own adventures with the real stories which concern him. These are the sufferings of ordinary people under monstrous tyrannies or in criminal, avoidable wars\". In \"The Guardian\", former British Ambassador to Libya Oliver Miles complained of \"a deplorable number of mistakes\" in the book that \"undermine the reader's confidence\", and that \"vigilant editing and ruthless pruning could perhaps have made two or three good short books out of this one\". Richard Beeston, a longtime foreign correspondent and then foreign editor for \"The Times\", wrote in a review of the book that Fisk's \"central argument is lost in a verbal avalanche, as Fisk empties 30 years of notebooks onto the page\" and that while there are what he calls \"passages of descriptive brilliance\" he considered some of his arguments \"ridiculous\" and \"utter nonsense\".\nOsama bin Laden.\nFisk interviewed Osama bin Laden on three occasions. The interviews appeared in articles published by \"The Independent\" on 6 December 1993, 10 July 1996, and 22 March 1997. In Fisk's first interview, \"Anti-Soviet warrior puts his army on the road to peace\", he wrote of bin Laden, then overseeing the construction of a highway in Sudan: \"With his high cheekbones, narrow eyes and long brown robe, Mr Bin Laden looks every inch the mountain warrior of mujahedin legend. Chadored children danced in front of him, preachers acknowledged his wisdom\" while observing that he was accused of \"training for further jihad wars\".\nDuring one of Fisk's interviews with bin Laden, Fisk noted an attempt by bin Laden to convert him. Bin Laden said: \"Mr Robert, one of our brothers had a dream\u00a0... that you were a spiritual person ... this means you are a true Muslim\". Fisk replied: \"Sheikh Osama, I am not a Muslim. ... I am a journalist [whose] task is to tell the truth.\" Bin Laden replied: \"If you tell the truth, that means you are a good Muslim.\" During the 1996 interview, bin Laden said the Saudi royal family was corrupt. During the final interview in 1997, bin Laden said he sought God's help \"to turn America into a shadow of itself\".\nFisk strongly condemned the September 11 attacks, calling them a \"hideous crime against humanity\". He also denounced the Bush administration's response to the attacks, arguing that \"a score of nations\" were being identified and positioned as \"haters of democracy\" or \"kernels of evil\", and urged a more honest debate on U.S. policy in the Middle East. He argued that such a debate had hitherto been avoided \"because, of course, to look too closely at the Middle East would raise disturbing questions about the region, about our Western policies in those tragic lands, and about America's relationship with Israel\".\nIn 2007, Fisk expressed personal doubts about the official historical record of the attacks. In an article for \"The Independent\", he wrote that, while the Bush administration was incapable of successfully carrying out such attacks due to its organisational incompetence, he was \"increasingly troubled at the inconsistencies in the official narrative of 9/11\". He said he did not condone the \"crazed 'research' of David Icke\" but was \"talking about scientific issues\". Fisk had earlier addressed similar concerns in a 2006 speech at Sydney University, in which he said: \"Partly I think because of the culture of secrecy of the White House\u2014never have we had a White House so secret as this one\u2014partly because of this culture, I think suspicions are growing in the United States, not just among Berkeley guys with flowers in their hair. ... But there are a lot of things we don't know, a lot of things we're not going to be told. ... Perhaps the [fourth] plane was hit by a missile, we still don't know\".\nBill Durodi\u00e9 noted that at one point bin Laden advised the White House to \"read Robert Fisk, rather than, as one might have supposed, the Koran.\"\nSyrian Civil War.\nReporting from Douma in April 2018 on the Douma chemical attack, Fisk quoted a Syrian doctor who attributed the victims' breathing problems not to gas but to dust and lack of oxygen after heavy shelling by government forces. Other people he spoke to doubted a gas attack, and Fisk queried the incident. His reporting was criticised for relying on government-supplied contacts, with Asser Khattab writing in \"Raseef22\" that the doctor Fisk quoted \"had been introduced to him by officials in the Syrian government and army\". Richard Spencer and Catherine Philp in \"The Times\" wrote that journalists had been taken to Douma on a government-organised trip while international investigators were forced to remain in Damascus, and that the doctor Fisk interviewed admitted to not having been to the hospital where the victims were taken. According to Snopes, other reporters on the same trip as Fisk had interviewed locals who said they had inhaled toxic gas.\nFisk returned to the subject of the Douma attacks in a January 2020 article about internal disagreements within the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) recorded in documents released by WikiLeaks.\nMedia appearances.\nIn 1993, Fisk produced a three-part series, \"From Beirut To Bosnia\", which he said was an attempt \"to find out why an increasing number of Muslims had come to hate the West\". Fisk said that the Discovery Channel did not rerun the films, after initially showing them in full, due to a letter campaign by pro-Israel groups such as CAMERA.\nKirsty Young interviewed Fisk for \"Desert Island Discs\" in 2006. His final selections were \"Adagio for Strings\" by Samuel Barber, \"Le Morte d'Arthur\" by Thomas Malory, and a violin.\nFisk featured in the 2016 documentary film \"Notes to Eternity\" by New Zealand filmmaker Sarah Cordery, along with Noam Chomsky, Norman Finkelstein, and Sara Roy. The film explores their lives and work in relation to the Israel-Palestine conflict.\nFisk was profiled in Yung Chang's 2019 documentary film \"This Is Not a Movie\". Reviewing the film, \"Slant Magazine\" wrote: \"The two things that give this documentary its power and provocativeness are intellectual rather than dramatic: Fisk\u2019s work, and his ideas.\" Cath Clarke, writing for \"The Guardian\", said the film asks its audience about war: \"Is there something deep in our souls that permits it because it feels natural? His painful, deeply serious question about the inevitability of war sets the tone of this documentary about his career.\"\nViews.\nStances and reception.\nFisk was known for his criticism of U.S. foreign policy, particularly the country's involvement in the wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East. He was consistently critical of Israel, calling some of its actions against Palestinians war crimes. One of his beliefs was that he should report events from the point of view of the victim rather than those in authority. In its November 2020 obituary of Fisk, \"The Times\" wrote that he had developed a \"visceral dislike of the Israeli government and its allies\" after covering the Sabra and Shatila massacre, arguing that this had made Fisk biased and \"unable to provide a dispassionate account of events and their context\". David Pryce-Jones, writing in \"The Spectator\" in 2003, said that Fisk was guilty of \"hysteria and distortion\" in his coverage of Middle Eastern topics. In contrast, \"The Independent\", for whom he wrote from 1989, called him \"renowned for his courage in questioning official narratives from governments\".\nThe BBC's Jeremy Bowen also praised Fisk after his death, and noted the controversy he drew for his \"sharp criticism of the US and Israel, and of Western foreign policy\". Bowen called himself an admirer who would miss Fisk's \"guts and his appetite for the fight\". Fisk dismissed the controversy related to his reporting in Syria, saying he was \"writing only what he saw and heard\". His ex-wife, Lara Marlowe, took exception to the use of the adjective \"controversial\" in his obituaries, saying \"he was a prolific non-conformist in the world of journalism, whose judgments avoided jumping on the bandwagon\" and, in her experience, had been \"intuitive, rapid [...] and invariably right\".\nSimilarly, the foreign correspondent for \"The Independent\" Patrick Cockburn, responding to criticisms raised in obituaries, said \"Derring-do in times of war usually gets good notices from the press and from public opinion, but moral endurance is a much rarer commodity, when the plaudits are replaced by abuse, often from people who see a world divided between devils and angels and denounce anybody reporting less than angelic behaviour on the part of the latter for being secret sympathisers with the devil.\" Cockburn wrote that Fisk, better than anyone else, could \"find out significant news as fast as possible, disregard all efforts by governments, armies and media to suppress it, and pass that information on to the public so they can better judge what is happening in the world around them\".\nOn journalism and politics.\nFisk described himself as a pacifist and non-voter. He said that journalism must \"challenge authority, all authority, especially so when governments and politicians take us to war\". He quoted, with approval, the words of Israeli journalist Amira Hass: \"There is a misconception that journalists can be objective. ... What journalism is really about is to monitor power and the centres of power.\" In light of his earlier training as a journalist on the \"Newcastle Evening Chronicle\", he said, \"I had a suspicion that the language we were forced to write as trainee reporters all those years ago had somehow imprisoned us, that we had been schooled to mould the world and ourselves in clich\u00e9s, that for the most part this would define our lives, destroy our anger and imagination, make us loyal to our betters, to governments, to authority. For some reason, I had become possessed of the belief that the blame for our failure as journalists to report the Middle East with any sense of moral passion or indignation lay in the way that we as journalists were trained.\" In an interview with the BBC in 2005, he articulated this position further: \"If you believe that victims should have more of a say than people who commit atrocities, then yes, I take a definite position. If reporters don't do that then they are out of their minds.\"\nOn coverage of foreign reporting, he said in a 2006 interview with Harry Kreisler of the Institute of International Studies at UC Berkeley: \"the French are very good at getting to the scene and reporting the reality. I know France doesn't have a very clean reputation in American politics at the moment but my goodness, they've got good journalists. You read a translation of \"Lib\u00e9ration\", \"Figaro\", \"Le Monde\u2014\"they've got it. I work a lot with French. I normally work on my own, but if I work with other reporters, I tend to report with Italians or the French because, my goodness, they get to the war front.\"\nSpeaking on \"Lies, Misreporting, and Catastrophe in the Middle East\" at the First Congregational Church of Berkeley on 22 September 2010, Fisk said: \"I think it is the duty of a foreign correspondent to be neutral and unbiased on the side of those who suffer, whoever they may be.\" He wrote at length on how many contemporary conflicts had their origins, in his view, in lines drawn on maps: \"After the Allied victory of 1918, at the end of my father's war, the victors divided up the lands of their former enemies. In the space of just seventeen months, they created the borders of Northern Ireland, Yugoslavia and most of the Middle East. And I have spent my entire career\u2014in Belfast and Sarajevo, in Beirut and Baghdad\u2014watching the people within those borders burn.\"\nArmenian genocide.\nFisk wrote extensively about the Armenian genocide of 1915 and supported moves to persuade the Turkish government to acknowledge it.\nRemembrance Day.\nFor Remembrance Day in 2011, Fisk wrote that his father \"old Bill Fisk became very ruminative about the Great War. He learned that Haig had lied, that he himself had fought for a world that betrayed him, that 20,000 British dead on the first day of the Somme\u2014which he mercifully avoided because his first regiment, the Cheshires, sent him to Dublin and Cork to deal with another 1916 \"problem\"\u2014was a trashing of human life. In hospital and recovering from cancer, I asked him once why the Great War was fought. 'All I can tell you, fellah,' he said, 'was that it was a great waste.' And he swept his hand from left to right. Then he stopped wearing his poppy. I asked him why, and he said that he didn't want to see 'so many damn fools' wearing it.\" He returned to the subject in 2014, writing: \"My family was haunted by my father's experience on the Somme and the loss of his friends. Why do we pay homage to the dead but ignore the lessons of their war?\" In 2016, he said: \"His example was one of great courage. He fought for his country and then, unafraid, he threw his poppy away. Television celebrities do not have to fight for their country\u2014yet they do not even have the guts to break this fake conformity and toss their sordid poppies in the office waste paper bin.\"\nPersonal life.\nFisk married American-born journalist Lara Marlowe in 1994. They divorced in 2006. At the time of his death, he was married to Nelofer Pazira, an Afghan-Canadian journalist, author and human rights activist.\nOn settling down, he wrote in 2005: \"I told the journalism students there [at City, University of London] that when I saw families walking happily in London or Paris, I wondered whether I had not missed out on life, that perhaps comparative safety and security with nothing more than the mortgage to worry about was preferable to the existence I had chosen for myself. A friend of my father's once said I had enjoyed the privilege of seeing things that no other man had seen. But after a flood of questions from students in Sydney about suffering in the Middle East, I began to wonder if my privilege had not also been my curse.\"\nDeath.\nOn 30 October 2020, Fisk died aged 74 at St. Vincent's University Hospital in Dublin, Ireland, after a suspected stroke. Due to the Irish government's COVID-19 restrictions, his funeral was held privately.\nIrish president Michael D. Higgins said, \"with his passing the world of journalism and informed commentary on the Middle East has lost one of its finest commentators\". Taoiseach Miche\u00e1l Martin said, \"he was fearless and independent in his reporting, with a deeply researched understanding of the complexities of the Middle East, eastern history and politics\".\nThe Australian antiwar journalist John Pilger said: \"Robert Fisk has died. I pay warmest tribute to one of the last great reporters. The weasel word 'controversial' appears in even his own paper, \"The Independent\", whose pages he honoured. He went against the grain and told the truth, spectacularly. Journalism has lost the bravest.\" Former Leader of the UK Labour Party Jeremy Corbyn eulogised him on Twitter, writing, \"So sad to hear of the death of Robert Fisk. A huge loss of a brilliant man with unparalleled knowledge of history, politics and people of Middle East.\" The Greek politician and economic theorist Yanis Varoufakis also posted a eulogy on Twitter, writing, \"With Robert Fisk's passing we have lost a journalistic eye without which we shall be partially blind, a pen without which our capacity to express the truth is diminished, a soul without which our own empathy for victims of imperialism will be lacking.\" Christian Broughton, the managing director of \"The Independent\", said: \"Fearless, uncompromising, determined and utterly committed to uncovering the truth and reality at all costs, Robert Fisk was the greatest journalist of his generation. The fire he lit at \"The Independent\" will burn on.\" Harry Browne wrote in \"Jacobin\": \"Robert Fisk's voice was everywhere, and his ideas were vital in both creating and meeting that Irish urge for explanation.\" The \"Irish Times\" obituary read: \"He used to explain his rejection of conventional journalistic detachment by saying: 'If you watch wars, the old ideas of journalism that you have to be neutral and take nobody's side is rubbish. As a journalist, you have got to be neutral and unbiased on the side of those who suffer.\" Former Chartered Institute of Journalists president Liz Justice wrote: \"I knew him as a very detailed and knowledgeable journalist. My friend had to edit his work from 2,000 words to 400 and we have very different views involving eggshells and walking carefully. We both agree he will be missed.\" Richard Falk, in an interview with \"CounterPunch\", said: \"Fisk's departure from the region left a journalistic gap that has not been filled. It is important to appreciate that there are few war correspondents in the world that combine Fisk's reporting fearlessness with his interpretative depth, engaging writing style, and candid exposures of the foibles of the high and mighty.\"\nMemoir.\n\"Love in a Time of War\", a memoir by Fisk's first wife, Lara Marlowe, was published in 2021. It covers the years from 1988 to 2003, the period Fisk and Marlowe worked together.\nAwards, honours and degrees.\nFisk received the British Press Awards' International Journalist of the Year seven times, and twice won its \"Reporter of the Year\" award. He also received Amnesty International UK Media Awards in 1992 for his report \"The Other Side of the Hostage Saga\", in 1998 for his reports from Algeria and again in 2000 for his articles on the NATO air campaign against the FRY in 1999.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51609", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51609", "title": "Commedia dell arte", "text": ""}
{"id": "51610", "revid": "134766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51610", "title": "Sketch comedy", "text": "Series of short comedy scenes or vignettes\nSketch comedy comprises a series of short, amusing scenes or vignettes, called \"sketches\" or \"skits\", commonly between one and ten minutes long, performed by a group of comic actors or comedians. While the form developed and became popular in music hall in Britain and vaudeville in North America, today it is used widely in variety shows, as well as in late night talk shows and even some sitcoms. While sketch comedy is now associated mostly with adult entertainment, certain children's television series such have used it, too. The sketches may be improvised live by the performers, developed through improvisation before public performance, or scripted and rehearsed in advance like a play.\nHistory.\nSketch comedy has its origins in music hall and vaudeville, where many brief humorous acts were strung together to form a larger programme. In the 1890s, music hall impresario Fred Karno developed a form of sketch comedy without dialogue, and in 1904 he produced a sketch called \"Mumming Birds\" for the Hackney Empire in London, which included the pie in the face gag among other innovations. His troupe, advertised as \"Fred Karno's London Comedians\", included Charlie Chaplin and Stan Laurel.\nIn Britain, it moved to stage performances by Cambridge Footlights, such as \"Beyond the Fringe\" and \"A Clump of Plinths\" (which evolved into \"Cambridge Circus\"), to radio, with such shows as \"It's That Man Again\" and \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", then to television, with such shows as \"The Benny Hill Show\", \"Not Only... But Also\", \"Monty Python's Flying Circus,\" \"The Two Ronnies\", \"Not the Nine O'Clock News\" (and its successor \"Alas Smith and Jones\"), and \"A Bit of Fry and Laurie\". Making his television debut in 1949, Benny Hill, who developed his parodic sketches on BBC variety shows before having his own show in 1955, was described as \"a comic genius steeped in the British music hall tradition\". Charles Isherwood writes that Monty Python, like Benny Hill, \"derived their sketch formats in part from the rowdy tradition of the music hall.\"\nAn early, perhaps the first, televised example of a sketch comedy show is \"Texaco Star Theater\" aka \"The Milton Berle Show\" 1948\u20131967, hosted by Milton Berle. In Mexico, the series \"Los Supergenios de la Mesa Cuadrada\", created by Mexican comedian Roberto G\u00f3mez Bola\u00f1os under the stage name Chespirito, was broadcast between 1968 and 1973, creating such famous characters as El Chavo del Ocho and El Chapul\u00edn Colorado.\nIn Uruguay, the television program \"Telecatapl\u00fam\" premiered in 1962 on Teledoce and aired successfully until 1969, returning later from 1977 to 2001. The cast included, among others, Ricardo Espalter, Eduardo D'Angelo, Raimundo Soto, Henny Trayles, and Gabriela Acher, who gained widespread popularity not only in Uruguay but also in Argentina and Chile, where the same actors produced similar programs for the local audience. Among its most emblematic sketches was , which became a hallmark of televised humor in the R\u00edo de la Plata region.\nFrom 1978 to 2001, Uruguay\u2019s Canal 10 also broadcast the show \"Decalegr\u00f3n\", which achieved high audience ratings and featured several of the original cast members from \"Telecatapl\u00fam\". Among its most renowned sketches was Espalter\u2019s \u201cPinchinatti\u201d in 1989, in which he portrayed a fictional presidential candidate with absurd and satirical populist proposals. The sketch became extremely popular, prompting rallies that closely resembled real political campaigns, with large crowds carrying banners, posters, and flags, along with campaign-style propaganda and jingles\u2014although these events were entirely theatrical and not in support of a real candidate.\nWhile separate sketches historically have tended to be unrelated, more recent groups have introduced overarching themes that connect the sketches within a particular show with recurring characters that return for more than one appearance. Examples of recurring characters include Mr. Gumby from \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\"; Ted and Ralph from \"The Fast Show\"; The Family from \"The Carol Burnett Show\"; the Head Crusher from \"The Kids in the Hall\"; Martin Short's Ed Grimley, a recurring character from both \"SCTV\" and \"Saturday Night Live\"; The Nerd from \"Robot Chicken\"; and Kevin and Perry from \"Harry Enfield and Chums\". Recurring characters from \"Saturday Night Live\" have notably been featured in a number of spinoff films, including \"The Blues Brothers\" (1980), \"Wayne's World\" (1992) and \"Superstar\" (1999).\nThe idea of running characters was taken a step further with shows like \"The Red Green Show\" and \"The League of Gentlemen\", where sketches centered on the various inhabitants of the fictional towns of Possum Lake and Royston Vasey, respectively. In \"Little Britain\", sketches focused on a cast of recurring characters.\nIn North America, contemporary sketch comedy is largely an outgrowth of the improvisational comedy scene that flourished during the 1970s, largely growing out of \"The Second City\" in Chicago and Toronto, which was built upon the success in Minneapolis of The Brave New Workshop and Dudley Riggs.\nNotable contemporary American stage sketch comedy groups include The Second City, the Upright Citizens Brigade, and The Groundlings. In South Bend, Indiana, area high school students produced a sketch comedy series called \"Beyond Our Control\" that aired on the local NBC affiliate WNDU-TV from 1967 to 1986.\nWarner Bros. Animation made two sketch comedy shows, \"Mad\" and \"Right Now Kapow\".\nAustralian television of the 1980s and 1990s featured several successful sketch comedy shows, notably \"The Comedy Company\", whose recurring characters included Col'n Carpenter, Kylie Mole and Con the Fruiterer.\nFilms.\nAn early British example is the influential \"The Running Jumping &amp; Standing Still Film\" (1959).\nSketch films made during the 1970s and 1980s include \"If You Don't Stop It... You'll Go Blind\" and the sequel \"Can I Do It... 'Til I Need Glasses?\", \"The Groove Tube\", \"Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask)\", \"The Kentucky Fried Movie\" and \"Amazon Women on the Moon\", and Monty Python's \"And Now for Something Completely Different\" and \"The Meaning of Life\".\nMore recent sketch films include \"The Underground Comedy Movie\", \"InAPPropriate Comedy\", \"Movie 43\" and \"Livr\u00e9s chez vous sans contact\".\nFestivals.\nMany of the sketch comedy revues in Britain included seasons at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival.\nSince 1999, the growing sketch comedy scene has precipitated the development of sketch comedy festivals in cities all around North America. Noted festivals include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51611", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51611", "title": "Shropshire", "text": "County in England\nShropshire (; abbreviated Salop) is a ceremonial county in the West Midlands of England, on the border with Wales. It is bordered by Cheshire to the north-east, Staffordshire to the east, Worcestershire to the south-east, Herefordshire to the south, and the Welsh principal areas of Powys and Wrexham to the west and north-west respectively. The largest settlement is Telford, while Shrewsbury is the county town.\nThe county has an area of and a population of 498,073. Telford in the east and Shrewsbury in the centre are the largest towns. Shropshire is otherwise rural, and contains market towns such as Oswestry in the north-west, Market Drayton in the north-east, Bridgnorth in the south-east, and Ludlow in the south. For local government purposes the county comprises the unitary authority areas of Shropshire and Telford and Wrekin. The county historically had a large exclave around Halesowen and Oldbury, which are now in the West Midlands county.\nThe south-west and far west of the county are upland. The Shropshire Hills occupy most of the south-west and include the Stiperstones, Clee Hills, Long Mynd plateau, and the Wenlock Edge escarpment. Together with the Wrekin, which stands isolated to the west of Telford, they have been designated a national landscape. To their west is the upland Clun Forest, and in the far north-west of the county are the Oswestry uplands. The north of the county is a plain, and the far north contains Whixall Moss, part of a national nature reserve. The south-east is a sandstone plateau which forms part of the catchment of the Severn, the county's major river; it enters Shropshire in the west and flows through Shrewsbury before turning south-east and exiting into Worcestershire south of Bridgnorth.\nThere is evidence of Neolithic and Bronze Age human occupation in Shropshire, including the Shropshire bulla pendant. The hillfort at Old Oswestry dates from the Iron Age, and the remains of the city of Viroconium Cornoviorum date from the Roman period. During the Anglo-Saxon era the area was part of Mercia. During the High Middle Ages the county was part of the Welsh Marches, the border region between Wales and England; from 1472 to 1689 Ludlow was the seat of the Council of Wales and the Marches, which administered justice in Wales and Herefordshire, Shropshire, Worcestershire and Gloucestershire. During the English Civil War Shropshire was Royalist, and Charles II fled through the county\u2014famously hiding in an oak tree\u2014after his final defeat at the Battle of Worcester. The area around Coalbrookdale is regarded as one of the birthplaces of the Industrial Revolution and has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nHistory.\nPrehistory and antiquity.\nEvidence of Neolithic occupation of a religious form dating back before 2,000 BC, was discovered in 2017 in the grounds of a church, the medieval Church of the Holy Fathers in Sutton, Shrewsbury, making it Britain's oldest place of worship.\nThe Shropshire bulla (\"bulla\" is Medieval Latin for \"a round seal\", Classical Latin for \"bubble, blob\", plural bullae), also known as the Shropshire sun pendant, is a Late Bronze Age gold pendant found by a metal detectorist in 2018 in Shropshire. At Mitchel's Fold there is a Bronze Age stone circle set in dramatic moorland on Stapeley Hill.\nThe area was once part of the lands of the Cornovii, which consisted of the modern day counties of Cheshire, Shropshire, north Staffordshire, north Herefordshire, and eastern parts of Powys. This was a tribal Celtic Iron Age kingdom. Their capital in pre-Roman times was probably a hill fort on the Wrekin. There is an important Iron Age Hill fort at Old Oswestry earthworks, this has been linked to where King Arthur\u2019s Guinevere was born and called \"the Stonehenge of the Iron Age.\"\nAccording to tradition, Caracticus made his last stand against the Romans in Shropshire. Ptolemy's 2nd century \"Geography\" names one of their towns as being Viroconium Cornoviorum (Wroxeter), which became their capital under Roman rule and one of the largest settlements in Britain.\nMiddle Ages.\nEarly period.\nAfter the Roman occupation of Britain ended in the 5th century, the Shropshire area was in the eastern part of the Welsh Kingdom of Powys; known in Welsh poetry as the \"Paradise of Powys\".\nAs 'Caer Guricon' it is a possible Shrewsbury was the site of the seat of the Kingdom of Powys in the Early Middle Ages. This would date establishment of the town to the 500s CE under Brochwel Ysgithrog. It is believed the area of Shrewsbury was settled in the 5th century by refugees from the nearby Roman City of Viroconium Cornoviorum, most physical evidence dates from the 7th century.\nOswestry saw conflict in the early mediaeval period and is reputed to be the place of death of Oswald of Northumbria in 641 or 642 CE. Oswald was later regarded as a saint, with Bede saying that the spot where he died came to be associated with miracles, and people took dirt from the site, which led to a hole being dug as deep as a man's height.\nKing Offa of Mercia annexed the entirety of Shropshire over the course of the 8th century from Powys, with Shrewsbury captured in 778, with two dykes built to defend, or at least demarcate it from the Welsh. King Offa converted the palace of the rulers of Powys into his first church, dedicated to St Chad (a foundation that still survives in the town and operated on that initial site for over 1000 years, moving in 1792).\nIn later centuries, Vikings repeatedly invaded and fortresses were built at Bridgnorth (912) and Chirbury (913).\nIn 914, \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d, Lady of the Mercians, fortified Shrewsbury, along with two other fortresses, at \"Scergeat\" (a currently unknown location) and \"Weardbyrig\", Viking rides from the north traveling south were reaching Bridgnorth at this time (910CE). In the early tenth century, the relics of St Alkmund were translated to Whitchurch, this was also probably the work of \u00c6thelfl\u00e6d.\nThere is evidence to show that by the beginning of the 900s, Shrewsbury was home to a mint.\nArchaeological excavations at the site of Shrewsbury castle in 2019 have indicated that the castle itself may have been a fortified site in the time of the Saxons.\nHigh medieval period.\nAfter the Norman conquest in 1066, major estates in Shropshire were granted to Normans, including Roger de Montgomerie and later his son Robert de Bell\u00eame, who ordered significant constructions, particularly in Shrewsbury, the town of which he was Earl.\nMany defensive castles were built at this time across the county to defend against the Welsh and enable effective control of the region, including Ludlow Castle and Shrewsbury Castle.\nThe western frontier with Wales was not finally determined until the 14th century. Also in this period, a number of religious foundations were formed, the county largely falling at this time under the Diocese of Hereford and that of Coventry and Lichfield. Some parishes in the north-west of the county in later times fell under the Diocese of St. Asaph until the disestablishment of the Church in Wales in 1920, when they were ceded to the Lichfield diocese.\nThe county was a central part of the Welsh Marches during the medieval period and was often embroiled in the power struggles between powerful Marcher Lords, the Earls of March and successive monarchs.\nModern history.\nFrom 1457, King Henry VI created for his son, Prince Edward, a Council to rule Wales and the Marches, Cheshire, and Cornwall, which became the Council of the Marches. Shropshire was governed via this council for several centuries.\nAccording to historian John Davies, at its peak under Sir Henry Sidney and for a period thereafter the Council:\nrepresented a remarkable experiment in regional government. It administered the law cheaply and rapidly; it dealt with up to twenty cases a day and George Owen stated that the 'oppressed poor' flocked to it.\nCivil War.\nDuring the English Civil War, Shropshire was a Royalist stronghold, under the command of Sir Francis Ottley. In the autumn of 1642, Charles I had a temporary capital at Shrewsbury, though he immediately moved to Oxford after the events of the Battle of Wem. Prince Rupert established his headquarters in the town on 18 February 1644, being welcomed by Shrewsbury's aldermen.\nVictorian era.\nMuch Wenlock was the birthplace of the modern Olympic movement.\nCulture and cultural references.\nLiterature and legends.\nIn the High Medieval period the Shropshire area influenced important poetry: the poet William Langland, writer of Piers Plowman, was born in Cleobury Mortimer, and the 14th-century alliterative poem St Erkenwald is written in a local dialect. The only copy of the ancient poem 'Life and Death' was also found in Shropshire.\nIn this period the county was also associated in divers places and ways with Arthurian legends, for instance at Hawkstone, where there is a legend that one of the caves of Hawkstone Park was the burial ground of King Arthur, and the Arthurian story of the giants Tarquin and Tarquinus is located, or Whittington Castle and linked to the Holy Grail since the 13th century. Old Oswestry has been identified as a possible home of Guinevere. Ludlow Castle site features heavily in the folk-story of Fulk FitzWarin, outlawed Lord of Whittington, Shropshire and a possible inspiration for the \"Robin Hood\" legend.\nParts of Shropshire are inside the ancient Forest of Arden, which was the part if the English Midlands, that in antiquity and into the Early Modern Period was bounded by the Roman roads including to the North by the Watling Street and to the west by Wales. This forest was the Setting of Shakespeare's \"As You Like It,\" and that play is acknowledged to potentially be a cultural monument to Sir Rowland Hill, a prominent Tudor statesman and publisher of the Geneva Bible from the county.\nShropshire was the original seat of prominence of the Cotton family who held the Cotton Library before it was taken to found the British Library.\nShrewsbury Abbey features in \"The Cadfael Chronicles\"; Brother Cadfael is a member of the community at the Abbey.\nThe poet A. E. Housman used Shropshire as the setting for many of the poems in his first book, \"A Shropshire Lad\". Moreover, many of Malcolm Saville's children's books are set in Shropshire. Additionally, D. H. Lawrence's novella, \"St. Mawr\", is partially set in the Stiperstones area of South Shropshire.\nThe early 20th century novelist and poet Mary Webb was born in Shropshire and lived most of her life there, and all her novels are set there, most notably \"Precious Bane\", with its powerful evocation of the Shropshire countryside. A school in Pontesbury bears her name.\nShropshire is widely believed to have been an influence for J. R. R. Tolkien's landscape of the Shire in \"The Lord of the Rings\". Specifically, the Wrekin (as The Lonely Mountain) and Ellesmere (as Laketown) are said to have inspired the English fantasy writer.\nIn Susanna Clarke's \"Jonathan Strange &amp; Mr Norrell\" (2004), Jonathan Strange is from the county, and some parts of the book are set there. Another fictional character from Shropshire is Mr Grindley, from Charles Dickens' \"Bleak House\".\nP. G. Wodehouse's fictional Blandings Castle, the ancestral home of Lord Emsworth, is located in Shropshire. Also from Shropshire is Psmith, a fictional character in a series of Wodehouse's novels.\nIn Oscar Wilde's \"The Importance of Being Earnest\", Algernon attempts to trick Jack into revealing the location of his country home by inferring he resides in Shropshire.\nThe 1856 plantation literature novel \"White Acre vs. Black Acre\" by William M. Burwell features two Shropshire farms acting as an allegory for American slavery \u2013 \"White Acre Farm\" being the abolitionist Northern United States, and \"Black Acre Farm\" being the slaveholding Southern United States.\nThe angel Aziraphale, a principal character in \"Good Omens\", was credited with designing Shropshire by Terry Pratchett.\nIn the novel \"Howards End\", Mr. Wilcox's daughter gets married in Shropshire. Part of the novel is set near Clun.\nTheology.\nShropshire was the native county and rural seat of power of Sir Rowland Hill, who coordinated and published the 1560 Geneva Bible. This important Bible was the senior Bible of English Protestantism for the early decades of the Elizabethan Religious Settlement.\nDrama.\nPrior to the Reformation, there are accounts of major festivals in the county. The \"first flowerings of English drama\" in the Tudor period are considered to be in the town, according to the 18th century Poet laureate and scholar Thomas Warton. Whitsuntide and mystery plays were performed in the founding years of Shrewsbury School under Thomas Ashton; they attracted the attention of Queen Elizabeth I. Later this was expressed in the many arbours built in Shrewsbury for that town's particular tradition of pageantry and performance.\nShakespeare.\nShakespeare memorialised the Battle of Shrewsbury in \"Henry IV, Part 1\", in Acts IV (Scenes and 3) and V (Scenes 1\u20135). The arrest of Buckingham referred to in \"Richard III\" (Act IV, scene iv) happened near Wem. Ludlow castle is also referred to in the same play (Act II, scene ii). There is a tradition that the Stanley monuments in St Bartholomew's Church, Tong are the work of Shakespeare.\nOther playwrights.\nWilliam Wycherley was born at Clive near Shrewsbury, although his birthplace has been said to be Trench Farm to the north near Wem later the birthplace of another writer, John Ireland, who was said to have been adopted by Wycherley's widow following the death of Ireland's parents.\nThe playwright George Farquhar's 1706 play \"The Recruiting Officer\" is set in Shrewsbury.\nBirthplace of English ballet and pantomime.\nThe \"father of English ballet\", as well as the originator of pantomime, John Weaver, developed his art in Shrewsbury. A second generation dancing master in the town, he founded English ballet, founded pantomime, and wrote on the philosophy, theology, statecraft and biology embedded in his era's understating of dance. Later in life he came to publish on the subject of dance, which he located in a wider understanding of his culture as representing a component of Ptolemaic harmony and an earnest part of the statecraft of his time.\nArchitecture.\nThe first known architectural project of Inigo Jones is the Cotton monument in the Church of St Chad, Norton-in-Hales.\nThere are a number of important buildings in the county. The world's first iron-framed building was built in Shrewsbury at the Flaxmill Maltings: the techniques pioneered in that building were necessary preconditions for skyscrapers.\nNash and Repton were active at Attingham Park.\nA rare Anglo-Saxon hall, which was a high status building from the Anglo Saxon period, and possibly a feasting hall or palace, was excavated at nearby Attingham in 2018; the dating window is between 400 AD and 1066.\nFilm and television.\nThe landscape around Hawkstone Park was used to represent parts of Narnia in the BBC's TV adaptation of C. S. Lewis's books in \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\" in 1988 and \"Prince Caspian\" a year later.\nThe 1984 film version of Charles Dickens' \"A Christmas Carol\" was filmed in Shrewsbury. The 2005 sitcom \"The Green Green Grass\" is set in Shropshire and was filmed near Ludlow.\nThe 2007 film \"Atonement\" was partly filmed in the county.\nThe 2023 BBC adaptation of \"Bleak House\" was filmed partly in Shropshire.\nEmblems.\nCoat of arms.\nThe blazon for the coat of arms of the county of Shropshire is:erminois, three pile azure, two issuant from the chief and one in base, each charged with a leopard's face The arms were officially granted on 18 June 1896 and continued by the new authority in 2009.\nThe heads are often referred to as \"the loggerheads\". This is thought to originate from the practice of carving a leopard head as a motif on the head of the log used as a battering ram.\nFlag.\nThe Shropshire county flag is a banner of arms taken from its coat of arms. It was registered with the Flag Institute in March 2012. It shows three leopard heads ('loggerheads') on a gold and blue background.\nCounty flower.\nIn a national poll in 2002, conducted by Plantlife International, the round-leaved sundew (\"Drosera rotundifolia\") was chosen as Shropshire's county flower. The round-leaved sundew is a crimson-coloured insectivorous plant that requires a boggy habitat. Due to habitat loss its range is now dramatically reduced, and Shropshire's Longmynd is one of the few areas in England where it can now be found.\nShropshire Day.\nShropshire's county day is on 23 February, the feast day of St Milburga, abbess of Wenlock Priory. St Milburga was the daughter of Anglo-Saxon king Merewalh, who founded the abbey within his sub-kingdom of Magons\u00e6te. The town adjoining the priory is now known as Much Wenlock, and lies within the boundaries of the modern county of Shropshire.\nMotto.\nShropshire's motto is \"Floreat Salopia\", meaning \"May Shropshire flourish\".\nBritish Rail loco No.31147 was named 'Floreat Salopia'.\nEtymology.\nShropshire is first recorded in the \"Anglo-Saxon Chronicle\" annal for 1006.\nThe origin of the name is the Old English \"Scrobbesbyrigsc\u012br\", meaning \"Shrewsburyshire\", \"the shire of the fortified place in the scrublands\" (or \"shrubs\", the modern derivative). Salop is an old name for Shropshire, historically used as an abbreviated form for post or telegrams; it is thought to derive from the Anglo-French \"Salopesberia\".\nIt is nowadays normally replaced by Shrops, although Shropshire residents are still referred to as Salopians.\nSalop is also an alternative name for the county town, Shrewsbury, which shares the motto \"Floreat Salopia\".\nGeography.\nWhen a county council for the county was first established in 1889, it was called Salop County Council. Following the Local Government Act 1972, Salop became the official name of the county. The name was not well-regarded locally, and a subsequent campaign led by a local councillor, John Kenyon, succeeded in having both the county and council renamed as Shropshire in 1980. This took effect from 1 April of that year.\nCounty extent.\nThe border with Wales was defined in the 16th century \u2013 the hundreds of Oswestry (including Oswestry town) and Pimhill (including Wem) and part of Chirbury had prior to the Laws in Wales Act formed various Lordships in the Welsh Marches.\nThe present day ceremonial county boundary is almost the same as the historic one. Notably there has been the removal of several exclaves and enclaves. The largest of the exclaves was Halesowen, which became part of Worcestershire in 1844 (and is now part of the West Midlands county), and the largest of the enclaves was Herefordshire's Farlow in South Shropshire, also transferred in 1844, to Shropshire. Alterations have been made on Shropshire's border with all neighbouring English counties over the centuries. Gains have been made to the south of Ludlow (from Herefordshire), to the north of Shifnal (from Staffordshire) and to the north (from Cheshire) and south (from Staffordshire) of Market Drayton. The county has lost land in two places \u2013 to Staffordshire and Worcestershire.\nGeographically, Shropshire is divisible into two distinct halves \u2013 north and south. The county has a highly diverse geology. The West Midlands Green Belt extends into eastern Shropshire, covering an area north from Highley, to the east of Bridgnorth, north to the eastern side of Telford, leaving Shropshire eastwards alongside the A5. This encompasses Shifnal, Cosford and Albrighton, and various other villages paralleling Dudley and Wolverhampton.\nNorth Shropshire.\nThe North Shropshire Plain is an extension of the flat and fertile Cheshire Plain. It is here that most of the county's large towns, and population, are to be found. Shrewsbury at the centre, Oswestry to the north west, Whitchurch to the north, Market Drayton to the north east, and Newport and the Telford conurbation (Telford, Wellington, Oakengates, Donnington and Shifnal) to the east. The land is fertile and agriculture remains a major feature of the landscape and the economy. The River Severn runs through the lower half of this area (from Wales in the west, eastwards), through Shrewsbury and down the Ironbridge Gorge, before heading south to Bridgnorth.\nThe area around Oswestry has more rugged geography than the North Shropshire Plain and the western half is over an extension of the Wrexham Coalfield and there are also copper deposits on the border with Wales. Mining of stone and sand aggregates is still going on in Mid-Shropshire, notably on Haughmond Hill, near Bayston Hill, and around the village of Condover. Lead mining also took place at Snailbeach and the Stiperstones, but this has now ceased. Other primary industries, such as forestry and fishing, are to be found too.\nThe A5 and M54 run from Wolverhampton (to the east of the county) across to Telford, around Shrewsbury parallel to the line of Watling Street, an ancient trackway. The A5 then turns north west to Oswestry, before heading north into Wales in the Wrexham area. This is an important artery and the corridor is where most of Shropshire's modern commerce and industry is found, notably in Telford new town. There are also a number of railway lines crossing over the area, which centre at Shrewsbury. To the south west of Telford, near the Ironbridge Gorge, was Ironbridge Power Station.\nThe new town of Telford is built partly on a former industrial area centred on the East Shropshire Coalfield as well as on former agricultural land. There are still many ex-colliery sites to be found in the area, as well as disused mine shafts. This industrial heritage is an important tourist attraction, as is seen by the growth of museums in the Ironbridge, Coalbrookdale, Broseley and Jackfield area. Blists Hill museum and historical (Victorian era) village is a major tourist attraction as well as the Iron Bridge itself. In addition, Telford Steam Railway runs from Horsehay.\nSouth Shropshire.\nSouth Shropshire is more rural, with fewer settlements and no large towns, and its landscape differs greatly from that of North Shropshire. The area is dominated by significant hill ranges and river valleys, woods, pine forests and \"batches\", a colloquial term for small valleys. Farming is more pastoral than the arable found in the north of the county. The only substantial towns are Bridgnorth, with a population of around 12,000 people, Ludlow and Church Stretton. The Shropshire Hills AONB is located in the south-west, covering an area of ; it forms the only specifically protected area of the county. Inside this area is the popular Long Mynd, a large plateau of overlooking Church Stretton and to its west, the rocky ridge of Stiperstones.\nThe A49 is the main road through the area, running north to south, from Shrewsbury to Herefordshire. A railway line runs through the area on the same route as the A49 with stations at Church Stretton, Craven Arms and Ludlow. The steam heritage Severn Valley Railway runs from Bridgnorth into Worcestershire along the Severn Valley, terminating at Kidderminster.\nBecause of its valley location and character, Church Stretton is sometimes called Little Switzerland, and is depicted in \"Little Switzerland\". Nearby are the old mining and quarrying communities on the Clee Hills, notable geological features in the Onny Valley and Wenlock Edge and fertile farmland in Corve Dale. The River Teme drains this part of the county, before flowing into Worcestershire to the south and joining the River Severn.\nOne of the Clee Hills, the Brown Clee Hill, is the county's highest peak at . It is the 13th highest county top in England.\nSouth West Shropshire is a markedly rural part of the county, with Clun Forest, Offa's Dyke, the River Clun and the River Onny. The small towns of Clun and Bishop's Castle are in this area. To the south of Clun is the Welsh border town of Knighton.\nNatural regions.\nNatural England recognised the following national character areas that lie wholly or partially within Shropshire:\nClimate.\nThe climate of Shropshire is moderate. Rainfall averages 760 to 1,000\u00a0mm (30 to 40 in), influenced by being in the rainshadow of the Cambrian Mountains from warm, moist frontal systems of the Atlantic Ocean which bring generally light precipitation in Autumn and Spring. The hilly areas in the south and west are much colder in the winter, due to their high elevation, they share a similar climate to that of the Welsh Marches and Mid-Wales. The flat northern plain in the north and east has a similar climate to that of the rest of the West Midlands.\nBeing rural and inland, temperatures can fall more dramatically on clear winter nights than in many other parts of England. It was at Harper Adams University, in Edgmond, where on 10 January 1982 the lowest temperature weather record for England was broken (and is kept to this day): .\nThe only major Met Office weather station in the county is located at Shawbury, which is in the north, between Shrewsbury and Market Drayton.\nGeology.\nShropshire has a huge range of different types of rocks, stretching from the Precambrian until the Holocene. In the northern part of the county there are examples of Jurassic, Carboniferous, Permian and Triassic. Centrally, Precambrian, Cambrian, Ordovician, Carboniferous and Permian predominate. And in the south it is predominantly Silurian and Quaternary. Shropshire has a number of areas with Silurian and Ordovician rocks, where a number of shells, corals and trilobites can be found. Mortimer Forest and Wenlock Edge are examples where a number of fossils can be found.\nStatistical.\nFor Eurostat purposes, the county (less the unitary district of Telford and Wrekin) is a NUTS 3 region (code UKG22). The two Shropshire unitary areas (covering all of the ceremonial county), together with the authorities covering the ceremonial county of Staffordshire, comprise the \"Shropshire and Staffordshire\" NUTS 2 region.\nEconomy.\nRayburn Range and Aga Rangemaster Group are based in Telford; the PDSA is in St George's and Priorslee, Telford. The MoD have a significant depot at Lilleshall and Donnington. Here are also high-technology industries such as Unimation, Nikon, Hitachi Maxell, Ricoh, Capgemini, Fujitsu and Electronic Data Systems. In Hadley Castle, Denso Manufacturing UK Ltd make car air-conditioning systems and GKN Wheels make car wheels. Makita Manufacturing Europe at Hortonwood, Telford is the only plant in the UK that makes power tools.\nM\u00fcller Dairy Ltd is based in Market Drayton, and Palethorpes, part of Pork Farms which makes own-label sausages. At Crudgington, Dairy Crest made Country Life butter and Clover until February 2015, and have their Technical Centre. Anglo Beef Processors (ABP Food Group) are at Harlescott in the north of Shrewsbury. Uniq plc have a plant at Minsterley and make chilled desserts for Tesco.\nBT have their National Network Management Centre (Whittington House) in Whittington, Shropshire. Military helicopter training in the UK takes place at RAF Shawbury, alongside training for the RAF's air traffic controllers (ATC).\nTowns and villages.\nShropshire has no cities, but 22 towns, of which two can be considered major. Telford is the largest town in the county with a population of 138,241 (which is approximately 30% of the total Salopian populace); whereas the county town of Shrewsbury has a lower, but still sizeable population of 71,715 (15%). The other sizeable towns are Oswestry, Bridgnorth, Newport and Ludlow. The historic town of Wellington now makes up part of the Telford conurbation. The majority of the other settlements can be classed as villages or towns such as Much Wenlock or Whitchurch. Several villages have larger populations than the smallest town, Clun. The largest of these, Bayston Hill, is the 10th most populous settlement in the county. The names of several villages close to the border are of Welsh origin, such as Gobowen and Selattyn.\nThe larger settlements are primarily concentrated in a central belt that roughly follows the A5/M54 roadway. Other settlements are concentrated on rivers, for example Bridgnorth and Ironbridge on the Severn, or Ludlow on the Teme, as these waterways were historically vital for trade and a supply of water.\nThe town of Telford was created by the merger and expansion of older, small towns to the north and east of The Wrekin. These towns now have sizeable populations that now make up the population of Telford: Wellington (20,430), Madeley (17,935), Dawley (11,399) and Oakengates (8,517), but the Telford and Wrekin borough towns incentive aims to make Oakengates into the largest of the towns.\nHistorically, all or parts of the towns of Halesowen, Smethwick and Oldbury, as well as the Quinton suburb of Birmingham, were in Shropshire.\nPolitics.\nParliamentary constituencies.\nThe county has five parliamentary constituencies. In the July 2024 General Election, two returned Conservative MPS, two Labour and one Liberal Democrat.\nAt the 2005 general election, four returned Conservative MPs, Telford, returned a Labour MP. This was a marked change from the 2001 general election result, where the county returned only one Conservative, three Labour and a Liberal Democrat MP to the House of Commons (see maps to the right) (Labour = Red, Conservatives = Blue and\nLiberal Democrats = Orange).\nThe current MPs of Shropshire, following the 2024 General Election, are:\n2021 refers to the by election in North Shropshire only.\nDivisions and environs.\nMost of the ceremonial county of Shropshire is covered for purposes of local government by Shropshire Council, a unitary authority established in 2009. Telford and Wrekin is a unitary authority, with borough status, which forms part of the county for various functions such as Lord Lieutenant but is a separate local authority from Shropshire Council. Many services are shared by both authorities, such as the fire and rescue service, and the two authorities co-operate on some projects such as mapping flood risk.\nThe new unitary authority for Shropshire, Shropshire Council, divides the county into three areas, each with its own area committee: North, Central and South. These area committees deal with town and country planning matters.\nWith the parishing of the formerly unparished area of Shrewsbury in 2008, the entire ceremonial county is now parished. The sizes of parishes varies enormously in terms of area covered and population resident. Shrewsbury is the most populous parish in the county (and one of the most populous in England) with over 70,000 residents, whilst Boscobel is the smallest parish in Shropshire by geographical area and by population, with just 12 residents according to the 2001 census. The smaller parishes (with populations of less than 200) usually have a joint parish council with one or more neighbouring parishes, or in some instances, have a parish meeting (such as in Sibdon Carwood). The urban area of Telford is divided into many parishes, each covering a particular suburb, some of which are historic villages or towns (such as Madeley). The parish remains an important sub-division and tier of local government in both unitary authority areas of Shropshire.\nLocal government 1974\u20132009.\nIn 1974 the non-metropolitan county of Salop was constituted, covering the entire county. After a local campaign, the council voted 48-5 to revert to Shropshire from 1 April 1980. There was a two-tier system of local government, constituting a county council (as the upper tier) and six district councils \u2013 Bridgnorth, North Shropshire, Oswestry, Shrewsbury and Atcham, South Shropshire and The Wrekin. In 1998 The Wrekin became a unitary authority, administratively separate from the county council, and became Telford and Wrekin. The two-tier structure remained in the remainder of the county and was the least populated two-tier area in England.\nOswestry and Shrewsbury &amp; Atcham were each granted borough status in 1974. Telford and Wrekin became a borough in 2002.\n2009 restructuring.\nIn 2006 a local government white paper supported proposals for new unitary authorities to be set up in England in certain areas. Existing non-metropolitan counties with small populations, such as Cornwall, Northumberland and Shropshire, were favoured by the government to be covered by unitary authorities in one form or another (the county either becoming a single unitary authority, or be broken into a number of unitary authorities). For the counties in the 2009 reorganisation, existing unitary authority areas within the counties' ceremonial boundaries (such as Telford and Wrekin) were not to be affected and no boundary changes were planned.\nShropshire County Council, supported by South Shropshire District Council and Oswestry Borough Council, proposed to the government that the non-metropolitan county of Shropshire become a single unitary authority. This was opposed by the other three districts in the county, with Shrewsbury &amp; Atcham Borough Council taking their objection to the High Court in a judicial review.\nThe proposal to create a Shropshire unitary authority, covering the area of the existing non-metropolitan county, was supported by the DCLG and 1 April 2009 was set as the date for the re-organisation to take place. The first elections to Shropshire Council took place on 4 June 2009, with the former Shropshire County Council being the continuing authority and its councillors became the first members of the new Shropshire Council on 1 April.\nPart of the proposals include parishing and establishing a town council for Shrewsbury. The parish was created on 13 May 2008 and is the second most populous civil parish in England (only Weston-super-Mare has a greater population) with a population of over 70,000.\nPolitical control of councils.\nShropshire Council was under Conservative control from the first election held in 2009 until that of 2025, when the Liberal Democrats took control; Telford and Wrekin Council has been under Labour control since 2011.\nEconomy.\nTraditionally, agriculture has dominated the economy of Shropshire. The area later became more service-oriented. The county town of Shrewsbury, the historic castle-dominated Ludlow, the International Olympic Movement's reputed birthplace Much Wenlock and the industrial birthplace of Ironbridge Gorge are the foremost tourist areas in Shropshire, along with the restored canal-network which provides narrowboat holidays on the Shropshire Union Canal and other canals in the region. The natural beauty of the county draws people to all areas. In 2024, Shropshire was listed on the ABTA's list of global destinations to watch for its 'beautiful landscapes, towns and villages'.\nIndustry is mostly found in Telford, Oswestry, Whitchurch, Market Drayton and Shrewsbury, though small industrial estates have developed in most of the market towns as well as on former airfields in rural areas. In towns such as Whitchurch, much of the high street is predominantly composed of small independent business which specialise in handmade items or antiques. Shrewsbury is becoming a centre for distribution and warehousing, as it is located on a nodal point of the regional road-network.\nIn Telford, a new rail freight facility was opened in 2009 by Telford and Wrekin Council at Donnington with the future goal of extending the line to Stafford.\nTelford and Shrewsbury are the county's two main retail centres, with contrasting styles of shopping \u2013 Shrewsbury's largely historic streets and Telford's large modern mall, Telford Shopping Centre. Shrewsbury also has two medium-sized shopping centres, the indoor \"Pride Hill\" and \"Darwin\" centres (both located on Pride Hill), and (prior to its demolition in 2024) a smaller, partially covered, \"Riverside Mall\". Shrewsbury's location as the nearest substantial town for those in a large area of mid-Wales helps it draw in considerable numbers of shoppers, notably on Saturdays.\nWell-known companies in Shropshire include M\u00fcller Dairy (UK) Ltd in Market Drayton. The Royal Air Force operates two bases at RAF Cosford and RAF Shawbury, and the charity PDSA has its head office in Priorslee, Telford.\nStatistics.\nBelow is the chart of regional gross value added for the non-metropolitan county (that is, excluding Telford &amp; Wrekin) of Shropshire at current basic prices, with figures in millions of British pounds sterling.\nWith the statistics for the borough of Telford and Wrekin included, the following represents the ceremonial county:\nEducation.\nThe Shropshire Council area has a completely comprehensive education system, whilst in the borough of Telford and Wrekin there are two selective schools, both of which are located in Newport\u2014these are the Haberdashers' Adams School and Newport Girls' High School (both of which are ranked within the top thirty schools in the country). In Telford itself is the Thomas Telford School, ranked as one of the best comprehensive schools in England.\nSome Shropshire children attend schools in Wales, including Llanfyllin High School.\nThe county has many independent schools, such as Oswestry School (founded in 1407), Shrewsbury School, (founded in 1552), and Ellesmere College (founded in 1884).\nThere are three sixth-form colleges located in Shropshire: the New College, Telford, Shrewsbury Sixth Form College and Ludlow College. Haberdashers\u2019 Adams and Newport Girls' High Schools both provide sixth-form education as well as secondary education.\nThere are also two institutions of higher education in Shropshire, the Telford campus of the University of Wolverhampton and in Edgmond, near Newport, Harper Adams University, which formerly offered mostly agriculture-based degrees but is expanding its range of provision. A third higher education institution was created in Shrewsbury in 2015, which is a campus of the University of Chester.\nIn Ironbridge, the University of Birmingham operates the Ironbridge Institute in partnership with the Ironbridge Gorge Museum Trust, which offers postgraduate and professional development courses in heritage.\nShropshire has the highest educational attainment in the West Midlands region.\nTransport.\nShropshire is connected to the rest of the United Kingdom via a number of road and rail links. Historically, rivers and later canals in the county were used for transport also, although their use in transport is now significantly reduced. The county's main transport hub is Shrewsbury, through which many significant roads and railways pass and join.\nCanals in Britain were originally constructed for the transport of goods, but are now mainly used for leisure. In northern Shropshire three canals with a total navigable length of are managed by the Canal &amp; River Trust: the Shropshire Union Canal (from north of Adderley to near Knighton), the Llangollen Canal (from Chirk Aqueduct to Grindley Brook) and the Montgomery Canal (from its beginning at Frankton Junction to Llanymynech). In addition, the Shrewsbury and Newport Canal potentially could be restored in the\nfuture.\nMajor roads in the county include the M54 motorway, which connects Shropshire to the rest of the motorway network, and more specifically to the West Midlands county. The A5 also runs through the county, in an east\u2013west direction. The road formerly ran through Shrewsbury, although a large dual-carriageway bypass has since been built. Other major trunk roads in the county include the north\u2013south A49, the A53 and the A41.\nThere are a number of major railway lines running through the county, including the Welsh Marches Line, the Heart of Wales Line, the Cambrian Line, the Shrewsbury to Chester Line and the Wolverhampton to Shrewsbury Line, as well as heritage railways including the well established Severn Valley Railway. The Cambrian Heritage Railway exists in Oswestry. The three train operating companies working in the county are West Midlands Trains, Transport for Wales and Avanti West Coast. A new company, Wrexham &amp; Shropshire, commenced services from Shropshire to London Marylebone, in spring 2008 but the service was discontinued on 28 January 2011 leaving Shrewsbury without a direct link to the capital. Virgin Trains (the operator at the time) recommenced services from Shrewsbury to London Euston on 11 December 2014, having withdrawn them in the late 1990s, however, their successor Avanti West Coast is set to withdraw service once again in June 2024.\nTwo major water supply aqueducts run across Shropshire; the Elan aqueduct running through South Shropshire carrying water from Elan Valley to Birmingham and the Vyrnwy Aqueduct running through North Shropshire delivering water from Lake Vyrnwy to Liverpool.\nMedia.\nThe county is served by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central television, and BBC Radio Shropshire. County-wide commercial radio stations are Hits Radio Black Country &amp; Shropshire, Greatest Hits Radio Black Country &amp; Shropshire, Heart West Midlands, Capital North West and Wales, Smooth West Midlands and Sunshine Radio (serving Ludlow and southern parts of Shropshire).\nThe \"Shropshire Star\" newspaper covers the county.\nPlaces of interest.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSport.\nThere are a significant number of sporting clubs and facilities in Shropshire, many of which are found in Shrewsbury and Telford in addition to a number of clubs found locally throughout the county. Shropshire is home to a variety of established amateur, semi-pro and professional sports clubs.\nThe county is home to one of five National Sports Centres. Situated at Lilleshall Hall just outside Newport in Lilleshall, this is where the 1966 England National football team trained for two weeks prior to their success in the World Cup of 1966.\nFootball.\nThe three highest football (and only professional) clubs in the county are Shrewsbury Town (EFL League Two), A.F.C. Telford United (Southern League Premier Division Central) and The New Saints (Welsh Premier League) in Oswestry.\nThere are numerous semi-professional football clubs in the lower leagues. The governing body in the county is the Shropshire Football Association, who organise a number of county-wide cup competitions, including the Shropshire Senior Cup. In 2020 the Shropshire County Football League was created, replacing the Shropshire Premier League. As of the 2022\u201323 football season[ [update]] the following Shropshire clubs play in these English leagues (the highest team of each club shown only):\nAlso, some clubs situated near the Welsh border play in the Welsh league system:\nOther sports.\nThe historic Wenlock Olympian Society Annual Games (begun 1850) are held annually in Much Wenlock during the second weekend in July. A four-day festival, the Games include cricket, volleyball, tennis, bowls, badminton, triathlon, 10k road race, track and field events, archery, five-a-side football, veteran cycle events, clay pigeon shooting and a golf competition.\nThe county of private and public golf courses, including the Church Stretton Golf Club, situated on the slopes of the Long Mynd. It is the oldest 18-hole golf course in Shropshire, opened in 1898, and one of the highest in the United Kingdom. There is one notable horse racing racecourse in Shropshire, near Ludlow, the Ludlow Racecourse.\nThe area also has a rich motorsports heritage, with the Loton Park Hillclimb and Hawkstone Park Motocross Circuit situated near Shrewsbury. Shrewsbury Motocross Club has staged motocross events in the area for over 30 years. There is additionally an ice hockey club in the county, the Telford Tigers.\nOne of the biggest one-day events in Shropshire and the biggest one-day cycle race in the UK is the Shropshire Star Newport Nocturne, founded 1970; held every four years, it is Britain's only floodlit cycle race.\nThe county has one American football team, Shropshire Revolution, which was founded in 2006, and is a club in the British American Football League. Former teams in the county have included the Wrekin Giants, which ran from 1985 to 1989 and the Shropshire Giants which ran in 1989. Shropshire has a number of rugby clubs, including Newport (Salop) Rugby Union Football Club, and https://, the highest-levelled teams in the county, both playing in the Regional 1 Midlands league.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51612", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51612", "title": "Homosexuality and morality", "text": ""}
{"id": "51613", "revid": "18916437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51613", "title": "Daniel Webster", "text": "American lawyer and statesman (1782\u20131852)\nDaniel Webster (January 18, 1782 \u2013 October 24, 1852) was an American lawyer and statesman who represented New Hampshire and Massachusetts in the U.S. Congress and served as the 14th and 19th U.S. secretary of state under presidents William Henry Harrison, John Tyler, and Millard Fillmore. Webster was one of the most prominent American lawyers of the 19th century, arguing over 200 cases before the United States Supreme Court in his career. During his life, Webster had been a member of the Federalist Party, the National Republican Party, and the Whig Party. He was among the three members of the Great Triumvirate along with Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun.\nBorn in Salisbury, New Hampshire, in 1782, Webster established a successful legal practice in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, after graduating from Dartmouth College and serving a legal apprenticeship. A prominent opponent of the War of 1812, he won election to the United States House of Representatives, where he served as a leader of the Federalist Party. Webster left office after two terms and moved to Boston, Massachusetts. He became a leading attorney before the U.S. Supreme Court, winning cases such as \"Dartmouth College v. Woodward\", \"McCulloch v. Maryland\", and \"Gibbons v. Ogden\".\nWebster returned to Congress in 1823 and became a key supporter of President John Quincy Adams. He won election to the United States Senate in 1827 and worked with Henry Clay to build the National Republican Party in support of Adams. After Andrew Jackson defeated Adams in the 1828 U.S. presidential election, Webster became a leading opponent of Jackson's domestic policies. He strongly objected to the theory of nullification espoused by John C. Calhoun. His 1830 \"Second Reply to Hayne\" speech is widely regarded as one of the greatest speeches ever delivered in Congress.\nWebster supported Jackson's defiant response to the nullification crisis but broke with the president due to disagreements over the Second Bank of the United States. Webster joined with other Jackson opponents in forming the Whig Party, and unsuccessfully ran in the 1836 U.S. presidential election. He supported Harrison in the 1840 U.S. presidential election and was appointed secretary of state after Harrison took office. Unlike the other members of Harrison's Cabinet, he continued to serve under President Tyler after Tyler broke with congressional Whigs. As secretary of state, Webster negotiated the Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty, which settled border disputes with Britain. In 1837, Webster was elected as a member to the American Philosophical Society.\nWebster returned to the Senate in 1845 and resumed his status as a leading congressional Whig. During the Mexican\u2013American War, he emerged as a leader of the \"Cotton Whigs\", a faction of Northern Whigs that emphasized good relations with the South over anti-slavery policies. In 1850, President Fillmore appointed Webster as secretary of state, and Webster contributed to the passage of the Compromise of 1850, which settled several territorial issues and enacted a new fugitive slave law. The Compromise proved unpopular in much of the North and undermined Webster's standing in his home state. Webster sought the Whig presidential nomination in the 1852 U.S. presidential election, but a split between supporters of Fillmore and Webster led to the nomination of Major General Winfield Scott. Webster is widely regarded as an important and talented attorney, orator, and politician, but historians and observers have offered mixed opinions on his moral qualities and ability as a national leader.\nEarly life.\nDaniel Webster was born on January 18, 1782, in Salisbury, New Hampshire, at a location within the present-day city of Franklin. He was the son of Abigail (n\u00e9e Eastman) and Ebenezer Webster, a farmer and local official who served in the French and Indian War and the American Revolutionary War. Ebenezer's ancestor, the English-born Thomas Webster, had migrated to North America around 1636. Ebenezer had three children from a previous marriage who survived to maturity, as well as five children from his marriage to Abigail; Webster was the second-youngest of the eight siblings. He was particularly close to his older brother, Ezekiel, who was born in 1780. As a youth, he helped work the family farm but was frequently in poor health. With the encouragement of his parents and tutors, he often read works by authors such as Alexander Pope and Isaac Watts.\nIn 1796, he attended Phillips Exeter Academy, a preparatory school in Exeter, New Hampshire. Exeter's Daniel Webster Debate Society, founded in 1818, is generally regarded as the oldest secondary school debate society in the nation. After studying the classics and other subjects for several months under a clergyman, Webster was admitted to Dartmouth College in 1797. During his time at Dartmouth, he managed the school newspaper and emerged as a strong public speaker. He was chosen as the Fourth of July orator in the college town of Hanover in 1800, and his speech contained the substance of the political principles which he would later become famous for developing. Like his father, and like many other New England farmers, Webster was firmly devoted to the Federalist Party and favored a strong central government. He graduated from Dartmouth in 1801 and was elected to the Phi Beta Kappa honor society.\nAfter graduating from Dartmouth, he apprenticed under Salisbury lawyer Thomas W. Thompson. Though unenthusiastic about studying the law, he believed that becoming a lawyer would allow him to \"live comfortably\" and avoid the bouts of poverty that had afflicted his father. In order to help support his brother Ezekiel's study at Dartmouth, Webster temporarily resigned from the law office to work as a schoolteacher at Fryeburg Academy in Maine. In 1804, he obtained a position in Boston under the prominent attorney Christopher Gore. Clerking for Gore\u2014who was involved in international, national, and state politics\u2014he learned about many legal and political subjects and met numerous New England politicians. He grew to love Boston, and, in 1805, was admitted to the bar.\nRise to prominence.\nImmediately after winning admission to the bar, Webster set up a legal practice in Boscawen, New Hampshire. He became increasingly involved in politics and began to speak locally in support of Federalist causes and candidates. After his father's death in 1806, he handed over his practice to his brother, Ezekiel, and opened a new practice in the larger town of Portsmouth. Over the decade-long period he lived in Portsmouth, he handled over 1700 cases, becoming one of the most prominent attorneys in New Hampshire. Along with two other lawyers, he was appointed to revise the New Hampshire criminal code and devise regulations for state prisons.\nDuring this time the ongoing Napoleonic Wars began to more strongly affect Americans, as Britain impeded U.S. trade with France and impressed sailors on American ships who they alleged had deserted from the Royal Navy. President Thomas Jefferson retaliated with the Embargo Act of 1807, cutting off all American trade with Britain and France. As New England relied on commerce with the two nations, the region strongly suffered from the embargo, and Webster wrote an anonymous pamphlet attacking Jefferson's policies. He also campaigned for various Federalist candidates, including presidential candidate Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and gubernatorial candidate Jeremiah Smith. Although Jefferson's Democratic-Republican Party dominated national elections, the Federalist Party was competitive throughout the states of New England. In 1812, the United States declared war on Britain, beginning the War of 1812. On July 4, 1812, Webster was invited to give a speech before the Washington Benevolent Society. His speech, which strongly attacked the war but warned against secession, was reprinted in newspapers throughout New England.\nAfter the speech, he was selected as a delegate to the Rockingham Convention, a local assembly that issued a report critical of Jefferson's Democratic-Republican successor, James Madison. The Rockingham Memorial, which was largely written by Webster, challenged Madison's reasons for going to war, arguing that France had been just as culpable in impeding American trade as Britain had and raising the specter of secession. The Rockingham Memorial gained nationwide notoriety as a document exemplifying New England's opposition to the war. After the convention, the state Federalist Party nominated him as a candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives. Though Madison won re-election in the 1812 U.S. presidential election, the Federalist-backed presidential candidate won New England, and Federalists swept the New Hampshire elections for the House of Representatives.\nCongressman and constitutional lawyer.\nFirst stint in the House, 1813\u20131817.\nBy May 1813, when he arrived in the House of Representatives for the first time, the United States had seen numerous setbacks in the War of 1812. Nonetheless, Madison's Democratic-Republican Party dominated the Thirteenth Congress, controlling over three-fifths of the seats in the House of Representatives and over two-thirds of the seats in the Senate. Webster continued to criticize the war and attacked efforts to impose conscription, wartime taxes, and a new trade embargo. He was appointed to a steering committee that coordinated Federalist actions in the House of Representatives and, by the end of the Thirteenth Congress, he had emerged as a respected speaker on the House floor. In early 1815, the war came to an end after news of the signing of the Treaty of Ghent reached the United States.\nAfter the war, President Madison called for the establishment of the Second Bank of the United States (known as the \"national bank\"), the imposition of a protective tariff, and federally-financed public works. While Speaker of the House Henry Clay and Congressman John C. Calhoun worked to pass Madison's proposals, other Democratic-Republicans opposed these policies because they conflicted with the party's traditional commitment to a weaker federal government. Webster favored a national bank in principle, but he voted against the bill that established the national bank because he believed that the bank should be required to remove paper banknotes issued by various state-charted banks from circulation. Before the national bank came into operation, he then led the passage of a bill that required all debts to the government to be paid in specie, Treasury notes, or notes issued by the national bank. In the tariff debate, he occupied a middle ground; he favored using tariff rates to protect domestic manufacturing, but did not want tariff rates to be so high that they would harm his home state's trading concerns. Though he took an active role in crafting the tariff bill, he ultimately missed the final vote on the Tariff of 1816. Seeking more lucrative legal work, he began to strongly consider relocating to Boston or New York during his time in Congress. In 1816, he declined to seek another term in the House of Representatives, instead establishing a new residence in Boston. In the 1816 elections, the Federalist Party suffered numerous defeats throughout the country and Democratic-Republican candidate James Monroe was elected president.\nLeading lawyer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"This, sir, is my case. It is the case not merely of that humble institution, it is the case of every college in our land... Sir, you may destroy this little institution; it is weak; it is in your hands! I know it is one of the lesser lights in the literary horizon of our country. You may put it out. But if you do so you must carry through your work! You must extinguish, one after another, all those greater lights of science which for more than a century have thrown their radiance over our land. \"It is, sir, as I have said, a small college. And yet there are those who love it!\"\"\nDaniel Webster (\"Dartmouth College v. Woodward\")\nWebster continued to practice law while serving in the House of Representatives, and he argued his first case before the Supreme Court of the United States in early 1814. He had been highly regarded in New Hampshire since his days in Boscawen and was respected for his service in the House of Representatives, but he came to national prominence as counsel in a number of important Supreme Court cases. Between 1814 and 1852, he argued at least one case in the vast majority of the sessions of the Supreme Court; he served as counsel in a total of 223 cases, and won approximately half of those cases. He also represented numerous clients outside of Supreme Court cases, including prominent individuals such as George Crowninshield, Francis Cabot Lowell, and John Jacob Astor.\nThough Congress was dominated by Democratic-Republicans, Chief Justice John Marshall ensured that the Federalist ideology retained a presence in the courts. Webster quickly became skilled at articulating arguments designed to appeal to Marshall and another influential Supreme Court justice, Joseph Story. He played an important role in eight of the most celebrated constitutional cases decided by the Court between 1814 and 1824. In many of these\u2014particularly in \"Dartmouth College v. Woodward\" (1819) and \"Gibbons v. Ogden\" (1824)\u2014the Supreme Court handed down decisions based largely on his arguments. Marshall's most famous declaration, \"the power to tax is the power to destroy,\" in \"McCulloch v. Maryland\" (1819), was taken from Webster's presentation against the state of Maryland. As a result of his series of successes in Supreme Court cases, many people began calling him the \"Great Expounder and Defender of the Constitution.\" He would continue to argue cases before the Supreme Court after Marshall's death in 1835, but he generally found the Taney Court to be less receptive to his arguments.\nIn \"Dartmouth College v. Woodward\", Webster was retained by the Federalist trustees of his alma mater, Dartmouth College, in their case against the newly elected New Hampshire Democratic-Republican state legislature. The legislature had passed new laws converting Dartmouth into a state institution, by changing the size of the college's trustee body and adding a further board of overseers, which they put into the hands of the state senate. He argued that the Constitution's Contract Clause prohibited the legislature from altering the college's board of trustees. The Marshall Court, continuing with its history of limiting states' rights and reaffirming the supremacy of the constitutional protection of contract, ruled in favor of Dartmouth. The ruling set the important precedent that corporations did not, as many then held, have to justify their privileges by acting in the public interest, but were independent of the states.\nHe remained politically active during his time out of Congress, serving as a presidential elector, meeting with officials like Secretary of War John C. Calhoun, and delivering a well-received speech that attacked high tariffs. With the Federalists fading away as a national party, the period of Monroe's presidency came to be known as the \"Era of Good Feelings\" due to the lack of partisan conflict. As the Federalists failed to field a candidate in the 1820 U.S. presidential election, Webster, acting in his capacity as a presidential elector, cast his vote for Monroe. He was then elected as a delegate to the Massachusetts Constitutional Convention of 1820\u20131821. There he spoke in opposition to suffrage for all regardless of property ownership, arguing that power naturally follows property, and the vote should be limited accordingly; but the constitution was amended against his advice. He also supported the (existing) districting of the state senate so that each seat represented an equal amount of property. His performance at the convention furthered his reputation. In a letter to a mutual friend, Joseph Story wrote, \"our friend Webster has gained a noble reputation. He was before known as a lawyer; but he has now secured the title of an eminent and enlightened statesman.\" In December 1820, he delivered an enthusiastically received address commemorating the bicentennial of the landing of the \"Mayflower\" at Plymouth Rock.\nSecond stint in the House, 1823\u20131827.\nAt the behest of Federalist leaders and the business elite in Boston, Webster agreed to run for the United States House of Representatives in 1822. He won the election and returned to Congress in December 1823. In recognition of his mastery of legal issues, Speaker of the House Henry Clay assigned him the chairmanship of the House Judiciary Committee. In that role, he tried to pass a bill that would relieve Supreme Court justices of having to travel to far-flung western districts, but his bill did not receive a vote in the House. Seeking to re-establish his reputation for oratorical prowess on the floor of the House of Representatives, he gave a speech supporting the Greek cause in the Greek War of Independence. In another speech, he attacked the bill imposing the Tariff of 1824, arguing that high tariff rates unfairly benefited manufacturing to the detriment of agriculture and commerce. In a third speech, he defended the construction of internal improvements by the federal government, arguing that roads helped unite the nation both economically and in creating a \"feeling truly national.\"\nWhile a representative, he continued accepting speaking engagements in New England, most notably his oration on the fiftieth anniversary of the Battle of Bunker Hill. He also continued his legal work, though his government service required him to rely more on his law partners.\nIn the 1824 U.S. presidential election, the Democratic-Republicans split among Clay, Calhoun, William H. Crawford, Andrew Jackson, and John Quincy Adams. Despite their shared connection to Massachusetts, Webster had an uneasy relationship with Adams because the latter had left the Federalist Party earlier in his career; for his part, Adams detested him. As no candidate won a majority of the electoral vote, the 1824 election was decided in a contingent election held by the House of Representatives. Webster had remained neutral prior to the election, but he supported Adams in the contingent election, in large part because he viewed Jackson as completely unqualified to be president and Crawford had suffered a major stroke. Along with Clay, he helped rally members of the House around Adams, and Adams was elected on the first ballot of the contingent election.\nIn 1825, President Adams set off a partisan realignment by putting forward an ambitious domestic program, based on Clay's American System, that included a vast network of federally-funded infrastructure projects. States' rights Democratic-Republicans, including Senator Martin Van Buren and Vice President John C. Calhoun, strongly opposed the program and rallied around Jackson. While some Federalists gravitated to Jackson's camp, Webster became the leader of the pro-administration forces in the House of Representatives. Supporters of Adams became known as National Republicans, while Jackson's followers coalesced into the Democratic Party. Like many Federalists, he did not immediately cast aside his partisan identity as a Federalist but embraced the American System and began to favor protective tariff rates. Justus D. Doenecke indicates that his newfound support of protective tariffs was the result of \"his new closeness to the rising mill-owning families of the region, the Lawrences and the Lowells.\" He also backed the administration's defense of treaty-sanctioned Creek Indian land rights against Georgia's expansionist claims.\nFirst period in the Senate.\nAdams administration, 1827\u20131829.\nIn 1827, the Massachusetts legislature elected him to the United States Senate. He was initially reluctant to leave the House of Representatives, where he had established seniority and a strong base of power, but ultimately accepted election to the Senate. After a period of consideration, he voted for the Tariff of 1828, which raised tariff rates. Prior to the 1828 U.S. presidential election, he worked with Clay to build the National Republican Party across the country. While Clay rallied support for the party in the West, he emerged as a leading National Republican in the Northeastern states. Despite his efforts and those of Clay, Democratic candidate Andrew Jackson decisively defeated President Adams in the 1828 election.\nJackson administration, 1829\u20131837.\nSecond Reply to Hayne.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhen my eyes shall be turned to behold\nfor the last time the sun in heaven, may I not see him shining on the\nbroken and dishonored fragments of a once glorious Union; on States\ndissevered, discordant, belligerent; on a land rent with civil feuds, or\ndrenched, it may be, in fraternal blood! Let their last feeble and\nlingering glance rather behold the gorgeous ensign of the republic... not a stripe\nerased or polluted, nor a single star obscured, bearing for its motto,\nno such miserable interrogatory as \"What is all this worth?\" nor those\nother words of delusion and folly, \"Liberty first and Union afterwards\";\nbut everywhere, spread all over in characters of living light, blazing\non all its ample folds, as they float over the sea and over the land,\nand in every wind under the whole heavens, that other sentiment, dear to\nevery true American heart,\u2014 Liberty \"and\" Union, now and for ever, one\nand inseparable!\n Daniel Webster (\"Second Reply to Hayne\")\nAfter Jackson took office, Webster opposed most of the measures favored by the new administration, including the Indian Removal Act and the establishment of the spoils system. The Jackson administration suffered from factionalism between supporters of Secretary of State Van Buren and Vice President Calhoun, the latter of whom took a prominent role in propounding the doctrine of nullification. Calhoun held that the states had the power to \"nullify\" laws, and he and his allies sought to nullify the high tariff rates imposed by the Tariff of 1828 (which they referred to as the \"Tariff of Abominations\"). During a debate over land policy in January 1830, South Carolina Senator Robert Y. Hayne, in an effort to sway the West against the North and the tariff, accused the North of attempting to limit Western expansion for their own benefit. Hayne served as a surrogate for Vice President Calhoun, who could not himself address the Senate on the issue due to his status as the Senate's presiding officer. Webster objected to the sectional attack on the North, but even more strongly objected to Hayne's pro-states' rights position. Speaking before the Senate, he articulated his belief in a \"perpetual\" union and attacked the institution of slavery, baiting Hayne into expounding on the doctrine of nullification on the Senate floor.\nReplying to his first speech, Hayne accused him of \"making war upon the unoffending South,\" and he asserted that nullification was constitutional because the federal government was ultimately subservient to the states. On January 27, Webster delivered his response, titled the \"Second Reply to Hayne\". He held that the people, and not the states, held ultimate power, and the people had established the Constitution as the supreme law of the land. He further argued that the doctrine of nullification \"approach[ed] absurdity,\" and, by denying power to the federal government, would effectively restore the balance of power established under the Articles of Confederation. He argued that nullification constituted treason against the United States, and would ultimately lead to civil war as state officials would call out the militia to resist federal laws and actions. He ended his speech with a call for \"Liberty \"and\" Union, now and for ever, one and inseparable!\" The \"Second Reply to Hayne\" was reprinted thousands of times, and was favorably received throughout the country. In assessing the speech's impact and popularity, some contemporaries compared it to the Federalist Papers. Three months after he delivered the \"Second Reply to Hayne\", Calhoun openly broke with President Jackson when, in response to Jackson's toast of \"Our Union, it be preserved,\" Calhoun replied, \"The Union: Next to our liberty, the most dear.\"\nBank War and 1832 election.\nBy 1830, he considered Clay to be the likely National Republican nominee in the 1832 U.S. presidential election, though he was skeptical that Clay would be able to defeat the Democratic nominee. The establishment of the Anti-Masonic Party, a third party opposed to both Jackson and Clay, added a new factor into the election. Some Anti-Masonic leaders attempted to recruit him to run for the presidency, but he ultimately declined to run for fear of alienating Clay and other National Republicans. Instead, he undertook a subtle campaign to win the National Republican nomination, planning a tour of the Northeast and the Northwest; His angling for the presidency marked the start of an ambivalent relationship between Clay and Webster. Nonetheless, he urged Clay to accept election to the Senate, and the two convinced Nicholas Biddle, the president of the national bank, to apply for an early renewal of the national bank's charter. As Jackson had a long record of opposing the national bank, both hoped to make the national bank an issue in the 1832 presidential election. Clay was formally nominated by the National Republicans in December 1831, while Jackson was nominated for a second term in 1832.\nBiddle requested a renewal of the national bank's charter in January 1832, setting off what became known as the \"Bank War.\" With Clay focusing on a tariff bill, Webster became the unofficial leader of pro-national bank forces in the Senate. He helped ensure that Congress approved a renewal of the charter without making any major modifications, such as a provision that would allow states to prevent the national bank from establishing branches within their borders. Congress approved the charter renewal, but, as was expected, Jackson vetoed the bill in July 1832; Jackson argued the bank was unconstitutional and served to \"make the rich richer and the potent more powerful.\" On the Senate floor, Webster attacked the veto, arguing that only the judicial branch could judge a bill's constitutionality. Afterward he supported Clay's presidential campaign and continued his efforts on behalf of the national bank, but Jackson was re-elected by a decisive margin.\nNullification Crisis.\nThough Congress replaced the \"Tariff of Abominations\" with the Tariff of 1832, Calhoun and his Nullifier allies remained dissatisfied with tariff rates. Shortly after the 1832 presidential election, a South Carolina convention passed a resolution declaring the Tariff of 1832 to be \"null, void, and no law\" in South Carolina, marking the start of the Nullification Crisis. Hayne resigned from the Senate to become the governor of South Carolina, while Calhoun took Hayne's former seat in the Senate. In December 1832, Jackson issued the Proclamation to the People of South Carolina, warning that he would not allow South Carolina to defy federal law. Webster strongly approved of the Proclamation, telling an audience at Faneuil Hall that Jackson had articulated \"the true principles of the Constitution,\" and that he would give the president \"my entire and cordial support\" in the crisis. He strongly supported Jackson's proposed Force Bill, which would authorize the president to use force against states that attempted to obstruct federal law. At the same time, he opposed Clay's efforts to end the crisis by lowering tariff rates, as he believed that making concessions to Calhoun's forces would set a bad precedent. After a spirited debate between himself and Calhoun, Congress passed the Force Bill in February 1833. Soon after, it passed the Tariff of 1833, the product of negotiations between Clay and Calhoun; the bill called for the gradual lowering of tariffs over a ten-year period. Although they symbolically \"nullified\" the Force Bill, South Carolina leaders accepted the new tariff law, bringing an end to the Nullification Crisis.\nRise of the Whig Party and 1836 candidacy.\nAs Calhoun drifted away from the Democratic Party and occasionally cooperated with the National Republicans to oppose Jackson, some contemporaries began to refer to Calhoun, Webster, and Clay as \"the Great Triumvirate.\" At the same time, Webster's alliance with Jackson in the Nullification Crisis caused some observers to wonder if he would join the Democratic Party or found a new party centered on their nationalistic vision. Jackson's decision to remove government deposits from the national bank in late 1833 ended any possibility of a Webster-Jackson alliance and helped to solidify partisan lines. As chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Webster led the Senate's effort to prevent Jackson's secretary of the treasury, Roger Taney, from removing government deposits. As the national bank's charter was due to expire in 1836, before the end of Jackson's term, he attempted to save the national bank through a compromise measure, but Democrats rejected his proposal. Ultimately, the Senate was unable to prevent the deposit removals or the expiration of the national bank's charter, but it did pass resolutions censuring Jackson and Taney. Webster's decision to vote for the censure resolution caused a permanent break with Jackson.\nIn the aftermath of the battle over the national bank, Jackson's political opponents coalesced into the Whig Party. By taking a name rooted in American and British history, the Whigs implicitly criticized Jackson as a tyrannical executive. Although National Republicans like Clay and Webster formed the core of the Whig Party, Anti-Masonic leaders like William H. Seward and states' rights Democrats like John Tyler also joined the new party. The Whig Party proved more durable than the National Republican Party and, along with the Democrats, the Whigs became one of the two major parties of the Second Party System, which would extend into the 1850s. By 1834, Webster supporters such as Caleb Cushing, Rufus Choate, Abbott Lawrence, and Edward Everett had begun preparing for his candidacy in the 1836 U.S. presidential election. With Clay showing no indication of making another run, Webster hoped to become the main Whig candidate in the 1836 election, but General William Henry Harrison and Senator Hugh Lawson White retained strong support in the West and the South, respectively. Rather than uniting behind one presidential candidate, Whig leaders settled on a strategy of running multiple candidates in order to force a contingent election in the House of Representatives.\nHe was nominated for president by the Massachusetts legislature, but Harrison won the backing of most Whigs outside of the South. Although his reputation as a national figure was far greater than that of Harrison, many Whigs hoped that Harrison's military record would allow him to replicate Jackson's 1828 victory. Webster's chances also suffered from his lingering association with the Federalist Party, his close relationship with elite politicians and businessmen, and his lack of appeal among the broad populace; Robert Remini writes that the American public \"admired and revered him but did not love or trust him.\" With little support outside of his home state, he attempted to withdraw his presidential candidacy, but, to his eventual regret, Massachusetts Whig leaders convinced him to stay in the race. Meanwhile, the 1835 Democratic National Convention nominated Van Buren, Jackson's preferred successor, for president. In the 1836 election, Van Buren won a majority of the popular and electoral vote, Harrison finished a distant second, and White carried two Southern states. Webster won only the electoral votes of Massachusetts. Adding to his displeasure, he lost a major Supreme Court decision, \"Charles River Bridge v. Warren Bridge\", shortly after the election.\nVan Buren administration, 1837\u20131841.\nShortly after Van Buren took office, a major economic downturn known as the Panic of 1837 began. Webster and his Whig allies blamed Jackson's policies, including the Specie Circular, for the panic, but a worldwide economic downturn was a major contributing factor. The panic hit the country hard and proved disastrous for Webster's personal finances. With the help of Nicholas Biddle and other friendly bankers, Webster had gone into debt to engage in land speculation on a broad scale. His debt was exacerbated by his propensity for lavishly furnishing his estate and giving away money with \"reckless generosity and heedless profusion,\" in addition to indulging the smaller-scale \"passions and appetites\" of gambling and alcohol. The panic resulted in many creditors calling in their loans and, according to Remini, Webster would never emerge from debt after 1837. Nonetheless, he remained focused on his political career. While Whigs promoted the American System as the means for economic recovery, Van Buren's response to the panic focused on the practice of \"strict economy and frugality.\" Webster attacked Van Buren's proposals to address the economic crisis, including the establishment of an Independent Treasury system, and he helped arrange for the rescinding of the Specie Circular.\nHe entertained hopes of winning the Whig nomination in the 1840 U.S. presidential election but ultimately declined to challenge Clay or Harrison, both of whom commanded broader support within the party. He remained neutral between Clay and Harrison, instead departing for a trip to Europe, where he attended his daughter's wedding and befriended Alexander Baring, 1st Baron Ashburton. While he was abroad, the 1839 Whig National Convention nominated Harrison for president. Although many Whigs favored a Harrison-Webster ticket, the convention instead nominated John Tyler of Virginia for vice president. Webster served as a prominent campaign surrogate for Harrison in the 1840 election, although he disliked the party's new, popular style of campaigning that made use of songs and slogans like \"Tippecanoe and Tyler too.\" The Whigs enjoyed great success in the 1840 elections, as Harrison took a majority of the popular and electoral vote and the party won control of Congress.\nSecretary of State in the Tyler administration.\nHarrison extensively consulted Webster and Clay regarding presidential appointments, and the two Whig leaders competed to place their supporters and allies in key positions. Harrison initially hoped that Webster would serve as secretary of the treasury in order to spearhead his economic program, but Webster instead became secretary of state, giving him oversight of foreign affairs. Just one month after taking office, Harrison died from pneumonia, and was succeeded by John Tyler. Though Tyler and Webster strongly differed regarding ideology (Tyler was a devotee of states' rights) and personality, they initially enjoyed a strong working relationship, partly because each saw Clay as a rival for power in the Whig Party. As Tyler, a former Democrat, had long been skeptical of the need for a national bank, Webster urged Whig congressmen to back a compromise bill put forward by Secretary of the Treasury Thomas Ewing which would have re-established the national bank but restricted its branching power. Congress rejected the compromise and instead passed Clay's bill, which was subsequently vetoed by Tyler. After Tyler vetoed another Whig bill, every Cabinet member except for Webster resigned, and a caucus of Whigs voted to expel Tyler from the party in September 1841. When Webster informed Tyler that he would not resign, Tyler responded, \"give me your hand on that, and now I will say to you that Henry Clay is a doomed man.\"\nFacing a hostile Congress, Tyler and Webster turned their attention to foreign policy. The administration put a new emphasis on American influence in the Pacific Ocean, reaching the first U.S. treaty with China, seeking to partition Oregon Country with Britain, and announcing that the United States would oppose any attempt to colonize the Hawaiian Islands. The most pressing foreign policy issue involved relations with Britain, as the United States had nearly gone to war with Britain over the Caroline affair and a border conflict between Maine and Canada. Seeking improved relations with the United States, British prime minister Robert Peel dispatched Lord Ashburton on a special mission to the United States. After extensive negotiations, the United States and Britain reached the Webster\u2013Ashburton Treaty, which clearly delineated Maine's northern border and other sections of the U.S.\u2013Canada border that had been in dispute. Senator Thomas Hart Benton led Senate opposition to the treaty, arguing that it \"needlessly and shamelessly\" relinquished American territory, but few others joined Benton in voting against the treaty, and it won ratification.\nAfter mid-1841, congressional Whigs continually pressured Webster to resign, and by early 1843, Tyler had also begun to pressure Webster to leave office. As Tyler moved even farther away from Whig positions and began preparing a campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 1844 U.S. presidential election, Webster left office in May 1843. With Webster gone, Tyler turned his attention to the Texas annexation. Clay was nominated for president at the 1844 Whig National Convention, while the Democrats spurned both Tyler and former president Van Buren in favor of James K. Polk, a protege of Andrew Jackson. Webster's service in the Tyler administration had badly damaged his credibility among Whigs, but he began to rebuild old alliances within the party. Tyler's attempts to annex Texas became the key issue in the 1844 election, and Webster came out strongly against annexation. He campaigned on behalf of Clay, telling one crowd, \"I know of no great national constitutional question; I know of no great interest of the country ... in which there is any difference between the distinguished leader of the Whig Party and myself.\" Despite Webster's campaigning, Polk defeated Clay in a close election. The election of the expansionist Polk ensured the annexation of Texas, and annexation was completed after Polk took office.\nSecond period in the Senate.\nPolk administration, 1845\u20131849.\nWebster considered retiring from public office after the 1844 election, but he accepted election to the United States Senate in early 1845. Webster sought to block the adoption of Polk's domestic policies, but Congress, controlled by Democrats, reduced tariff rates through the Walker tariff and re-established the Independent Treasury system. In May 1846, the Mexican\u2013American War began after Congress, responding to a clash instigated by U.S. troops against the Mexican Army at the disputed Texas\u2013Mexico border, declared war on Mexico. During the war, Northern Whigs became increasingly split between \"Conscience Whigs\" like Charles Sumner, who strongly favored anti-slavery policies, and \"Cotton Whigs\" like Webster, who emphasized good relations with Southern leaders. Webster had been a long-standing opponent of slavery; in an 1837 speech he called slavery a \"great moral, social, and political evil\", and added that he would vote against \"any thing that shall extend the slavery of the African race on this continent, or add other slaveholding states to the Union.\" Unlike his more strongly anti-slavery constituents, he did not believe that Congress should interfere with slavery in the states, and he placed less emphasis on preventing the spread of slavery into the territories. Nonetheless, because Webster opposed the acquisition of Mexican territory (with the exception of San Francisco), he voted against the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, in which the United States acquired the Mexican Cession.\nGeneral Zachary Taylor's success in the Mexican\u2013American War drove him to the front ranks of Whig candidates in the 1848 U.S. presidential election. As Taylor held unclear political positions and had never been publicly affiliated with the Whig Party, Clay and Webster each launched their own bids for the presidency, but opposition from the Conscience Whigs badly damaged Webster's standing. On the first ballot of the 1848 Whig National Convention Webster finished a distant fourth behind Taylor, Clay, and General Winfield Scott. Taylor ultimately won the presidential nomination on the convention's fourth ballot, while Millard Fillmore of New York was selected as the party's vice presidential nominee. After Webster declined the request of Conscience Whigs to lead a new, anti-slavery third party, Conscience Whigs and \"Barnburner\" Democrats launched the Free Soil Party and nominated a ticket consisting of former president Van Buren and Charles Francis Adams. Despite having previously stated that he would not support Taylor in the 1848 presidential campaign, Webster threw his backing behind Taylor. Ultimately, Taylor won the election, defeating both Van Buren and Democratic nominee Lewis Cass.\nTaylor administration, 1849\u20131850.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI shall stand by the Union...with absolute disregard of personal consequences. What are personal consequences...in comparison with the good or evil that may befall a great country in a crisis like this?...Let the consequences be what they will... No man can suffer too much, and no man can fall too soon, if he suffer or if he fall in defense of the liberties and constitution of his country.\nDaniel Webster (\"July 17, 1850 address to the Senate\")\nHaving only tepidly endorsed Taylor's campaign, Webster was excluded from the new administration's Cabinet and was not consulted on major appointments. After the 1848 election, the fate of the territories acquired in the Mexican-American War became a major subject of debate in Congress, as Northern and Southern leaders quarreled over the extension of slavery. In January 1850, Clay introduced a plan which combined the major subjects under discussion. His legislative package included the admission of California as a free state, the cession by Texas of some of its northern and western territorial claims in return for debt relief, the establishment of New Mexico and Utah territories, a ban on the importation of slaves into the District of Columbia for sale, and a more stringent fugitive slave law. The plan faced opposition from strongly pro-slavery Southern leaders like Calhoun and anti-slavery Northerners like William Seward and Salmon Chase. President Taylor also opposed Clay's proposal, since he favored granting California statehood immediately and denied the legitimacy of Texas's claims over New Mexico.\nClay had won Webster's backing for his proposal before presenting it to Congress, and Webster provided strong support for Clay's bill in the Senate. In what became known as the \"Seventh of March Speech\", Webster attacked Northerners and Southerners alike for stirring up tensions over slavery. He admonished Northerners for obstructing the return of fugitive slaves but attacked Southern leaders for openly contemplating secession. After the speech, Webster was bitterly attacked by New England abolitionists. Theodore Parker complained, \"No living man has done so much to debauch the conscience of the nation,\" while Horace Mann described Webster as \"a fallen star! Lucifer descending from Heaven!\" In contrast to that view, James G. Blaine wrote a few decades later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe debate over Clay's compromise proposal continued into July 1850, when Taylor suddenly and unexpectedly died of an illness.\nSecretary of State in the Fillmore administration.\nCompromise of 1850.\nMillard Fillmore ascended to the presidency upon Taylor's death. Shortly after taking office, Fillmore dismissed Taylor's Cabinet appointees, named Webster as his secretary of state, and came out in favor of Clay's compromise. Fillmore chose the remaining members of his Cabinet in consultation with Webster, and Webster became the unofficial leader in the Cabinet. After Fillmore took office, Clay took a temporary leave from the Senate, but Democratic senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois took the lead in advocating for a compromise based largely on Clay's proposals. On behalf of the president, Webster drafted a special message to Congress calling for an end to the crisis over the territories, and he used the power of patronage to woo potential supporters. Soon after the Fillmore administration delivered the special message, Congress passed Douglas's legislative package, which became known as the Compromise of 1850.\nDue to a prosperous economy and various other trends, few Whigs pushed for a revival of the national bank and other long-standing party policies during the Fillmore administration, and the Compromise of 1850 became the central political issue. While Fillmore hoped to reconcile with anti-Compromise Northern Whigs, Webster sought to purge them from the party, and he frequently intervened to block the election or appointment of anti-Compromise Whigs. In the North, the most controversial portion of the Compromise of 1850 was the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850, and Webster became closely involved in enforcing the law. Disputes over fugitive slaves were widely publicized North and South, inflaming passions and raising tensions in the aftermath of the Compromise of 1850. Many of the administration's prosecutions or attempts to return slaves ended badly for the government, as in the case of Shadrach Minkins. In Massachusetts, anti-slavery Whigs allied with Democrats and, in a major rebuke to Webster, elected Free Soil leader Charles Sumner to the Senate.\nOpening of the New York &amp; Erie Rail Road.\nWhen the New York &amp; Erie Rail Road was completed in May 1851, President Fillmore and several members of his cabinet, including Webster, made a special, two-day excursion run to open the railway. It is reported that Webster viewed the entire run from a rocking chair attached to a flatcar, with a steamer rug and jug of high-quality Medford rum. At stops, he would get down and speechify.\nForeign affairs.\nFillmore appointed Webster not only for his national stature and pro-Compromise position, but also for his experience in foreign affairs, and Fillmore relied on Webster to guide his administration's foreign policy. In the aftermath of the failed Hungarian Revolution of 1848, a diplomatic incident with the Austrian Empire arose over the Taylor administration's sympathetic actions towards the Hungarian rebels. Rather than backing down, the Fillmore administration secured the release of exiled Hungarian leader Lajos Kossuth from the Ottoman Empire and gave a banquet in Kossuth's honor. In 1851, Webster wrote a book about Kossuth's life.&lt;ref name=\"Webster/1851/Kossuth\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The administration was particularly active in Asia and the Pacific, especially with regard to Japan, which prohibited nearly all foreign contact. In November 1852, the administration launched the Perry Expedition to force Japan to establish trade relations with the United States. Perry was successful in his mission, as Japan agreed to open trade relations with the 1854 Convention of Kanagawa. The Fillmore administration also reached trade agreements with Latin American countries, worked to counter British influence in Central America and took measures to prevent unauthorized military expeditions against Cuba and other Latin American countries. An expedition to Cuba led by Narciso L\u00f3pez precipitated a diplomatic crisis with Spain, but Fillmore, Webster, and the Spanish government worked out a series of face-saving measures that prevented an outbreak of hostilities from occurring.\n1852 election.\nEncouraged by Fillmore's professed lack of desire to pursue the Whig nomination in the 1852 U.S. presidential election, Webster launched another campaign for the presidency in 1851. Fillmore was sympathetic to the ambitions of his secretary of state, but he was unwilling to completely rule out accepting the party's 1852 nomination, as he feared doing so would allow his rival, William Seward, to gain control of the party. Another candidate emerged in the form of General Winfield Scott, who, like previously successful Whig presidential nominees William Henry Harrison and Zachary Taylor, had earned fame for his martial accomplishments. Scott had supported the Compromise of 1850, but his association with Seward made him unacceptable to Southern Whigs. As Southerners retained a lingering distrust of Webster, they threw their backing behind Fillmore. Thus, Scott emerged as the preferred candidate of most Northern Whigs, Fillmore became the main candidate of Southern Whigs, and Webster was only able to win backing from a handful of delegates, most of whom were from New England.\nOn the first presidential ballot of the 1852 Whig National Convention, Fillmore received 133 of the necessary 147 votes, while Scott won 131 and Webster won 29. Although both Webster and Fillmore were willing to withdraw in favor of the other, their respective delegates at the convention were unable to unite around one candidate, and Scott took the nomination on the 53rd ballot. Webster was personally devastated by the defeat, and he refused to endorse Scott's candidacy. Webster allowed various third party groups to nominate him for president, although he did not openly condone these efforts. Scott proved to be a poor candidate, and he suffered the worst defeat in Whig history, losing to Democratic nominee Franklin Pierce. Thousands of anti-Scott Whigs and members of the nativist Native American Party cast their vote for Webster.\nPersonal life, family, and religious views.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf we work upon marble, it will perish; if we work upon brass, time will efface it; if we rear temples, they will crumble to dust; but if we work on men's immortal minds, if we impress on them with high principles, the just fear of God and love for their fellow-men, we engrave on those tablets something which no time can efface, and which will brighten and brighten to all eternity.\nDaniel Webster (\"May 22, 1852\")\nIn 1808, Webster married Grace Fletcher, a schoolteacher and the daughter of a New Hampshire clergyman. Between 1810 and 1822, Daniel and Grace had five children: Grace, Daniel \"Fletcher\", Julia, Edward, and Charles. Grace and Charles died before reaching adulthood. Webster's wife, Grace, died in January 1828 due to a cancerous tumor, and Webster suffered another loss when his brother, Ezekiel, died in April 1829. In December 1829, Webster married Caroline LeRoy, the 32-year-old daughter of New York merchant Herman LeRoy. They remained married until Webster's death, and she lived until 1882. She and Webster had two children together, another daughter named Grace and a son named Noah Webster. After the death of his first wife, Webster was frequently the subject of rumors in Washington regarding his alleged promiscuity; many suspected that the painter Sarah Goodridge, with whom he had a close relationship, was his mistress.\nWebster and his family lived in Portsmouth until 1816 when they relocated to Boston. In 1831, Webster purchased a 150-acre estate (now known as the Thomas\u2013Webster Estate) in Marshfield, Massachusetts. In the ensuing years, Webster spent much of his earnings making various improvements to his estate, and he made it his primary residence in 1837. After 1829, Webster also owned his father's home, the Elms, in Franklin, New Hampshire. Webster's older son, Fletcher, married a niece of Joseph Story, established a profitable law practice, served as chief clerk of the State Department, and was the only one of his siblings to outlive his father. Fletcher died at the 1862 Second Battle of Bull Run while serving as a colonel in the Union army. Webster's younger son, Edward, died of typhoid fever in January 1848 while serving in the Mexican-American War. Webster's daughter, Julia, married Samuel Augustus Appleton, but died of tuberculosis in April 1848.\nConflicting opinions have been voiced as to his religion. The Unitarian Universalist Church, citing \"Unitarianism in America\" from 1902, claim him as their own. Another source, the 1856 biography \"The American Statesman: The Life and Character of Daniel Webster\", proclaims him an avowed orthodox Trinitarian, baptized and raised in an Orthodox Congregational Church, and who died a member of the Episcopal Church. Remini writes that, though Webster occasionally attended other churches, he remained closely affiliated with the Congregational church throughout his life. In an 1807 letter to a Congregational pastor, Webster wrote, \"I believe in the utter inability of any human being to work out his own Salvation, without the constant aids of the spirit of all grace... Although I have great respect for some other forms of worship, I believe the Congregational mode, on the whole, to be preferable to any other.\"\nDeath.\nBy early 1852, Webster had begun to suffer from cirrhosis of the liver, and his poor health increasingly made it difficult for him to serve as secretary of state. In September 1852, Webster returned to his Marshfield estate, where his health continued to decline due to cirrhosis and a subdural hematoma. He died in Marshfield, Massachusetts on October 24, 1852, at the age of 70, and is buried in Winslow Cemetery near his estate. His last words were, \"I still live.\"\nLegacy.\nHistorical evaluations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecession! Peaceable secession! Sir, your eyes and mine are never destined to see that miracle. The dismemberment of this vast country without convulsion!\u00a0... There can be no such thing as a peaceable secession. Peaceable secession is an utter impossibility\u00a0... We could not separate the states by any such line if we were to draw it\u00a0...\nDaniel Webster (\"March 7, 1850 A Plea for Harmony and Peace\")\nRemini writes that \"whether men hated or admired [Webster], all agreed ... on the majesty of his oratory, the immensity of his intellectual powers, and the primacy of his constitutional knowledge.\" Ralph Waldo Emerson, who had criticized Webster following the Seventh of March address, remarked in the immediate aftermath of his death that Webster was \"the completest man\", and that \"nature had not in our days, or not since Napoleon, cut out such a masterpiece.\" In \"Profiles in Courage\", John F. Kennedy called Webster's defense of the Compromise of 1850, despite the risk to his presidential ambitions and the denunciations he faced from the North, one of the \"greatest acts of courageous principle\" in the history of the Senate. Conversely, \"Seventh of March\" has been criticized by Henry Cabot Lodge who contrasted the speech's support of the 1850 compromise with his 1833 rejection of similar measures. \"While he was brave and true and wise in 1833,\" said Lodge, \"in 1850 he was not only inconsistent, but that he erred deeply in policy and statesmanship\" in his advocacy of a policy that \"made war inevitable by encouraging slave-holders to believe that they could always obtain anything they wanted by a sufficient show of violence.\"\nSeveral historians suggest Webster failed to exercise leadership for any political issue or vision. Lodge describes Webster's \"susceptibility to outside influences that formed such an odd trait in the character of a man so imperious by nature. When acting alone, he spoke his own opinions. When in a situation where public opinion was concentrated against him, he submitted to modifications of his views with a curious and indolent indifference.\" Similarly, Arthur Schlesinger cites Webster's letter requesting retainers for fighting for the national bank, one of his most inveterate causes; he then asks how Webster could \"expect the American people to follow him through hell or high water when he would not lead unless someone made up a purse for him?\" Remini writes that \"Webster was a thoroughgoing elitist\u2014and he reveled in it.\"\nWebster retains his high prestige in some recent historiography. Baxter argues that his nationalistic view of the union as one and inseparable from liberty helped the union to triumph over the states-rights Confederacy, making it his greatest contribution. Bartlett, however, emphasizing Webster's private life, says his great oratorical achievements were in part undercut by his improvidence with money, his excessively opulent lifestyle, and his numerous conflict-of-interest situations. Remini points out that Webster's historical orations taught Americans their history before textbooks were widely available. In 1957, a Senate Committee headed by then Senator John F. Kennedy named Webster, Clay, Calhoun, Robert M. La Follette, and Robert A. Taft as the five greatest senators in history\u2014portraits of the \"famous five\" were added to the Senate Reception Room.\nWhile evaluations on his political career vary, Webster is widely praised for his talent as an orator and attorney. Former Solicitor General Seth P. Waxman writes that \"in the realm of advocacy, Webster doesn't merely sit in the Pantheon: He is Zeus himself.\" Kennedy praised Webster's \"ability to make alive and supreme the latent sense of oneness, of union, that all Americans felt but few could express.\" Webster's \"Reply to Hayne\" in 1830 was generally regarded as \"the most eloquent speech ever delivered in Congress,\" and was a stock exercise for oratory students for 75 years. Schlesinger, however, notes that he is also an example of the limitations of formal oratory: Congress heard Webster or Clay with admiration, but they rarely prevailed at the vote. Plainer speech and party solidarity were more effective, and Webster never approached Jackson's popular appeal.\nMemorials.\nWebster's legacy has been commemorated with statues and other memorials. A statue stands in the National Statuary Hall Collection, while another statue stands in Central Park. Another Webster statue is located outside the Massachusetts State House. The \"USS Daniel Webster (SSBN-626)\" and the liberty ship were both named for Webster. The first Webster postage stamp was issued in 1870. In all, Daniel Webster is honored on 14 different US postage issues, more than most U.S. Presidents. There is a Daniel Webster Highway and Mount Webster in New Hampshire There are 27 towns named for Webster in California, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Texas, Virginia, and West Virginia, and Wisconsin. A ghost town in Colorado and Webster Hollow in Tennessee are also named for Daniel Webster. Seven counties or parishes are named for Webster. Daniel Webster Elementary School in Marshfield, Massachusetts and Daniel Webster Middle School in Los Angeles, California bear his name.\nDaniel Webster has been honored on numerous U.S. Postage stamps\nIn media.\nWebster is the major character in a fictional short story, \"The Devil and Daniel Webster\", by Stephen Vincent Ben\u00e9t. It serves as the basis for a one-act opera of the same name written by American composer Douglas Moore and the 1941 film directed by William Dieterle.\nWebster is briefly discussed in Chapter XIX of MacKinlay Kantor's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel \"Andersonville\" (1955).\nJefferson Smith sits at what is said to be Webster's desk when he takes his seat in the Senate in Mr. Smith Goes to Washington (1939).\nOn film, Webster has been portrayed by\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBiographies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51614", "revid": "50935760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51614", "title": "Biology and sexual orientation", "text": "Field of sexual orientation research\nThe relationship between biology and sexual orientation is a subject of ongoing research. While scientists do not know the exact cause of sexual orientation, they theorize that it is caused by a complex interplay of genetic, hormonal, and environmental influences. However, evidence is weak for hypotheses that the postnatal social environment impacts sexual orientation, especially for males.\nBiological theories for explaining the causes of sexual orientation are favored by scientists. These factors, which may be related to the development of a sexual orientation, include genes, the early uterine environment (such as prenatal hormones), and brain structure. While the evolutionary explanation for heterosexuality in organisms that reproduce sexually is straightforwardly understood to be a psychological adaptation resulting from greater reproductive success, evolutionary explanations for homosexuality rely upon other mechanisms of evolution such as kin selection and inclusive fitness, or antagonistic pleiotropy that favors heterozygotes causing homosexuality among homozygotes as a by-product.\nScientific research and studies.\nFetal development and hormones.\nThe influence of hormones on the developing fetus has been the most influential causal hypothesis of the development of sexual orientation. In simple terms, the developing fetal brain begins in a \"female\" state. Both INAH3 (the third interstitial nucleus of the anterior hypothalamus) area on the left side of the hypothalamus, which stores gender preference, and the center area of the bed stria terminalis (BSTc) area on the right side of the hypothalamus, which stores gender identity, are undeveloped and function as female. The action of the SRY gene in the Y chromosome in the fetus prompts the development of testes, which release testosterone, the primary androgen receptor-activating hormone, to allow testosterone to enter the cells and masculinize the fetus and fetal brain. If a sufficient amount of testosterone is received by INAH3 at 12 weeks following conception, the testosterone stimulates the enlargement of INAH3, which is known to be involved in directing typical male sex behavior, such as attraction to females. If INAH3 does not receive enough testosterone to override the circulating estrogen, it may not grow to the size typically observed in males. Subsequently, INAH3 may function as female or partially female, potentially causing same-sex attraction to males. Although the size of INAH3 in homosexual men compared to heterosexual men may not be statistically different, homosexual men may have a greater cell density than heterosexual men, though a similar total number of INAH3 neurons.\n Average volumes of INAH3 in straight and gay men and in women.\nStudies have shown that INAH3 in gay men has likely been exposed to lower levels of testosterone in the brain compared to straight men, or had different levels of receptivity to its masculinizing effects, or experienced hormone fluctuations at critical times during fetal development. In women, if INAH3 receives more testosterone than is normal for females, INAH3 may enlarge somewhat or even to the size that is normal for males, increasing the likelihood of same sex attraction. Supporting this are studies of the finger digit ratio of the right hand, which is a robust marker of prenatal testosterone exposure. Lesbians tend to have significantly more masculine digit ratios, a finding which has been replicated in numerous cross-cultural studies. Controlled experiments in animals, where scientists manipulate exposure to sex hormones during gestation, can also induce lifelong male-typical behavior and mounting in females, and female-typical behavior in males.\nMaternal immune responses during fetal development are strongly demonstrated as causing male homosexuality and bisexuality. Research since the 1990s has demonstrated that as a woman has more sons, there is a higher chance of later born sons having same-sex attraction. During pregnancy, male cells enter a mother's bloodstream, which provoke an immune response to neutralize them. These antibodies are then released on future male fetuses and may neutralize Y-linked antigens, which play a role in brain masculinization, leaving areas of the brain responsible for sexual attraction in the female-typical default position, i.e. expressing attraction to men. Each subsequent son will increase the levels of these antibodies, creating the observed fraternal birth order effect. Biochemical evidence to support this effect was confirmed in a lab study in 2017, finding that mothers with a gay son, particularly those with older brothers, had heightened levels of antibodies to the NLGN4Y Y-protein than mothers with heterosexual sons. This effect is estimated to account for between 15 and 29% of gay men, while other gay and bisexual men are thought to owe sexual orientation to genetic and hormonal interactions.\nSocialization theories, which were dominant in the 1900s, favored the idea that children were born \"undifferentiated\" and were socialized into gender roles and sexual orientation. This led to medical experiments in which newborn and infant boys were surgically reassigned into girls after accidents such as botched circumcisions. These males were then reared and raised as females without telling them, but contrary to expectations, this did not make them feminine nor attracted to men. All published cases providing sexual orientation grew up to be strongly attracted to women. The failure of these experiments demonstrate that socialization effects do not induce feminine sexual behavior or psychology in males, and that the organizational effects of hormones on the fetal brain prior to birth have permanent effects. These indicate the primary role of nature, not post-birth nurture, in the development of male sexual orientation.\n Average volumes of the equivalent cell group in sheep (oSDN) for heterosexual and homosexual rams and for ewes. Sex differences are formed under the influence of prenatal hormones in utero, rather than acquired after birth.\nIn the brain, the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area (SDN-POA) is a key region which differs between males and females in humans and a number of mammals (e.g., sheep/rams, mice, rats), and is caused by sex differences in hormone exposure. Also, the INAH-3 region is bigger in males than in females, and is known to be critical for sexual behavior. Dissection studies found that gay men had significantly smaller INAH-3 than heterosexual men, a shift in the female direction, as first demonstrated by neuroscientist Simon LeVay, which has been replicated. Dissection studies are rare, however, due to lack of funding and brain samples.\nLong-term studies of homosexual behavior in domesticated sheep led by Charles Roselli have found that 6-8% of rams have a homosexual preference through their life. Dissection of ram brains also found a similar smaller (feminized) structure in homosexually oriented rams in the brain region equivalent to human SDN, the ovine sexually dimorphic nucleus (oSDN). The size of the sheep oSDN has also been demonstrated to be formed in utero, rather than postnatally, underscoring the role of prenatal hormones in masculinization of the brain for sexual attraction.\nOther studies in humans have relied on brain imaging, such as research led by Ivanka Savic which compared hemispheres of the brain. This research found that straight men had right hemispheres 2% larger than the left, described as modest but \"highly significant difference\" by LeVay. In heterosexual women, the two hemispheres were the same size. In gay men, the two hemispheres were also the same size, or sex atypical, while in lesbians, the right hemispheres were slightly larger than the left, indicating a small shift in the male direction.\nA model proposed by evolutionary geneticist William R. Rice argues that a misexpressed epigenetic modifier of testosterone sensitivity or insensitivity that affected development of the brain can explain homosexuality, and can best explain twin discordance. Rice et al. propose that these epimarks normally canalize sexual development, preventing intersex conditions in most of the population, but sometimes failing to erase across generations and causing reversed sexual preference. On grounds of evolutionary plausibility, Gavrilets, Friberg and Rice argue that all mechanisms for exclusive homosexual orientations likely trace back to their epigenetic model. Testing this hypothesis is possible with current stem cell technology.\nPrenatal thyroid theory.\nPrenatal thyroid theory of same-sex attraction/gender dysphoria has been based on clinical and developmental observations of youngsters presenting to child psychiatry clinics in Istanbul/Turkey. The report of 12 cases with same-sex attraction/gender dysphoria born to mothers with thyroid diseases was first presented in EPA Congress, Vienna (2015) and published as an article in the same year. The extremely significant relationship between the two conditions suggested an independent model, named the \"Prenatal Thyroid Model of Homosexuality\". According to Turkish child &amp; adolescent psychiatrist Osman Sabuncuoglu, who generated the theory, maternal thyroid dysfunction may lead to abnormal deviations from gender-specific development in the offspring. Autoimmune destructive process as seen in Hashimoto's thyroiditis, diminished supply of thyroid hormones, and impacts on prenatal androgen system were all considered as contributing mechanisms. In a follow-up theoretical paper, previous research findings indicating higher rates of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in female-to-male transsexuals and lesbian women were conceived as an indication of \"Prenatal Thyroid Model\" since PCOS and autoimmune thyroiditis are frequently comorbid diseases. Likewise, increased rates of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) in children born to mothers with thyroid dysfunction and overrepresentation of ASD individuals in gender dysphoria populations suggest such an association. A second group of young children with this pattern were presented in IACAPAP Congress, Prague (2018). Furthermore, 9 additional cases were reported in the IACAPAP Congress (2024).\nThe findings from previous research in LGBT populations had called for attention to be paid to the thyroid system. A commentary by Jeffrey Mullen, published shortly after the 2015 article, underlined the importance of \"Prenatal Thyroid Model\" and supported developments in this field. Afterwards, several authors have emphasized the role of thyroid system in sexuality while citing the \"Prenatal Thyroid Model.\" Among them, Carosa et al. concluded that thyroid hormones, affecting the human sexual function strongly, the thyroid gland must be considered, along with the genitals and the brain, a sexual organ. As a tertiary source, an authoritative book on the subject of interplay between endocrinology, brain and behavior has also cited the thyroid-homosexuality proposal article in the latest edition.\nGenetic influences.\nMultiple genes have been found to play a role in sexual orientation. Scientists caution that many people misconstrue the meanings of \"genetic\" and \"environmental\". Environmental influence does not automatically imply that the social environment influences or contributes to the development of sexual orientation. Hypotheses for the impact of the post-natal social environment on sexual orientation are weak, especially for males. There is a vast non-social environment, particularly prenatal development, which remains poorly understood.\nTwin studies.\nTwin studies are one method of testing genetic and environmental influences, although they cannot reveal what kind of environmental influence this may include (social or non-social). Identical or monozygotic twins share their genes, while fraternal or dizygotic twins are only as genetically similar as any other sibling pair. When twins both share a trait, they are \"concordant\" for this trait; and when they differ they are \"discordant\". If identical twins have a higher rate of concordance for a trait than fraternal twins, it indicates that genes may contribute to the trait.\nThe 2016 Bailey et al. meta-analysis of all twin studies on sexual orientation found that the median concordance for homosexual or non-heterosexual orientation in twins in unbiased probability samples is 24% for monozygotic identical twins, and 15% for dizygotic twins. According to Rice et al. the identical twin concordance for homosexuality is similar to identical twin concordance for two other traits influenced by prenatal androgens: cryptorchidism and hypospadias (feminized male gonads) which have an identical twin concordance around 25%, despite twins sharing genes and prenatal environments.\nTwin studies have also found that among twins with differing sexual orientations, homosexual twins were significantly more gender nonconforming than their heterosexual co-twin, and that this was noticeable from a young age. Bailey states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What kind of environmental factor can cause genetically identical twins reared in the same family from birth\u2014often dressed alike and given the same toys\u2014to differ in their sexual orientations? It is a fascinating question that we haven't begun to answer well. One hint comes from the childhood behavior findings. When identical twins differed in their sexual orientation, the gay one tended to recall being much more feminine than the straight one. This means that the environmental factors that cause the twin differences are there early on, by childhood. Based on other things we know, such as studies of children with cloacal exstrophy, I suspect that these factors operate in the womb.\nIdentical twins reared apart from birth are another method of studying the origin of psychological traits, although such twin pairs are rare. Three sets of male twin pairs exist in the literature. In the first pair found by Thomas Bouchard, both male twins reared apart from birth were homosexual. In a second pair found by Whitham, both males were also homosexual. In the third pair found by Bouchard, the male twins were neither definitively concordant nor discordant, as both had relations with males and females, thus this pair may be concordant for bisexuality. Among the female twin pairs; four female twin pairs were all discordant, although the small number of cases prevent any strong conclusions.\nAccording to William Rice and colleagues, the concordance of homosexuality among twins raises the possibility that homosexuality is not caused by genes nor atypical levels of hormones, but an epigenetic mechanism controlling how sensitive fetuses are to prenatal hormones.22\nChromosome linkage studies.\nChromosome linkage studies of sexual orientation have indicated the presence of multiple contributing genetic factors throughout the genome. In 1993, Dean Hamer and colleagues published findings from a linkage analysis of a sample of 76 gay brothers and their families. Hamer et al. found that the gay men had more gay male uncles and cousins on the maternal side of the family than on the paternal side. Gay brothers who showed this maternal pedigree were then tested for X chromosome linkage, using twenty-two markers on the X chromosome to test for similar alleles. In another finding, thirty-three of the forty sibling pairs tested were found to have similar alleles in the distal region of Xq28, which was significantly higher than the expected rates of 50% for fraternal brothers. This was popularly dubbed the \"gay gene\" in the media, causing significant controversy. In 1998, Sanders et al. reported on their similar study, in which they found that 13% of uncles of gay brothers on the maternal side were homosexual, compared with 6% on the paternal side.\nA later analysis by Hu et al. replicated and refined the earlier findings. This study revealed that 67% of gay brothers in a new saturated sample shared a marker on the X chromosome at Xq28. Two other studies (Bailey et al., 1999; McKnight and Malcolm, 2000) failed to find a preponderance of gay relatives in the maternal line of homosexual men. One study by Rice et al. in 1999 failed to replicate the Xq28 linkage results. Meta-analysis of all available linkage data indicates a significant link to Xq28, but also indicates that additional genes must be present to account for the full heritability of sexual orientation.\nBocklandt et al. (2006) found extreme skewing of X-inactivation in mothers of two or more gay men. Typically, women's cells randomly inactivate one or both X chromosomes, while mothers of multiple gay men inactivate the same X chromosome in every cell. While this finding remains unexplained, it points indirectly to a role for the X chromosome in male sexual orientation.\nMustanski et al. (2005) performed a full-genome scan (instead of just an X chromosome scan) on individuals and families previously reported on in Hamer et al. (1993) and Hu et al. (1995), as well as additional new subjects. In the full sample they did not find linkage to Xq28.\nResults from the first large, comprehensive multi-center genetic linkage study of male sexual orientation were reported by an independent group of researchers at the American Society of Human Genetics in 2012. The study population included 409 independent pairs of gay brothers, who were analyzed with over 300,000 single-nucleotide polymorphism markers. The data strongly replicated Hamer's Xq28 findings as determined by both two-point and multipoint (MERLIN) LOD score mapping. Significant linkage was also detected in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 8, overlapping with one of the regions detected in the Hamer lab's previous genome-wide study. The authors concluded that \"our findings, taken in context with previous work, suggest that genetic variation in each of these regions contributes to development of the important psychological trait of male sexual orientation\". Female sexual orientation does not seem to be linked to Xq28, though it does appear moderately heritable.\nIn addition to sex chromosomal contribution, a potential autosomal genetic contribution to the development of homosexual orientation has also been suggested. In a study population composed of more than 7000 participants, Ellis et al. (2008) found a statistically significant difference in the frequency of blood type A between homosexuals and heterosexuals. They also found that \"unusually high\" proportions of homosexual males and homosexual females were Rh negative in comparison to heterosexuals. As both blood type and Rh factor are genetically inherited traits controlled by alleles located on chromosome 9 and chromosome 1 respectively, the study indicates a potential link between genes on autosomes and homosexuality.\nThe biology of sexual orientation has been studied in detail in several animal model systems. In the common fruit fly \"Drosophila melanogaster\", the complete pathway of sexual differentiation of the brain and the behaviors it controls is well established in both males and females, providing a concise model of biologically controlled courtship. In mammals, a group of geneticists at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology bred female mice specifically lacking a particular gene related to sexual behavior. Without the gene, the mice exhibited masculine sexual behavior and attraction toward urine of other female mice. Those mice who retained the gene fucose mutarotase (FucM) were attracted to male mice.\nIn interviews to the press, researchers have pointed that the evidence of genetic influences should not be equated with genetic determinism. According to Dean Hamer and Michael Bailey, genetic aspects are only one of the multiple causes of homosexuality.\nIn 2017, \"Scientific Reports\" published an article with a genome wide association study on male sexual orientation. The research consisted of 1,077 homosexual men and 1,231 heterosexual men. A gene named \"SLITRK6\" on chromosome 13 was identified. The research supports another study which had been done by the neuroscientist Simon LeVay. LeVay's research suggested that the hypothalamus of gay men is different from straight men. The SLITRK6 is active in the mid-brain where the hypothalamus is. The researchers found that the thyroid stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) on chromosome 14 shows sequence differences between gay and straight men. Graves' disease is associated with TSHR abnormalities, with previous research indicating that Graves' disease is more common in gay men than in straight men. Research indicated that gay people have lower body weight than straight people. It had been suggested that the overactive TSHR hormone lowered body weight in gay people, though this remains unproven.\nIn 2018, Ganna et al. performed another genome-wide association study on sexual orientation of men and women with data from 26,890 people who had at least one same-sex partner and 450,939 controls. The data in the study was meta-analyzed and obtained from the UK Biobank study and 23andMe. The researchers identified four variants more common in people who reported at least one same-sex experience on chromosomes 7, 11, 12, and 15. The variants on chromosomes 11 and 15 were specific to men, with the variant on chromosome 11 located in an olfactory gene and the variant on chromosome 15 having previously been linked to male-pattern baldness. The four variants were also correlated with mood and mental health disorders; major depressive disorder and schizophrenia in men and women, and bipolar disorder in women. However, none of the four variants could reliably predict sexual orientation.\nIn August 2019, a genome-wide association study of 493,001 individuals concluded that hundreds or thousands of genetic variants underlie homosexual behavior in both sexes, with 5 variants in particular being significantly associated. Some of these variants had sex-specific effects, and two of these variants suggested links to biological pathways that involve sex hormone regulation and olfaction. All the variants together captured between 8 and 25% of the variation in individual differences in homosexual behavior. These genes partly overlap with those for several other traits, including openness to experience and risk-taking behavior. Additional analyses suggested that sexual behavior, attraction, identity, and fantasies are influenced by a similar set of genetic variants. They also found that the genetic effects that differentiate heterosexual from homosexual behavior are not the same as those that differ among nonheterosexuals with lower versus higher proportions of same-sex partners, which suggests that there is no single continuum from heterosexual to homosexual preference, as suggested by the Kinsey scale.\nIn October 2021, another research paper reported that genetic factors influence the development of same-sex sexual behavior. A two-stage genome-wide association study (GWAS) with a total sample of 1478 homosexual males and 3313 heterosexual males in Han Chinese populations identified two genetic loci (FMR1NB and ZNF536) showing consistent association with male sexual orientation.\nEpigenetics studies.\nA hypothesis developed by Rice et al. proposes that epigenetic \"epi\u2010marks\" (non\u2013DNA sequence modifications like DNA methylation) play a central buffering role in sexual development, by controlling how strongly fetal androgen signaling influences tissues. Some of those epi\u2010marks are sex\u2010specific (i.e. different in XX vs. XY embryos) and help protect against atypical androgen exposure (too much in XX, too little in XY). Occasionally, some of these protective epi\u2010marks escape erasure across generations, and find themselves in an opposite\u2010sex individual, causing a gonad\u2013trait discordance (a mismatch between gonadal sex and some sexually dimorphic traits). Rice et al. propose that such a discordance may be causing same\u2010sex sexual orientations.\nBirth order.\nBlanchard and Klassen (1997) reported that each additional older brother increases the odds of a man being gay by 33%. This is now \"one of the most reliable epidemiological variables ever identified in the study of sexual orientation\". To explain this finding, it has been proposed that male fetuses provoke a maternal immune reaction that becomes stronger with each successive male fetus. This maternal immunization hypothesis (MIH) begins when cells from a male fetus enter the mother's circulation during pregnancy or while giving birth. Male fetuses produce H-Y antigens which are \"almost certainly involved in the sexual differentiation of vertebrates\". These Y-linked proteins would not be recognized in the mother's immune system because she is female, causing her to develop antibodies which would travel through the placental barrier into the fetal compartment. From here, the anti-male bodies would then cross the blood/brain barrier (BBB) of the developing fetal brain, altering sex-dimorphic brain structures relative to sexual orientation, increasing the likelihood that the exposed son will be more attracted to men than women. It is this antigen which maternal H-Y antibodies are proposed to both react to and 'remember'. Successive male fetuses are then attacked by H-Y antibodies which somehow decrease the ability of H-Y antigens to perform their usual function in brain masculinization.\nIn 2017, researchers discovered a biological mechanism of gay people who tend to have older brothers. They believed the Neuroligin 4 Y-linked protein was responsible for a later son being gay. They found that women had significantly higher anti-NLGN4Y levels than men. In addition, mothers of gay sons, particularly those with older brothers, had significantly higher anti-NLGN4Y levels than did the control samples of women, including mothers of heterosexual sons. The results suggest an association between a maternal immune response to NLGN4Y and subsequent sexual orientation in male offspring.\nThe fraternal birth order effect, however, does not apply to instances where a firstborn is homosexual.\nPheromone studies.\nResearch conducted in Sweden has suggested that gay and straight men respond differently to two odors that are believed to be involved in sexual arousal. The research showed that when both heterosexual women and gay men are exposed to a testosterone derivative found in men's sweat, a region in the hypothalamus is activated. Heterosexual men, on the other hand, have a similar response to an estrogen-like compound found in women's urine. The conclusion is that sexual attraction, whether same-sex or opposite-sex oriented, operates similarly on a biological level. Researchers have suggested that this possibility could be further explored by studying young subjects to see if similar responses in the hypothalamus are found and then correlating these data with adult sexual orientation.\nStudies of brain structure.\nA number of sections of the brain have been reported to be sexually dimorphic; that is, they vary between men and women. There have also been reports of variations in brain structure corresponding to sexual orientation. In 1990, Dick Swaab and Michel A. Hofman reported a difference in the size of the suprachiasmatic nucleus between homosexual and heterosexual men. In 1992, Allen and Gorski reported a difference related to sexual orientation in the size of the anterior commissure, but this research was refuted by numerous studies, one of which found that the entirety of the variation was caused by a single outlier.\nResearch on the physiologic differences between male and female brains are based on the idea that people have a male or a female brain, and this mirrors the behavioral differences between the two sexes. Some researchers state that solid scientific support for this is lacking. Although consistent differences have been identified, including the size of the brain and of specific brain regions, male and female brains are very similar.\nSexually dimorphic nuclei in the anterior hypothalamus.\nLeVay also conducted some of these early researches. He studied four groups of neurons in the hypothalamus called INAH1, INAH2, INAH3 and INAH4. This was a relevant area of the brain to study, because of evidence that it played a role in the regulation of sexual behaviour in animals, and because INAH2 and INAH3 had previously been reported to differ in size between men and women.\nHe obtained brains from 41 deceased hospital patients. The subjects were classified into three groups. The first group comprised 19 gay men who had died of AIDS-related illnesses. The second group comprised 16 men whose sexual orientation was unknown, but whom the researchers presumed to be heterosexual. Six of these men had died of AIDS-related illnesses. The third group was of six women whom the researchers presumed to be heterosexual. One of the women had died of an AIDS-related illness.\nThe HIV-positive people in the presumably heterosexual patient groups were all identified from medical records as either intravenous drug abusers or recipients of blood transfusions. Two of the men who identified as heterosexual specifically denied ever engaging in a homosexual sex act. The records of the remaining heterosexual subjects contained no information about their sexual orientation; they were assumed to have been primarily or exclusively heterosexual \"on the basis of the numerical preponderance of heterosexual men in the population\".\nLeVay found no evidence for a difference between the groups in the size of INAH1, INAH2 or INAH4. However, the INAH3 group appeared to be twice as big in the heterosexual male group as in the gay male group; the difference was highly significant, and remained significant when only the six AIDS patients were included in the heterosexual group. The size of INAH3 in the homosexual men's brains was comparable to the size of INAH3 in the heterosexual women's brains.\nWilliam Byne and colleagues attempted to identify the size differences reported in INAH 1\u20134 by replicating the experiment using brain samples from other subjects: 14 HIV-positive homosexual males, 34 presumed heterosexual males (10 HIV-positive), and 34 presumed heterosexual females (9 HIV-positive). The researchers found a significant difference in INAH3 size between heterosexual men and heterosexual women. The INAH3 size of the homosexual men was apparently smaller than that of the heterosexual men, and larger than that of the heterosexual women, though neither difference quite reached statistical significance.\nByne and colleagues also weighed and counted numbers of neurons in INAH3 tests not carried out by LeVay. The results for INAH3 weight were similar to those for INAH3 size; that is, the INAH3 weight for the heterosexual male brains was significantly larger than for the heterosexual female brains, while the results for the gay male group were between those of the other two groups but not quite significantly different from either. The neuron count also found a male-female difference in INAH3, but found no trend related to sexual orientation.\nLeVay has said that Byne replicated his work, but that he employed a two-tailed statistical analysis, which is typically reserved for when no previous findings had employed the difference. LeVay has said that \"given that my study had already reported a INAH3 to be smaller in gay men, a one tailed approach would have been more appropriate, and it would have yielded a significant difference [between heterosexual and homosexual men]\".\nJ. Michael Bailey has criticized LeVay's critics\u2014describing the claim that the INAH-3 difference could be attributable to AIDS as \"aggravating\", since the \"INAH-3 did not differ between the brains of straight men who died of AIDS and those who did not have the disease\". Bailey has further criticized the second objection that was raised, that being gay might have somehow caused the difference in INAH-3, and not vice-versa, saying \"the problem with this idea is that the hypothalamus appears to develop early. Not a single expert I have ever asked about LeVay's study thought it was plausible that sexual behavior caused the INAH-3 differences.\"\nNeuroscientist Marc Breedlove also countered William Byne, arguing that \"We cannot know whether gay men were born with a small INAH3 that led them to develop a gay orientation, or whether some other process caused them to develop a gay orientation and, in doing so, resulted in a lower INAH3 than in heterosexual men,\" and that \"Gay men are widely perceived as 'less masculinized', but the data indicate that they are exposed to as much prenatal androgen as heterosexual men\".\nThe SCN of homosexual males has been demonstrated to be larger (both the volume and the number of neurons are twice as many as in heterosexual males). These areas of the hypothalamus have not yet been explored in homosexual females nor bisexual males nor females. Although the functional implications of such findings still have not been examined in detail, they cast serious doubt over the widely accepted D\u00f6rner hypothesis that homosexual males have a \"female hypothalamus\" and that the key mechanism of differentiating the \"male brain from originally female brain\" is the epigenetic influence of testosterone during prenatal development.\nA 2010 study by Garcia-Falgueras and Swaab stated that \"the fetal brain develops during the intrauterine period in the male direction through a direct action of testosterone on the developing nerve cells, or in the female direction through the absence of this hormone surge. In this way, our gender identity (the conviction of belonging to the male or female gender) and sexual orientation are programmed or organized into our brain structures when we are still in the womb. There is no indication that social environment after birth has an effect on gender identity or sexual orientation.\"\nOvine model.\nThe domestic ram is used as an experimental model to study early programming of the neural mechanisms which underlie homosexuality, developing from the observation that approximately 8% of domestic rams are sexually attracted to other rams (male-oriented) when compared to the majority of rams which are female-oriented. In many species, a prominent feature of sexual differentiation is the presence of a sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN) in the preoptic hypothalamus, which is larger in males than in females.\nRoselli et al. discovered an ovine SDN (oSDN) in the preoptic hypothalamus that is smaller in male-oriented rams than in female-oriented rams, but similar in size to the oSDN of females. Neurons of the oSDN show aromatase expression which is also smaller in male-oriented rams versus female-oriented rams, suggesting that sexual orientation is neurologically hard-wired and may be influenced by hormones. However, results failed to associate the role of neural aromatase in the sexual differentiation of brain and behavior in the sheep, due to the lack of defeminization of adult sexual partner preference or oSDN volume as a result of aromatase activity in the brain of the fetuses during the critical period. Having said this, it is more likely that oSDN morphology and homosexuality may be programmed through an androgen receptor that does not involve aromatisation. Most of the data suggests that homosexual rams, like female-oriented rams, are masculinized and defeminized with respect to mounting, receptivity, and gonadotrophin secretion, but are not defeminized for sexual partner preferences, also suggesting that such behaviors may be programmed differently. Although the exact function of the oSDN is not fully known, its volume, length, and cell number seem to correlate with sexual orientation, and a dimorphism in its volume and of cells could bias the processing cues involved in partner selection. More research is needed in order to understand the requirements and timing of the development of the oSDN and how prenatal programming effects the expression of mate choice in adulthood.\nChildhood gender nonconformity.\nChildhood gender nonconformity is a strong predictor of adult sexual orientation that has been consistently replicated in research, and is thought to be strong evidence of a biological difference between heterosexual and non-heterosexuals. A review authored by J. Michael Bailey states: \"childhood gender nonconformity comprises the following phenomena among boys: cross-dressing, desiring to have long hair, playing with dolls, disliking competitive sports and rough play, preferring girls as playmates, exhibiting elevated separation anxiety, and desiring to be\u2014or believing that one is\u2014a girl. In girls, gender nonconformity comprises dressing like and playing with boys, showing interest in competitive sports and rough play, lacking interest in conventionally female toys such as dolls and makeup, and desiring to be a boy\". This gender nonconformist behavior typically emerges at preschool age, although is often evident as early as age 2. Children are only considered gender nonconforming if they persistently engage in a variety of these behaviors, as opposed to engaging in a behavior on a few times or on occasion. It is also not a one-dimensional trait, but rather has varying degrees.\nChildren who grow up to be non-heterosexual were, on average, substantially more gender nonconforming in childhood. This is confirmed in both retrospective studies where homosexuals, bisexuals and heterosexuals are asked about their gender typical behavior in childhood, and in prospective studies, where highly gender nonconforming children are followed from childhood into adulthood to find out their sexual orientation. A review of retrospective studies that measured gender nonconforming traits estimated that 89% of homosexual men exceeded heterosexual males level of gender nonconformity, whereas just 2% of heterosexual men exceeded the homosexual median. For female sexual orientation, the figures were 81% and 12% respectively. A variety of other assessments such as childhood home videos, photos and reports of parents also confirm this finding. Critics of this research see this as confirming stereotypes; however, no study has ever demonstrated that this research has exaggerated childhood gender nonconformity. J. Michael Bailey argues that gay men often deny that they were gender nonconforming in childhood because they may have been bullied or maltreated by peers and parents for it, and because they often do not find femininity attractive in other gay males and thus would not want to acknowledge it in themselves.80 Additional research in Western cultures and non-Western cultures including Latin America, Asia, Polynesia, and the Middle East supports the validity of childhood gender nonconformity as a predictor of adult non-heterosexuality.\nThis research does not mean that all non-heterosexuals were gender nonconforming, but rather indicates that long before sexual attraction is known, non-heterosexuals, on average, are noticeably different from other children. There is little evidence that gender nonconforming children have been encouraged or taught to behave that way; rather, childhood gender nonconformity typically emerges despite conventional socialization. Medical experiments in which infant boys were sex reassigned and reared as girls did not make them feminine nor attracted to males.\nBoys who were surgically reassigned female.\nBetween the 1960s and 2000, many newborn and infant boys were surgically reassigned as females if they were born with malformed penises, or if they lost their penises in accidents. Many surgeons believed such males would be happier being socially and surgically reassigned female. In all seven published cases that have provided sexual orientation information, the subjects grew up to be attracted to females. Six cases were exclusively attracted to females, with one case 'predominantly' attracted to females. In a review article in the journal \"Psychological Science in the Public Interest,\" six researchers including J. Michael Bailey state this establishes a strong case that male sexual orientation is partly established before birth:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This is the result we would expect if male sexual orientation were entirely due to nature, and it is opposite of the result expected if it were due to nurture, in which case we would expect that none of these individuals would be predominantly attracted to women. They show how difficult it is to derail the development of male sexual orientation by psychosocial means.\nThey further argue that this raises questions about the significance of the social environment on sexual orientation, stating, \"If one cannot reliably make a male human become attracted to other males by cutting off his penis in infancy and rearing him as a girl, then what other psychosocial intervention could plausibly have that effect?\" It is further stated that neither cloacal exstrophy (resulting in a malformed penis), nor surgical accidents, are associated with abnormalities of prenatal androgens, thus, the brains of these individuals were male-organized at birth. Six of the seven identified as heterosexual males at follow up, despite being surgically altered and reared as females, with researchers adding: \"available evidence indicates that in such instances, parents are deeply committed to raising these children as girls and in as gender-typical a manner as possible.\" Bailey et al. describe these sex reassignments as 'the near-perfect quasi-experiment' in measuring the impact of 'nature' versus 'nurture' with regards to male homosexuality.\nHomosexuality and evolution.\nGeneral.\nSexual practices that significantly reduce the frequency of heterosexual intercourse also significantly decrease the chances of successful reproduction, and for this reason, they would appear to be maladaptive in an evolutionary context following a simple Darwinian model (competition amongst individuals) of natural selection\u2014on the assumption that homosexuality would reduce this frequency. Several theories have been advanced to explain this contradiction, and new experimental evidence has demonstrated their feasibility.\nKin selection.\nThe \"gay uncle hypothesis\" posits that people who themselves do not have children may nonetheless increase the prevalence of their family's genes in future generations by providing resources (e.g., food, supervision, defense, shelter) to the offspring of their closest relatives.\nThis hypothesis is an extension of the theory of kin selection, which was originally developed to explain apparent altruistic acts which seemed to be maladaptive. The initial concept was suggested by J. B. S. Haldane in 1932 and later elaborated by many others including John Maynard Smith, W. D. Hamilton, Mary Jane West-Eberhard, and E. O. Wilson. This concept was also used to explain the patterns of certain social insects where most of the members are non-reproductive. Conversely, social psychologist David Buss has argued that there is no empirical evidence that supports the hypothesis.\nIn 2001, \"Evolution and Human Behavior\" published a questionnaire survey of 57 heterosexual and 66 homosexual male subjects in the United States that found that homosexual subjects were no more likely to provide financial resources towards family members, heterosexual subjects were more likely give more financial resources to siblings than homosexual subjects, and homosexual subjects tended to be more estranged from family members. In 2005, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a replication study with 60 heterosexual and 60 homosexual male subjects in England that likewise found no significant differences between heterosexual and homosexual subjects in familial affinity or generosity towards family members. Vasey, Pocock, and VanderLaan (2007) and Vasey and VanderLaan (2010) tested the theory on the Pacific island of Samoa, where they studied women, straight men, and the \"fa'afafine\", men who prefer other men as sexual partners and are accepted within the culture as a distinct third gender category. Vasey and VanderLaan found that the \"fa'afafine\" said they were significantly more willing to help kin, yet much less interested in helping children who are not family, providing the first evidence to support the kin selection hypothesis. The hypothesis is consistent with other studies on homosexuality, which show that it is more prevalent amongst both siblings and twins.\nAnthropologist Raymond Hames notes that Vasey and VanderLaan's research on the \"fa'afafine\" identifies them as \"transgendered androphilic males\" as opposed to \"sex-gender congruent androphiles\" or \"egalitarian homosexuals\" in Western societies. Based on research conducted in Japan that found no evidence that homosexual Japanese men exhibited elevated avuncular tendencies compared to heterosexual counterparts, Vasey and VanderLaan (2011) provides evidence that if an adaptively designed avuncular male androphilic phenotype exists and its development is contingent on a particular social environment, then a collectivistic cultural context is insufficient, in and of itself, for the expression of such a phenotype. In 2011 and 2014, the \"Journal of Cognition and Culture\" published two studies that found that Canadian homosexual men exhibited significantly greater altruistic tendencies toward kin versus non-kin children relative to heterosexual men and women, but did not find that Canadian homosexual males exhibited significantly higher altruistic behavior towards nieces and nephews over geographic disconnect.\nIn 2016, the \"Journal of Sex Research\" published a study comprising 278 homosexual (or \"kathoey\") and heterosexual male subjects in Italy and Spain and from the Urak Lawoi of Thailand that found no greater kin altruism or avuncularity among homosexual subjects in any of the three cultures and that kin altruism and avuncularity was associated with societal differences in cultural norms about general altruism toward non-kin children. In 2017, \"Evolutionary Psychological Science\" published a logistic regression analysis of the results of 17,295 female subjects across 58 countries on World Values Survey questionnaires about attitudes toward homosexuality that found that subjects that were potentially most in need of alloparental support exhibited significantly more positive attitudes towards homosexuals, which the researchers suggested was circumstantial evidence in support of the hypothesis on a global scale. In 2018, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study comparing avuncular tendencies between heterosexual and homosexual men on Java in Indonesia that found that homosexual men reported an increased willingness to transfer resources and money toward nephews and nieces but only reduced the direct reproductive cost to homosexual men by 20%, with the researchers concluding that kin selection alone was an insufficient explanation of male homosexuality.\nAntagonistic pleiotropy.\nSome scholars have suggested that homosexuality is indirectly adaptive, by conferring a reproductive advantage on heterosexual siblings or their children. By way of analogy, the allele (a particular version of a gene) which causes sickle cell disease when two copies are present, also confers an adaptive advantage when one copy is present by providing resistance to malaria with non-symptomatic sickle cell trait\u2014which is known as \"heterozygote advantage\".\nBrendan Zietsch of the Queensland Institute of Medical Research proposes the alternative theory that men exhibiting female traits become more attractive to females and are thus more likely to mate, provided the genes involved do not drive them to complete rejection of heterosexuality.\nIn a 2008 study, its authors stated that \"There is considerable evidence that human sexual orientation is genetically influenced, so it is not known how homosexuality, which tends to lower reproductive success, is maintained in the population at a relatively high frequency.\" They hypothesized that \"while genes predisposing to homosexuality reduce homosexuals' reproductive success, they may confer some advantage in heterosexuals who carry them\". Their results suggested that \"genes predisposing to homosexuality may confer a mating advantage in heterosexuals, which could help explain the evolution and maintenance of homosexuality in the population\". However, in the same study, the authors noted that \"nongenetic alternative explanations cannot be ruled out\" as a reason for the heterosexual in the homosexual-heterosexual twin pair having more partners, specifically citing \"social pressure on the other twin to act in a more heterosexual way\" (and thus seek out a greater number of sexual partners) as an example of one alternative explanation. The study acknowledges that a large number of sexual partners may not lead to greater reproductive success, specifically noting there is an \"absence of evidence relating the number of sexual partners and actual reproductive success, either in the present or in our evolutionary past\".\nThe heterosexual advantage hypothesis was given strong support by the 2004 Italian study demonstrating increased fecundity in the female matrilineal relatives of gay men. As originally pointed out by Dean Hamer, even a modest increase in reproductive capacity in females carrying a \"gay gene\" could easily account for its maintenance at high levels in the population.\nIn 2004, Italian researchers conducted a study of about 4,600 people who were the relatives of 98 homosexual and 100 heterosexual men. Female relatives of the homosexual men tended to have more offspring than those of the heterosexual men. Female relatives of the homosexual men on their mother's side tended to have more offspring than those on the father's side. The researchers concluded that there was genetic material being passed down on the X chromosome which both promote fertility in the mother and homosexuality in her male offspring. The connections discovered would explain about 20% of the cases studied, indicating that it being a highly significant factor to account for, but not the sole genetic factor determining sexual orientation. A 2008 follow-up study using a comparative survey design found that 147 white and non-white homosexual men had a significantly more relatives in their maternal lines than 155 heterosexual men but not in the paternal line, and while the maternal aunts of white homosexual men had significantly elevated fecundity as compared to white heterosexual men, every class of relative for non-white heterosexual men showed elevated fecundities as compared to non-white homosexual men.\nNoting subsequent research by the original researchers that found that female relatives in the maternal line of homosexual men have higher fertility, anthropologist Ruth Mace suggests that homosexuality is maintained by antagonistic pleiotropy and cites a cross-cultural study spanning 48 societies that found that male homosexuality was more prevalent in stratified societies, did not appear to be a cultural universal, and is possibly maintained by hypergyny. While the original cross-cultural study's empirical findings, conceptual basis, and methodology has been disputed by other researchers, a subsequent cross-cultural study of 107 societies across 6 continents replicated the previous study's findings.\nIn 2005, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study comparing family size and fecundity among family relatives between 301 homosexual men and 404 heterosexual men and found that the mean family size for homosexual men was significantly larger than heterosexual men as well as increased fecundity among the relatives of homosexual men. In 2007, the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society: Series B\" published a study comparing the number of siblings of a sample of Samoan heterosexual males to \"fa'afafine\" counterparts that found that the \"fa'afafine\" tend to have more siblings, and specifically, a greater number of older brothers, older sisters, and younger brothers, and \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a replication study in 2011 that found that likewise showed that the \"fa'afafine\" had a greater number of siblings than heterosexual males, which the researchers suggested indicates that a maternal fecundity effect exists in Samoa. In 2009, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study that examined the probands of 152 homosexual men and 98 heterosexual men that found a significant fecundity increase in mothers (including primiparous mothers) but no evidence of increased paternal fecundity, which the researchers concluded suggested the existence of a sexually antagonistic inheritance partly linked to the X-chromosome promoting fecundity in females and homosexual sexual orientation in males.\nIn 2009, the \"Journal of Sexual Medicine\" published a study of 151 homosexual or bisexual men and 88 exclusively heterosexual men that found that significantly higher fecundity of female relatives of the maternal line (including mothers, maternal grandparents, and maternal aunts) for both bisexuals and homosexuals compared to the corresponding relatives of heterosexual subjects, which the researchers argued provided evidence for an association between X-chromosomal genetic factors with bisexuality in men and fecundity promotion in female carriers. In 2010, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study comparing the pedigree sizes of 694 homosexual men and 894 heterosexual men sampled at pride parades that found that homosexual men had more relatives, especially paternal relatives, but no evidence that male sexual orientation is transmitted predominantly through the maternal line\u2014which the researchers noted was contrary to previous research. In 2012, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study that compared the probands of 4,784 firstborn homosexual men and 40,197 first-born heterosexual men across 6 datasets that found that the homosexual probands had significantly fewer siblings or a statistically insignificant difference in the number of siblings\u2014which the researcher concluded was a direct contradiction of an antagonistic pleiotropy explanation of homosexuality, but also that such an explanation could not be tested solely by comparing the number of siblings of heterosexual and homosexual subjects because of the confounding impact of the fraternal birth order effect.\nIn 2012, \"PLOS One\" published a study that compared the fecundity of the paternal and maternal line grandmothers, aunts, and uncles of 86 Samoan heterosexual males and 86 \"fa'afafine\" that found elevated fecundity in the paternal and maternal line grandmothers of \"fa'afafine\" but not their aunts or uncles. In 2012, the \"Journal of Sexual Medicine\" published a study examining the phenotypic expression of the genetic factors that influence increased fecundity in female relative carriers that found that as compared with corresponding female relatives of heterosexual men, mothers and maternal aunts of homosexual men had fewer gynecological disorders and complicated pregnancies, had reduced family stability and a higher divorce and spousal separation rate, and self-reported less interest in having children, less emphasis on romantic love within couples, and less importance on their social life, but scored higher on the extraversion scale of a Big Five personality traits questionnaire.\nIn 2017, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study investigating differences in fertility rates of the paternal and maternal biological relatives of 191 \"fa'afafine\" and 191 homosexual Samoan male subjects that found that the mothers and maternal grandmothers of \"fa'afafine\" showed elevated fertility as compared with homosexual men but not for paternal grandmothers or aunts, which led the researchers to conclude that their findings in Samoa for an antagonistic pleiotropy explanation of homosexuality provided only equivocal support. In 2018, \"Human Nature\" published a study investigating the fecundity among 30,203 relatives of 650 homosexual or bisexual women as compared with 808 heterosexual women that found that the direct fitness of homosexual females was four times lower than that of heterosexual females, but that the pedigree size and relative average fecundity in both the paternal and maternal sides of the families of the homosexual women were significantly higher than the families of the heterosexual women\u2014which the researchers suggested appeared to offset the loss in fitness.\nIn 2020, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study that investigated fecundity among the relatives of 115 transgender men and 112 homosexual men in the Isthmus Zapotec culture of Mexico (whom the Isthmus Zapotec refer to as \"muxe gunaa\" and the \"muxe nguiiu\" respectively) as compared with 171 heterosexual men and found that the mothers and paternal aunts of the transgender men had higher fecundity than those of homosexual and heterosexual men, but found no such differences between the families of the heterosexual men and the homosexual men. In 2020, the \"Proceedings of the Royal Society: Series B\" published a meta-analysis of 10 studies comprising 5,390 homosexual and heterosexual subjects across 14 samples that found evidence for a fraternal birth order effect but no evidence for a female fecundity effect (i.e. an association between higher maternal fertility and homosexual orientation among male offspring) using a mathematical model proposed by mathematician Tanya Khovanova, but the reviewers noted that Khovanova's methodology restricted samples to one-son and two-son families which resulted in lost data and possibly biased results, and also made the assumption that female offspring could be ignored for simplicity and clarity while the female fecundity effect is specified in terms of total offspring rather than male offspring exclusively.\nIn 2022, the \"Journal of Sex Research\" published a study of 26,542 men and 33,534 women that had entered same-sex unions in the Netherlands as compared with 4,607,785 men and 4,405,635 women that found robust evidence of a fraternal birth order effect on both male and female homosexuality and no support for a female fecundity effect, but the researchers qualified that their findings could be a result of sampling through a same-sex unions registry and only considered maternal siblings rather than other female relatives (e.g. sisters, maternal aunts, maternal grandmothers), and as such, that the existence of a female fecundity effect could not be discounted. In 2024, \"Archives of Sexual Behavior\" published a study comparing the fertility of the parents and grandparents of 459 homosexual men and 79 homosexual women to 7,312 heterosexual men and 3,352 heterosexual women in the Czech Republic that found higher fertility for only the paternal grandmothers of homosexual men and with a small effect size, leading the researchers to conclude that their findings did not support an antagonistic pleiotropy explanation of homosexuality.\nIn 2021, \"Nature Human Behaviour\" published a study that used the results from a pair of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that found that opposite-sex behavior individuals that were carriers of genetic variants associated with same-sex behavior had a greater number of opposite-sex sexual partners on average, and that computer simulations suggested that such a mating advantage could explain the maintenance of such genetic variants in human populations. In 2024, \"Science Advances\" published a GWAS study that found that only the genetic variants associated with male bisexual behavior to be associated with greater offspring while the genetic variants associated with exclusive same-sex behavior were negatively associated with the number of offspring. In 2025, \"Trends in Genetics\" published a review analyzing the two studies that concluded that the evolutionary explanation of the persistence of genetic variants associated with same-sex behavior despite apparent fitness costs remained uncertain, but that antagonistic pleiotropy is a plausible persistence mechanism.\nBiological differences in gay men and lesbian women.\nSome studies have found correlations between physiology of people and their sexuality; these studies provide evidence which suggests that:\nJ. Michael Bailey has argued that the early childhood gender nonconforming behavior of homosexuals, as opposed to biological markers, are better evidence of homosexuality being an inborn trait. He argues that gay men are \"punished much more than rewarded\" for their childhood gender nonconformity, and that such behavior \"emerges with no encouragement, and despite opposition\", making it \"the sine qua non of innateness\".123\nPolitical aspects.\nWhether genetic or other physiological or psychological determinants form the basis of sexual orientation is a highly politicized issue. \"The Advocate\", a U.S. gay and lesbian newsmagazine, reported in 1996 that 61% of its readers believed that \"it would mostly help gay and lesbian rights if homosexuality were found to be biologically determined\". A cross-national study in the United States, the Philippines, and Sweden found that those who believed that \"homosexuals are born that way\" held significantly more positive attitudes toward homosexuality than those who believed that \"homosexuals choose to be that way\" or \"learn to be that way\".\nThe Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment to the United States Constitution and the Due Process Clause of the 5th Amendment by reverse incorporation requires that when the federal or state governments create a classification for a group suspected of being discriminated against, eligibility for heightened scrutiny is based on several factors including immutability. Evidence that sexual orientation is biologically determined (and therefore perhaps immutable in the legal sense) would strengthen the legal case for heightened scrutiny of laws discriminating on that basis. In \"Obergefell v. Hodges\" (2015), the Supreme Court of the United States held that the Equal Protection Clause requires state governments to license same-sex marriages and recognize same-sex marriages performed by other state governments citing an \"amicus curiae\" brief that argued that sexual orientation is immutable which was jointly filed by the American Psychological Association, the American Psychiatric Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy, the National Association of Social Workers, the American Psychoanalytic Association, the American Academy of Family Physicians, and the American Medical Association.\nThe perceived causes of sexual orientation have a significant bearing on the status of sexual minorities in the eyes of social conservatives. The Family Research Council, a conservative Christian think tank in Washington, D.C., argues in the book \"Getting It Straight\" that finding people are born gay \"would advance the idea that sexual orientation is an innate characteristic, like race; that homosexuals, like African-Americans, should be legally protected against 'discrimination;' and that disapproval of homosexuality should be as socially stigmatized as racism. However, it is not true.\" On the other hand, some social conservatives such as Reverend Robert Schenck have argued that people can accept any scientific evidence while still morally opposing homosexuality. National Organization for Marriage board member and fiction writer Orson Scott Card has supported biological research on homosexuality, writing that \"our scientific efforts in regard to homosexuality should be to identify genetic and uterine causes... so that the incidence of this dysfunction can be minimized... [However, this should not be seen] as an attack on homosexuals, a desire to 'commit genocide' against the homosexual community... There is no 'cure' for homosexuality because it is not a disease. There are, however, different ways of living with homosexual desires.\"\nSome advocates for the rights of sexual minorities resist what they perceive as attempts to pathologise or medicalise 'deviant' sexuality, and choose to fight for acceptance in a moral or social realm. The journalist Chandler Burr has stated that \"[s]ome, recalling earlier psychiatric \"treatments\" for homosexuality, discern in the biological quest the seeds of genocide. They conjure up the specter of the surgical or chemical \"rewiring\" of gay people, or of abortions of fetal homosexuals who have been hunted down in the womb.\" LeVay has said in response to letters from gays and lesbians making such criticisms that the research \"has contributed to the status of gay people in society\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Causes of gender incongruence\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51619", "revid": "862068366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51619", "title": "Teratogenic", "text": ""}
{"id": "51621", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51621", "title": "Montgolfier brothers", "text": "18th-century French inventors\nThe Montgolfier brothers \u2013 Joseph-Michel Montgolfier (; 26 August 1740 \u2013 26 June 1810) and Jacques-\u00c9tienne Montgolfier (; 6 January 1745 \u2013 2 August 1799) \u2013 were aviation pioneers, balloonists and paper manufacturers from the commune Annonay in Ard\u00e8che, France. They invented the Montgolfi\u00e8re-style hot air balloon, globe a\u00e9rostatique, which launched the first confirmed piloted ascent by humans in 1783, carrying Jacques-\u00c9tienne.\nJoseph-Michel also invented the self-acting hydraulic ram (1796) and Jacques-\u00c9tienne founded the first paper-making vocational school. Together, the brothers invented a process to manufacture transparent paper.\nEarly years.\nJoseph-Michel and Jacques-\u00c9tienne Montgolfier were born into a family of paper manufacturers. Their parents were Pierre Montgolfier (1700\u20131793) and Anne Duret (1701\u20131760), who had 16 children. Pierre Montgolfier established his eldest son, Raymond (1730\u20131772), as his successor.\nJoseph-Michel was the 12th child. Described as a maverick and dreamer, he was impractical in terms of business and personal affairs. \u00c9tienne was the 15th child, had a much more even and businesslike temperament and was sent to Paris to train as an architect. After the sudden and unexpected death of Raymond in 1772, he was recalled to Annonay to run the family business. In the subsequent 10 years, \u00c9tienne applied his talent for technical innovation to the family business of paper making, which then as now was a high-tech industry. He succeeded in incorporating the latest Dutch innovations of the day into the family mills.\nHot air balloon experiments, 1782\u201384.\nHot air balloon experiments, 1782.\nOf the two brothers, it was Joseph who was first interested in aeronautics; as early as 1775 he built parachutes, and once jumped from the family house. He first contemplated building machines when he observed laundry drying over a fire incidentally form pockets that billowed upwards. Joseph made his first definitive experiments in November 1782 while living in Avignon. He reported some years later that he was watching a fire one evening while contemplating one of the great military issues of the day\u2014an assault on the fortress of Gibraltar, which had proved impregnable from both sea and land. Joseph mused on the possibility of an air assault using troops lifted by the same force that was lifting the embers from the fire. He believed that the smoke itself was the buoyant part and contained within it a special gas, which he called \"Montgolfier Gas\", with a special property he called levity, which is why he preferred smoldering fuel.\nJoseph then built a box-like chamber out of very thin wood, and covered the sides and top with lightweight taffeta cloth. He crumpled and lit some paper under the bottom of the box. The contraption quickly lifted off its stand and collided with the ceiling.\nJoseph recruited his brother to balloon building by writing, \"Get in a supply of taffeta and of cordage, quickly, and you will see one of the most astonishing sights in the world.\" The two brothers built a similar device, three times larger having a volume 27 times greater. On 14 December 1782 they conducted their first test flight, using ignited wool and hay as fuel. The lifting force was so great that they lost control of their craft. The device floated nearly but was destroyed after landing by the \"indiscretion\" of a bypasser.\nPublic demonstrations, summer 1783.\nTo make a public demonstration and to claim its invention, the brothers constructed a globe-shaped balloon of sackcloth tightened with three thin layers of paper inside. The envelope could contain nearly of air and weighed . It was constructed of four pieces (the dome and three lateral bands) and held together by 1,800 buttons. A reinforcing fish net of cord covered the outside of the envelope.\nOn 4 June 1783, they flew the balloon at Annonay in front of a group of dignitaries from the \"\u00e9tats particuliers\". The flight covered , lasted 10 minutes, and had an estimated altitude of . Word of their success quickly reached Paris. \u00c9tienne went to the capital to make further demonstrations and to solidify the brothers' claim to the invention of flight. Joseph, given his unkempt appearance and shyness, remained with the family. \u00c9tienne was \"the epitome of sober virtues ... modest in clothes and manner...\"\nIn collaboration with the wallpaper manufacturer Jean-Baptiste R\u00e9veillon, \u00c9tienne constructed a envelope of taffeta coated with a varnish of alum for fireproofing. The balloon was sky blue and decorated with golden flourishes, signs of the zodiac, and suns. The design showed the intervention of R\u00e9veillon. The next test was on 11 September from the grounds of \"la Folie Titon\", close to R\u00e9veillon's house. There was some concern about the effects of flight into the upper atmosphere on living creatures. The king proposed to launch two convicted criminals, but it is most likely that the inventors decided to send a sheep, a duck, and a rooster aloft first.\nOn 19 September 1783, the \"A\u00e9rostat R\u00e9veillon\" was flown with the first living beings in a basket attached to the balloon: a sheep called Montauciel (\"Climb-to-the-sky\"), a duck and a rooster. The sheep was believed to have a reasonable approximation of human physiology. The duck was expected to be unharmed by being lifted and was included as a control for effects created by the aircraft rather than the altitude. The rooster was included as a further control as it was a bird that did not fly at high altitudes. The demonstration was performed at the royal palace in Versailles, before King Louis XVI and Queen Marie Antoinette and a crowd. The flight lasted approximately eight minutes, covered , and obtained an altitude of about . The craft landed safely after flying.\nPiloted flight, autumn 1783.\nSince the animals survived, the king allowed flights with humans. Again in collaboration with R\u00e9veillon, \u00c9tienne built a balloon for the purpose of making flights with humans. It was about tall and about in diameter. R\u00e9veillon supplied rich decorative touches of gold figures on a deep blue background, including fleur-de-lis, signs of the zodiac, and suns with Louis XVI's face in the center interlaced with the royal monogram in the central section. Red and blue drapery and golden eagles were at the base of the balloon. \u00c9tienne Montgolfier was the first human to lift off the Earth in a balloon, making a tethered test flight from the yard of the R\u00e9veillon workshop in the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, most likely on 15 October 1783. A little while later on that same day, physicist Pil\u00e2tre de Rozier became the second to ascend into the air, to an altitude of , which was the length of the tether.\nOn 21 November 1783, the first free flight by humans was made by Pil\u00e2tre de Rozier, together with an army officer, the marquis d'Arlandes. The flight began from the grounds of the Ch\u00e2teau de la Muette close to the Bois de Boulogne park in the western outskirts of Paris. They flew about above Paris for a distance of nine kilometers. After 25 minutes, the balloon landed between the windmills, outside the city ramparts, on the Butte-aux-Cailles. Enough fuel remained on board at the end of the flight to have allowed the balloon to fly four to five times as far. However, burning embers from the fire were scorching the balloon fabric and had to be daubed out with sponges. As it appeared it could destroy the balloon, Pil\u00e2tre took off his coat to stop the fire.\nThe early flights made a sensation. During those first few years, numerous items, such as fans, furniture, handkerchiefs, pencil boxes, umbrella tops, etc., could be found with ballooning images engraved on them. Some items would be celebrating specific ballooning events, while others would be celebrating ballooning itself.\nIn December 1783, father Pierre Montgolfier was elevated to the nobility and the hereditary appellation of de Montgolfier by King Louis XVI. \nOther balloons, competing claims.\nSome claim that the hot air balloon was invented about 74 years earlier by the Brazilian/Portuguese priest Bartolomeu de Gusm\u00e3o. A description of his invention was published in 1709(?) in Vienna, and another one was found in the Vatican in about 1917. However, this claim is not generally recognized by aviation historians outside the Portuguese-speaking community, in particular the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration A\u00e9ronautique Internationale.\nOn 1 December 1783, a few months after the Montgolfiers' first flight, Jacques Alexandre C\u00e9sar Charles rose to an altitude of about near Paris in a hydrogen-filled balloon he had developed.\nIn early 1784, the Flesselles balloon, named after the unfortunate Jacques de Flesselles, later to be an early casualty of the French Revolution at the Bastille, gave a rough landing to its passengers.\nIn June 1784, the \"Gustave\" (a hot air balloon christened \"La Gustave\" in honour of King Gustav III of Sweden's visit to Lyon) saw the first female aeronaut, \u00c9lisabeth Thible.\nOther Montgolfier inventions.\nBoth brothers invented a process to manufacture transparent paper similar to vellum, imitating the technique of the English, followed by the papermakers Johannot and R\u00e9veillon. In 1796, Joseph Michel Montgolfier invented the first self-acting hydraulic ram, a water pump to raise water for his paper mill at Voiron. In 1772, the British clockmaker John Whitehurst had invented its precursor, the \"pulsation engine\". In 1797, Montgolfier's friend Matthew Boulton took out a British patent on his behalf.\nIn 1816, Joseph Michel's sons obtained a British patent for an improved version of the pump.\nDeath, the Montgolfier company.\nBoth brothers were freemasons in Les Neuf Soeurs lodge in Paris.\nIn 1799, Etienne de Montgolfier died on the way from Lyon to Annonay. His son-in-law, Barth\u00e9l\u00e9my Barou de la Lombardi\u00e8re de Canson (1774\u20131859), succeeded him as the head of the company, thanks to his marriage with Alexandrine de Montgolfier. The company became Montgolfier et Canson in 1801, then Canson-Montgolfier in 1807. In 1810, Joseph-Michel died in Balaruc-les-Bains.\nThe Montgolfier Company in Annonay still exists under the name Canson. It produces fine art papers, school drawing papers and digital fine art and photography papers sold in 150 countries.\nIn 1983, the Montgolfier brothers were inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51624", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51624", "title": "Thomas Young (scientist)", "text": "English polymath (1773\u20131829)\nThomas Young FRS (13 June 1773\u00a0\u2013 10 May 1829) was a British polymath who made notable contributions to the fields of vision, light, solid mechanics, energy, physiology, language, musical harmony, and Egyptology. He was instrumental in the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphs, specifically the Rosetta Stone.\nYoung has been described as \"The Last Man Who Knew Everything\". His work influenced that of William Herschel, Hermann von Helmholtz, James Clerk Maxwell, and Albert Einstein. Young is credited with establishing Christiaan Huygens' wave theory of light, in contrast to the corpuscular theory of Isaac Newton. Young's work was subsequently supported by the work of Augustin-Jean Fresnel.\nPersonal life.\nYoung belonged to a Quaker family of Milverton, Somerset, where he was born in 1773, the eldest of ten children. By the age of fourteen, Young had learned Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Syriac, Samaritan Hebrew, Arabic, Biblical Aramaic, Persian, Turkish, and Ge'ez.\nYoung began to study medicine in London at St Bartholomew's Hospital in 1792, moved to the University of Edinburgh Medical School in 1794, and a year later went to G\u00f6ttingen, Lower Saxony, Germany, where he obtained the degree of doctor of medicine in 1796 from the University of G\u00f6ttingen. In 1797 he entered Emmanuel College, Cambridge. In the same year he inherited the estate of his grand-uncle, Richard Brocklesby, which made him financially independent, and in 1799 he established himself as a physician at 48 Welbeck Street, London (now recorded with a blue plaque). Young published many of his first academic articles anonymously to protect his reputation as a physician.\nIn 1801, Young was appointed professor of natural philosophy (mainly physics) at the Royal Institution. In two years, he delivered 91 lectures. In 1802, he was appointed foreign secretary of the Royal Society, of which he had been elected a fellow in 1794. He resigned his professorship in 1803, fearing that its duties would interfere with his medical practice. His lectures were published in 1807 in the \"Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy\" and contain a number of anticipations of later theories.\nIn 1811, Young became physician to St George's Hospital, and in 1814 he served on a committee appointed to consider the dangers involved in the general introduction of gas for lighting into London. In 1816 he was secretary of a commission charged with ascertaining the precise length of the seconds pendulum (the length of a pendulum whose period is exactly 2 seconds), and in 1818 he became secretary to the Board of Longitude and superintendent of the HM Nautical Almanac Office.\nYoung was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1822. A few years before his death he became interested in life insurance, and in 1827 he was chosen as one of the eight foreign associates of the French Academy of Sciences. In the same year he became a first class corresponding member, living abroad, of the Royal Institute of the Netherlands. In 1828, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nIn 1804, Young married Eliza Maxwell. They had no children.\nYoung died in his 56th year in London on 10 May 1829, having suffered recurrent attacks of \"asthma\". His autopsy revealed atherosclerosis of the aorta. His body was buried in the graveyard of St Giles\u2019 Church at Farnborough, in the county of Kent. Westminster Abbey houses a white marble tablet in memory of Young, bearing an epitaph by Hudson Gurney:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sacred to the memory of Thomas Young, M.D., Fellow and Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society Member of the National Institute of France; a man alike eminent in almost every department of human learning. Patient of unintermitted labour, endowed with the faculty of intuitive perception, who, bringing an equal mastery to the most abstruse investigations of letters and of science, first established the undulatory theory of light, and first penetrated the obscurity which had veiled for ages the hieroglyphs of Egypt. Endeared to his friends by his domestic virtues, honoured by the World for his unrivalled acquirements, he died in the hopes of the Resurrection of the just.\u00a0\u2014Born at Milverton, in Somersetshire, 13 June 1773. Died in Park Square, London, 10 May 1829, in the 56th year of his age.\nYoung was highly regarded by his friends and colleagues. He was said never to impose his knowledge, but if asked was able to answer even the most difficult scientific question with ease. Although very learned he had a reputation for sometimes having difficulty in communicating his knowledge. It was said by one of his contemporaries that, \"His words were not those in familiar use, and the arrangement of his ideas seldom the same as those he conversed with. He was therefore worse calculated than any man I ever knew for the communication of knowledge.\"\nReligious views.\nThough he sometimes dealt with religious topics of history in Egypt and wrote about the history of Christianity in Nubia, not much is known about Young's personal religious views. On George Peacock's account, Young never spoke to him about morals, metaphysics or religion, though according to Young's wife, his attitudes showed that \"his Quaker upbringing had strongly influenced his religious practices.\" Authoritative sources have described Young in terms of a cultural Christian Quaker.\nHudson Gurney informed that before his marriage, Young had to join the Church of England, and was baptized later. Gurney stated that Young \"retained a good deal of his old creed, and carried to his scriptural studies his habit of inquisition of languages and manners,\" rather than the habit of proselytism. Yet, the day before his death, Young participated in religious sacraments; as reported in David Brewster's \"Edinburgh Journal of Science\": \"After some information concerning his affairs, and some instructions concerning the hierographical papers in his hands, he said that, perfectly aware of his situation, he had taken the sacraments of the church on the day preceding. His religious sentiments were by himself stated to be liberal, though orthodox. He had extensively studied the Scriptures, of which the precepts were deeply impressed upon his mind from his earliest years; and he evidenced the faith which he professed; in an unbending course of usefulness and rectitude.\"\nResearch.\nWave theory of light.\nIn Young's own judgment, of his many achievements the most important was to establish the wave theory of light set out by Christiaan Huygens in his \"Treatise on Light\" (1690). To do so, he had to overcome the century-old view, expressed in the venerable Newton's \"Opticks\", that light is a particle. In the early 19th century Young put forth a number of theoretical reasons supporting the wave theory of light, and he developed two enduring demonstrations to support this viewpoint. With the ripple tank he demonstrated the idea of interference in the context of water waves. With additional experiments, including the predecessor of the double-slit experiment, he demonstrated interference in the context of light as a wave.\nYoung, speaking on 24 November 1803, to the Royal Society of London, began his now-classic description of the historic experiment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The experiments I am about to relate ... may be repeated with great ease, whenever the sun shines, and without any other apparatus than is at hand to every one.\nIn his subsequent paper, titled \"Experiments and Calculations Relative to Physical Optics\" (1804), Young describes an experiment in which he placed a card measuring approximately in a beam of light from a single opening in a window and observed the fringes of colour in the shadow and to the sides of the card. He observed that placing another card in front or behind the narrow strip so as to prevent the light beam from striking one of its edges caused the fringes to disappear. This supported the contention that light is composed of waves.\nYoung performed and analysed a number of experiments, including interference of light from reflection off nearby pairs of micrometre grooves, from reflection off thin films of soap and oil, and from Newton's rings. He also performed two important diffraction experiments using fibres and long narrow strips. In his \"Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy and the Mechanical Arts\" (1807) he gives Grimaldi credit for first observing the fringes in the shadow of an object placed in a beam of light. Within ten years, much of Young's work was reproduced and then extended by Augustin-Jean Fresnel.\nYoung's modulus.\nYoung described the characterization of elasticity that came to be known as Young's modulus, denoted as \"E\", in 1807, and further described it in his \"Course of Lectures on Natural Philosophy and the Mechanical Arts\".\nHowever, the first use of the concept of Young's modulus in experiments was by Giordano Riccati in 1782\u2014predating Young by 25 years.\nFurthermore, the idea can be traced to a paper by Leonhard Euler published in 1727, some 80 years before Thomas Young's 1807 paper.\nYoung's modulus relates the stress (compression or decompression) in a body to its associated strain (fractional change in length); that is, stress = \"E\" \u00d7 strain, for a uniaxially loaded specimen. Young's modulus is independent of the quantity under investigation; that is, it is an intensive property of the material. Young's Modulus allowed, for the first time, prediction of the strain in a component subject to a known stress (and vice versa). Prior to Young's contribution, engineers were required to apply Hooke's F = kx relationship to identify the deformation (x) of a body subject to a known load (F), where the constant (k) is a function of both the geometry and material under consideration. Finding k required physical testing for any new component, as the F = kx relationship is a function of both geometry and material. Young's Modulus depends only on the material, not its geometry, thus allowing a revolution in engineering strategies.\nYoung's problems in sometimes not expressing himself clearly were shown by his own definition of the modulus: \"The modulus of the elasticity of any substance is a column of the same substance, capable of producing a pressure on its base which is to the weight causing a certain degree of compression as the length of the substance is to the diminution of its length.\" When this explanation was put to the Lords of the Admiralty, their clerk wrote to Young saying \"Though science is much respected by their Lordships and your paper is much esteemed, it is too learned ... in short it is not understood.\"\nVision and colour theory.\nYoung has also been called the founder of physiological optics. In 1793 he explained the mode in which the eye accommodates itself to vision at different distances as depending on change of the curvature of the crystalline lens; in 1801 he was the first to describe astigmatism; and in his lectures he presented the hypothesis, afterwards developed by Hermann von Helmholtz, (the Young\u2013Helmholtz theory), that colour perception depends on the presence in the retina of three kinds of nerve fibres. This foreshadowed the modern understanding of colour vision, in particular the finding that the eye does indeed have three colour receptors which are sensitive to different wavelength ranges.\nYoung\u2013Laplace equation.\nIn 1804, Young developed the theory of capillary phenomena on the principle of surface tension. He also observed the constancy of the angle of contact of a liquid surface with a solid, and showed how to deduce from these two principles the phenomena of capillary action. In 1805, Pierre-Simon Laplace, the French philosopher, discovered the significance of meniscus radii with respect to capillary action.\nIn 1830, Carl Friedrich Gauss, the German mathematician, unified the work of these two scientists to derive the Young\u2013Laplace equation, the formula that describes the capillary pressure difference sustained across the interface between two static fluids.\nYoung was the first to define the term \"energy\" in the modern sense. He also did work on the theory of tides paralleling that of Laplace and anticipating more well-known work by Airy.\nYoung's equation and Young\u2013Dupr\u00e9 equation.\nYoung's equation describes the contact angle of a liquid drop on a plane solid surface as a function of the surface free energy, the interfacial free energy and the surface tension of the liquid. Young's equation was developed further some 60 years later by Dupr\u00e9 to account for thermodynamic effects, and this is known as the Young\u2013Dupr\u00e9 equation.\nMedicine.\nIn physiology Young made an important contribution to haemodynamics in the Croonian lecture for 1808 on the \"Functions of the Heart and Arteries,\" where he derived a formula for the wave speed of the pulse. His medical writings included \"An Introduction to Medical Literature\", including a \"System of Practical Nosology\" (1813) and \"A Practical and Historical Treatise on Consumptive Diseases\" (1815).\nYoung devised a rule of thumb for determining a child's drug dosage. Young's Rule states that the child dosage is equal to the adult dosage multiplied by the child's age in years, divided by the sum of 12 plus the child's age.\nLanguages.\nIn an appendix to his 1796 G\u00f6ttingen dissertation there are four pages added proposing a universal phonetic alphabet (so as \"not to leave these pages blank\"; \"\"). It includes 16 \"pure\" vowel symbols, nasal vowels, various consonants, and examples of these, drawn primarily from French and English.\nIn his \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" article \"Languages\", Young compared the grammar and vocabulary of 400 languages. In a separate work in 1813, he introduced the term Indo-European languages, 165 years after the Dutch linguist and scholar Marcus Zuerius van Boxhorn proposed the grouping to which this term refers in 1647.\nEgyptian hieroglyphs.\nYoung made significant contributions to the decipherment of ancient Egyptian writing systems. He started his Egyptology work rather late, in 1813, when the work was already in progress among other researchers. He began by using an Egyptian demotic alphabet of 29 letters built up by Johan David \u00c5kerblad in 1802 (14 turned out to be incorrect). \u00c5kerblad was correct in stressing the importance of the demotic text in trying to read the inscriptions, but he wrongly believed that demotic was entirely alphabetic.\nBy 1814 Young had completely translated the \"enchorial\" text of the Rosetta Stone (using a list with 86 demotic words), and then studied the hieroglyphic alphabet but initially failed to recognise that the demotic and hieroglyphic texts were paraphrases and not simple translations.\nThere was considerable rivalry between Young and Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Champollion while both were working on hieroglyphic decipherment. At first they briefly cooperated in their work, but later, from around 1815, a chill arose between them. For many years they kept details of their work away from each other. When Champollion finally published a translation of the hieroglyphs and the key to the grammatical system in 1822, Young (and many others) praised his work. Nevertheless, a year later Young published an \"Account of the Recent Discoveries in Hieroglyphic Literature and Egyptian Antiquities\", with the aim of having his own work recognised as the basis for Champollion's system.\nSome of Young's conclusions appeared in the famous article \"Egypt\" he wrote for the 1818 edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\".\nYoung had correctly found the sound value of six hieroglyphic signs, but had not deduced the grammar of the language. Young himself acknowledged that he was somewhat at a disadvantage because Champollion's knowledge of the relevant languages, such as Coptic, was much greater.\nSeveral scholars have suggested that Young's true contribution to Egyptology was his decipherment of the demotic script. He made the first major advances in this area; he also correctly identified demotic as being composed by both ideographic and phonetic signs.\nSubsequently, Young felt that Champollion was unwilling to share the credit for the decipherment. In the ensuing controversy, strongly motivated by the political tensions of that time, the British tended to champion Young, while the French mostly championed Champollion. Champollion did acknowledge some of Young's contribution, but rather sparingly. However, after 1826, when Champollion was a curator in the Louvre, he did offer Young access to demotic manuscripts.\nIn England, while Sir George Lewis still doubted Champollion's achievement as late as 1862, others were more accepting. For example, Reginald Poole, and Sir Peter Le Page Renouf both defended Champollion.\nMusic.\nYoung developed Young temperament, a method of tuning musical instruments.\nLegacy.\nLater scholars and scientists have praised Young's work although they may know him only through achievements he made in their fields. His contemporary Sir John Herschel called him a \"truly original genius\". Albert Einstein praised him in the 1931 foreword to an edition of Isaac Newton's \"Opticks\". Other admirers include physicist Lord Rayleigh and Nobel Physics laureate Philip Anderson.\nThomas Young's name has been adopted as the name of the London-based Thomas Young Centre, an alliance of academic research groups engaged in the theory and simulation of materials.\nYoung Sound in eastern Greenland was named in his honour by William Scoresby (1789\u20131857).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51626", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51626", "title": "Pelagius of Asturias", "text": "King of Asturias (c. 685\u2013737)\nPelagius (; c.\u2009685 \u2013 737) was a Visigothic nobleman who founded the Kingdom of Asturias in 718. Pelagius is credited with initiating the \"Reconquista\", the Christian reconquest of the Iberian Peninsula from the Moors, and establishing the Asturian monarchy.\nEarly life.\nPelagius was born around 685, although the exact details of his early life remain largely unknown. Traditionally, Pelagius was depicted as of Visigothic origin. Recent scholarship increasingly supports that Pelagius was a nobleman of Hispano-Roman descent, linked to the local Asturian elite., although by the time, legal distinctions between Roman and Germanic people had already been dropped starting with the Visigothic Code. Historical texts emphasize Pelayo's connection to the local Asturian society. He is believed to be the son of Favila. The \"Chronica Albeldense\", elaborated three centuries after his death, says that Favila was a \"dux\" of Gallaecia, who was killed by Wittiza. The \"Chronicle of Alfonso III\" identifies Pelagius as a grandson of Chindasuinth and says that his father was blinded in C\u00f3rdoba, at the instigation of Wittiza. Wittiza is also said to have exiled Pelagius from Toledo upon assuming the crown in 702. In the opinion of Roger Collins, this is a late tradition and the account of the \"Albeldense\", which locates Pelagius's origins in the north of the peninsula, is more credible. Both chronicles agree, however, that he was a Visigoth who was exiled from Toledo by Wittiza.\nAccording to the later tradition, Munuza, the Berber governor of \"Iegione\" (either Gij\u00f3n or Le\u00f3n), became attracted to Pelagius's sister and sent word to Tariq ibn Ziyad, who ordered him to capture Pelagius and send him to C\u00f3rdoba. If Munuza's seat is identified with Gij\u00f3n, it may be inferred that the Arabs had established their rule in the Asturias and that Pelagius was not the leader of a local resistance to Arab conquest. Pelagius may have come to terms with the Arab elite whereby he was permitted to govern locally in the manner of the previous Visigoths, as is known to have occurred between Arab rulers and Visigothic noblemen elsewhere, as in the case of Theudimer, although most historians consider this unlikely.\nReign.\nAt some point, Pelagius is said to have rebelled, but for what reasons is unknown; such rebellions by local authorities against their superiors formed a common theme in Visigothic Spain. A Muslim army was sent against him under the command of Alkama and the Christian bishop of Seville, Oppa. That Alkama was the general and that there was a bishop of Seville named Oppa among his ranks is generally accepted. A battle was fought near Covadonga (\"in monte Auseva\" or \"in monte Libana\") in which Alkama was killed and Oppa captured. Moorish chronicles of the event describe Pelagius and his small force as \"thirty wild donkeys\", as reported by al-Maqqari in the 17th century. The battle is usually dated to 718 or 719, between the governorships of al-Hurr and al-Samh, though some have dated it as late as 722 and the \"Chronica Albeldensia\" dates it in the 740s.\nAfter his election as \"princeps\" (prince, principal leader) of the Asturians by the local magnates in the Visigothic manner, Pelagius made his capital at Cangas de On\u00eds. The \"\" says about this election:\nAnd he [Pelagius], going to his mountainous lands, gathered all those who were going to council and ascended a big mountain named Asseuua. He spread his orders between all the Astures, who gathered in council and elected Pelagius as their \"princeps\".\nHis kingdom, firstly centred on the eastern Asturias, soon grew. He married his daughter Ermesinda to the future king Alfonso I, son of Pelagius's eastern neighbour, Duke Peter of Cantabria.\nPelagius reigned for eighteen or nineteen years until his death in 737, when he was succeeded by his son Fafila.\nPelagius was buried in the church of Santa Eulalia de Abamia, located in the surroundings of the village of Corao, near Cangas de On\u00eds. His remains were transferred by King Alfonso X of Castile to the Holy Cave of Covadonga, as were those of his wife Gaudiosa and his sister. He left, in addition to his son and successor Fafila, a daughter, Ermesinda, who was to become progenitress, along with King Alfonso I of Asturias (\"Alfonso the Catholic\"), of the later royalty of Asturias.\nHistoriography.\nThe chief sources for Pelagius's life and career are two Latin chronicles written in the late ninth century in the kingdom he founded. The first is the \"Chronica Albeldensia\", written at Albelda towards 881, and preserved in the \"Codex Vigilanus,\" with a continuation to 976. The latter is the \"Chronicle of Alfonso III\", which was revised in the early tenth century and preserved in two textual traditions that diverge in several key passages: the ', preserved in the \"C\u00f3dice de Roda\", and the ', supposedly written by Sebastian, Bishop of Salamanca (910\u2013913). The only likely earlier written sources from which these chroniclers could derive information are regnal lists.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51627", "revid": "195596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51627", "title": "Democratic-Republicans", "text": ""}
{"id": "51628", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51628", "title": "Sweet potato", "text": "Species of edible plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe sweet potato or sweetpotato (\"Ipomoea batatas\") is a dicotyledonous plant in the morning glory family, Convolvulaceae. Its sizeable, starchy, sweet-tasting tuberous roots are used as a root vegetable, which is a staple food in parts of the world. Cultivars of the sweet potato have been bred to bear tubers with flesh and skin of various colors. Moreover, the young shoots and leaves are occasionally eaten as greens. The sweet potato and the potato are only distantly related, both being in the order Solanales. Although darker sweet potatoes are often known as \"yams\" in parts of North America, they are even more distant from actual yams, which are monocots in the order Dioscoreales.\nThe sweet potato is native to the tropical regions of South America in what is present-day Ecuador. Of the approximately 50 genera and more than 1,000 species of Convolvulaceae, \"I. batatas\" is the only crop plant of major importance\u2014some others are used locally (e.g., \"I. aquatica\" \"kangkong\" as a green vegetable), but many are poisonous. The genus \"Ipomoea\" that contains the sweet potato also includes several garden flowers called morning glories, but that term is not usually extended to \"I. batatas\". Some cultivars of \"I. batatas\" are grown as ornamental plants under the name \"tuberous morning glory,\" and used in a horticultural context. Sweet potatoes can also be called yams in North America. When soft varieties were first grown commercially there, there was a need to differentiate between the two. Enslaved Africans had already been calling the 'soft' sweet potatoes 'yams' because they resembled the unrelated yams in Africa. Thus, 'soft' sweet potatoes were referred to as 'yams' to distinguish them from the 'firm' varieties.\nDescription.\nThe plant is a herbaceous perennial vine, bearing alternate triangle-shaped or palmately lobed leaves and medium-sized sympetalous flowers. The stems are usually crawling on the ground and form adventitious roots at the nodes. The leaves are screwed along the stems. The leaf stalk is long. The leaf blades are very variable, long, the shape is heart-, kidney- to egg-shaped, rounded or triangular and spear-shaped, the edge can be entire, toothed or often three to seven times lobed, cut or divided. Most of the leaf surfaces are bare, rarely hairy, and the tip is rounded to pointed. The leaves are mostly green in color, but the accumulation of anthocyanins, especially along the leaf veins, can make them purple. Depending on the variety, the total length of a stem can be between . Some cultivars also form shoots up to in length. However, these do not form underground storage organs.\nThe hermaphrodite, five-fold and short-stalked flowers are single or few in stalked, zymous inflorescences that arise from the leaf axils and stand upright. It produces flowers when the day is short. The small sepals are elongated and tapering to a point and spiky and (rarely only 7) long, usually finely haired or ciliate. The inner three are a little longer. The long, overgrown and funnel-shaped, folded crown, with a shorter hem, can be lavender to purple-lavender in color, the throat is usually darker in color, but white crowns can also appear. The enclosed stamens are of unequal length with glandular filaments. The two-chamber ovary is upper constant with a relatively short stylus. Seeds are only produced from cross-pollination.\nThe flowers open before sunrise and stay open for a few hours. They close again in the morning and begin to wither. The edible tuberous root is long and tapered, with a smooth skin whose color ranges between yellow, orange, red, brown, purple, and beige. Its flesh ranges from beige through white, red, pink, violet, yellow, orange, and purple. Sweet potato cultivars with white or pale yellow flesh are less sweet and moist than those with red, pink or orange flesh.\nTaxonomy.\nThe sweet potato originates in South America in what is present-day Ecuador. The domestication of sweet potato occurred in either Central or South America. In Central America, domesticated sweet potatoes were present at least 5,000 years ago, with the origin of \"I. batatas\" possibly between the Yucat\u00e1n Peninsula of Mexico and the mouth of the Orinoco River in Venezuela. The cultigen was most likely spread by local people to the Caribbean and South America by 2500 BCE.\n\"I. trifida\", a diploid, is the closest wild relative of the sweet potato, which originated with an initial cross between a tetraploid and another diploid parent, followed by a second complete genome duplication event. The oldest radiocarbon dating remains of the sweet potato known today were discovered in caves from the Chilca Canyon, in the south-central zone of Peru, and yield an age of 8080 \u00b1 170 BC.\nTransgenicity.\nThe genome of cultivated sweet potatoes contains sequences of DNA from \"Agrobacterium\" (\"sensu lato\"; specifically, one related to \"Rhizobium rhizogenes\"), with genes actively expressed by the plants. The T-DNA transgenes were not observed in closely related wild relatives of the sweet potato. Studies indicated that the sweet potato genome evolved over millennia, with eventual domestication of the crop taking advantage of natural genetic modifications. These observations make sweet potatoes the first known example of a naturally transgenic food crop.\nCultivation.\nDispersal history.\nBefore the arrival of Europeans to the Americas, sweet potato was grown in Polynesia, generally spread by vine cuttings rather than by seeds. Sweet potato has been radiocarbon-dated in the Cook Islands to 1210\u20131400 CE. A common hypothesis is that a vine cutting was brought to central Polynesia by Polynesians who had traveled to South America and back, and spread from there across Polynesia to Easter Island, Hawaii and New Zealand. Genetic similarities have been found between Polynesian peoples and indigenous Americans including the Zen\u00fa, a people inhabiting the Pacific coast of present-day Colombia, indicating that Polynesians could have visited South America and taken sweet potatoes prior to European contact. Dutch linguists and specialists in Amerindian languages Willem Adelaar and Pieter Muysken have suggested that the word for sweet potato is shared by Polynesian languages and languages of South America: Proto-Polynesian * (compare Rapa Nui , Hawaiian , M\u0101ori ) may be connected with Quechua and Aymara ~ . Adelaar and Muysken assert that the similarity in the word for sweet potato is proof of either incidental contact or sporadic contact between the Central Andes and Polynesia.\nSome researchers, citing divergence time estimates, suggest that sweet potatoes might have been present in Polynesia thousands of years before humans arrived there. However, the present scholarly consensus favours the pre-Columbian contact model.\nThe sweet potato arrived in Europe with the Columbian exchange. It is recorded, for example, in \"Elinor Fettiplace's Receipt Book\", compiled in England in 1604.\nSweet potatoes were first introduced to the Philippines during the Spanish colonial period (1521\u20131898) via the Manila galleons, along with other New World crops. It was introduced to the Fujian of China in about 1594 from Luzon, in response to a major crop failure. The growing of sweet potatoes was encouraged by the Governor Chin Hs\u00fceh-tseng (Jin Xuezeng).\nSweet potatoes were also introduced to the Ryukyu Kingdom, present-day Okinawa, Japan, in the early 1600s by the Portuguese. Sweet potatoes became a staple in Japan because they were important in preventing famine when rice harvests were poor. Aoki Kony\u014d helped popularize the cultivation of the sweet potato in Japan, and the Tokugawa bakufu sponsored, published, and disseminated a vernacular Japanese translation of his research monograph on sweet potatoes to encourage their growth more broadly. Sweet potatoes were planted in Sh\u014dgun Tokugawa Yoshimune's private garden. It was first introduced to Korea in 1764. Kang P'il-ri and Yi Kwang-ry\u014f embarked on a project to grow sweet potatoes in Seoul in 1766, using the knowledge of Japanese cultivators they learned in Tongnae starting in 1764. The project succeeded for a year but ultimately failed in winter 1767 after Kang's unexpected death.\nNames.\nAlthough the soft, orange sweet potato is often called a \"yam\" in parts of North America, the sweet potato is distinct from the botanical yam (\"Dioscorea\"), which has a cosmopolitan distribution, and belongs to the monocot family Dioscoreaceae. A different crop plant, the \"oca\" (\"Oxalis tuberosa\", a species of wood sorrel), is called a \"yam\" in many parts of the world.\nAlthough the sweet potato is not closely related botanically to the common potato, they have a shared etymology. The first Europeans to taste sweet potatoes were members of Christopher Columbus's expedition in 1492. Later explorers found many cultivars under an assortment of local names, but the name which stayed was the indigenous Ta\u00edno name of \"batata\". The Spanish combined this with the Quechua word for potato, , to create the word for the common potato.\nThough the sweet potato is also called () in Hebrew, this is not a direct loan of the Ta\u00edno word. Rather, the Spanish was loaned into Arabic as (), owing to the lack of a sound in Arabic, while the sweet potato was called (); literally ('sweet potato'). The Arabic was loaned into Hebrew as designating the sweet potato only, as Hebrew had its own word for the common potato, (, literally 'earth apple'; compare French \"pomme de terre\").\nSome organizations and researchers advocate for the styling of the name as one word\u2014\"sweetpotato\"\u2014instead of two, to emphasize the plant's genetic uniqueness from both common potatoes and yams and to avoid confusion of it being classified as a type of common potato. In its current usage in American English, the styling of the name as two words is still preferred.\nIn Argentina, Colombia, Venezuela, Puerto Rico, and the Dominican Republic, the sweet potato is called . In Brazil, the sweet potato is called . In Mexico, Bolivia, Peru, Chile, Central America, and the Philippines, the sweet potato is known as (alternatively spelled in the Philippines), derived from the Nahuatl word .\nIn Peru and Bolivia, the general word in Quechua for the sweet potato is , but there are variants used such as , (Ayacucho Quechua), and (Bolivian Quechua), strikingly similar to the Polynesian name and its regional Oceanic cognates (, , , etc.), which has led some scholars to suspect an instance of pre-Columbian trans-oceanic contact. This theory is also supported by genetic evidence.\nIn Australia, about 90% of production is devoted to the orange cultivar 'Beauregard',&lt;ref name=\"researchgate/281529159\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; which was originally developed by the Louisiana Agricultural Experiment Station in 1981.\nIn New Zealand, the M\u0101ori varieties bore elongated tubers with white skin and a whitish flesh, which points to pre-European cross-Pacific travel. Known as \"kumara\" (from the M\u0101ori language ), the most common cultivar now is the red 'Owairaka', but orange ('Beauregard'), gold, purple and other cultivars are also grown.\nHabitat.\nThe plant does not tolerate frost. It grows best at an average temperature of , with abundant sunshine and warm nights. Annual rainfalls of are considered most suitable, with a minimum of in the growing season. The crop is sensitive to drought at the tuber initiation stage 50\u201360 days after planting, and it is not tolerant to waterlogging, which may cause tuber rots and reduce the growth of storage roots if aeration is poor.\nDepending on the cultivar and conditions, tuberous roots mature in two to nine months. With care, early-maturing cultivars can be grown as an annual summer crop in warm temperate areas, such as the Eastern United States and China. Sweet potatoes rarely flower when the daylight is longer than 11 hours, as is normal outside of the tropics. They are mostly propagated by stem or root cuttings or by adventitious shoots called \"slips\" that grow out from the tuberous roots during storage. True seeds are used for breeding only.\nThey grow well in many farming conditions and have few natural enemies; pesticides are rarely needed. Sweet potatoes are grown on a variety of soils, but well-drained, light- and medium-textured soils with a pH range of 4.5\u20137.0 are more favorable for the plant. They can be grown in poor soils with little fertilizer. However, sweet potatoes are very sensitive to aluminium toxicity and will die about six weeks after planting if lime is not applied at planting in this type of soil. As they are sown by vine cuttings rather than seeds, sweet potatoes are relatively easy to plant. As the rapidly growing vines shade out weeds, little weeding is needed. A commonly used herbicide to rid the soil of any unwelcome plants that may interfere with growth is DCPA, also known as Dacthal. In the tropics, the crop can be maintained in the ground and harvested as needed for market or home consumption. In temperate regions, sweet potatoes are most often grown on larger farms and are harvested before first frosts.\nSweet potatoes are cultivated throughout tropical and warm temperate regions wherever there is sufficient water to support their growth. Sweet potatoes became common as a food crop in the islands of the Pacific Ocean, South India, Uganda and other African countries.\nA cultivar of the sweet potato called the \"boniato\" is grown in the Caribbean; its flesh is cream-colored, unlike the more common orange hue seen in other cultivars. \"Boniatos\" are not as sweet and moist as other sweet potatoes, but their consistency and delicate flavor are different from the common orange-colored sweet potato.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nSweet potatoes have been a part of the diet in the U.S. for most of its history, especially in the Southeast. The annual per capita consumption of sweet potatoes in the United States is only about , down from in 1920. \"Orange sweet potatoes (the most common type encountered in the US) received higher appearance liking scores compared with yellow or purple cultivars.\" Purple and yellow sweet potatoes were not as well liked by consumers compared to orange sweet potatoes \"possibly because of the familiarity of orange color that is associated with sweet potatoes.\"\nIn the Southeastern U.S., sweet potatoes are traditionally cured to improve storage, flavor, and nutrition, and to allow wounds on the periderm of the harvested root to heal. Proper curing requires drying the freshly dug roots on the ground for two to three hours, then storage at with 90 to 95% relative humidity from five to fourteen days. Cured sweet potatoes can keep for thirteen months when stored at with &gt;90% relative humidity. Colder temperatures injure the roots.\nProduction.\nIn 2020, global production of sweet potatoes was 89 million tonnes, led by China with 55% of the world total (table). Secondary producers were Malawi, Tanzania, and Nigeria. It is the fifth most important food crop in developing countries. Studies are being done to develop a salt tolerant variety to combat the effects of climate change.\nDiseases.\nSweet potato suffers from Sweet potato chlorotic stunt virus (a Crinivirus). In synergy with other any of a large number of other viruses, Untiveros et al., 2007 finds SPCSV produces an even more severe symptomology. \"I. batatas\" suffers from several \"Phytophthora\"s including \"P. carotovorum\", \"P. odoriferum\", and \"P. wasabiae\".\nUses.\nNutrition.\nCooked sweet potato (baked in skin) is 76% water, 21% carbohydrates, 2% protein, and contains negligible fat (table). In a 100-gram reference amount, baked sweet potato provides of food energy, and rich contents (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin A (120% DV), vitamin C (24% DV), manganese (24% DV), and vitamin B6 (20% DV). It is a moderate source (10\u201319% DV) of some B vitamins and potassium. Between 50% and 90% of the sugar content is sucrose. Maltose content is very low, but baking can increase the maltose content from between 10% and 20%.\nSweet potato cultivars with dark orange flesh have more beta-carotene (converted to a higher vitamin A content once digested) than those with light-colored flesh, and their increased cultivation is being encouraged in Africa where vitamin A deficiency is a serious health problem. Sweet potato leaves are edible and can be prepared like spinach or turnip greens.\nComparison to other food staples.\nThe table below presents the relative performance of sweet potato (in column)&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;[G] to other staple foods on a dry weight basis to account for their different water contents. While sweet potato provides less edible energy and protein per unit weight than cereals, it has higher nutrient density than cereals.\nAccording to a study by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, sweet potatoes are the most efficient staple food to grow in terms of farmland, yielding approximately daily.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;A raw yellow dent corn\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;B raw unenriched long-grain white rice\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;C raw hard red winter wheat\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;D raw potato with flesh and skin\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;E raw cassava\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;F raw green soybeans\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;G raw sweet potato\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;H raw sorghum\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;Y raw yam\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;Z raw plantains\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;/* unofficial\nCulinary.\nThe starchy tuberous roots of the sweet potato are by far the most important product of the plant. In some tropical areas, the tubers are a staple food crop. The tuber is often cooked before consumption as this increases its nutrition and digestibility, although the American colonists in the Southeast ate raw sweet potatoes as a staple food.\nThe vines' tips and young leaves are edible as a green vegetable with a characteristic flavor. Older growths may be used as animal fodder.\nAfrica.\n\"Amukeke\" (sun-dried slices of root) and \"inginyo\" (sun-dried crushed root) are a staple food for people in northeastern Uganda. \"Amukeke\" is mainly served for breakfast, eaten with peanut sauce. \"Inginyo\" is mixed with cassava flour and tamarind to make \"atapa\". People eat \"atapa\" with smoked fish cooked in peanut sauce or with dried cowpea leaves cooked in peanut sauce. \"Emukaru\" (earth-baked root) is eaten as a snack anytime and is mostly served with tea or with peanut sauce. Similar uses are also found in South Sudan.\nThe young leaves and vine tips of sweet potato leaves are widely consumed as a vegetable in West African countries (Guinea, Sierra Leone and Liberia, for example), as well as in northeastern Uganda, East Africa. According to FAO leaflet No. 13 \u2013 1990, sweet potato leaves and shoots are a good source of vitamins A, C, and B2 (riboflavin), and according to research done by A. Khachatryan, are an excellent source of lutein.\nIn Kenya, Rhoda Nungo of the home economics department of the Ministry of Agriculture has written a guide to using sweet potatoes in modern recipes. This includes uses both in the mashed form and as flour from the dried tubers to replace part of the wheat flour and sugar in baked products such as cakes, chapatis, mandazis, bread, buns and cookies. A nutritious juice drink is made from the orange-fleshed cultivars, and deep-fried snacks are also included.\nIn Egypt, sweet potato tubers are known as () and are a common street food in winter, when street vendors with carts fitted with ovens sell them to people passing time by the Nile or the sea. The cultivars used are an orange-fleshed one as well as a white/cream-fleshed one. They are also baked at home as a snack or dessert, drenched with honey.\nIn Ethiopia, the commonly found cultivars are black-skinned, cream-fleshed and called \"bitatis\" or \"mitatis\". They are cultivated in the eastern and southern lower highlands and harvested during the rainy season (June/July). In recent years, better yielding orange-fleshed cultivars were released for cultivation by Haramaya University as a less sugary sweet potato with higher vitamin A content. Sweet potatoes are widely eaten boiled as a favored snack.\nIn South Africa, sweet potatoes are often eaten as a side dish such as soetpatats.\nAsia.\nIn East Asia, roasted sweet potatoes are popular street food. In China, sweet potatoes, typically yellow cultivars, are baked in a large iron drum and sold as street food during winter. In Korea, sweet potatoes, known as , are roasted in a drum can, baked in foil or on an open fire, typically during winter. In Japan, a dish similar to the Korean preparation is called \"yaki-imo\" (roasted sweet potato), which typically uses either the yellow-fleshed \"Japanese sweet potato\" or the purple-fleshed \"Okinawan sweet potato\", which is known as .\nSweet potato soup, served during winter, consists of sweet potato boiled in water with rock sugar and ginger. In Fujian cuisine and Taiwanese cuisine, sweet potato is often cooked with rice to make congee. Steamed and dried sweet potato is a specialty of Liancheng County. Sweet potato greens are a common side dish in Taiwanese cuisine, often boiled or saut\u00e9ed and served with a garlic and soy sauce mixture, or simply salted before serving. They, as well as dishes featuring the sweet potato root, are commonly found at bento () restaurants. In northeastern Chinese cuisine, sweet potatoes are often cut into chunks and fried, before being drenched into a pan of boiling syrup.\nIn some regions of India, sweet potato is roasted slowly over kitchen coals at night and eaten with some dressing, while the easier way in the south is simply boiling or pressure cooking before peeling, cubing and seasoning for a vegetable dish as part of the meal. In the Indian state of Tamil Nadu, it is known as . It is boiled and consumed as an evening snack. In some parts of India, fresh sweet potato is chipped, dried and then ground into flour; this is then mixed with wheat flour and baked into \"chapatti\" (bread). Between 15 and 20 percent of the sweet potato harvest is converted by some Indian communities into pickles and snack chips. A part of the tuber harvest is used in India as cattle fodder.\nIn Pakistan, sweet potato is known as and is cooked as a vegetable dish and also with meat dishes (chicken, mutton or beef). The ash-roasted sweet potatoes are sold as a snack and street food in Pakistani bazaars especially during the winter months.\nIn Sri Lanka, it is called , and tubers are used mainly for breakfast (boiled sweet potato is commonly served with sambal or grated coconut) or as a supplementary curry dish for rice.\nThe tubers of this plant, known as in Dhivehi, have been used in the traditional diet of the Maldives. The leaves were finely chopped and used in dishes such as \"mas huni\".\nIn Japan, both sweet potatoes (called ) and true purple yams (called ) are grown. Boiling, roasting and steaming are the most common cooking methods. Also, the use in vegetable tempura is common. () is a baked and caramel-syruped sweet potato dessert. As it is sweet and starchy, it is used in \"imo-kinton\" and some other traditional sweets, such as \"ofukuimo\". What is commonly called \"sweet potato\" () in Japan is a cake made by baking mashed sweet potatoes.\n\"Sh\u014dch\u016b\", a Japanese spirit normally made from the fermentation of rice, can also be made from sweet potato, in which case it is called . \"Imo-gohan\", sweet potato cooked with rice, is popular in Guangdong, Taiwan and Japan. It is also served in \"nimono\" or \"nitsuke\", boiled and typically flavored with soy sauce, \"mirin\" and \"dashi\".\nIn Korean cuisine, sweet potato starch is used to produce (cellophane noodles). Sweet potatoes are also boiled, steamed, or roasted, and young stems are eaten as \"namul\". Pizza restaurants such as Pizza Hut and Domino's in Korea are using sweet potatoes as a popular topping. Sweet potatoes are also used in the distillation of a variety of Soju. A popular Korean side dish or snack, , also known as Korean candied sweet potato, is made by deep-frying sweet potatoes that were cut into big chunks and coating them with caramelized sugar.\nIn Malaysia and Singapore, sweet potato is often cut into small cubes and cooked with taro and coconut milk () to make a sweet dessert called \"bubur cha cha\". A favorite way of cooking sweet potato is deep-frying slices of sweet potato in batter, served as a tea-time snack. In homes, sweet potatoes are usually boiled. The leaves of sweet potatoes are usually stir-fried with only garlic or with and dried shrimp by Malaysians.\nIn the Philippines, sweet potatoes (locally known as or ) are an important food crop in rural areas. They are often a staple among impoverished families in provinces, as they are easier to cultivate and cost less than rice. The tubers are boiled or baked in coals and may be dipped in sugar or syrup. Young leaves and shoots (locally known as or ' tops) are eaten fresh in salads with shrimp paste () or fish sauce. They can be cooked in vinegar and soy sauce and served with fried fish (a dish known as ), or with recipes such as \"sinigang\". The stew obtained from boiling ' tops is purple-colored, and is often mixed with lemon as juice. Sweet potatoes are also sold as street food in suburban and rural areas. Fried sweet potatoes coated with caramelized sugar and served in skewers (\"camote cue\") or as French fries are popular afternoon snacks. Sweet potatoes are also used in a variant of \"halo-halo\" called , where they are cooked in coconut milk and sugar and mixed with a variety of rootcrops, sago, jackfruit, and (glutinous rice balls). Bread made from sweet potato flour is also gaining popularity. Sweet potato is relatively easy to propagate, and in rural areas can be seen abundantly at canals and dikes. The uncultivated plant is usually fed to pigs.\nIn Indonesia, sweet potatoes are locally known as (lit: \"spreading tuber\") or simply and are frequently fried with batter and served as snacks with spicy condiments, along with other kinds of fritters such as fried bananas, tempeh, tahu, breadfruit, or cassava. In the mountainous regions of West Papua, sweet potatoes are the staple food among the natives there. Using the method of cooking, rocks that have been burned in a nearby bonfire are thrown into a pit lined with leaves. Layers of sweet potatoes, an assortment of vegetables, and pork are piled on top of the rocks. The top of the pile is then insulated with more leaves, creating a pressure of heat and steam inside which cooks all food within the pile after several hours.\nIn Vietnamese cuisine sweet potatoes are known as and they are commonly cooked with a sweetener such as corn syrup, honey, sugar, or molasses.\nYoung sweet potato leaves are also used as baby food, particularly in Southeast Asia and East Asia. Mashed sweet potato tubers are used similarly throughout the world.\nUnited States.\nCandied sweet potatoes are a side dish consisting mainly of sweet potatoes prepared with brown sugar, marshmallows, maple syrup, molasses, orange juice, \"marron glac\u00e9\", or other sweet ingredients. It is often served in the US on Thanksgiving. Sweet potato casserole is a side dish of mashed sweet potatoes in a casserole dish, topped with a brown sugar and pecan topping.\nThe sweet potato became a favorite food item of the French and Spanish settlers, thus beginning a long history of cultivation in Louisiana. Sweet potatoes are recognized as the state vegetable of Alabama, Louisiana, and North Carolina. Sweet potato pie is also a traditional favorite dish in Southern U.S. cuisine. Another variation on the typical sweet potato pie is the Okinawan sweet potato haupia pie, which is made with purple sweet potatoes.\nThe fried sweet potatoes tradition dates to the early nineteenth century in the United States. Sweet potato fries or chips are a common preparation and are made by julienning and deep-frying sweet potatoes in the fashion of French fried potatoes. Roasting sliced or chopped sweet potatoes lightly coated in animal or vegetable oil at high heat became common in the United States at the start of the 21st century, a dish called \"sweet potato fries\". Sweet potato mash is served as a side dish, often at Thanksgiving dinner or with barbecue.\nJohn Bettencourt Avila is called the \"father of the sweet potato industry\" in North America.\nOceania.\nM\u0101ori grew several varieties of small, yellow-skinned, finger-sized k\u016bmara (with names including , , , , and ) that they had brought with them from east Polynesia. Modern trials have shown that these smaller varieties were capable of producing well, but when American whalers, sealers and trading vessels introduced larger cultivars in the early 19th century, they quickly predominated.\nPrior to 2021, archaeologists believed that the sweet potato failed to flourish in New Zealand south of Christchurch due to the colder climate, forcing M\u0101ori in those latitudes to become (along with the Moriori of the Chatham Islands) the only Polynesian people who subsisted solely on hunting and gathering. However, a 2021 analysis of material excavated from a site near Dunedin, some further south, revealed that sweet potatoes were grown and stored there during the 15th century, before the industry was disrupted by factors speculated to be due to the Little Ice Age.\nM\u0101ori traditionally cooked k\u016bmara in a h\u0101ng\u012b (earth oven). This is still a common practice when there are large gatherings on marae.\nIn 1947, black rot (\"Ceratocystis fimbriata\") appeared in k\u016bmara around Auckland and increased in severity through the 1950s. A disease-free strain was developed by Joe and Fay Gock. They gave the strain to the nation, earning them the Bledisloe Cup in 2013.\nThere are three main cultivars of k\u016bmara sold in New Zealand: 'Owairaka Red' (\"red\"), 'Toka Toka Gold' (\"gold\"), and 'Beauregard' (\"orange\"). The country grows around 24,000 metric tons of k\u016bmara annually, with nearly all of it (97%) grown in the Northland Region. K\u016bmara are widely available throughout New Zealand year-round, where they are a popular alternative to potatoes.\nK\u016bmara are often included in roast meals, and served with sour cream and sweet chili sauce. They are served alongside such vegetables as potatoes and pumpkin and as such, are generally prepared in a savory manner. They are ubiquitous in supermarkets, roast meal takeaway shops and h\u0101ng\u012b.\nAmong the Urapmin people of Papua New Guinea, taro (known in Urap as ) and the sweet potato (Urap: ) are the main sources of sustenance, and in fact the word for 'food' in Urap is a compound of these two words.\nEurope.\nIn the Veneto (northeast Italy), sweet potato is known as in the Venetian language ( in Italian, meaning \"American potato\"), and it is cultivated above all in the southern area of the region;.\nIn Spain, sweet potato is called . On the evening of All Souls' Day, in Catalonia (northeastern Spain) it is traditional to serve roasted sweet potato and chestnuts, panellets and sweet wine. The occasion is called . As of 2023 Spain is the largest sweet potato producer in Europe.\nSouth America.\nIn Peru, sweet potatoes are called and are frequently served alongside ceviche. Sweet potato chips are also a commonly sold snack, be it on the street or in packaged foods.\nDulce de batata is a traditional Argentine, Paraguayan and Uruguayan dessert, which is made of sweet potatoes. It is a sweet jelly, which resembles a marmalade because of its color and sweetness but it has a harder texture, and has to be sliced into thin portions with a knife as if it were a pie.\nGlobally.\nGlobally, sweet potatoes are now a staple ingredient of modern sushi cuisine, specifically used in maki rolls. The advent of sweet potato as a sushi ingredient is credited to chef Bun Lai of Miya's Sushi, who first introduced sweet potato rolls in the 1990s as a plant-based alternative to traditional fish-based sushi rolls.\nMolecular gastronomy.\nFreezing a sweet potato until solid, baking at a low temperature, then increasing to a high temperature brings out the sweetness by caramelizing converted sugars.\nCeramics.\nCeramics modeled after sweet potatoes or are often found in the Moche culture.\nDyes.\nIn South America, the juice of red sweet potatoes is combined with lime juice to make a dye for cloth. By varying the proportions of the juices, every shade from pink to black can be obtained. Purple sweet potato color is also used as a natural food coloring.\nAquariums.\nCuttings of sweet potato vine, either edible or ornamental cultivars, will rapidly form roots in water and will grow in it, indefinitely, in good lighting with a steady supply of nutrients. For this reason, sweet potato vine is ideal for use in home aquariums, trailing out of the water with its roots submerged, as its rapid growth is fueled by toxic ammonia and nitrates, a waste product of aquatic life, which it removes from the water. This improves the living conditions for fish, which also find refuge in the extensive root systems.\nOrnamentals.\nOrnamental sweet potatoes are popular landscape, container, and bedding plants. Grown as an annual in zones up to USDA hardiness Zone 9, they grow rapidly and spread quickly. Cultivars are available in many colors, such as green, yellow, and purple. Some ornamental varieties, like 'Blackie', flower more than others. These ornamental cultivars are not poisonous, and although the leaves are edible, the tubers do not have a good taste.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51630", "revid": "1893804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51630", "title": "Pulse-amplitude modulation", "text": "Form of signal modulation where information is encoded in the amplitude of a series of pulses\nPulse-amplitude modulation (PAM) is a form of signal modulation in which the message information is encoded in the amplitude of a pulse train interrupting the carrier frequency. Demodulation is performed by detecting the amplitude level of the carrier at every single period.\nTypes.\nPolarities.\nThere are two types of pulse amplitude modulation:\nPulse-amplitude modulation is widely used in modulating signal transmission of digital data, with non-baseband applications having been largely replaced by pulse-code modulation, and, more recently, by pulse-position modulation.\nAmplitudes.\nThe number of possible pulse amplitudes in analog PAM is theoretically infinite. Digital PAM reduces the number of pulse amplitudes to some natural number not less than 3 (PAM-2 would be a simple binary signal and is usually not considered to be PAM). Common choices for the number of amplitudes are: 3, 4, 5, 8, 16.\nUses.\nEthernet.\nSome versions of the Ethernet communication standard are an example of PAM usage. \nUSB.\nUSB4 Version 2.0 uses PAM-3 signaling for USB4 80\u00a0Gbps (USB4 Gen 4\u00d72) and USB4 120\u00a0Gbps (USB4 Gen 4 Asymmetric) transmitting 3 bits per 2 clock cycles. Thunderbolt 5 uses the same PHY.\nVideo memory.\nGDDR6X, developed by Micron and Nvidia and first used in the Nvidia RTX 3080 and 3090 graphics cards, uses PAM-4 signaling to transmit 2 bits per clock cycle without having to resort to higher frequencies or two channels or lanes with associated transmitters and receivers, which may increase power or space consumption and cost. Higher frequencies require higher bandwidth, which is a significant problem beyond 28\u00a0GHz when trying to transmit through copper. PAM-4 costs more to implement than earlier NRZ (non return to zero, PAM-2) coding partly because it requires more space in integrated circuits, and is more susceptible to SNR (signal to noise ratio) problems.\nGDDR7 utilizes PAM-3 signaling to achieve speeds of 36\u00a0Gbps/pin. The higher data transmission rate per cycle compared to NRZ/PAM-2-signaling used by GDDR6 and prior generations improves power efficiency and signal integrity. Compared to PAM-4 (GDDR6X), it is less strict on manufacturing equipment.\nPCI Express.\nPCI Express 6.0 has introduced PAM-4 usage.\nDigital television.\nThe North American Advanced Television Systems Committee standards for digital television uses a form of PAM to broadcast the data that makes up the television signal. This system, known as 8VSB, is based on an eight-level PAM. It uses additional processing to suppress one sideband and thus make more efficient use of limited bandwidth. Using a single 6\u00a0MHz channel allocation, as defined in the previous NTSC analog standard, 8VSB is capable of transmitting 32\u00a0Mbit/s. After accounting for error-correcting codes and other overhead, the data rate in the signal is 19.39\u00a0Mbit/s.\nPhotobiology.\nThe concept is also used for the study of photosynthesis using a specialized instrument that involves a spectrofluorometric measurement of the kinetics of fluorescence rise and decay in the light-harvesting antenna of thylakoid membranes, thus querying various aspects of the state of the photosystems under different environmental conditions. Unlike the traditional dark-adapted chlorophyll fluorescence measurements, pulse amplitude fluorescence devices allow measuring under ambient light conditions, which made measurements significantly more versatile.\nElectronic drivers for LED lighting.\nPulse-amplitude modulation has also been developed for the control of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), especially for lighting applications. LED drivers based on the PAM technique offer improved energy efficiency over systems based upon other common driver modulation techniques such as pulse-width modulation (PWM) as the forward current passing through an LED is relative to the intensity of the light output and the LED efficiency increases as the forward current is reduced.\nPulse-amplitude modulation LED drivers are able to synchronize pulses across multiple LED channels to enable perfect color matching. Due to the inherent nature of PAM in conjunction with the rapid switching speed of LEDs, it is possible to use LED lighting as a means of wireless data transmission at high speed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51631", "revid": "1827553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51631", "title": "Flora (disambiguation)", "text": "Flora is plant life collectively.\nFlora may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51632", "revid": "49992694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51632", "title": "Puffball", "text": "Fungus\nPuffballs are a type of fungus featuring a ball-shaped fruiting body that, when mature, bursts on contact or impact, releasing a cloud of dust-like spores into the surrounding area. Puffballs belong to the division Basidiomycota and encompass several genera, including \"Calvatia\", \"Calbovista\" and \"Lycoperdon\". The puffballs were previously treated as a taxonomic group called the Gasteromycetes or Gasteromycetidae, but they are now known to be a polyphyletic assemblage.\nThe distinguishing feature of all puffballs is that they do not have an open cap with spore-bearing gills. Instead, spores are produced internally, in a spheroidal fruit body called a \"gasterothecium\" (gasteroid 'stomach-like' basidiocarp). As the spores mature, they form a mass called a gleba in the centre of the fruitbody that is often of a distinctive color and texture. The basidiocarp remains closed until after the spores have been released from the basidia. Eventually, it develops an aperture, or dries, becomes brittle, and splits, and the spores escape. The spores of puffballs are \"statismospores\" rather than ballistospores, meaning they are not forcibly extruded from the basidium. Puffballs and similar forms are thought to have evolved convergently (that is, in numerous independent events) from Hymenomycetes by \"gasteromycetation\", through secotioid stages. Thus, 'Gasteromycetes' and 'Gasteromycetidae' are now considered to be descriptive, morphological terms (more properly \"gasteroid\" or \"gasteromycetes\", to avoid taxonomic implications) but not valid cladistic terms.\nTrue puffballs do not have a visible stalk or stem, while stalked puffballs do have a stalk that supports the gleba. None of the stalked puffballs are edible as they are tough and woody mushrooms. The Hymenogastrales and \"Enteridium lycoperdon\", a slime mold, are the \"false puffballs\". A gleba which is powdery on maturity is a feature of true puffballs, stalked puffballs and earthstars. False puffballs are hard like rock or brittle. All false puffballs are inedible, as they are tough and bitter to taste. The genus \"Scleroderma\", which has a young purple gleba, should also be avoided.\nPuffballs were traditionally used in Tibet for making ink by burning them, grinding the ash, then putting them in water and adding glue liquid and \"a decoction\", which, when pressed for a long time, made a black dark substance that was used as ink. Rural Americans burned the common puffball with some kind of bee smoker to anesthetize honey bees as a means to safely procure honey; the practice later inspired experimental medicinal application of the puffball smoke as a surgical general anesthetic in 1853.\nEdibility and identification.\nWhile most puffballs are not poisonous, some often look similar to young agarics, and especially the deadly Amanitas, such as the death cap or destroying angel mushrooms. Young puffballs in the edible stage, before maturation of the gleba, have undifferentiated white flesh within, whereas the gills of immature Amanita mushrooms can be seen if they are closely examined. They can be very toxic.\nThe giant puffball, \"Calvatia gigantea\" (earlier classified as \"Lycoperdon giganteum\"), reaches or more in diameter, and is difficult to mistake for any other fungus. It has been estimated that, when mature, a large specimen of this fungus will produce around 7 \u00d7 1012 spores, which is more than any other known organism.\nNot all true puffball mushrooms are without stalks.[] Some may also be stalked, such as the \"Podaxis pistillaris\", which is also called the \"false shaggy mane\". There are also a number of false puffballs that look similar to the true ones.\nStalked.\nStalked puffballs species:\nTrue.\nTrue puffballs genera and species:\nFalse.\nFalse puffballs species:\nTraditional uses.\nPuffballs have a long history of use in traditional medicine across the world. The dry, powdery spores were widely used as a styptic to stop bleeding and as a dressing for wounds, burns, and sores. This practice was common among Indigenous peoples of North America, who applied the spore powder directly to wounds, cuts, and nosebleeds, and also used it on the umbilical cords of newborns to aid clotting and prevent infection. This ethnomycological use was not confined to the Americas, with similar hemostatic applications being independently developed in Asia and Europe. Modern scientific analysis has lent support to these traditional practices, finding that puffball spores contain compounds with antimicrobial and antibacterial properties effective against some pathogens, and that they can promote fibrin formation.\nClassification.\nMajor orders:\nSimilarly, the true truffles (Tuberales) are gasteroid Ascomycota. Their ascocarps are called tuberothecia.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51634", "revid": "274535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51634", "title": "Mens rea", "text": "In criminal law, the \"guilty mind\"\nIn criminal law, (; Law Latin for \"guilty mind\") is the mental state of a defendant who is accused of committing a crime. In common law jurisdictions, most crimes require proof both of \"mens rea\" and \"actus reus\" (\"guilty act\") before the defendant can be found guilty.\nIntroduction.\nThe standard common law test of criminal liability is expressed in the Latin phrase , i.e. \"the act is not culpable unless the mind is guilty\". As a general rule, someone who acted without mental fault is not liable in criminal law. Exceptions are known as strict liability crimes. Moreover, when a person intends a harm, but as a result of bad aim or other cause the intent is transferred from an intended victim to an unintended victim, the case is considered to be a matter of transferred intent.\nThe types of mental states that apply to crimes vary depending on whether a jurisdiction follows criminal law under the common law tradition or, within the United States, according to the Model Penal Code.\nIn civil law, it is usually not necessary to prove a subjective mental element to establish liability for breach of contract or tort, for example. But if a tort is intentionally committed or a contract is intentionally breached, such intent may increase the scope of liability and the damages payable to the plaintiff.\nIn some jurisdictions, the terms and have been replaced by alternative terminology.\nLevels of \"mens rea\" within the United States.\nUnder the tradition of common law, judges would often require a \"bad state of mind\" in addition to an action or omission (\"actus reus\") to find a criminal guilty. Over time, culpable mental states (\"mens rea\") became varied among different types of crimes. Such crimes and mental states might include, for example, \"malice\" for murder, \"fraudulence\" for fraud, \"willfulness and corruption\" for perjury, and so on. The crime of manslaughter, further, might not even require a \"bad mind\" but simply a \"negligent\" one. Regardless of how the requirements are categorized, the Supreme Court has explained \"mens rea\" requirements for crimes are \"universal\" and essential to \"mature systems of law\", even going so far as to say that this belief undergirds notions of free will and morality.\nWithin the United States, there is no single encompassing criminal law. Criminal laws are passed and enforced by the states\u201a or the federal government, but each of these criminal \"codes\" vary and may or may not draw from the same theoretical sources.\nState criminal law.\nThe vast majority of criminal prosecutions in the United States are carried out by the several states in accordance with the laws of the state in question. Historically, the states (with the partial exception of civil-law Louisiana) applied common law rules of \"mens rea\" similar to those extant in England, but over time American understandings of common law \"mens rea\" terms diverged from those of English law and from each other. Concepts like \"general intent\" and \"specific intent\" dominated classifications of mental states in state common law, but by the late 1950s to early 1960s, the common law of \"mens rea\" was widely acknowledged to be a slippery, vague, and confused mess. This was one of several factors that led to the development of the Model Penal Code. Nevertheless, states continue to use mental states beyond or besides those listed in the Model Penal Code.\nSupreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer described the distinction between the two systems in his dissent in \"Delling v. Idaho\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Case One: The defendant, due to insanity, believes that the victim is a wolf. He shoots and kills the victim.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Case Two: The defendant, due to insanity, believes that a wolf, a supernatural figure, has ordered him to kill the victim.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In Case One, the defendant does not know he has killed a human being, and his insanity negates a mental element necessary to commit the crime. In Case Two, the defendant has intentionally killed a victim whom he knows is a human being; he possesses the necessary mens rea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In both cases the defendant is unable, due to insanity, to appreciate the true quality of his act, and therefore unable to perceive that it is wrong. But \u2026 the defendant in Case One could defend the charge by arguing that he lacked the mens rea, whereas the defendant in Case Two would not be able to raise a defense based on his mental illness.\nFederal criminal law.\nSince the federal government of the United States does not have a generalized police power like that of the states, the scope of its criminal statutes is necessarily circumscribed. Ordinary prosecutions are the province of the states, and only crimes connected to the constitutional powers may be pursued by the federal government. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court holds that required \"mens rea\" is an essential element of federal criminal offenses. Consequently, Title 18 of the United States Code does not use the aforementioned culpability scheme but relies instead on more traditional definitions of crimes taken from common law. For example, \"malice aforethought\" is used as a requirement for committing capital murder, and the Supreme Court has applied mental states such as \"willfully.\"\nModel Penal Code.\nBecause the landscape of criminal law varied from state to state, the American Law Institute (which issues \"restatements\" of American legal jurisprudence) declined to issue a restatement of criminal law in favor of a \"model\" code for states to issue new, standardized criminal law. This Model Penal Code (\"MPC\") was completed in 1962, and received praise from legal scholars for its reformulation of criminal law. Although not all states follow the criminal law as constructed within the MPC, over 34 states had adopted part or substantially all of the MPC as law by 1983. The federal government has not adopted the MPC, although it has attempted to do so for many decades.\nThe formulation of \"mens rea\" set forth in the Model Penal Code has been highly influential throughout the United States in clarifying the discussion of the different modes of culpability since its publication. The following levels of \"mens rea\" are found in the MPC \u00a72.02(2), and are considered by the United States Supreme Court to be the four states of mind that give rise to criminal liability:\nThe above mental states also work in a hierarchy, with \"negligence\" as the lowest mental state and \"purposefully\" as the highest: a finding of purposefully/intentional establishes a state of knowingness, recklessness, and negligence; a finding of knowingness establishes a finding of recklessness and negligence, and a finding of recklessness establishes a state of negligence.(5)\nThe MPC also recognizes culpability not because of a mental state, but for crimes that are legislatively proscribed due to the imposition of \"absolute liability.\" Strict liability crimes will require evidence of such legislative intent, and courts seriously examine such evidence before assuming a crime permits strict liability rather than a mens rea.\nDifferences between common law crimes and MPC crimes.\nThe elements constituting a crime vary between codes that draw on common law principles and those that draw from the Model Penal Code. For example, the \"mens rea\" required of murder in federal law under the United States Code is distinct from the \"mens rea\" of murder under the Texas Penal Code (which adopted the Model Penal Code in 1974):\nIn the common law approach as under 18 U.S.C. \u00a71111, the definition of murder includes an \"actus reus\" (the unlawful killing of a human being) and a common law \"mens rea\": malice aforethought. Modern criminal law approaches the analysis somewhat differently. Using a framework from the American Law Institute's Model Penal Code, homicide is a \"results\" offense in that it forbids any \"purposeful\" or \"knowing\" conduct that causes, and therefore \"results\" in, the death of another human being. \"Purposeful\" in this sense means the actor possessed a conscious purpose or objective that the result (i.e. the death of another human being) be achieved. \"Knowing\" means that the actor was aware or practically certain that a death would result, but had no purpose or desire for it to occur. By contrast with traditional common law, the Model Penal Code specifically distinguishes purpose and knowledge to avoid confusion regarding \"intent\" elements. Many states still adhere to older terminology, relying on the terms \"intentional\" to cover both types of \"mens rea\": \"purposeful\" and \"knowing\".\nLimits and criticisms of MPC \"mens rea\".\nNot all states have adopted the MPC, and for states that have, application of the Model Code varies. Despite its attempt to standardize criminal law, this variance has resulted in confusion and criticism. Some scholars have criticized the levels of culpability in the current Model Penal Code as insufficient or needing revision. Scholars' allegations include incoherency from conflicted philosophical commitments, or the federal governments' failure to explicitly adopt the Model Penal Code resulting in departure from common law precedents. Since the publication of the MPC, confusion has also occurred where norms towards crimes have also changed: especially regarding sexual crimes, hate crimes, drug crimes, and digital crimes. But while some scholarship argues that commitment to reforms gave way to \"cynicism and fatigue,\" others argue the original commitment of the MPC to \"imprisonment as a last result\" should be preserved in potential revisions to the Code and criminal law.\nRather than dwell on philosophical or normative arguments, some scholars have looked to evidence-based arguments to update the Code. In an empirical study, participants were presented with scenarios and asked to rate how deserving of punishment the scenario was. The results showed that participants' judgments matched up with the hierarchy of \"mens rea\" in the MPC, but also found that participants struggled most with \"recklessness\" scenarios. As a result, the study suggests revising the language of the categories.\nModes of culpability outside the United States.\nThe levels of \"mens rea\" and the distinction between them vary among jurisdictions. Although common law originated from England, the common law of each jurisdiction with regard to culpability varies as precedents and statutes vary.\nCanada.\nThe Supreme Court of Canada has found that the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees a minimum requirement for the mental state of various crimes. For example, the crime of murder must include a mental requirement of at least subjective foresight of death. For crimes where imprisonment is a sanction, there is a requirement of at least a defence of due diligence.\nAustralia.\nMens rea is an element of the offence that the prosecution needs to assert beyond a reasonable doubt for the accused to be found fully liable of the offence, assuming the offence is one that requires an element of mens rea (see, He Kaw Teh v R - case from the Australian High Court regarding importance of establishment of the element of mens rea). Some offences exist whereby an act can be proven but there is lack of the necessary guilt of mind, such can be seen in instances where courts are unable to establish criminal intent due to persistent mental health or cognitive impairment (see, Mental Health and Cognitive Impairment (Forensic Provisions) Act (NSW) s 30). Mens rea can be established both through common law (see R v Morgan) or through statute law. Often in cases where the full guilty mind can not be established, statute law in Australia will provide an alternative sentencing option, such relationship can be seen in the Crimes Act 1900, s33 and 35, where s33(3) states s 35 as an alternate sentence for a finding of Grievous Bodily Harm in the event whereby the Jury is not satified that the accused held the necessary element of specific intent required for criminal liability under s 33. In such instances, s 35 being a charge of recklessness instead of intent, is prescribed.\nIndia.\nMens Rea in the Indian Penal Code 1860 sets out the definition of offences, the general conditions of liability, the conditions of exemptions from liability and punishments for the respective offences. Legislatures had not used the common law doctrine of mens rea in defining these crimes. However, they preferred to import it by using different terms indicating the required evil intent or mens rea as an essence of a particular offence.\nGuilt in respect to almost all offences created under the IPC is fastened either on the ground of intention, knowledge or reason to believe. Almost all the offences under the IPC are qualified by one or other words such as 'wrongful gain or loss', 'dishonesty', 'fraudulently', 'reason to believe', 'criminal knowledge or intention', 'intentional cooperation', 'voluntarily', 'malignantly', 'wantonly', 'maliciously'. All these words indicate the blameworthy mental condition required at the time of commission of the offence, nowhere found in the IPC, its essence is reflected in almost all the provisions of the Indian Penal Code 1860. Every offence created under the IPC virtually imports the idea of criminal intent or mens rea in some form or other.\nIslamic law.\nIn Islamic law, intention (\"niyya\") is a criterion for determining whether a criminal act is punishable or pardonable, or whether the penalty for such a crime is predetermined (\"\u1e25add\") or discretionary (\"ta\u02bfz\u012br\"). The offender cannot be found guilty until their intention in committing the crime has been taken into consideration.\nIgnorance of law contrasted with \"mens rea\".\nThe general rule under common law and statutory law is that ignorance of the law or a mistake of law is no defense to criminal prosecution. However, in some cases, courts have held that if knowledge of a law, or if intent to break a law, is a material element of an offense, then a defendant may use good faith ignorance as a defense.\nIn the 1991 US Supreme Court opinion for \"Cheek v. United States\", Byron White wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The proliferation of statutes and regulations has sometimes made it difficult for the average citizen to know and comprehend the extent of the duties and obligations imposed by the tax laws. [...] Thus, the Court almost 60 years ago interpreted the statutory term \"willfully\" as used in the federal criminal tax statutes as carving out an exception to the traditional rule. This special treatment of criminal tax offenses is largely due to the complexity of the tax laws.\nCrimes like tax evasion are specific intent crimes and require intent to violate the law as an element of the offense. In \"R v. Klundert\", for example, the Court of Appeal for Ontario found as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[55] Section 239(1)(d) is part of an Act which is necessarily and notoriously complex. It is subject to ongoing revision. No lay person is expected to know all the complexities of the tax laws. It is accepted that people will act on the advice of professionals and that the advice will often turn on the meanings to be given to provisions in the Act that are open to various interpretations. Furthermore, it is accepted that one may legitimately structure one's affairs so as to minimize tax liability. Considered in this legislative context, I have no difficulty in holding that a mistake or ignorance as to one's liability to pay tax under the Act may negate the fault requirement in the provision, regardless of whether it is a factual mistake, a legal mistake, or a combination of both.\nA good-faith belief that a law is unjust or unconstitutional is no excuse, but \"reasonable reliance upon an official statement of law, afterward determined to be invalid or erroneous\" does not constitute a criminal act.\nIn the United States, a law must be reasonably clear; it must be worded so that a reasonable layman can comprehend the specific prohibited acts. Otherwise, the law may be unconstitutional pursuant to the vagueness doctrine.\nSubjective and objective tests.\nA hybrid test for the existence of \"mens rea\" is as follows:\nThe court will have little difficulty in establishing \"mens rea\" if there is actual evidence\u00a0\u2013 for instance, if the accused made an admissible admission. This would satisfy a \"subjective\" test. But a significant proportion of those accused of crimes makes no such admission. Hence, some degree of objectivity must be brought to bear as the basis upon which to impute the necessary components. It is always reasonable to assume that people of ordinary intelligence are aware of their physical surroundings and of the ordinary laws of cause and effect (see causation). Thus, when a person plans what to do and what not to do, they will understand the range of likely outcomes from given behaviour on a sliding scale from \"inevitable\" to \"probable\" to \"possible\" to \"improbable\". The more an outcome shades towards the \"inevitable\" end of the scale, the more likely it is that the accused both foresaw and desired it, and, therefore, the safer it is to impute intention. If there is clear subjective evidence that the accused did \"not\" have foresight, but a reasonable person would have, the hybrid test may find criminal negligence. In terms of the burden of proof, the requirement is that a jury must have a high degree of certainty before convicting, defined as \"beyond a reasonable doubt\" in the United States and \"sure\" in the United Kingdom. It is this reasoning that justifies the defenses of infancy, and of lack of mental capacity under the M'Naghten Rules, an alternate common law rule (e.g., \"Durham\" rule), and one of various statutes defining mental illness as an excuse. Moreover, if there is an irrebuttable presumption of \"doli incapax\" \u2013 that is, that the accused did not have sufficient understanding of the nature and quality of his actions\u00a0\u2013 then the requisite \"mens rea\" is absent no matter what degree of probability might otherwise have been present. For these purposes, therefore, where the relevant statutes are silent and it is for the common law to form the basis of potential liability, the reasonable person must be endowed with the same intellectual and physical qualities as the accused, and the test must be whether an accused with these specific attributes would have had the requisite foresight and desire.\nIn English law, s. 8 Criminal Justice Act 1967 provides a statutory framework within which \"mens rea\" is assessed. It states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnder s. 8(b), therefore, the jury is allowed a wide latitude in applying a hybrid test to impute intention or foresight (for the purposes of recklessness) on the basis of all the evidence.\nRelevance of motive.\nOne of the mental components often raised in issue is that of motive. If the accused admits to having a motive consistent with the elements of foresight and desire, this will add to the level of probability that the actual outcome was intended (it makes the prosecution case more credible). But if there is clear evidence that the accused had a different motive, this may decrease the probability that he or she desired the actual outcome. In such a situation, the motive may become subjective evidence that the accused did not intend, but was reckless or willfully blind.\nMotive cannot normally be a defense. If, for example, a person breaks into a laboratory used for the testing of pharmaceuticals on animals, the question of guilt is determined by the presence of an \"actus reus\", i.e. entry without consent and damage to property, and a \"mens rea\", i.e. intention to enter and cause the damage. That the person might have had a clearly articulated political motive to protest such testing does not affect liability. If motive has any relevance, this may be addressed in the sentencing part of the trial, when the court considers what punishment, if any, is appropriate.\nRarely, a motive may amount to a defence if it is specifically allowed in law, or is protected as a right (for example, if a conviction for crimes committed during a protest would unduly interfere with free speech rights; see \"DPP v Ziegler\").\nRecklessness (United States: \"willful blindness\").\nIn such cases, there is clear subjective evidence that the accused foresaw but did not desire the particular outcome. When the accused failed to stop the given behavior, he took the risk of causing the given loss or damage. There is always some degree of intention subsumed within recklessness. During the course of the conduct, the accused foresees that he may be putting another at risk of injury: A choice must be made at that point in time. By deciding to proceed, the accused actually intends the other to be exposed to the risk of that injury. The greater the probability of that risk maturing into the foreseen injury, the greater the degree of recklessness and, subsequently, sentence rendered. In common law, for example, an unlawful homicide committed recklessly would ordinarily constitute the crime of involuntary manslaughter. One committed with \"extreme\" or \"gross\" recklessness as to human life would constitute murder, sometimes defined as \"depraved heart\" or \"abandoned and malignant heart\" or \"depraved indifference\" murder.\nCriminal negligence.\nHere, the test is both subjective and objective. There is credible subjective evidence that the particular accused neither foresaw nor desired the particular outcome, thus potentially excluding both intention and recklessness. But a reasonable person with the same abilities and skills as the accused would have foreseen and taken precautions to prevent the loss and damage being sustained. Only a small percentage of offences are defined with this \"mens rea\" requirement. Most legislatures prefer to base liability on either intention or recklessness and, faced with the need to establish recklessness as the default \"mens rea\" for guilt, those practising in most legal systems rely heavily on objective tests to establish the minimum requirement of foresight for recklessness.\nConsciousness of guilt.\nConsciousness of guilt is a type of circumstantial evidence of criminal intent that judges, prosecutors, and juries may consider when weighing the relative guilt or innocence of a defendant. It is admissible evidence, and judges are required to instruct juries on this form of evidence. Deceptive statements, failure to cooperate with authorities, or evasive actions made by a defendant after the commission of a crime or other wrongdoing are seen as evidence of a guilty conscience. These are not the typical behaviors of an innocent person, and a \"defendant's actions are compared unfavorably to what a normal, innocent person would have done, with the implication that the discrepancy indicates guilt\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51635", "revid": "20585603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51635", "title": "Deponent", "text": "Deponent may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51636", "revid": "28078505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51636", "title": "Depose", "text": ""}
{"id": "51640", "revid": "50076165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51640", "title": "Geastrales", "text": "Order of fungi\nThe Geastrales are an order of gasterocarpic basidiomycetes (fungi) that are related to the Gomphales. The order contains the families Geastraceae\u2014which include the \"earthstars\" formerly placed in Lycoperdales or Phallales,\u2014and also Schenellaceae, Sclerogastraceae and Sphaerobolaceae.\nAbout 160 species are classified in this order, divided among seven or eight genera, including \"Geastrum\", \"Myriostoma\" and \"Sphaerobolus\". \"Sphaerobolus\" species are known as \"shotgun fungus\" or \"cannonball fungus\". They colonize wood-based mulches and may throw black, sticky, spore-containing globs onto nearby surfaces.\nIn \"Geastrum\", once mature, the exoperidium splits into a variable number of rays, which give them their visible star shape. The exoperidial rays are there to protect the endoperidial body and orchestrate spore dispersal. The fruiting bodies of several earthstars are hygrometric: in dry weather the rays will dry and curl up around the soft spore sac, protecting it. In this state, often the whole fungus becomes detached from the ground and may roll around like a tumbleweed. In wetter weather, the rays moisten and uncurl; some even curl backward lifting the spore sac up. This allows rain or animals to hit the spore sac, emitting spores when enough moisture is present for them to germinate and establish.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51641", "revid": "14703151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51641", "title": "Pet Shop Boys", "text": "English synth-pop duo\nPet Shop Boys are an English synth-pop duo formed in London in 1981. Consisting of keyboardist Chris Lowe and vocalist Neil Tennant, they have sold more than 100 million records worldwide and were listed as the most successful duo in UK music history in the 1999 edition of \"The Guinness Book of Records\".\nPet Shop Boys have achieved 42 top 30 singles, including 22 top-10 hits on the UK singles chart, including four UK number-ones: \"West End Girls\" (also number one on the US \"Billboard\" Hot 100), \"It's a Sin\", a synth-pop version of \"Always on My Mind\", and \"Heart\". Other hit songs include a cover of \"Go West\", and their own \"Opportunities (Let's Make Lots of Money)\", and \"What Have I Done to Deserve This?\" in a duet with Dusty Springfield. With five US top 10 singles in the 1980s, they are associated with the Second British Invasion.\nPet Shop Boys have won three Brit Awards and have been nominated for Grammy Awards. At the 2009 Brit Awards in London, they received an award for Outstanding Contribution to Music. In 2016, \"Billboard\" named Pet Shop Boys the number one dance duo or group since the chart's inception in 1976. In 2017, the duo received \"NME\"'s Godlike Genius Award, and in 2024, they were awarded the Pop Pioneers award at the MTV Europe Music Awards.\nHistory.\nEarly years (1981\u20131984).\nNeil Tennant and Chris Lowe met in a hi-fi shop, Chelsea Record Centre, at 203 King's Road, in Chelsea, London, on 19 August 1981. Tennant needed a connector for a Korg MS-10 synthesiser he had purchased, which sparked a conversation with Lowe. Discovering that they had a mutual interest in disco and electronic music, they became friends. In particular, the pair drew inspiration from two synth-pop records: \"Souvenir\" by Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark (OMD); and \"Bedsitter\" by Soft Cell, which reflected their lifestyles at the time. According to Tennant, he and Lowe would listen to \"pioneers of electronic music\", including OMD, Soft Cell, Kraftwerk, the Human League, and Depeche Mode.\nThe duo began to work together on material, first in Tennant's flat in Chelsea, then, from 1982, in a small studio in Camden Town owned by Ray Roberts. \"Jealousy\", written in 1982, was among the first songs they recorded there. They briefly labelled their demo tapes under the band name West End before settling on Pet Shop Boys. They say that their band name was taken from friends who worked in a pet shop in Ealing and were known as the \"pet shop boys\". They also noted a naming similarity with the recently formed rap rock group Beastie Boys. In August 1983, Tennant, who was an assistant editor at \"Smash Hits\", went to New York to interview Sting. While there, he arranged to meet hi-NRG producer Bobby Orlando and gave him a demo tape containing \"It's a Sin\" and \"Opportunities (Let's Make Lots of Money)\".\nFrom 1983 to 1984, Orlando recorded a number of tracks with Tennant and Lowe, including \"Two Divided by Zero\", \"West End Girls\", \"Opportunities (Let's Make Lots of Money)\", \"A Man Could Get Arrested\", \"That's My Impression\", \"Pet Shop Boys\", \"One More Chance\", \"Rent\", \"It's a Sin\", \"I Get Excited\", and \"To Speak Is a Sin\". In April 1984, the Orlando-produced \"West End Girls\" was released, becoming a club hit in Los Angeles and San Francisco. On 2\u00a0November, it was voted \"Screamer of the Week\" by listeners of Long Island, New York, radio station WLIR. It was a minor dance hit in Belgium and France, but was only available in the United Kingdom as a 12\" import.\n\"Please\" (1985\u20131986).\nIn March 1985, after long negotiations, Pet Shop Boys cut their contractual ties with Orlando, with a settlement giving him significant royalties for future sales. Hiring manager Tom Watkins, they signed with the London-based Parlophone label. In April, Tennant left \"Smash Hits\" magazine\u2014where he had progressed to the position of deputy editor\u2014and in July, a new single, \"Opportunities (Let's Make Lots of Money)\", was released, reaching number 116 in the UK. The B-side to this single, \"In the Night\", later resurfaced, in a longer remixed version, as the opening track to the duo's first remix album, \"Disco\", in 1986. This version was also used as the theme for the UK television series \"The Clothes Show\".\nThey returned to the studio in August to re-record \"West End Girls\" with producer Stephen Hague. Released in October 1985 it rose slowly in the British charts to become number one in January 1986. It subsequently replicated this success in the United States, Canada, Finland, Hong Kong, Ireland, Israel, New Zealand and Norway and sold an estimated 1.5\u00a0million copies worldwide.\nAfter the success of \"West End Girls\", Pet Shop Boys released a follow-up single, \"Love Comes Quickly\", on 24 February 1986. The single reached number nineteen on the UK Singles Chart and was followed by their debut album, \"Please\", on 24 March. In June 1986, the band announced a tour of Europe and America; however, their plans for a theatrical extravaganza proved to be too expensive and the tour was cancelled. \"Please\" started Pet Shop Boys' tradition of choosing one-word album titles, which Neil Tennant has since stated is now a Pet Shop Boys \"signature thing\", akin to e.\u00a0e. cummings' use of exclusively lower case letters. New versions of their second single, \"Opportunities (Let's Make Lots of Money)\", and the album track \"Suburbia\" were also released in 1986, followed by \"Disco\". In September 1986, Pet Shop Boys performed \"Love Comes Quickly\" and \"West End Girls\" at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards in Los Angeles.\n\"Actually\" (1987\u20131988).\nIn 1987, Pet Shop Boys received both a BRIT Award and Ivor Novello Award for \"West End Girls\". On 15 June, they released what became their second number one single, \"It's a Sin\". The single caused some controversy: Tennant's school, St. Cuthbert's Grammar School in Newcastle upon Tyne, chastised him in the \"Evening Chronicle\", while pop impresario Jonathan King accused them of plagiarising the Cat Stevens song \"Wild World\". King recorded a version of \"Wild World\" in the style of Pet Shop Boys to prove his point. The group later sued King and won damages, which were donated to Jefferiss Research Trust, supporting the study of sexually transmitted diseases. The music video for \"It's a Sin\" was their first collaboration with director Derek Jarman.\nThe success of \"It's a Sin\" was followed up with the release of \"What Have I Done to Deserve This?\" on 10 August. Co-written with Allee Willis and also featuring Dusty Springfield on vocals, the single reached number two on the UK Singles Chart and the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart. Although the duo had wanted to release this track on their debut album, Springfield had not agreed, and they were reluctant to record it with any other female singer, despite their record company's suggestions. Springfield's manager finally contacted them in 1986, following the release of \"Please\", and towards the end of that year, she travelled to London to record \"What Have I Done to Deserve This?\" with them. It was the first track to be recorded for the duo's second album, \"Actually\". Pet Shop Boys had been told that Springfield was difficult to work with and even that she could no longer sing; however, her performance on the track put any such concerns to rest and they began a collaboration with her, which lasted until the end of the decade. The song resurrected Springfield's career, leading to her 1990 album, \"Reputation\", on which Pet Shop Boys were major contributing writers and producers. This duet was also the start of a series of collaborations with high-profile musicians, going on throughout the band's career.\n\"Actually\" was released in September 1987, followed by the single \"Rent\" in October, which reached number eight in the UK. The last track on the album, \"King's Cross\", accidentally anticipated the King's Cross fire at the London Underground section of the station in November of that year (part of the lyrics read: \"Dead and wounded on either side/You know it's only a matter of time\"). \"The Sun\" newspaper in the UK subsequently tried to get the track released as a charity single, but Pet Shop Boys did not agree.\nAt the end of the year, \"Always on My Mind\" became both the duo's third number one single in the UK and the Christmas number one single for 1987, beating \"Fairytale of New York\" by The Pogues and Kirsty MacColl. Pet Shop Boys had selected the song for an appearance on \"Love Me Tender\", an ITV programme commemorating the tenth anniversary of Elvis Presley's death, and decided to release it. The song was not included on \"Actually\", prompting EMI to repackage the album in the U.S. with a 12\" version of the single; an extended version, \"Always on My Mind/In My House\", was later included on \"Introspective\" (1988). In November 2004, \"The Daily Telegraph\" newspaper placed Pet Shop Boys' version of \"Always on My Mind\" at number two in a list of the fifty greatest cover versions of all time.\nTo capitalise on their string of hits, and in lieu of a tour, Pet Shop Boys made a film that incorporated songs from \"Please\" and \"Actually\". Working with director Jack Bond, the project grew into a full-scale movie, \"It Couldn't Happen Here\", starring Barbara Windsor, Joss Ackland and Gareth Hunt. Footage from the film was used in the music video for \"Always on My Mind\". The film was released in 1988 to mixed reviews.\n\"Heart\", released in March 1988 as the last single from \"Actually\", was Pet Shop Boys' fourth UK number one hit and their last to date. The video for the single, directed by Jack Bond, starred Ian McKellen as a vampire.\nPet Shop Boys wrote and produced the song \"I'm Not Scared\" for Patsy Kensit's band, Eighth Wonder. The song, released in February 1988, became her biggest hit single. Pet Shop Boys recorded their own version of the track for their album \"Introspective\" later that year.\n\"Introspective\" and \"Behaviour\" (1988\u20131992).\nNeil Tennant has said that the Pet Shop Boys' \"Imperial Phase\" ended in September 1988, when their new single, \"Domino Dancing\", entered the UK Singles Chart at number nine and only reached number seven. Tennant recalls being disappointed upon hearing the news, and he felt that their peak period was over and that it was going to be a challenge to maintain their level of success in the future.\nTheir third album, \"Introspective\", was released on 10 October 1988. Unusually, this was a six-track album of previously unheard remixes and new tracks in extended form. It was followed by the Trevor Horn\u2013produced top-five single \"Left to My Own Devices\", and a cover version of the Sterling Void song \"It's Alright\". Pet Shop Boys embarked on their first tour in 1989, performing in Hong Kong, Japan, and Britain. The tour followed the ideas of the extravaganza that could not have been afforded earlier in their careers. Derek Jarman returned to direct the performance and he provided several films that were projected during the shows.\nThe September 1990 single, \"So Hard\" reached number four in the UK and was followed by their fourth studio album, \"Behaviour\", which was recorded in Munich with producer Harold Faltermeyer. The album was not intended to reflect a dramatic change in mood from their earlier albums; however, it is noticeably subdued. It included the fan favourite \"Being Boring\", the second single from the album, which only reached number 20 on the UK Singles Chart, their lowest placing at the time. The title is from a quote by Zelda Fitzgerald: \"...she refused to be bored chiefly because she wasn't boring\", and the song was a personal commentary on the AIDS epidemic. The music video was directed by filmmaker Bruce Weber. By this time, the duo had parted ways with manager Tom Watkins, replacing him with Jill Carrington, who had previously been marketing director at Polydor.\nIn March 1991, a cover of U2's \"Where the Streets Have No Name\" as a medley with \"Can't Take My Eyes Off You\", the 1960s pop song by Frankie Valli/the Four Seasons, was released as a double-A-sided single with a remix of the album track \"How Can You Expect to Be Taken Seriously?\" by Brothers in Rhythm. This was followed by the duo's first world tour. Named \"Performance\", the tour kicked off in Tokyo, on 11 March 1991, and visited the United States, Canada, France, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, Czechoslovakia, Austria, Hungary, Yugoslavia, Switzerland, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Ireland and the United Kingdom. The shows were designed by David Alden and David Fielding, who had designed several sets for the Royal Opera House.\nBefore taking a break in 1992, Pet Shop Boys released an 18-track compilation called \"\" (1991), which included all of their single releases up until then and two new singles\u2014\"DJ Culture\" and \"Was It Worth It?\"\u2014omitting only \"How Can You Expect to Be Taken Seriously?\" (although it did appear on the video companion \"Videography\"). While \"DJ Culture\" had some success, \"Was It Worth It?\" became the duo's first single to miss the UK top 20 since their two Bobby O debut singles.\nDuring this period, Pet Shop Boys continued to collaborate with many high-profile musicians. They worked again with Dusty Springfield, on the singles \"Nothing Has Been Proved\", recorded for the film \"Scandal\" about the Profumo political scandal, and \"In Private\". The duo later went on to produce half of the tracks on her 1990 solo \"Reputation\" album. Pet Shop Boys were also asked to write and produce an album for Liza Minnelli, in 1989. The album, \"Results\", generated four singles, including the hit \"Losing My Mind\", a cover version of the Stephen Sondheim song from the 1971 Broadway musical \"Follies\". The duo's own demo of this appeared on their \"Jealousy\" single as a B-side.\nTennant worked with Bernard Sumner and Johnny Marr on their first album as Electronic, whose first single, \"Getting Away with It\", co-written and co-produced by Tennant, was released on 4 December 1989. In 1991, Lowe also contributed to the Electronic project, contributing the chord sequence to \"The Patience of a Saint\" on their 1991 album. In 1992, Tennant sang lead vocals on the non-album single \"Disappointed\", which was featured on the soundtrack to the film \"Cool World\". Pet Shop Boys set up the Spaghetti Records label in 1991. Their most successful release was the soundtrack to the 1992 film \"The Crying Game\", which featured Boy George performing a cover of Dave Berry's 1964 song \"The Crying Game\". The song was produced by Pet Shop Boys and featured Tennant on backing vocals. Other artists on the label included Scottish singer Cicero, the Ignorants, and Masterboy.\nIn 1992, they were the subjects of a \"South Bank Show\" documentary on ITV with contributions from Liza Minnelli, Eric Watson (photographer and video director), Simon Frith (music critic), David Alden and David Fielding.\n\"Very\" and \"Disco 2\" (1993\u20131995).\nIn June 1993, Pet Shop Boys re-invented their image and made a strong return to the UK Singles Chart with \"Can You Forgive Her?\". Taking its title from the Anthony Trollope novel of the same name, the single reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart, while its iconic music video featured the duo in orange body suits and tall dunce caps, in a world of computer-generated imagery. The theme was continued with the follow-up single, a cover of the Village People song \"Go West\", which reached number two in the UK, with another computer-generated music video, this time inspired by the Soviet Union, with shots of the duo filmed in Moscow. The tune was adopted as a football chant at Arsenal Football Club, which Chris Lowe supports, and it became a widespread and iconic stadium anthem.\nThe duo's fifth studio album, \"Very\", followed on 27 September and is the only Pet Shop Boys album to reach number one on the UK Albums Chart. It was produced by Pet Shop Boys and mixed with additional production by Stephen Hague, who had worked with them on their first album and had subsequently made records with OMD, New Order and Erasure. The other singles from \"Very\", \"I Wouldn't Normally Do This Kind of Thing\", \"Liberation\" and \"Yesterday, When I Was Mad\", continued the theme of CGI videos, peaking with the \"Liberation\" video, which contained almost no real-life elements at all. All these videos were directed by Howard Greenhalgh, who continued to work with Pet Shop Boys well into the next decade. \"Very\" was also released in a limited edition including an entirely new album, \"Relentless\", which was composed of six all-new progressive house tracks.\nIn 1994, Pet Shop Boys offered to remix fellow Parlophone act Blur's single \"Girls &amp; Boys\". It was a club hit throughout Europe and started a sporadic trend for Pet Shop Boys to remix other artists' music. Also in 1994, Pet Shop Boys released the Comic Relief single, \"Absolutely Fabulous\". The idea started when Tennant and Lowe were playing around with samples from the BBC sitcom \"Absolutely Fabulous\" in the studio. They approached lead actors Jennifer Saunders and Joanna Lumley and suggested it as a charity single. It was released under the artist name 'Absolutely Fabulous'; Tennant and Lowe do not consider it as a Pet Shop Boys single release and it was not included on their next best-of album. The video featured clips from the sitcom, along with newly recorded footage of Tennant and Lowe with the characters of Edina (Saunders) and Patsy (Lumley).\nOn 12 September 1994, Pet Shop Boys released the follow-up to their 1986 remix album \"Disco\", in the form of \"Disco 2\". The album featured club remixes of the singles released from \"Very\" and \"Behaviour\", in a continuous megamix by Danny Rampling. Then, in October, Pet Shop Boys began their \"Discovery\" tour, visiting areas that they had never performed in before: Singapore, Australia, Puerto Rico, Mexico, Colombia, Chile, Argentina and Brazil. The following year, a new version of \"Paninaro\", the 1986 B-side to \"Suburbia\", was released to promote the B-sides collection \"Alternative\". The single, called \"Paninaro '95\", is based on the live version from the \"Discovery\" tour.\n\"Bilingual\" and \"Nightlife\" (1996\u20132001).\nThe Pet Shop Boys remix of the David Bowie song \"Hallo Spaceboy\" featured Tennant on backing vocals and was released in the UK on 19 February 1996. Pet Shop Boys then joined Bowie during his performance of the song at the 1996 Brit Awards ceremony, as well as an appearance on the \"Top of the Pops\" television programme. Tina Turner released her \"Wildest Dreams\" album in April, featuring the song \"Confidential\", written and co-produced by Pet Shop Boys.\nThe Pet Shop Boys single \"Before\" reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart in April. In August, they released a follow-up single, \"Se a vida \u00e9 (That's the Way Life Is)\", a Latin American music-inspired track, featuring a drum sample from a track called \"Estrada da paix\u00e3o\" by Brazilian act Olodum. This preceded the sixth Pet Shop Boys album \"Bilingual\", which was released in September.\nPet Shop Boys were the first band to have a residency at a West End theatre, playing for two weeks at the Savoy Theatre in June 1997. Lowe selected the song \"Somewhere\" from \"West Side Story\" to be the centrepiece of the performance and a new single. The production featured an interactive film by Sam Taylor-Wood showing a party scene, which Tennant and Lowe appeared to leave and enter from the stage. The show lost money, and the duo offset their losses in part by playing music festivals including the Roskilde Festival in 1997 and Creamfields in 1999.\nThe majority of 1998 was spent with a series of live dates and minor releases, including a charity album of No\u00ebl Coward songs, called \"\". The album included Pet Shop Boys' version of \"Sail Away\", along with songs performed by Elton John, Texas, Marianne Faithfull, The Divine Comedy, Suede, Damon Albarn, Vic Reeves and Robbie Williams. Tennant also co-produced the Williams track and provided backing vocals for Elton John. Tennant provided backing vocals on Robbie Williams' \"No Regrets\" single, along with Neil Hannon from The Divine Comedy. Meanwhile, the band switched managers again as Carrington resigned and was succeeded by Mitch Clark, who had previously worked for EMI International as Head of Promotion.\nDuring this time, Pet Shop Boys began to work with playwright Jonathan Harvey on a stage musical project. In 1999, some of the tracks they recorded ended up on their seventh studio album, \"Nightlife\", including \"Closer to Heaven\", which would later become the title song of their musical. \"Nightlife\" produced the top 10 hit \"You Only Tell Me You Love Me When You're Drunk\" and the top 20 singles \"I Don't Know What You Want But I Can't Give It Any More\" and \"New York City Boy\". The album also featured a duet with Kylie Minogue, \"In Denial\", about a father coming out to his daughter. Minogue later performed the track live, during her 2005 \"\" tour, singing to a pre-recorded Neil Tennant. This was not the first time that Pet Shop Boys worked with Minogue: In 1994, they wrote a song for her eponymous \"Kylie Minogue\" album, called \"Falling\", which was based on an unreleased remix of \"Go West\" with new lyrics by Tennant; however, Minogue and her record company did not like the style of Pet Shop Boys' demo and asked Farley &amp; Heller to produce the track.\nPet Shop Boys incurred financial losses on the Nightlife Tour in 1999\u20132000 after promoter Harvey Goldsmith's company went into receivership. During a concert in a partially empty arena in Sheffield, they briefly considered disbanding; the duo later recalled this period as a low point in their career.\nOn 24 June 2000, Pet Shop Boys made their debut at the Glastonbury Festival on the Pyramid Stage as the sun was setting, before Travis headlined. Cerys Matthews of Catatonia took the part of Dusty Springfield for the duet on \"What Have I Done to Deserve This?\" Their performance before an enthusiastic crowd was considered a triumph. The following week at Roskilde, Pet Shop Boys and Oasis refused to perform when the organisers decided to continue with the festival despite the deaths of nine people in a crowd crush during Pearl Jam's set.\nThe musical \"Closer to Heaven\" premiered in London in May 2001 to mixed reviews. The run was originally extended to February 2002, but it closed in October 2001 along with a number of other productions after the 11 September 2001 attacks.\n\"Release\" (2002\u20132005).\nWhile \"Closer to Heaven\" was still in development, Pet Shop Boys had started work on their eighth studio album in September 2000. After toying with genres including hip hop, they went for a stripped back, guitar-driven sound as a departure from dance music, at Lowe's suggestion. In 2002, they released the modestly successful album \"Release\". Most of the tracks were produced by the duo themselves and many featured Johnny Marr on guitar. The first single, \"Home and Dry\", featured a very peculiar music video, directed by Wolfgang Tillmans, mostly consisting of raw camcorder footage of mice filmed in the London Underground. The follow-up single \"I Get Along\" had a video filmed by Bruce Weber.\nPet Shop Boys embarked on another world tour, although this time it was a stripped back affair, with no dancers, backing singers, costumes or lavish sets. They used two extra guitarists, Bic Hayes and Mark Refoy, percussionist Dawne Adams, and regular programmer Pete Gleadall, alongside Lowe on keyboards and Tennant on guitar and vocals. They started with a tour of universities around the UK, performing at Bristol University, Keele University, University of East Anglia in Norwich, University of Teesside, Middlesbrough and De Montfort University, Leicester. Subsequent dates took them to Germany, the U.S., Canada, Spain, Italy, France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, then another series of dates in the UK, and on to Switzerland, Japan, Singapore, Hong Kong, and then a first-ever date in Thailand as the final show, at the large Bangkok Impact Arena.\nA third single, \"London\", was released in Germany at the request of EMI Germany. It was never planned for release in the UK, although a promotional video was shot by the distinguished photographer Martin Parr and it was serviced to some UK radio stations. Following a live stint on the John Peel show on Radio 1, Pet Shop Boys released \"Disco 3\", in February 2003. The album followed their previous \"Disco\" albums, but this one also included new songs as well as remixes.\nIn 2003, Pet Shop Boys launched two new labels, Olde English Vinyl and Lucky Kunst, their Spaghetti Records label becoming defunct. The first release on Olde English Vinyl was Atomizer's \"Hooked on Radiation\", followed by Pete Burns' \"Jack and Jill Party\" in 2004. The only Lucky Kunst release to date is the Kiki Kokova's version of \"Love to Love You Baby\". They also remixed Yoko Ono's \"Walking on Thin Ice\" in 2003 and Rammstein's \"Mein Teil\" in 2004. Another new manager, David Dorrell, was brought on board to replace Clark. In November 2003, Pet Shop Boys released a second greatest hits album, \"\", a double compilation with two new singles: \"Miracles\" and \"Flamboyant\". Not chronologically arranged, the tracks were divided into two discs: \"Pop\" including the more traditional pop songs and \"Art\" containing those works which were considered more experimental.\nIn September 2004, Pet Shop Boys appeared at a free concert in Trafalgar Square in London, where they performed, with the Dresdner Sinfoniker orchestra, a whole new soundtrack to accompany the seminal 1925 silent film \"Battleship Potemkin\". There were four further live performances of the work with the Dresdner Sinfoniker in Germany in September 2005. The \"Battleship Potemkin\" soundtrack was then released on 5 September 2005. In November 2004, Pet Shop Boys played at the Prince's Trust concert titled \"Produced by Trevor Horn\" with other artists who had worked with Trevor Horn, including Grace Jones, ABC, Seal and Frankie Goes to Hollywood. In 2005, Pet Shop Boys were selected as the headline act for the Moscow Live 8 concert, in Red Square, where a crowd of between 60,000 and 80,000 gathered to watch them perform. Also in 2005, Pet Shop Boys were asked to put together \"\", the twentieth release in an ongoing series showcasing artists' favourite music selections, with an emphasis on afterhours chill-out music. As a condition, Neil Tennant and Chris Lowe were given one disc each, whereas all previous releases in the series consisted of only a single disc per group.\n\"Fundamental\" (2006\u20132008).\nPet Shop Boys began 2006 remixing Madonna's single \"Sorry\", for release in February. The single reached number one in the UK and the Pet Shop Boys remix included new backing vocals performed by Tennant. Madonna subsequently used the Pet Shop Boys remix, including Tennant's vocals, on her 2006 Confessions Tour.\nIn April, Pet Shop Boys released a new single that reached number eight in the UK, \"I'm with Stupid\", a commentary on the relationship between George W. Bush and Tony Blair. The promo video featured Matt Lucas and David Walliams, better known as the team behind \"Little Britain\". Lucas and Walliams portray Lowe and Tennant, parodying two of the duo's previous videos, \"Go West\", and \"Can You Forgive Her?\". The ninth Pet Shop Boys studio album, \"Fundamental\", followed in May, reaching number five in the UK. The album was produced by Trevor Horn, who Pet Shop Boys had previously worked with on \"Left to My Own Devices\", in 1988. The album was also released with a limited edition remix album called \"Fundamentalism\", which included a version of \"In Private\" as a duet with Elton John and \"Fugitive\", a new track produced by Richard X.\nThe week that \"Fundamental\" was released, a documentary, titled \"\", was broadcast on Channel 4, directed by George Scott and produced by Nick de Grunwald. The original broadcast was less than an hour in duration; a 140-minute version was released on DVD in October 2006. Contributors to the programme included Robbie Williams, Brandon Flowers, Tim Rice-Oxley, Jake Shears and Bruce Weber. The DVD also contained promo videos that had been made since the release of \"PopArt\".\nThe second single to be taken from the album was the UK top twenty \"Minimal\". The duo filmed the video to the single in Paris with Don Cameron. The single was the first of theirs to be playlisted by London's biggest radio station, Capital Radio, in a decade. Pet Shop Boys began a worldwide tour in support of \"Fundamental\" in June 2006 in Norway. The show was designed and directed by Es Devlin, a British theatre designer, and choreographed by Hakeem Onibudo. Between 15 June and 10 September 2006, Pet Shop Boys played a series of concert dates across Europe, mainly at assorted festivals and outdoor venues. These included two dates at the Tower of London on 28 and 29 June and a single show at Thetford Forest, as well as performances of \"Battleship Potemkin\" in Germany and Spain. On 1 May 2006, \"Battleship Potemkin\" was also performed at the Swan Hunter shipyard, in Newcastle upon Tyne, with Pet Shop Boys accompanied by the Northern Sinfonia orchestra.\nOn 3 October 2006, the long-delayed U.S. release of their \"PopArt\" hits package was issued by Capitol Records. During 2006, Pet Shop Boys worked with Robbie Williams on his album \"Rudebox\", producing two tracks: a cover version of \"We're the Pet Shop Boys\", written by My Robot Friend (which Pet Shop Boys had also recorded themselves and released as a B-side to \"Miracles\" in 2003), and \"She's Madonna\", a duet with Tennant. On 10 October 2006, Pet Shop Boys embarked on the North and Central American leg of their world tour, which took them through Canada, the United States and Mexico, concluding on 16 November. A DVD of the show in Mexico City was released on 21 May 2007, titled \"Cubism\". It was recorded on 14 November 2006, in the Auditorio Nacional, and was directed by David Barnard.\nOn 16 October, \"Catalogue\" was published by Thames &amp; Hudson, a 336-page hardcover book written by Philip Hoare and Chris Heath, detailing their entire visual output, including photography as well as the design of albums, music videos, concert tours, books and fan club magazines from 1984 to 2004. Neil Tennant comments in the book: \"In the beginning we made a decision \u2013 and it was in our EMI contract \u2013 that that we would have control over how everything worked; that obviously the songs mattered hugely, but the way they were presented was going to matter hugely as well; and that we were never going to give up on that.\" Pet Shop Boys supported the publication of the book with signings in London, New York City, Los Angeles and Berlin. To coincide with the publication of \"Catalogue\", a small exhibition of portraits of Pet Shop Boys opened in the Bookshop Gallery of London's National Portrait Gallery on 30 October 2006 and ran to 4 March 2007.\nAlso on 16 October, the third single from \"Fundamental\", \"Numb\", written by Diane Warren, was released, following its appearance at the end of the BBC's coverage of England at the World Cup. \"Numb\" became only the second Pet Shop Boys single to that point to miss the Top 20.\nOn 23 October 2006, \"Concrete\" was released. It is a double CD of the complete Mermaid Theatre concert, with the BBC Concert Orchestra, featuring guests Rufus Wainwright, Frances Barber, and Robbie Williams, and Trevor Horn as the musical director. A 90-minute \"director's cut\" of the concert aired on BBC 6 Music, on 28 August 2006. On 7 December 2006, Pet Shop Boys were nominated for two 2007 Grammy Awards: Best Dance Recording for \"I'm with Stupid\", and Best Electronic/Dance Album for \"Fundamental\". During the latter part of 2006 and early 2007, Neil Tennant served as executive producer on Rufus Wainwright's album, \"Release the Stars\", recorded in Berlin. He sang backing vocals on a number of tracks, including \"Do I Disappoint You\", and \"Tiergarten\".\nPet Shop Boys continued their world tour, albeit with a slightly different production and set list, on 14 March 2007, in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, then played concerts in Argentina, Chile, New Zealand and Australia (as co-headliners of the V Festival 2007), Norway, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Germany, Switzerland, France, the Netherlands, Great Britain, Denmark, Ireland, Sweden, Italy, Spain, Belgium and Singapore. Pet Shop Boys \"played\" at the free festival Secondfest, in the online virtual world \"Second Life\", on 30 June. The Fundamental tour ended in Bucharest, Romania, in November 2007.\nOn 8 October 2007, Pet Shop Boys released \"Disco 4\", the latest in their series of remix albums; the fourth in the set differed in that it was largely made up of remixes, completed by Pet Shop Boys, of other artists' work over the past decade. These include The Killers, David Bowie, Yoko Ono, Madonna, Atomizer and Rammstein. Only two tracks by Pet Shop Boys, remixed versions of \"Fundamental\" tracks \"Integral\" and \"I'm with Stupid\", were included.\nIn October 2008, Pet Shop Boys released the single \"I'm in Love with a German Film Star\" featuring British photographer Sam Taylor-Wood on vocals. This single was made for her exhibition in London and it was released by Kompakt records in Germany, on both CD and 7\" and 12\" vinyl. The most notable remixes were by Gui Boratto, Jurgen Paape and Mark Reeder.\n\"Yes\" (2009\u20132011).\nPet Shop Boys received the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music in 2009. A statement from Brits Committee chairman Ged Doherty said: \"Since their first Brit Award over 20 years ago, Neil and Chris have produced a fantastic body of work with songs that truly were the soundtrack to a whole generation's lives. The Pet Shop Boys have since become one of the most influential groups of the modern era and are deserving recipients of the award.\" The duo performed a medley of their greatest hits at the ceremony, with Lady Gaga singing Dusty Springfield's part on \"What Have I Done to Deserve This?\"\nPet Shop Boys completed their next album in late 2008. Recorded with Xenomania and released in UK on 23 March 2009, \"Yes\" received generally favorable reviews and hit number four in the UK, their highest album chart position in more than a decade. Pet Shop Boys co-wrote the Girls Aloud Top 10 track \"The Loving Kind\". Originally written for \"Yes\", the song was deemed unsuitable by Lowe and was given to the popular girl group to record instead for their album \"Out of Control\". At the start of 2009, Pet Shop Boys appointed Angela Becker as their new manager.\nOn 4 November 2009, Pet Shop Boys celebrated the Brazilian leg of the tour by releasing a compilation titled \"Party\", including songs that were heavily featured in popular soap operas on TV Globo: \"Being boring\" (\"Meu Bem Meu Mal\" OST), \"Domino dancing\" (\"O Salvador da Patria\" OST), \"West End Girls\" (\"Selva de Pedra\" OST) and \"King of Rome\" (\"Viver a Vida\"). On 14 December 2009, Pet Shop Boys released an EP of covers, remixes, and new material, titled \"Christmas\". On 20 December the EP entered the UK chart at number 40.\nOn 15 February 2010, Pet Shop Boys released a live album/DVD double-pack called \"Pandemonium\". It contains the soundtrack and footage recorded from their 21 December 2009 show at the O2 Arena in London. Pet Shop Boys released their version of \"Love Life\" in April 2010 as a limited edition 7-inch vinyl single available only in independent UK record stores. The song was originally recorded during the \"Release\" sessions in 2001 and was subsequently given to Swedish band Alcazar. The B-side was \"A Powerful Friend\", a song originally composed in the early 1980s and subsequently recorded in late 2002 during the recording sessions that would contribute to the \"Disco 3\" album.\nIn June 2010, Pet Shop Boys headlined the Other Stage on the Saturday evening of the 40th anniversary Glastonbury Festival and were heralded as dazzling with \"one of the most spectacular Glastonbury moments ever.\". This set included a surprise cover of Coldplay's \"Viva La Vida\", which Tennant thought sounded similar to a Pet Shop Boys song when he first heard it.\nIn November they released their third compilation album \"Ultimate\" preceded by the single \"Together\"; a limited edition featured their entire Glastonbury festival performance from that year on an additional DVD.\nPet Shop Boys composed a ballet, \"The Most Incredible Thing\", based on a fairy tale by Hans Christian Andersen, which opened at Sadlers Wells in London on 17 March 2011. The story was adapted by Matthew Dunster and the ballet was choreographed by Javier de Frutos. It featured former Royal Ballet star Ivan Putrov, animated films created by Tal Rosner, and orchestrations by German composer Sven Helbig, who worked with the band in 2005 as a co-producer for \"Battleship Potemkin\".\n\"Elysium\" and \"Electric\" (2011\u20132015).\nOn 28 September 2011, Pet Shop Boys announced that they had written 16 songs in preparation for their next studio album. In the meantime, \"Format\", an album of the duo's B-sides from 1996 to 2009, was released on 6 February 2012 as a sequel to their earlier B-side collection \"Alternative\". \"Format\" entered the UK charts at number 26 on 12 February 2012.\nOn 21 November 2011, the Beyond Theatre Award was presented to Pet Shop Boys and the director of \"The Most Incredible Thing\", Javier de Frutos. The award was introduced and presented by the artist, film director and occasional PSB collaborator Sam Taylor-Wood.\nIn January 2012, Pet Shop Boys started recording their new album in Los Angeles with producer Andrew Dawson. In June, a teaser video by renowned Los Angeles artist/film-maker Brian Bress for the album track \"Invisible\" was released online, at which time \"Elysium\" was revealed to be name of the new album. The first single was \"Winner\", preceding the release of \"Elysium\" in September. On 28 July, Pet Shop Boys performed \"Winner\", \"Always On My Mind\" and \"What Have I Done to Deserve This?\" before the Olympic tennis games in Henman Hill, Wimbledon. At the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony on 12 August, Tennant and Lowe rode around the stadium in cycle-driven chariots, wearing pointy hats as they performed \"West End Girls\" to a global audience.\nIn March 2013, Pet Shop Boys announced that they were leaving their longtime record label Parlophone. Their twelfth album, entitled \"Electric\", was released on 12 July 2013 on their own label x2 through Kobalt Label Services. The album was the biggest-selling record among the UK's independent record shops during the week of its release, and went straight to the number one position on the Official Record Store Chart. \"Electric\" was the first of three consecutive albums produced by Stuart Price. The release coincided with the Electric Tour that included Chile, Argentina, Paraguay, Brazil, Colombia, Asia\u2014with dates in the Philippines, Indonesia, and China for the first time\u2014Lebanon, Israel, Turkey, Europe and North America. On 23 July, Pet Shop Boys appeared at the BBC Proms to premiere \"A Man from the Future\", a piece written for orchestra, choir, electronics, and narrator, based on the life of Alan Turing.\n\"Super\", \"Further Listening\", and \"Agenda\" (2016\u20132019).\nOn 21 January 2016, Pet Shop Boys previewed the track \"Inner Sanctum\" from their thirteenth album, \"Super\". The lead single from the album, \"The Pop Kids\", was released on 18 March, reaching number one on the US Dance Club Songs chart. The album debuted at number three on the UK Albums Chart, selling 16,953 copies in its first week, becoming their thirteenth consecutive top 10 studio album. In the United States, \"Super\" debuted at number 58 on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 10,000 copies. It also debuted at number one on \"Billboard\"'s Dance/Electronic Albums chart, becoming Pet Shop Boys' first number one album on the chart since \"Disco 3\" (2003).\nPet Shop Boys announced their \"Further Listening\" reissues project, called \"Catalogue: 1985\u20132012\" in June 2017. The first batch was released that July with a remaster of \"Nightlife\", \"Release\" and \"Fundamental\". Reissues of \"Yes\" and \"Elysium\" were released on 20 October 2017, and the previously released \"Further Listening\" albums \"Please\", \"Actually\", and \"Introspective\" were remastered and re-released on 2 March 2018. The fourth and final batch of reissues\u2014\"Behaviour\", \"Very\" and \"Bilingual\"\u2014was released on 31 August 2018.\nThe live album/DVD/Blu-ray \"Inner Sanctum\" was released in April 2019. It followed February's EP \"Agenda\". which contains four new songs with a political and pop culture angle. Neil Tennant said the release \"contains three satirical songs and one rather sad song. I think it's because of the times we're living through\".\n\"Hotspot\", Dreamworld and Unity Tours, and \"Nonetheless\" (2020\u2013present).\nIn 2020, their fourteenth album, \"Hotspot\", was released on x2/Kobalt. Three singles were released to promote \"Hotspot\": \"Dreamland\" featuring Years &amp; Years, \"Monkey Business\", and \"I Don't Wanna\".\nThe corresponding was planned to start mid-2020, but was postponed twice due to the COVID-19 pandemic; it finally got underway in May 2022 and included their third appearance at the Glastonbury festival, this time closing the Other Stage on the Sunday night. In September and October 2022, the band co-headlined the Unity Tour with New Order, playing twelve arenas across Canada and the US. On 31 December 2022, Pet Shop Boys performed at Edinburgh's Hogmanay celebrations with a special Dreamworld show. In 2023 they continued their Dreamworld tour, headlining the Primavera Sound festivals in Barcelona, Madrid, Porto, Santiago, S\u00e3o Paulo and Lima.\nIn March 2023, the duo started working on their fifteenth studio album with producer James Ford. In the interim, the EP \"Lost\", made up of music recorded during \"Super\" sessions was released.\nIn January 2024, the album title \"Nonetheless\" and its cover art were revealed with an 26 April release date, along with the news that Pet Shop Boys would be returning to Parlophone. The music video for the lead single, \"Loneliness\", was released on YouTube on 31 January. On 3 April the second single \"Dancing Star\" was released, inspired by Russian ballet dancer Rudolf Nureyev. The single featured a remix of a previous B-side \"Party in the Blitz\" featuring Princess Julia. The third single, \"A New Bohemia\" was released on 4 June, followed by a fourth single, \"Feel\" on 20 August. The fifth single, a double A-side of \"New London Boy\" and a cover version of \"All The Young Dudes\" by David Bowie, was released on 7 November, followed by an expanded re-release of \"Nonetheless\" on 22 November, including demo versions of all tracks plus four new bonus tracks.\nThe ongoing Dreamworld tour included a five-night residency at the Royal Opera House in July 2024, followed by a gig at Funny Girls in Blackpool and a headline appearance at the final night of Radio 2 in the Park in Preston in September. In November, Pet Shop Boys played \"All the Young Dudes\" in a medley with \"West End Girls\", accompanied by the Manchester Camerata, at the 2024 MTV Europe Music Awards, where the duo were honoured as Pop Pioneers. They also appeared on \"Strictly Come Dancing\" in Lowe's hometown during Blackpool Week, playing a medley of hits for the opening dance number, followed by a performance of \"All the Young Dudes\" the next night. The Dreamworld tour continued with concerts in the UK and Europe in summer 2025. A festival in Japan was the first tour date announced for 2026.\nStyle and image.\nIn 2020, BBC journalist Nick Levine noted that Pet Shop Boys still maintain a somewhat \"detached and ambivalent approach\" to their success, which also shows in their low profile on social media. Music journalist Steve Harnell described them as having both an \"ear for commerciality\" and the desire to create \"something more highbrow\". He also described Tennant's lyrics as showing a \"love for language\", which Tennant sparkles with sometimes quite-obscure cultural references. Their music in the 1980s was inspired by dance music in gay clubs but transformed into a \"very British and brainy brand of pop music, shot through with a streak of social comment so subtly done that people frequently missed the point entirely.\"\nLowe said in a 1986 \"Entertainment Tonight\" interview that he doesn't \"like country and western. I don't like rock music, I don't like rockabilly or rock and roll particularly. I don't like much, really, do I? But what I do like, I love passionately. The quote was subsequently sampled in the song \"Paninaro\". The 1997 B-side \"How I Learned to Hate Rock and Roll\", and their early 1990s songs \"DJ Culture\", \"Can You Forgive Her?\" and \"How Can You Expect to Be Taken Seriously?\" continued this sentiment. They are still known for openly criticising trends in the music business, such as reality television music shows in 2010 (\"it's so awful and negative and stifling, and so un-pop\").\nTheir band dynamic has played a role in their public image. Early in their career, the duo were frequently accused of lacking stage presence, said to be a deliberate reaction to the hyper-cheerful music of the time, demonstrated by bands such as Wham!. A typical early performance featured Lowe in the background playing the bassline on a Fairlight synthesiser keyboard and Tennant singing, but otherwise passive, in the foreground. Tennant and Lowe both became well known for standing still throughout performances. In a 2016 interview, Chris Lowe said the duo's live performances were a response to the music scene in the 1980s: \"Everyone was so active. It was a big party where everyone was having a great time and smiling at the camera. Thumbs aloft! We just didn't want to do that. So we ignored the cameras and the jollity of the situations. Let's face it, it's easier to stand stock-still isn't it?\".\nWhen they first began touring, in 1989, they were heavily influenced by opera and theatre staging. Derek Jarman staged their first tour, making a series of films to be projected behind the costumed singers and dancers. In 1991, they brought in David Alden and David Fielding, from the English National Opera, to create the staging and costume design, for a show which made little attempt to involve or even acknowledge the audience and pushed the choreography and staging centre-stage. Subsequent tours have used artist Sam Taylor-Wood and architect Zaha Hadid for stage design. The Fundamental Tour in 2006\u20132007 was conceived and designed by theatre designer Es Devlin, with choreography by Hakeem Onibudo. Es Devlin also conceived the 2009\u20132010 Pandemonium Tour as well as the Electric Tour beginning in 2013.\nTypically, Pet Shop Boys have favoured avant-garde tailored fashions. Tennant has referenced the designers of his suits in certain interviews and Lowe has often sported outfits and glasses made by Issey Miyake, St\u00fcssy, and Yohji Yamamoto's Y-3 for Adidas. Presentation has always been a major theme for Pet Shop Boys and the duo have dramatically \"re-invented\" their image twice in their career. In 1993, when promoting their \"Very\" album, they wore brightly coloured costumes and used state-of-the-art computer technology to place themselves in a modern computer graphic world. This concept of re-invention was revisited for the promotion of their \"Nightlife\" album, in which they transformed their look, wearing wigs and glasses, with stylised futuristic urban wardrobes. In 2006, both Tennant and Lowe were seen on stage and in photographs wearing clothes designed by Hedi Slimane/Dior Homme, and in 2018 they fronted the Dior Homme SS18 campaign.\nThey have always been interested in the artwork, design and photography of their own releases. Photographer Eric Watson helped shape the original image of Pet Shop Boys, creating many of their photographs and videos early in their career. In design they have primarily worked with Mark Farrow, who designed the cover of their first Parlophone album release in 1986. The collaboration between Mark Farrow and Pet Shop Boys is comparable to the designer/band relationship of Peter Saville and New Order, Anton Corbijn and Depeche Mode, or the epic-length collaboration of Simon Halfon and Paul Weller. Their record sleeves are quite often very minimal and the attention to detail is obvious. In October 2006, British art publisher Thames &amp; Hudson published a 336-page hardcover book titled \"Pet Shop Boys Catalogue\", by Chris Heath and Philip Hoare, showcasing the group's accomplishments in artwork, design and music. A German-language edition was also published. An exhibition of photographs of Pet Shop Boys was organised at the National Portrait Gallery in London to coincide with the publication.\nEven the band's fan base has been subject to commentary. In 2001, music theorist Fred Everett Maus wrote that, contrary to the ideologies of anti-commercialism and authenticity embodied by \"serious\" discussions of popular music such as rock, Pet Shop Boys fans exhibit \"an undisguised love of commercial success\". This was demonstrated through mailing list discussions from 1998 onwards, in which fans voiced concern over the \"most commercially promising selection and marketing of singles\" for the then-upcoming \"Nightlife\", and debated the quality of the then-recent \"Bilingual\", spurred by the album's poorer performance in sales. Most posters, Maus summarised, feared that the band's appeal would become essentially limited to a cult following; \"dissent, along the lines that the fans would always have the Pet Shop Boys, no matter what happened commercially, was scarce and ineffectual\". Noting the fact that Pet Shop Boys \"began their career with hits\", Maus made the point that this early success was valued by fans: the band's \"large audiences\" were just as important to \"many fans\" as the making of \"distinctive music that individual fans loved\".\nPet Shop Boys have been noted for keeping their fingers on the musical pulse to date, while \"maintaining the mystique of performers from a different era\". Lynn Barber, writing for the London Observer on 1 July 1997 stated that \"The genius of the Pet Shop Boys was to combine these polar opposites: Neil's wistful introspective lyrics and Chris's mindless, cheerful, upbeat rhythms. They would never have been in the Top 10 without Chris; they would never have engaged an intelligent audience without Neil.\"\nInfluence.\nAs of 2003, Pet Shop Boys were ranked by \"Billboard\"'s Joel Whitburn (in his book \"Billboard's Hot Dance/Disco 1974\u20132003\") as the fourth most successful act on the U.S. Dance/Club Play charts, behind only Madonna, Michael Jackson and Donna Summer.\nThe history between Madonna and Pet Shop Boys goes back to 1988, with the song \"Heart\". In the liner notes to their 1991 greatest hits album, \"\", the band states that: \"When we wrote this song (\"Heart\") we wanted to submit it to Madonna but didn't dare risk disappointment.\" Pet Shop Boys kept the song for themselves and it ended up going to number one in the UK. Later, in 1991, Madonna was referenced in a tongue-in-cheek lyric, in the song \"DJ Culture\", soon after she and Sean Penn had divorced. Tennant writes: \"Like Liz before Betty / She after Sean / Suddenly you're missing / Then you're reborn\". Madonna's album \"Confessions on a Dance Floor\", released November 2005, includes a track called \"Jump\", which has close similarities to \"West End Girls\". An interview at Popjustice with Stuart Price, who produced Madonna's album, revealed that the track was a complete Chris Lowe inspiration. Pet Shop Boys then remixed \"Sorry\", the second single from the album. Madonna has used their version in her 2006 \"Confessions\" tour. Lady Gaga stated that she listened regularly to Pet Shop Boys while working on her debut album \"The Fame\", and that they were an influence on her music.\nIn October 2005, a Swedish tribute band called West End Girls had a number three hit single in their home country, with a cover version of \"Domino Dancing\". In January 2006, they released their own version of \"West End Girls\" and an album was also released in June. In August 2014, Pet Shop Boys appeared in the BBC Radio 4 series \"The Archers\" as last-minute headliners at the fictional festival Loxfest. Both Tennant and Lowe had speaking roles in the show.\nSexuality.\nNeil Tennant, who neither denied nor confirmed gay rumours throughout the 1980s, came out in a 1994 interview for \"Attitude\", a UK gay lifestyle magazine. Tennant has said that he does not want to be defined by his sexuality or be labeled as a 'gay pop star' out of concern that it would dominate coverage of the Pet Shop Boys. He also noted, \"I do think that we have contributed, through our music and also through our videos and the general way we\u2019ve presented things, rather a lot to what you might call 'gay culture'\". In 1988, Pet Shop Boys played \"It's a Sin\" at a benefit opposing the anti-homosexuality law Section 28.\nMany of Tennant's lyrics are written using gender-neutral language, as a way to be inclusive. He has also written songs in character from the perspective of women and heterosexual men, and, as he stated in the \"Attitude\" interview, he has written songs from his own perspective as a gay man. In 2024, Tennant described the Pet Shop Boys album \"Nonetheless\" as \"our queer album\", with songs like \"Love Is the Law\", referencing Oscar Wilde, and \"New London Boy\", recalling his own experiences in London in the early 1970s.\nSeveral Pet Shop Boys songs deal with the AIDS crisis of the 1980s and early 1990s, which they lived through. Tennant wrote a trio of songs about his best friend from Newcastle, Christopher Dowell, who died from the disease in 1989: \"It Couldn't Happen Here\" alludes to their early complacency, \"Being Boring\" is an elegy to their friendship, and \"Your Funny Uncle\" describes his funeral.\nDiscography.\nStudio albums\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAwards and nominations.\n\"Billboard\" Music Awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n!Ref.\nBrit Awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nGrammy Awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nIvor Novello Awards.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nLunas del Auditorio.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nSmash Hits Poll Winners Party.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nOther awards.\n! Year !! Awards !! Work !! Category !! Result\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51645", "revid": "45733435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51645", "title": "Michael Gross", "text": "Michael Gross may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "51646", "revid": "985781269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51646", "title": "Second countable", "text": ""}
{"id": "51649", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51649", "title": "Primo", "text": "Primo may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51651", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51651", "title": "Primera, Texas", "text": "Primera is a town in Cameron County, Texas, United States, near Combes. The population was 5,257 at the 2020 census, up from 4,070 at the 2010 census. It is part of the Brownsville\u2013Harlingen\u2013Raymondville and the Matamoros\u2013Brownsville metropolitan areas.\nGeography.\nPrimera is located in western Cameron County at (26.223152, \u201397.751470). It is northwest of the center of Harlingen.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the town has a total area of , all land.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 5,257 people, 1,537 households, and 1,165 families residing in the town.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 2,723 people, 735 households, and 659 families residing in the town. The population density was . There were 780 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the town was 81.60% White, 0.66% African American, 0.44% Native American, 0.04% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 14.03% from other races, and 3.20% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 89.57% of the population.\nThere were 735 households, out of which 54.4% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 69.4% were married couples living together, 15.4% had a female householder with no husband present, and 10.3% were non-families. 8.8% of all households were made up of individuals, and 4.2% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 3.70 and the average family size was 3.90.\nIn the town, the population was spread out, with 36.2% under the age of 18, 11.1% from 18 to 24, 28.8% from 25 to 44, 17.4% from 45 to 64, and 6.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 27 years. For every 100 females, there were 99.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 88.6 males.\nThe median income for a household in the town was $26,841, and the median income for a family was $27,292. Males had a median income of $19,167 versus $16,667 for females. The per capita income for the town was $8,897. About 28.8% of families and 29.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 37.2% of those under age 18 and 33.2% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nPrimera is within the Harlingen Consolidated Independent School District.\nPrimera has one elementary school, Wilson Elementary School.\nIn addition, South Texas Independent School District operates magnet schools that serve the community.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51652", "revid": "46469420", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51652", "title": "Harlingen, Texas", "text": "Harlingen ( ) is a city in Cameron County in the central region of the Rio Grande Valley of the southern part of the U.S. state of Texas, about from the coast of the Gulf of Mexico. The city covers more than and is the second-largest city in Cameron County, as well as the fifth-largest in the Rio Grande Valley. As of the 2020 census, the city had a population of 71,892.\nHarlingen is a principal city of the Brownsville\u2013Harlingen metropolitan area, which is part of the larger Brownsville\u2013Harlingen\u2013Raymondville combined statistical area, included in the Matamoros\u2013Brownsville metropolitan region.\nHistory.\nHarlingen's strategic location at the intersection of U.S. Route 77 and U.S. Route 83, codesignated as Interstate 69 East and Interstate 2, respectively, in northwestern Cameron County, fostered its development as a distribution, shipping, and industrial center. In 1904, Lon C. Hill (a man of Choctaw ancestry) envisioned the Rio Grande as a commercial waterway. He named the town he founded on the north bank after the Frisian city of Harlingen, in the Netherlands. The town's post office was established that year. The first school opened with 15 pupils in 1905 near the Hill home, the first residence built in Harlingen. Harlingen incorporated on April 15, 1910, when the population totaled 1,126. In 1920, the census listed 1,748. The local economy at first was almost entirely agricultural, with the chief crops vegetables and cotton.\nWorld War II military installations in Harlingen caused a jump in population from 23,000 in 1950 to 41,000 by 1960. Harlingen Army Air Field preceded Harlingen Air Force Base, which closed in 1962. The city's population fell to 33,603 by 1972, then climbed to 40,824 by 1980. Local enterprise, focused on the purchase and use of the abandoned base and related housing, laid the groundwork for continuing progress through a diversified economy. The estimated population in July 1985 was 49,000, of which about 80% was Hispanic. In the late 1980s, income from tourism ranked second only to citrus fruit production, with grain and cotton next in order. The addition of wholesale and retail trade, light and medium manufacturing, and an array of service industries has broadened the economic base. Large-scale construction for multifaceted retirement communities is a new phase of industrial development.\nThe City of Harlingen operates a busy industrial airpark where bombers used to land. At Valley International Airport, the Confederate Air Force (now Commemorative Air Force) occupied hangar and apron space until 1991. The first hospital in Harlingen opened in 1923, and consisted of little more than two barracks as wings. The Valley Baptist Hospital was built nearby a few years later, and eventually the older hospital closed. The Valley Baptist Hospital has grown into the Valley Baptist Medical Center. The city's outstanding network of health-care specialists and facilities parallels the growth of the still-expanding center. Also serving regional health needs are the South Texas State Chest Hospital, the State Hospital for Children, and the Rio Grande State Mental Health and Mental Retardation Center.\nBesides public and church-affiliated schools, Harlingen students attend the University Preparatory School, the Marine Military Academy, Texas State Technical College, or Rio Grande Vocational and Rehabilitation classes. Civic and cultural development in Harlingen has kept pace with the growth of the community. Fraternal orders and civic organizations operating in the community include Rotary, Kiwanis, Lions, Optimist, 20\u201330, VFW, American Legion, and the Lower Valley Cotillion Club; a woman's building is maintained as a center for the activities of the many woman's clubs active in the city. Development and appreciation of the fine arts are encouraged by organizations such as the Rio Grande Valley Art League, the Art Forum, and the Rio Grande Valley Civic Association, which stages its winter concert series at the 2,300-seat Harlingen Municipal Auditorium. Each March, Harlingen is the site of the Rio Grande Valley International Music Festival. The city has two newspapers\u2014the \"Harlingen Press\", a weekly paper established in 1951, and the \"Valley Morning Star\", a daily established in 1911. In 1990, the population was 48,735. In 1992, the city was named an All-America City, cited especially for its volunteer spirit and self-help programs. In 2000, the community had 57,564 inhabitants and 2,549 businesses.\nGeography.\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , or 1.22%, is covered by water.\nSoils in Harlingen range in texture from fine sandy loam to clay. They are neutral to moderately alkaline with pH of 7.2 to 8.5 (most commonly around 8.2), and are moderately well drained or well drained in most cases, with small areas of poorly drained, saline clays.\nClimate.\nHarlingen has a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen Cfa). Summers are long, and very humid with hot days and warm nights. Winters are very dry with warm days and cool nights. Precipitation peaks during September, with an average of precipitation falling.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, there were 71,829 people, 21,752 households, and 15,548 families residing in the city.\n2000 census.\nAs of the census of 2000, 57,564 people, 19,021 households, and 14,360 families resided in the city. The population density was . The 23,008 housing units averaged . The racial makeup of the city was 78.68% White, 0.92% Black, 0.52% Native American, 0.88% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 16.39% from other races, and 2.58% from two or more races. About 72.76% of the population was Hispanic or Latino of any race; most are of Mexican descent.\nAs in other cities in the Lower Rio Grande Valley, a significant part of Harlingen's transient population and a significant contributor to its economy consists of \"Winter Texans\", generally retirees from the northern Midwestern states and Canada, who come to escape the northern winter weather between roughly November and April.\nOf the 19,021 households, 38.6% had children under the age of 18, 55.6% were married couples living together, 16.2% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.5% were not families; 20.9% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.3% had someone living alone 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.94, and the average family size was 3.44.\nIn the city, the population was distributed as 30.7% under the age of 18, 9.6% from 18 to 24, 26.5% from 25 to 44, 18.0% from 45 to 64, and 15.0% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 32 years. For every 100 females, there were 90.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 85.0 males.\nThe median income for a household in the city was $30,296, and for a family was $34,015. Males had a median income of $27,014 versus $21,795 for females. The per capita income for the city was $13,886. About 19.3% of families and 24.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 34.7% of those under age 18 and 16.2% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nCity government.\nHarlingen is governed by a mayor elected at-large and a five-member city commission representing five individual single-member districts. All seats are eligible for election every three years. The current mayor is Norma Sepulveda, who was elected in 2022. The city commissioners are District 1 Ford H. Kinsley, District 2 Daniel N. Lopez, District 3 Mike Mezmar, District 4 Frank Morales, and District 5 Rene Perez.\nCity commission.\nThe commission meets on the first and third Wednesdays of each month at 5:30\u00a0pm at City Hall.\nPolice department.\nThe Harlingen Police Department embraces the community policing philosophy. The police force consists of nearly 160 sworn police officers. The department receives more than 50,000 911 calls per year. The department's Mission Statement is, \"It is the mission of the Harlingen Police Department to provide services with integrity and dedication, to preserve life, to enforce the law, and to work in partnership with the community to enhance the quality of life in the City of Harlingen.\"\nState government.\nThe Texas Department of Criminal Justice operates the Harlingen Parole Office in Harlingen.\nFederal representation.\nThe United States Postal Service operates two post offices in Harlingen, including the Harlingen Post Office and the Downtown Harlingen post office.\nU.S. Department of Justice.\nHarlingen is home to the U.S. Immigration Court, one of 52 such courts in the U.S. that adjudicate immigration cases in the United States. The chief function of the Immigration Court is to conduct removal proceedings, which are administrative proceedings to determine the removability of noncitizens present within the United States.\nU.S. Homeland Security Agencies.\nThe United States Border Patrol Harlingen Station is located at 3902 S. Expressway 77 Harlingen, Texas.\nMilitary installations.\nThe Harlingen Armed Forces Reserve Center (AFRC) is located at 1300 W Teege Ave, Harlingen, Texas. This facility hosts Reserve components of the United States Armed Forces units from the United States Army Reserve 319th Combat Sustainment Support Battalion, 4th Team, 1st Judge Advocate General Detachment, 5th Team, 1st Judge Advocate General Detachment, and 812th Quartermaster Company (Supply). The United States Navy Reserve Navy Operations Support Center Harlingen (NOSC Harlingen) and the United States Marine Corps Reserve Charlie Company (Det) 1st Battalion 23rd Marines 4th Marine Division. This facility is mostly used for monthly drills. A Military Retiree Activities Office is located at the Harlingen AFRC.\nEducation.\nPrimary and secondary education.\nThe city is covered by the Harlingen Consolidated Independent School District and South Texas Independent School District. Harlingen is home to four high schools \u2013 Harlingen Collegiate High (formerly Early College High School before its deal with UTRGV), Harlingen High School, Harlingen High School South, and Harlingen School of Health Professions, and a freshman Academy, Dr. Abraham P. Cano Freshman Academy. The Saint Anthony Catholic School is a parochial school for grades K\u20138 (with a Montessori program for 3- and 4-year-olds). It is one of the few Catholic schools in the city of Harlingen and has an enrollment of approximately 220 students.\nThe Marine Military Academy is a private, all-male, college preparatory school located in Harlingen.\nUniversities and colleges.\nIn 1967, a branch of Texas State Technical College was established in Harlingen. The two-year technical state college currently offers more than 30 programs to over 5,000 students.\nIn 2002, the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio opened the Regional Academic Health Center (RAHC) Medical Education Division in Harlingen. In 2012, the UT System Board of Regents approved the merger of the University of Texas at Brownsville and the University of Texas-Pan American to form the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) and the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley School of Medicine, the latter using resources from the RAHC.\nThe University of Texas Rio Grande Valley School of Medicine welcomed its first students in the summer of 2016. UTRGV's psychiatry program and Institute for Neurosciences are based in Harlingen.\nSouthern Careers Institute has a campus located in Harlingen as well.\nSports and recreation.\nMost recently, Harlingen was the home of the Rio Grande Valley WhiteWings, a minor league baseball team that existed from 1994 to 2003 and from 2006 to 2015. In 2000, the WhiteWings won the Texas-Louisiana League championship. Previously, Harlingen was home to the Harlingen Capitals, who were members of the Class D Rio Grande Valley League (1950) and Class B Gulf Coast League (1951\u20131953). Earlier, the Harlingen Ladds were members of the Rio Grande Valley League (1931) and the Harlingen Hubs were members of the Texas Valley League (1938). The Rio Grande Valley Giants, based in Harlingen, played in the Class AA Texas League (1960\u20131961) as an affiliate of the San Francisco Giants. Baseball Hall of Fame inductee Gaylord Perry played for the Rio Grande Valley Giants in 1960. In 1976, the Rio Grande Valley WhiteWings played as members of the Gulf States League and the Harlingen Suns (1977) played in the Lone Star League. Beginning in 1950, all Harlingen teams played at Harlingen Field.\nValley Race Park is a racetrack for Greyhound dogs. It was the first Greyhound track in Texas to accept parimutuel wagering. The facility is fully air-conditioned and the grandstands totals over . The grandstand has over 400 monitors to pick up the 50-plus Simulcast Live Racing signals from the top Greyhound and horse tracks from all around the United States. Valley Race Park shut down in the fall of 1995, but reopened five years later, in the spring of 2000.\nThe World Birding Center (Harlingen Arroyo Colorado) has a location in Harlingen's Hugh Ramsey Nature Park. Work continues on designs for a new visitors' center at Hugh Ramsey Nature Park. The two-story center will include a gift shop, observation tower, meeting rooms, and enclosed viewing areas. Also, visitors at both Ramsey Park and the Thicket will find parking and extensive trails, as well as maps, information, and public restrooms.\nThe Rio Grande Valley Birding Festival occurs each November in Harlingen, attracting up to 3,000 participants per year. In 2018, the multi-day festival celebrated its 25th year, drawing 600 participants in guided birding tours, 80 to 90 paid guides, and 100 volunteers. 10,000-capacity\nJ. Lewis Boggus Stadium has an all-weather artificial playing surface and is located in downtown Harlingen. It is used for football, soccer, and other outdoor athletic events.\nHealthcare.\nHarlingen Medical Center (HMC) is a nationally recognized general acute-care hospital. HMC medical services include: bariatric, cardiac surgery, cardiology, emergency, gastroenterology, imaging services, internal medicine, neurology, obstetrics and gynecology, orthopedics, orthopedic surgery, pediatrics, sleep apnea treatment, vascular and endovascular surgery, and wound-healing care. The facility opened in October 2002 and has 112 beds.\nValley Baptist Medical Center (VBMC), with 586 beds, is the Rio Grande Valley's only Level II Trauma Center. With a 38-room emergency department and a heliport, Valley Baptist serves as the lead trauma center in the region, and is the only hospital in the area offering comprehensive stroke services, including advanced endovascular neurology procedures. Valley Baptist has the only newborn intensive-care unit in Harlingen, the only pediatric intensive-care unit in Cameron County, private labor/delivery/recovery suites, a family-centered maternity-care unit, women's surgery suites, day surgery, and outpatient services. In addition, Valley Baptist has a diabetes-education program, and a wound-care center and foot-care institute, and a surgical and medical weight-loss program.\nSolara Specialty Hospital Harlingen is a long-term acute-care facility where patients can receive treatment for as long as a month, compared to general hospitals where patients are treated for shorter periods. The 41\u2013bed hospital is owned by Solara Healthcare of Dallas, Valley Baptist Health System, and local physicians.\nThe Regional Academic Health Center is a teaching hospital that serves as an extension campus of the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio.\nSu Clinica Familiar offers services tailored to the border region, concentrating in the areas of dentistry, internal medicine, women's health, and pediatrics. Services are mostly tailored for the poor. It has a teaching partnership with the nearby Regional Academic Health Center.\nThe Harlingen VA Outpatient Clinic and VA Health Care Center are two Veteran Administration (VA) facilities in Harlingen. Both of these facilities fall under the VA Texas Valley Coastal Bend Health Care System.\nThe Harlingen Ambulatory Surgery and Specialty Outpatient Center opened in January 2011 and provides care to veterans. Orthopedics, urology, gastroenterology, otolaryngology, infectious disease, dermatology, cardiology, oncology, neurology, rheumatology, amputee/prosthetics, and endoscopy services are offered.\nThe Rio Grande State Center offers outpatient medical healthcare and in-patient mental health services. The center's psychiatric hospital is a 55-bed, in-patient facility and the long-term program is a 75-bed, residential facility. The outpatient medical clinic provides out-patient services which including primary care, women's health, diagnostic services, psychiatric consults and prescription assistance.\nA Ronald McDonald House opened in 1998. It offers a place to stay for families of children being treated for serious illness or injury. It is funded by private donations, grants, and fundraising events.\nPalms Behavioral Health, a 94-bed mental and behavioral health facility which opened in Harlingen in 2016.\nTransportation.\nAirports.\nThe city's airport, Valley International Airport, has a service area that encompasses the lower Rio Grande Valley and northern Mexico, serving more than two million people on both sides of the US-Mexico border. Valley International Airport lies in the northeastern portion of Harlingen and offers a border-crossing option via the Free Trade Bridge at Los Indios. The airport has aligned itself as the air cargo hub of the Rio Grande Valley and works closely with carriers such as DHL, FedEx and Southwest Airlines Cargo. In 1975, Southwest Airlines began to fly to the Rio Grande Valley via Valley International Airport with four roundtrips each business day. Southwest currently offers nonstop flights between Harlingen and Austin and Houston Hobby. Additional airlines that serve the airport include United Express to Houston Intercontinental, American Airlines with daily nonstop service to Dallas DFW, Frontier Airlines with weekly nonstop service to Chicago and Denver, and Delta Air Lines and Sun Country Airlines with seasonal, nonstop service to Minneapolis-St. Paul.\nPublic transit.\nThe city is working to build a public transit center as a hub for bus lines to Harlingen. The project is currently on hold due to funding issues.\nHighways.\nThe city of Harlingen is at the junction of U.S. Route 77 and U.S. Route 83, designated as Interstate 69E and Interstate 2, respectively. Interstate 69E runs through north\u2013south through Harlingen, while the city serves as the eastern terminus of Interstate 2. U.S. Route 77 connects the Rio Grande Valley to Interstate 37 at Corpus Christi. U.S. Route 83 connects the Rio Grande Valley with Interstate 35 at Laredo.\nInternational trade bridges.\nThe Free Trade Bridge at Los Indios is a state-of-the-art international bridge located just south of Harlingen. With a full U.S. Customs inspection facility that accommodates up to 75 trucks simultaneously, the Free Trade Bridge is acclaimed as the most time-efficient border crossing in the valley. The bridge accesses a four-lane highway in northern Mexico, offering a fast route to the border cities of Matamoros and Reynosa, as well as the industrial city of Monterrey. With the completion of Mexico's State of Tamaulipas new 'autopista', the Free Trade Bridge will provide a seamless highway connection for more efficient distribution of industrial products to and from interior Mexico.\nPorts.\nThe Port of Harlingen is located east of Harlingen on Highway 106. It is west of mile marker 646 on the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, which stretches from the Mexican border at Brownsville, along the entire coast of the Gulf of Mexico to St. Marks, Florida. The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway provides over of protected waterway, deep and wide. The Harlingen Channel is maintained to a width of and a depth of and is supplied by the Arroyo Colorado, a freshwater river.\nRailroads.\nUnion Pacific Railroad has a local terminal and switching yard in Harlingen. The Harlingen Industrial Parks and Port of Harlingen have direct rail access. Harlingen has a rich history as a railroad town. The Southern Pacific depot has been razed, but it was one of four SP depots in the Rio Grande Valley (the others are Brownsville, now a museum; McAllen, now a law office; and Edinburg, now the home of the Chamber of Commerce).\nHarlingen was served by the Missouri Pacific Railroad night train on a Houston, Texas-Brownsville, Texas route, the \"Pioneer\" (#315/316) until 1964 and day train on that route, the \"Valley Eagle\" (#321/322) until 1962.\nCulture and points of interest.\nThe Harlingen Public Library serves local residents.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51653", "revid": "545807", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51653", "title": "Burali-Forti paradox", "text": "Paradox in set theory\nIn set theory, a field of mathematics, the Burali-Forti paradox demonstrates that constructing \"the set of all ordinal numbers\" leads to a contradiction and therefore shows an antinomy in a system that allows its construction. It is named after Cesare Burali-Forti, who, in 1897, published a paper proving a theorem which, unknown to him, contradicted a previously proved result by Georg Cantor. Bertrand Russell subsequently noticed the contradiction, and when he published it in his 1903 book \"Principles of Mathematics\", he stated that it had been suggested to him by Burali-Forti's paper, with the result that it came to be known by Burali-Forti's name.\nStated in terms of von Neumann ordinals.\nWe will prove this by contradiction.\nWe have deduced two contradictory propositions ( and ) from the sethood of \u03a9 and, therefore, disproved that \u03a9 is a set.\nStated more generally.\nThe version of the paradox above is anachronistic, because it presupposes the definition of the ordinals due to John von Neumann, under which each ordinal is the set of all preceding ordinals, which was not known at the time the paradox was framed by Burali-Forti.\nHere is an account with fewer presuppositions: suppose that we associate with each well-ordering\nan object called its order type in an unspecified way (the order types are the ordinal numbers). The order types (ordinal numbers) themselves are well-ordered in a natural way,\nand this well-ordering must have an order type formula_1. It is easily shown in\nna\u00efve set theory (and remains true in ZFC but not in New Foundations) that the order\ntype of all ordinal numbers less than a fixed formula_2 is formula_2 itself.\nSo the order\ntype of all ordinal numbers less than formula_1 is formula_1 itself. But\nthis means that formula_1, being the order type of a proper initial segment of the ordinals, is strictly less than the order type of all the ordinals,\nbut the latter is formula_1 itself by definition. This is a contradiction.\nUsing the von Neumann definition, under which each ordinal is identified as the set of all preceding ordinals, the paradox is unavoidable: the offending proposition that the order type of all ordinal numbers less than a fixed formula_2 is formula_2 itself must be true. The collection of von Neumann ordinals, like the collection in the Russell paradox, cannot be a set in any set theory with classical logic. But the collection of order types in New Foundations (defined as equivalence classes of well-orderings under similarity) is actually a set, and the paradox is avoided because the order type of the ordinals less than formula_1\nturns out not to be formula_1.\nResolutions of the paradox.\nModern axioms for formal set theory such as ZF and ZFC circumvent this antinomy by not allowing the construction of sets using terms like \"all sets with the property formula_12\", as is possible in naive set theory and as is possible with Gottlob Frege's axioms\u00a0\u2013 specifically Basic Law V\u00a0\u2013 in the \"Grundgesetze der Arithmetik.\" Quine's system New Foundations (NF) uses a different solution. Rosser\u00a0(1942) showed that in the original version of Quine's system \"Mathematical Logic\" (ML), an extension of New Foundations, it is possible to derive the Burali-Forti paradox, showing that this system was contradictory. Quine's revision of ML following Rosser's discovery does not suffer from this defect, and indeed was subsequently proved equiconsistent with NF by Hao Wang.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51654", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51654", "title": "Soliton", "text": "Self-reinforcing single wave packet\nIn mathematics and physics, a soliton is a nonlinear, self-reinforcing, localized wave packet that is strongly stable, in that it preserves its shape while propagating freely, at constant velocity, and recovers it even after collisions with other such localized wave packets. Its remarkable stability can be traced to a balanced cancellation of nonlinear and dispersive effects in the medium. Solitons were subsequently found to provide stable solutions of a wide class of weakly nonlinear dispersive partial differential equations describing physical systems.\nThe soliton phenomenon was first described in 1834 by John Scott Russell who observed a solitary wave in the Union Canal in Scotland. He reproduced the phenomenon in a wave tank and named it the \"Wave of Translation\". The Korteweg\u2013de Vries equation was later formulated to model such waves, and the term \"soliton\" was coined by Norman Zabusky and Martin David Kruskal to describe localized, strongly stable propagating solutions to this equation. The name was meant to characterize the solitary nature of the waves, with the \"on\" suffix recalling the usage for particles such as electrons, baryons or hadrons, reflecting their observed particle-like behaviour.\nDefinition.\nA single, consensus definition of a soliton is difficult to find. ascribe three properties to solitons:\nMore formal definitions exist, but they require substantial mathematics. Moreover, some scientists use the term \"soliton\" for phenomena that do not quite have these three properties (for instance, the 'light bullets' of nonlinear optics are often called solitons despite losing energy during interaction).\nExplanation.\nDispersion and nonlinearity can interact to produce permanent and localized wave forms. Consider a pulse of light traveling in glass. This pulse can be thought of as consisting of light of several different frequencies. Since glass shows dispersion, these different frequencies travel at different speeds and the shape of the pulse therefore changes over time. However, also the nonlinear Kerr effect occurs; the refractive index of a material at a given frequency depends on the light's amplitude or strength. If the pulse has just the right shape, the Kerr effect exactly cancels the dispersion effect and the pulse's shape does not change over time. Thus, the pulse is a soliton. See soliton (optics) for a more detailed description.\nMany exactly solvable models have soliton solutions, including the Korteweg\u2013de Vries equation, the nonlinear Schr\u00f6dinger equation, the coupled nonlinear Schr\u00f6dinger equation, and the sine-Gordon equation. The soliton solutions are typically obtained by means of the inverse scattering transform, and owe their stability to the integrability of the field equations. The mathematical theory of these equations is a broad and very active field of mathematical research.\nSome types of tidal bore, a wave phenomenon of a few rivers including the River Severn, are 'undular': a wavefront followed by a train of solitons. Other solitons occur as the undersea internal waves, initiated by seabed topography, that propagate on the oceanic pycnocline. Atmospheric solitons also exist, such as the morning glory cloud of the Gulf of Carpentaria, where pressure solitons traveling in a temperature inversion layer produce vast linear roll clouds. The recent and not widely accepted soliton model in neuroscience proposes to explain the signal conduction within neurons as pressure solitons.\nA topological soliton, also called a topological defect, is any solution of a set of partial differential equations that is stable against decay to the \"trivial solution\". Soliton stability is due to topological constraints, rather than integrability of the field equations. The constraints arise almost always because the differential equations must obey a set of boundary conditions, and the boundary has a nontrivial homotopy group, preserved by the differential equations. Thus, the differential equation solutions can be classified into homotopy classes.\nNo continuous transformation maps a soliton in one homotopy class to another. The solitons are truly distinct, and maintain their integrity, even in the face of extremely powerful forces. Examples of topological solitons include the screw dislocation in a crystalline lattice, the Dirac string and the magnetic monopole in electromagnetism, the Skyrmion and the Wess\u2013Zumino\u2013Witten model in quantum field theory, the magnetic skyrmion in condensed matter physics, and cosmic strings and domain walls in cosmology.\nHistory.\nIn 1834, John Scott Russell described his \"wave of translation\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was observing the motion of a boat which was rapidly drawn along a narrow channel by a pair of horses, when the boat suddenly stopped\u00a0\u2013 not so the mass of water in the channel which it had put in motion; it accumulated round the prow of the vessel in a state of violent agitation, then suddenly leaving it behind, rolled forward with great velocity, assuming the form of a large solitary elevation, a rounded, smooth and well-defined heap of water, which continued its course along the channel apparently without change of form or diminution of speed. I followed it on horseback, and overtook it still rolling on at a rate of some eight or nine miles an hour, preserving its original figure some thirty feet long and a foot to a foot and a half in height. Its height gradually diminished, and after a chase of one or two miles I lost it in the windings of the channel. Such, in the month of August 1834, was my first chance interview with that singular and beautiful phenomenon which I have called the Wave of Translation.\nScott Russell spent some time making practical and theoretical investigations of these waves. He built wave tanks at his home and noticed some key properties:\nScott Russell's experimental work seemed at odds with Isaac Newton's and Daniel Bernoulli's theories of hydrodynamics. George Biddell Airy and George Gabriel Stokes had difficulty accepting Scott Russell's experimental observations because they could not be explained by the existing water wave theories. Additional observations were reported by Henry Bazin in 1862 after experiments carried out in the canal de Bourgogne in France. Their contemporaries spent some time attempting to extend the theory but it would take until the 1870s before Joseph Boussinesq and Lord Rayleigh published a theoretical treatment and solutions. In 1895 Diederik Korteweg and Gustav de Vries provided what is now known as the Korteweg\u2013de Vries equation, including solitary wave and periodic cnoidal wave solutions.\nIn 1965 Norman Zabusky of Bell Labs and Martin Kruskal of Princeton University first demonstrated soliton behavior in media subject to the Korteweg\u2013de Vries equation (KdV equation) in a computational investigation using a finite difference approach. They also showed how this behavior explained the puzzling earlier work of Fermi, Pasta, Ulam, and Tsingou.\nIn 1967, Gardner, Greene, Kruskal and Miura discovered an inverse scattering transform enabling analytical solution of the KdV equation. The work of Peter Lax on Lax pairs and the Lax equation has since extended this to solution of many related soliton-generating systems.\nSolitons are, by definition, unaltered in shape and speed by a collision with other solitons. So solitary waves on a water surface are \"near\"-solitons, but not exactly \u2013 after the interaction of two (colliding or overtaking) solitary waves, they have changed a bit in amplitude and an oscillatory residual is left behind.\nSolitons are also studied in quantum mechanics, thanks to the fact that they could provide a new foundation of it through de Broglie's unfinished program, known as \"Double solution theory\" or \"Nonlinear wave mechanics\". This theory, developed by de Broglie in 1927 and revived in the 1950s, is the natural continuation of his ideas developed between 1923 and 1926, which extended the wave\u2013particle duality introduced by Albert Einstein for the light quanta, to all the particles of matter. The observation of accelerating surface gravity water wave soliton using an external hydrodynamic linear potential was demonstrated in 2019. This experiment also demonstrated the ability to excite and measure the phases of ballistic solitons.\nIn fiber optics.\nMuch experimentation has been done using solitons in fiber optics applications. Solitons in a fiber optic system are described by the Manakov equations.\nSolitons' inherent stability make long-distance transmission possible without the use of repeaters, and could potentially double transmission capacity as well.\nIn biology.\nSolitons may occur in proteins and DNA. Solitons are related to the low-frequency collective motion in proteins and DNA.\nA recently developed model in neuroscience proposes that signals, in the form of density waves, are conducted within neurons in the form of solitons. Solitons can be described as almost lossless energy transfer in biomolecular chains or lattices as wave-like propagations of coupled conformational and electronic disturbances.\nIn material physics.\nSolitons can occur in materials, such as ferroelectrics, in the form of domain walls. Ferroelectric materials exhibit spontaneous polarization, or electric dipoles, which are coupled to configurations of the material structure. Domains of oppositely poled polarizations can be present within a single material as the structural configurations corresponding to opposing polarizations are equally favorable with no presence of external forces. The domain boundaries, or \"walls\", that separate these local structural configurations are regions of lattice dislocations. The domain walls can propagate as the polarizations, and thus, the local structural configurations can switch within a domain with applied forces such as electric bias or mechanical stress. Consequently, the domain walls can be described as solitons, discrete regions of dislocations that are able to slip or propagate and maintain their shape in width and length. \u00a0\nIn recent literature, ferroelectricity has been observed in twisted bilayers of van der Waal materials such as molybdenum disulfide and graphene. The moir\u00e9 superlattice that arises from the relative twist angle between the van der Waal monolayers generates regions of different stacking orders of the atoms within the layers. These regions exhibit inversion symmetry breaking structural configurations that enable ferroelectricity at the interface of these monolayers. The domain walls that separate these regions are composed of partial dislocations where different types of stresses, and thus, strains are experienced by the lattice. It has been observed that soliton or domain wall propagation across a moderate length of the sample (order of nanometers to micrometers) can be initiated with applied stress from an AFM tip on a fixed region. The soliton propagation carries the mechanical perturbation with little loss in energy across the material, which enables domain switching in a domino-like fashion.\nIt has also been observed that the type of dislocations found at the walls can affect propagation parameters such as direction. For instance, STM measurements showed four types of strains of varying degrees of shear, compression, and tension at domain walls depending on the type of localized stacking order in twisted bilayer graphene. Different slip directions of the walls are achieved with different types of strains found at the domains, influencing the direction of the soliton network propagation.\nNonidealities such as disruptions to the soliton network and surface impurities can influence soliton propagation as well. Domain walls can meet at nodes and get effectively pinned, forming triangular domains, which have been readily observed in various ferroelectric twisted bilayer systems. In addition, closed loops of domain walls enclosing multiple polarization domains can inhibit soliton propagation and thus, switching of polarizations across it. Also, domain walls can propagate and meet at wrinkles and surface inhomogeneities within the van der Waal layers, which can act as obstacles obstructing the propagation.\nIn magnets.\nIn magnets, there also exist different types of solitons and other nonlinear waves. These magnetic solitons are an exact solution of classical nonlinear differential equations\u00a0\u2014 magnetic equations, e.g. the Landau\u2013Lifshitz equation, continuum Heisenberg model, Ishimori equation, nonlinear Schr\u00f6dinger equation and others.\nIn nuclear physics.\nAtomic nuclei may exhibit solitonic behavior. Here the whole nuclear wave function is predicted to exist as a soliton under certain conditions of temperature and energy. Such conditions are suggested to exist in the cores of some stars in which the nuclei would not react but pass through each other unchanged, retaining their soliton waves through a collision between nuclei.\nThe Skyrme Model is a model of nuclei in which each nucleus is considered to be a topologically stable soliton solution of a field theory with conserved baryon number.\nBions.\nThe bound state of two solitons is known as a \"bion\", or in systems where the bound state periodically oscillates, a \"breather\". The interference-type forces between solitons could be used in making bions. However, these forces are very sensitive to their relative phases. Alternatively, the bound state of solitons could be formed by dressing atoms with highly excited Rydberg levels. The resulting self-generated potential profile features an inner attractive soft-core supporting the 3D self-trapped soliton, an intermediate repulsive shell (barrier) preventing solitons' fusion, and an outer attractive layer (well) used for completing the bound state resulting in giant stable soliton molecules. In this scheme, the distance and size of the individual solitons in the molecule can be controlled dynamically with the laser adjustment.\nIn field theory \"bion\" usually refers to the solution of the Born\u2013Infeld model. The name appears to have been coined by G. W. Gibbons in order to distinguish this solution from the conventional soliton, understood as a \"regular\", finite-energy (and usually stable) solution of a differential equation describing some physical system. The word \"regular\" means a smooth solution carrying no sources at all. However, the solution of the Born\u2013Infeld model still carries a source in the form of a Dirac-delta function at the origin. As a consequence it displays a singularity in this point (although the electric field is everywhere regular). In some physical contexts (for instance string theory) this feature can be important, which motivated the introduction of a special name for this class of solitons.\nOn the other hand, when gravity is added (i.e. when considering the coupling of the Born\u2013Infeld model to general relativity) the corresponding solution is called \"EBIon\", where \"E\" stands for Einstein.\nAlcubierre drive.\nIn work that has been shown to violate known physics,\nsolitons have been proposed that could allow for the generation of Alcubierre warp bubbles in spacetime without the need for exotic matter, i.e., matter with negative mass.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51655", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51655", "title": "Severn bore", "text": "Tidal bore seen on the tidal reaches of the River Severn in south western England\nThe Severn bore is a tidal bore seen on the tidal reaches of the River Severn in south western England. It is formed when the rising tide moves into the funnel-shaped Bristol Channel and Severn Estuary and the surging water forces its way upstream in a series of waves, as far as Gloucester and beyond. The bore behaves differently in different stretches of the river; in the lower, wider parts it is more noticeable in the deep channels as a slight roller, while the water creeps across the sand and mudflats. In the narrower, upper reaches, the river occupies the whole area between its banks and the bore advances in a series of waves that move upstream. Near Gloucester, the advancing water overcomes two weirs, and sometimes one in Tewkesbury, before finally petering out.\nBores are present on about 130 days in the year, concentrated on the days immediately following the new and full moon. The size and precise timing of the bore depend on such things as the time of high tide, the barometric pressure, the wind speed and direction, the amount of water coming down the river and how well scoured the main drainage channels are. There are a number of viewpoints from which the bore can be seen, or viewers can walk along the river bank or floodbanks. Historically, the bore has been of importance to shipping visiting the docks at Gloucester, but this was alleviated by the construction of an alternative route, the Gloucester and Sharpness Canal, which opened in 1827. Nowadays the bore is of interest to surfers and canoeists who attempt to ride the waves.\nFormation.\nThe Severn Estuary, which empties into the Bristol Channel, has one of the largest tidal ranges in the world\u00a0\u2013 about . It is exceeded only by the Bay of Fundy, and possibly Ungava Bay, both in Canada.\nThe tidal wave starts far out in mid-ocean. It moves towards the continent of Europe at about 700\u00a0miles (1100\u00a0km) wide. When it reaches the continental shelf, its width decreases to about 200 miles (320\u00a0km) wide, and its amplitude increases. Approaching the Bristol Channel, a segment of the wave has to accommodate to the ever-decreasing width by raising its height. When it reaches the Severn proper, its width has decreased from or so to less than , and its height is nearly . As the bed of the estuary starts to rise and the sides continue to converge, the bore forms and begins to surge up the river in a tidal stream. The front edge of the wave is steep and the trailing edge flatter. The bore consists of three or four sizeable waves followed by a few of diminishing size. As with other waves, the wave tends to break in shallow places and near the bank, and flow smoothly in deep water. The wave travels upstream against the river current at a speed of .\nIn the lower, broader part of the estuary near Avonmouth, the tidal surge advances as a slight roll in the deepwater channels and the water rapidly spreads across the sands and mudbanks. Often, the Severn Bore floods the lower village of Pill if flood defences are not closed. Past Sharpness, the bore begins to form and when it encounters the large left-handed bend at Hock Cliff, it crashes headlong into the rocks. Reforming, it runs up-river close to the Overton shore before crossing the estuary towards Box Cliff. As it rounds the Horseshoe Bend it keeps to the outside but it afterwards moves across to the eastern side of the river. Above Longney Sands, the river abruptly narrows to a hundred yards, the sands diminish and the channel occupies the whole of the river. Now the bore is recognisably the spectacular phenomenon that people expect rather than a swelling flood of water. From Minsterworth to Gloucester, the width of the river varies little and the bore continues unhindered, climbing the banks on the outer side of bends and breaking over shallow places. At Lower Parting, close to Gloucester, it splits in two to pass either side of Alney Island. Both branches encounter and overcome weirs and rejoin at Upper Parting, and the much diminished bore continues upstream. In particularly high tides the water may overtop the weir at Tewkesbury, and even the foot of the weir at Worcester may experience a rise in water level of a foot (30\u00a0cm) or so.\nTiming.\nThe largest bores occur around the times of the equinoxes but smaller ones can be seen throughout the year. There are about 260 bores in each year occurring twice a day on 130 days. Because the bores are associated with the phases of the moon, one occurs between 7 a.m. and noon on bore days, and the other between 7 p.m. and midnight GMT, with the largest bores occurring between 9 and 11 in both the morning and evening. Maximum bores occur between one and three days after new and full moons, and smaller ones on the days that precede and follow the maxima.\nTimetables for the bore and predictions of bore heights are published each year; however, the heights and timings are subject to minor variations. The bore height is increased by a strong southwest or west wind, low barometric pressure, about of fresh water below Gloucester and well-scoured channels in the estuary. The height is decreased by strong winds from the east or north, high barometric pressure and little fresh water below Gloucester or excessive fresh water. The bore is made earlier by strong southwest or west wind, low barometric pressure, between two and five feet of fresh water, and shorter and well-scoured channels in the estuary. Conversely, it is delayed by strong winds from the east or north, high barometric pressure, little fresh water and more meandering, poorly scoured channels. The wind direction out at sea is of more significance than the local air-flow.\nBeing the onset of the flood tide, the bore is accompanied by a rapid rise in water level which continues for about one and a half hours after the bore has passed. The Severn bore is not a self-reinforcing solitary wave or soliton but rather a shock wave which is formed because the wave is travelling faster than the wave speed in water above the bore (see tidal bore for more details). The passing of the bore causes a churning of the water, and the myriads of tiny bubbles popping contributes much of the roaring sound made by the bore. The largest recorded bore was on 15 October 1966, when it reached a height of at Stonebench.\nViewpoints.\nThere are a number of viewpoints from which the bore can be seen; viewers do not have to restrict themselves to these because most of the river banks and floodbanks are public footpaths. Crowds often assemble at popular viewing points and car parking may prove difficult. Related to the time of the high tide at Sharpness, the bore passes Newnham on Severn one hour before this, Framilode and Arlingham, twenty-five minutes before, Epney twenty minutes before, Minsterworth at the high tide, Stonebench, on the east bank, fifteen minutes after the high tide and Over Bridge thirty-five minutes afterwards.\nOne of the main viewpoints is at Minsterworth at the Severn Bore Inn on the A48. Another good place to see the spectacle is Over Bridge, but the view here is rather restricted by the adjacent railway bridge.\nTransport and surfing.\nThe River Severn is considered a navigable river and Gloucester used to be an important port, with shipping having to deal with the bore. Vessels can ride the tide up from Sharpness to Gloucester. The tide will outstrip the vessel but by timing the journey correctly, a barge can reach Gloucester at high water. Descending is more difficult, and barges often needed to start their descent with one tide, lay up before crossing Longney Sands, and finish the descent at the next tide. These inconveniences in accessing Gloucester were overcome when the Gloucester and Sharpness Canal was opened in 1827, bypassing the need for shipping to use the river to reach Gloucester.\nRiver surfing enthusiasts attempt to surf along on the wave, which can be high. The river was first surfed in 1955 by World War II veteran Jack Churchill, a Military Cross recipient renowned both for carrying a Scottish broadsword, and for being the only Allied soldier to kill an enemy with a longbow during the war. He became a surfing enthusiast in his later life and rode the bore on a board he designed himself.\nIn September 2005, several hundred surfers gathered in Newnham on Severn to celebrate 50 years since the first recorded attempt at surfing the Severn bore and to view the premi\u00e8re of \"Longwave\" by Donny Wright, a historical film documenting the evolution of the sport since its inception in 1955. In March 2006, Steve King, a railway engineer from Gloucestershire, set a world record for the longest surfing ride on a river bore while riding the Severn bore; King surfed up the river for a distance of , a Guinness World Record.\nOn days when a large bore is expected, hundreds of surfing enthusiasts may accumulate, waiting for the waves to arrive. Hazards in high water conditions can include floating trees, collapsing portions of river bank, overhanging branches and even dead farm animals. The Gloucester Harbour Trustees, as competent harbour authority for this part of the river, have issued safety guidance for surfers, canoeists, small craft and river bank users in relation to the bore.\nHistorical accounts.\nAn eighteenth century account of the bore that has been attributed to Charles Blagden (died 1820), secretary of the Royal Society, is in the collection of the Gloucestershire Archives under reference Glos. R.O., D 1914. In the account, the author described it rising to eight feet and how he rode on horseback between bends in the river in order to \"overtake\" the bore as observers still attempt to do. The phenomenon is referred to as a \"head of tide\" with the author noting at the end that elsewhere such things are known as a \"boar\" or \"bore\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51656", "revid": "29707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51656", "title": "Neighbourhood (topology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "51657", "revid": "29707", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51657", "title": "Neighborhood (topology)", "text": ""}
{"id": "51660", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51660", "title": "Sandman/Death", "text": ""}
{"id": "51661", "revid": "41959821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51661", "title": "Limey", "text": ""}
{"id": "51662", "revid": "16861812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51662", "title": "Goon Show", "text": ""}
{"id": "51664", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51664", "title": "Vacuously true", "text": ""}
{"id": "51666", "revid": "26021349", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51666", "title": "Semivariance", "text": ""}
{"id": "51667", "revid": "4626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51667", "title": "Theory of random functions", "text": ""}
{"id": "51668", "revid": "50994593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51668", "title": "Shoot (botany)", "text": "Young stem or branch\nIn botany, a plant shoot consists of any plant stem together with its appendages like leaves, lateral buds, flowering stems, and flower buds. The new growth from seed germination that grows upward is a shoot where leaves will develop. In the spring, perennial plant shoots are the new growth that grows from the ground in herbaceous plants or the new stem or flower growth that grows on woody plants.\nIn everyday speech, shoots are often synonymous with stems. Stems, which are an integral component of shoots, provide an axis for buds, fruits, and leaves.\nYoung shoots are often eaten by animals because the fibers in the new growth have not yet completed secondary cell wall development, making the young shoots softer and easier to chew and digest.\nAs shoots grow and age, the cells develop secondary cell walls that have a hard and tough structure.\nSome plants (e.g. bracken) produce toxins that make their shoots inedible or less palatable.\nShoot types of woody plants.\nMany woody plants have distinct short shoots and long shoots. In some angiosperms, the short shoots, also called spur shoots or fruit spurs, produce the majority of flowers and fruit. A similar pattern occurs in some conifers and in \"Ginkgo\", although the \"short shoots\" of some genera such as \"Picea\" are so small that they can be mistaken for part of the leaf that they have produced.\nA related phenomenon is seasonal heterophylly, which involves visibly different leaves from spring growth and later lammas growth. Whereas spring growth mostly comes from buds formed the previous season, and often includes flowers, lammas growth often involves long shoots.\nShoot Apical Meristem (SAM).\nThe shoot apical meristem (SAM) is the tiny growing tip at the very top of a plant\u2019s shoot. It is made of small, constantly dividing cells that act like a \u201cfactory\u201d for creating all new above-ground parts of the plant. It is very important to understand the organization of the SAM. The tunica-corpus model, first proposed by Schmidt in 1924, describes the organization of the shoot apical meristem into two structurally and functionally distinct regions based on the orientation of cell division. The tunica consists of the outer one or two cell layers (commonly referred to as L1 and L2), where cells predominantly divide anticlinally-perpendicular to the surface-thereby maintaining a continuous surface layer. Beneath the tunica lies the corpus, an inner mass of cells (L3 and deeper layers) that divide in multiple planes, including both anticlinal and periclinal orientations, contributing to the internal bulk and volume of the meristemhttps://] . Cells in the tunica divide mainly anticlinally to maintain a smooth outer surface and give rise to the epidermis of emerging leaves and stems. In contrast, the corpus contains cells that divide in multiple planes, contributing to the internal tissues and overall bulk of the growing shoot. Together, the tunica and corpus generate the continuous formation of new organs and tissues, allowing the shoot to elongate and produce leaves, branches, and reproductive structures.\nFunctions of the Shoot Apical Meristem.\nThe shoot apical meristem performs two major functions: maintaining a self-renewing pool of stem cells at the center of the apex and generating new lateral organs from its flanks. These functions depend on the coordinated activity of its structural regions- the central zone, peripheral zone, and rib meristem-and on the layered organization described by the tunica- corpus model. Recent research has shown that these developmental roles are regulated by interacting hormone gradients and transcription factors within the meristem. According to Shani, Yanai and Ori (2006), high cytokinin activity in the central zone, promoted by KNOXI and WUSCHEL proteins, supports meristem maintenance and indeterminate growth. In contrast, elevated auxin and gibberellin levels at the periphery specify the P0 region, where lateral organs are initiated. These opposing hormonal domains create stable boundaries between the tunica and corpus regions and between the meristem center and emerging primordia, allowing the SAM to continuously balance self-renewal with organ production.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51669", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51669", "title": "Aryan Nations", "text": "Extremist Christian Identity organization\nAryan Nations was a North American neo-Nazi and white supremacist hate group that was originally based in Kootenai County, Idaho, about &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+3\u20444 miles (4.4\u00a0km) north of the city of Hayden Lake. Richard Girnt Butler founded Aryan Nations in the 1970s.\nStarting in 1981, Butler organized yearly gatherings of white supremacists at his compound in Idaho which he termed the \"Aryan Nations World Congress.\" At his first conference, Butler called for the division of the United States into racial mini-states, including a white ethnostate in the Pacific Northwest. He said that he had a black ally in the plan, Louis Farrakhan, leader of the Nation of Islam. At the 1983 Aryan Nations World Congress, Louis Beam and other leaders in the white power movement declared war on the U.S. government.\nIn 2001, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) classified Aryan Nations as a \"terrorist threat.\" In a review of terrorist organizations, the RAND Corporation called it the \"first truly nationwide terrorist network\" in the United States and Canada.\nHistory.\nAryan Nations beliefs are based on the teachings of Wesley A. Swift, a leading figure in the early Christian Identity movement. Swift was originally exposed to British Israelism while at the Angelus Temple through the teachings of visiting minister Gerald Burton Winrod. Swift was also exposed to Charles Parham's British Israel teachings at the Angelus Temple. Combining British Israelism, extreme antisemitism, and political militancy, Swift later founded his own church in California in the mid-1940s known as the Anglo-Saxon Christian Congregation. He hosted a daily radio broadcast in California during the 1950s and 1960s. In 1957, the name of his church was changed to the Church of Jesus Christ\u2013Christian, a name which continues to be used by Aryan Nations churches.70\nWilliam Potter Gale introduced Richard Girnt Butler to Swift in 1962. Swift quickly converted Butler, who was an admirer of Adolf Hitler and Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy, to Christian Identity. When Swift died in 1971, Butler fought against Gale, James Warner, and Swift's widow for control of the Church of Jesus Christ\u2013Christian. Butler eventually gained control of the organization and moved it from California to Idaho in 1973. After moving to Idaho, Butler founded Aryan Nations as a paramilitary wing of the church with an ideological mixture of Christian Identity and Nazism.\nFrom 1974 until 2001, the Aryan Nations headquarters was located in a 20-acre (8.1 ha) compound 1.8 miles (3\u00a0km) north of Hayden, Idaho. Aryan Nations had a number of state chapters, but it was highly decentralized and the chapters' ties to the organization's headquarters were extremely loose. The group hosted an annual World Congress of Aryan Nations at Hayden Lake for Aryan Nations members and members of similar groups.\nAryan Nations had difficult relations with the city of Coeur d'Alene. In 1986-1987, there were a series of bombings of the homes of local human rights activists, after which, the city and Aryan Nations left each other alone. In 1998, Aryan Nations applied for a permit for a march in downtown Coeur d'Alene. Although the permit was approved, the city declared a public holiday on the same day, resulting in an empty downtown of closed businesses.\nUntil 1998, the leadership of Aryan Nations remained firmly in the hands of Richard Girnt Butler. By that time, he was over 80 years old, and his health was poor. As Butler's health deteriorated, so did his ability to lead the group. This led to a series of violent events in Coeur d'Alene involving skinheads who had infiltrated the group.\nAt the annual Aryan Nations World Congress in 2001, Neuman Britton was appointed to lead Aryan Nations as Butler's successor. Following Neuman's death in August 2001, Butler appointed Harold Ray Redfeairn of Ohio to lead Aryan Nations as his successor; he had been agitating for control of the organization since the mid-1990s. Redfeairn had brought in Dave Hall, an FBI informant who exposed the group's illegal activities. After this was discovered, Redfeairn was distrusted by some in the group. Redfeairn and August Kreis III, the propaganda minister for Aryan Nations, formed a splinter group, and Butler expelled them from Aryan Nations.\nA few months later, Redfeairn returned to form an alliance with Butler. Butler's 2002 World Congress drew fewer than 100 people, and when he ran for mayor, he lost, garnering only 50 votes against more than 2,100 votes. Redfeairn died in October 2003, and Butler died of heart failure in September 2004. At the time of Butler's death, Aryan Nations had about 200 actively participating members.\nShooting, lawsuit and breakup.\nIn September 2000, the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) won a $6.3 million judgment against Aryan Nations from an Idaho jury, who awarded punitive and compensatory damages to plaintiffs Victoria Keenan and her son Jason. The two Native Americans had been beaten with rifles by Aryan Nations security guards in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho in July 1998. The woman and her son were driving near Aryan Nations compound when their car backfired, which the guards claimed to misinterpret as gunfire. The guards fired at the car, striking it several times. The car crashed and one of the Nations guards held the Keenans at gunpoint, beating them. Two of the assailants, Aryan Nations security chief Edward Jessie Warfield and guard John Yeager, were prosecuted for the attack. Warfield pleaded guilty to aggravated assault and was sentenced to two to five years in prison. Yeager entered an Alford plea for assault and was sentenced to up 2.5 years in prison. A third attacker was never found.\nThe SPLC filed suit on behalf of the Keenans. A jury found that Butler and Aryan Nations were grossly negligent in selecting and supervising the guards, and awarded the Keenans $6.3 million. A local attorney from Keenan's legal team said that the large verdict was partly to compensate the Keenans, but largely to punish Butler and his followers, and serve to deter similar conduct in the future.\nThe $6.3 million verdict caused Butler to file for bankruptcy one month later. As part of the bankruptcy process, the group's property was put up for auction. SPLC loaned the Keenans $95,000 to bid on the 20-acre property. In February 2001, the group's Hayden Lake compound and intellectual property, including the names \"Aryan Nations\" and \"Church of Jesus Christ Christian\", were transferred to the Keenans. Idaho native and millionaire philanthropist Greg Carr purchased the property from the Keenans, donating it to the North Idaho College Foundation. It has been converted to a park dedicated to peace.\nLocal fire departments demolished some of the church's former buildings by burning them during training exercises, including the Hayden Lake headquarters on June 29, 2001. Edgar Steele, the attorney who had represented Butler, was later convicted of hiring a handyman to kill his own wife. In 2014, Steele died while serving a 50-year prison sentence.\nDecline and legacy.\nAryan Nations was divided between three main factions. The largest group after Aryan Nations' bankruptcy was led by Charles John Juba, followed by August Kreis III until Kreis stepped down as leader and designated Drew Bostwick as his successor in 2012. In 2002, Juba's group was based on a compound in the rural town of Ulysses in Potter County, north central Pennsylvania; it hosted the 2002 Aryan Nations World Congress. \nKreis established a new headquarters in Lexington, South Carolina, and he eventually moved it close to Union City, Tennessee. In 2005, Kreis received media attention because he attempted to form an Aryan Nations\u2013al Qaeda alliance. \nBased in New York, and led by Jay Faber, Aryan Nations Revival became one of the more well-known splinter groups. In the \"Congressional Record\", the leaders of Aryan Nations Revival were listed as domestic terrorists. The government concluded that the Holy Order of the Brotherhood of the Phineas Priesthood was the enforcement/terrorist wing of Aryan Nations. Aryan Nations Revival hosted a weekly radio broadcast which it titled \"The Aryan Nations Broadcast\". Airing from 1979 to 2009, the radio program was authorized by Richard Butler. The program ended when host Hal Turner was arrested for threatening the lives of federal judges in Chicago. While incarcerated, Turner announced, through his attorney, that he was a federal informant, and that Aryan Nations was among those organizations which had been informed upon.\nIn 2009, Aryan Nations Revival, which was then based in Texas, merged with Pastor Jerald O'Brien's Aryan Nations, which was based in Coeur d'Alene, Idaho. Both parties ardently adhered to Christian Identity.\nThe most successful splinter group was likely Paul Mullet's Crusaders of Yahweh, which had branches in 17 states.\nSymbols.\nThe emblem (or shield) of Aryan Nations is designed to reflect aspects of British Israelism.\nAssociates.\nIn 1983, Robert Jay Mathews, who had visited the Aryan Nations compound many times, formed The Order, along with Aryan Nations members Dan Bauer, Randy Duey, Denver Parmenter, and Bruce Pierce. The Order's mission was to overthrow the Zionist Occupational Government and establish the Northwest Territorial Imperative through an orchestrated plot to commit acts of domestic terrorism which would include murder, arson, armed robbery, theft, counterfeiting, and extortion between 1983 and 1984. Dennis McGiffen, who also had ties to Aryan Nations, formed a group called \"The New Order\", inspired by Mathews' group. The members were arrested before they could follow through with their violent plans.\nBuford O. Furrow, Jr., who was convicted of the Los Angeles Jewish Community Center shooting and the murder of Filipino American postal worker Joseph Ileto, had previously worked as a security guard at the Aryan Nations compound for some time.\nOn April 4, 2004, intending to start a \"Race War\", Sean Michael Gillespie (a former member of Aryan Nations) threw a Molotov cocktail at B'nai Temple Israel in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. There were no casualties, but the building sustained material damage. Gillespie was arrested in Little Rock, Arkansas, on April 16 of the same year, but it was not until August 2005 that he was sentenced to 39 years in prison for attacking the Jewish temple and trying to send a racist letter to the congregation. The defendant raised his hand in a Nazi salute with stiff arms as the judge left the courtroom.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51670", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51670", "title": "Silent Brotherhood", "text": ""}
{"id": "51671", "revid": "49607560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51671", "title": "Quatorzain", "text": "Poem of fourteen lines\nA quatorzain (from Italian \"quattordici\" or French \"quatorze\", fourteen) is a poem of fourteen lines. Historically the term has been used interchangeably with the term \"sonnet\". Various writers have tried to draw distinctions between \"true\" sonnets and quatorzains. Nowadays the term is rarely used. When it is used, it is to distinguish fourteen-line poems that do not follow the various rules which describe the sonnet.\nSome notable quatorzains were written by William Shakespeare (Sonnet 18, sonnet 73, sonnet 116) and Elizabeth Barrett Browning (a collection of 44 sonnets that she dedicated to her husband). Another noteworthy quatorzain poet to mention is John Milton.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51672", "revid": "50151310", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51672", "title": "Vacuous truth", "text": "Conditional statement which is true because the antecedent cannot be satisfied\nIn mathematics and logic, a vacuous truth is a conditional or universal statement (specifically a universal statement that can be converted to a conditional statement) that is true because the antecedent cannot be satisfied. \nIt is sometimes said that a statement is vacuously true because it does not really say anything. For example, the statement \"all cell phones in the room are turned off\" (alternatively said \"for all x in this room, \"if\" x is a cellphone then x is turned off\") will be true when no cell phones are present in the room. In this case, the statement \"all cell phones in the room are turned \"on\"\" would also be vacuously true, as would the conjunction of the two: \"all cell phones in the room are turned on \"and\" all cell phones in the room are turned off\", which would otherwise be incoherent and false.\nMore formally, a relatively well-defined usage refers to a conditional statement (or a universal conditional statement) with a false antecedent. One example of such a statement is \"if Tokyo is in Spain, then the Eiffel Tower is in Bolivia\".\nDefinitions.\nThese statements are considered vacuous truths because the fact that the antecedent is false prevents using the statement to infer anything about the truth value of the consequent. In essence, a conditional statement, that is based on the material conditional, is true when the antecedent (\"Tokyo is in Spain\" in the example) is false regardless of whether the conclusion or consequent (\"the Eiffel Tower is in Bolivia\" in the example) is true or false because the material conditional is defined in that way.\nExamples common to everyday speech include conditional phrases used as idioms of improbability like \"when hell freezes over\u00a0...\" and \"when pigs can fly\u00a0...\", indicating that not before the given (impossible) condition is met will the speaker accept some respective (typically false or absurd) proposition.\nIn pure mathematics, vacuously true statements are not generally of interest by themselves, but they frequently arise as the base case of proofs by mathematical induction. This notion has relevance in pure mathematics, as well as in any other field that uses classical logic.\nOutside of mathematics, statements in the form of a vacuous truth, while logically valid, can nevertheless be misleading. Such statements make reasonable assertions about qualified objects which do not actually exist. For example, a child might truthfully tell their parent \"I ate every vegetable on my plate\", when there were no vegetables on the child's plate to begin with. In this case, the parent can believe that the child has actually eaten some vegetables, even though that is not true.\nScope of the concept.\nA statement formula_1 is \"vacuously true\" if it resembles a material conditional statement formula_2, where the antecedent formula_3 is known to be false.\nVacuously true statements that can be reduced (with suitable transformations) to this basic form (material conditional) include the following universally quantified statements:\nVacuous truths most commonly appear in classical logic with two truth values. However, vacuous truths can also appear in, for example, intuitionistic logic, in the same situations as given above. Indeed, if formula_3 is false, then formula_2 will yield a vacuous truth in any logic that uses the material conditional; if formula_3 is a necessary falsehood, then it will also yield a vacuous truth under the strict conditional.\nOther non-classical logics, such as relevance logic, may attempt to avoid vacuous truths by using alternative conditionals (such as the case of the counterfactual conditional).\nIn computer programming.\nMany programming environments have a mechanism for querying if every item in a collection of items satisfies some predicate. It is common for such a query to always evaluate as true for an empty collection. For example:\nExamples.\nThese examples, one from mathematics and one from natural language, illustrate the concept of vacuous truths:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51673", "revid": "50584560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51673", "title": "Moro Islamic Liberation Front", "text": "Group in Mindanao, Philippines, seeking Moro autonomy\nThe Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF; ) is an Islamic armed group split from the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), was founded in 1977, based in Mindanao, Philippines, which sought an autonomous region of the Moro people from the central government. The group has a presence in the Bangsamoro region of Mindanao, the Sulu Archipelago, Palawan, Basilan, and other neighbouring islands. The armed wing of the group was the Bangsamoro Islamic Armed Forces (BIAF), although the name of its parent organization, the MILF, was often used to refer to the BIAF.\nIn July 2018, the Philippine government passed the Bangsamoro Organic Law, giving more autonomy to Muslims. In return, MILF announced that it would disarm its 30,000 fighters.\nHistory.\nFollowing the Jabidah massacre in 1968, the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) was established clandestinely in 1969 by Moro students studying at the University of the Philippines, Egypt, and in the Middle East who sought to create an independent Muslim nation in southern Philippines. The MNLF gained foreign support from Muammar Gaddafi of Libya, which supplied arms and provided training for Moro youths. The MNLF took part in violent acts and assassinations to achieve their goals. The government in Manila sent troops into the southern Philippines to control the insurgency. \nIn 1976, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi brokered a negotiation between the Philippine government and MNLF Leader Nur Misuari which led to the signing of the MNLF-GRPH Tripoli Agreement of 1976 wherein the MNLF accepted the Philippine government's offer of semi-autonomy of the regions in dispute.\nThe signing of this agreement brought about a serious rift in MNLF leadership, leading to the formation of a breakaway group in 1977 by Hashim Salamat and 57 MNLF officers. The group was initially known as \"The New Leadership\". Misuari expelled Salamat in December 1977, after which Salamat moved his new organization first to Cairo, Egypt, and then, in 1980, to Lahore, Pakistan, where it engaged in diplomatic activities. This organization was formally established in 1984 as the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). Muammar Gaddafi became a longstanding supporter of the MILF after its emergence.\nIn January 1987, the MNLF accepted the Philippine government's offer of semi-autonomy of the regions in dispute, subsequently leading to the establishment of the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao on November 6, 1990. The MILF, however, refused to accept this offer and continued their insurgency operations. A general cessation of hostilities between the government in Manila and the MILF was signed in July 1997, but this agreement was abolished in 2000 by the Philippine Army under the administration of President Joseph Estrada. In response, the MILF declared a jihad against the government, its citizens and supporters. Under President Gloria Arroyo, the government entered into a cease-fire agreement with the MILF and resumed peace talks.\nDespite peace negotiations and the cease-fire agreement, the MILF clashes with government troops in Maguindanao, resulting in at least twenty-three casualties in January 2005. The combined armies of the MILF and Abu Sayyaf were involved in days of fighting, which necessitated government troops using heavy artillery to engage rebel forces.\nThe bombing incident in Davao Airport in 2003, which the Philippine government blamed on MILF members, raised speculation that the peace negotiations would be ineffectual in bringing peace to Mindanao if the MILF was unable to control its operatives. The MILF has denied ties with the Islamic fundemantalist group Jemaah Islamiyah, although Jemaah Islamiyah is considered to have provided them with training facilities in areas they control. The MILF has also continued to deny connections with Al-Qaeda, though it has admitted to sending around 600 volunteers to Al-Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan and that Osama bin Laden sent money to the Philippines, though the group denies directly receiving any payment.\nFrom June 28 to July 6, 2006, conflict between the MILF and armed civilian volunteers under Maguindanao provincial governor Andal Ampatuan who were supported by the Philippine Army had been reported. The fighting began after Ampatuan blamed the MILF for a June 23 bombing incident on his motorcade, which killed five in his entourage. The MILF denied responsibility, but Ampatuan sent police and civilian volunteers to arrest MILF members involved to the incident. Four thousand families were reported displaced by the fighting that followed, which was ended by a cease-fire agreement signed on July 10 and 11.\nTalks between the MILF and the government collapsed in 2008 after a Supreme Court decision in Sema vs. COMELEC rejected a preliminary accord that would have expanded the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. In 2011, the MILF withdrew their demands for independence, instead saying that they would pursue substate status, likened to a U.S. state instead of independence from the Philippines.\nStruggles.\nMemorandum of Agreement on Ancestral Domain.\nOn August 4, 2008, the Supreme Court of the Philippines issued a temporary restraining order, preventing the government and the MILF from officially signing the Memorandum of Agreement on Ancestral Domain (MOA-AD), which would conclude all dispute and begin formal talks that would lead to the drafting and eventual signing of a Final Comprehensive Compact between the two groups. The court accepted motions by the southern provincial governments that objected to the extended boundaries for the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao envisioned in the peace deal. The MOA-AD would have allowed the Moro people to gain control of the region under the concept of human rights with the right to establish a police force and to control natural resources.\nThe MOA-AD was initialed by former governor and peace panel chair Rodolfo Garcia and Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process Hermogenes Esperon and MILF peace panel chair Mohagher Iqbal on July 27, 2008, in Malaysia. It was scheduled for formal signing on August 5, but the Supreme Court issued no negotiation preventing the executive department from signing the agreement. The MOA-AD was the last of several agenda items under the 2001 agreement of the GRP-MILF, after security and relief and rehabilitation, prior to the discussion on the political settlement.\nThe Young Moro Professionals Network (YMPN) appealed to the public in 2009 to not be afraid of the MOA-AD.\nIn these times of hardship, we hold hands as one, with our Christian and Islamic neighbours, in the name of peace, acceptance and justice. We are committed to democratic and peaceful resolution of the conflict. Do not be afraid of the MOA-AD. To the national public, open your hearts to the Moro grievance.\nOver the next month, several MILF commanders were tagged by government officials as having initiated an offensive campaign. The Armed Forces of the Philippines responded to the allegation by immediately deploying ten battalions composed of a total of 6,000 soldiers into Mindanao under the command of Lt. Gen. Cardozo Luna. The violence displaced over 600,000 people and left about 300 dead.\nOn October 14, 2008, the court conducted a series of divided votes declared \"contrary to law and the Constitution\" the MOA-AD of the Government of the Republic of the Philippines and Moro Islamic Liberation Front Tripoli Agreement of Peace on 2001. Conchita Carpio-Morales ruled: \"In sum, the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process committed grave abuse of discretion when he failed to carry out the pertinent consultation process. The furtive process by which the MOA-AD was designed and crafted runs contrary to and in excess of the legal authority and amounts to a whimsical, capricious, oppressive, arbitrary and despotic exercise thereof. It illustrates a gross evasion of positive duty and a virtual refusal to perform the duty enjoined.\"\nCivil society organizations such as Consortium of Bangsamoro Civil Society submitted a motion for reconsideration. However, on November 21, 2008, the Supreme Court affirmed its October 14 ruling that declared unconstitutional the MOA-AD between the Philippine government and the MILF.\nMILF soldiers offered to help free the Irish priest father Michael Sinott, who was kidnapped in the Philippines on October 14, 2009, and sought permission to deploy about 100 of its soldiers in the area where Sinnott is believed to be held. However, this was turned down by the Philippine government.\nModification of demands.\nOn September 23, 2010, Mohagher Iqbal said that the MILF would pursue a substate, likened to a U.S. state, instead of independence from the Philippines. The Muslim substate would not exercise power over national defense, foreign affairs, currency and coinage, and postal services, which the central government would continue to exercise. Iqbal further added that the substate would not have its own armed forces but instead would have troops for internal security.\nPeace talks.\n\"Moro women were initially disenfranchised in the peace talks, even if they are equal stakeholders in the war making and peacebuilding in Mindanao, and that \"the war years took their toll mostly on women and children\" (Arguillas 2014).\" Jopson said. There were no Moro women publicly involved in the peace talks. The all-men panels reflected the military framework of the earlier talks.\nEmily Marohombsar was the first Moro woman negotiator for the GPH from 1998 to 2004. The rounds of peace talks from 2010 was more diverse in terms of participation and leadership. Women's involvement in peace talks justified the limited scope and narrow focus of gender content in the peace documents, since securing the BARMM was the main goal and the Moro identity was important.\nOn October 7, 2012, President Benigno Aquino announced a peace deal with the MILF and that \"This framework agreement paves the way for a final and enduring peace in Mindanao\". MILF vice-chair Ghazali Jaafar said, \"We are very happy. We thank the president for this.\" The deal was signed on October 15, 2012. Its aim is to pave the way to enduring peace between the two parties by officially envisaging an autonomous region in Mindanao.\nAccording to the framework, this semi-independent Muslim area would have a more just share of revenues from the extraction of its own plentiful resources, budgetary autonomy, its own police, and sharia law only for Muslims. In exchange for this, the MILF would be willing to stop armed movements against the government for autonomy and allow the national government to retain its control of national security and foreign policy. The autonomy agreement to be gradually implemented would also rename the region \"Bangsamoro\", after the Moro people.\nChief peace negotiator Miriam Coronel-Ferrer said that the government was cautiously optimistic for a final agreement soon following six days of talks on July 13, 2013. She said: \"This signing indicates that both sides are really committed to finish the peace negotiations. Nobody wants this not to reach its fruition.\" The agreement would see government allowances for the MILF to have a 75 percent share of earnings from natural resources and metallic minerals in a proposed autonomous region. For other energy resources, earnings would be split equally in accordance with Malaysia-brokered talks.\nPeace agreement.\nOn January 24, 2014, Philippine government chief negotiator Miriam Coronel Ferrer and MILF chief negotiator Mohagher Iqbal signed a peace agreement in Kuala Lumpur. The agreement would pave the way for the creation of the new Muslim autonomous entity called \"Bangsamoro\" under a law to be approved by the Philippine Congress. The government aimed to set up the region by 2016. The agreement called for Muslim self-rule in parts of the southern Philippines in exchange for a deactivation of rebel forces by the MILF. MILF forces would turn over their firearms to a third party selected by the MILF and the Philippine government. A regional police force would be established, and the Philippine military would reduce the presence of troops and help disband private armies in the area. President Rodrigo Duterte signed the law, a key step to ending a Muslim rebellion in the south of the mainly Catholic Philippines. In early January 2020, the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process announced progress exceeding its target for the decommissioning of MILF fighters, noting that \"8,879 out of the 12,000 MILF combatants were decommissioned from the last quarter of 2019\". Some former rebel fighters have joined the police and military to protect certain areas of the Bangsamoro region until an elected government is established in 2022.\nAs of 2023, the MILF is steering the BARMM and started decommissioning in 2019, and the peace negotiators are preparing for an exit agreement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51674", "revid": "800496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51674", "title": "Tautonymy", "text": ""}
{"id": "51677", "revid": "43475265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51677", "title": "Kinderhook (town), New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "51679", "revid": "49817879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51679", "title": "The Powerpuff Girls", "text": "American animated superhero television series\nThe Powerpuff Girls is an American animated superhero television series created by Craig McCracken and produced by Cartoon Network Studios for Cartoon Network. The show centers on Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup, three kindergarten-aged girls with superpowers. They live in the fictional city of Townsville with their father and creator, a scientist named Professor Utonium, and are frequently called upon by the city's mayor to help fight nearby criminals and other enemies using their powers.\nWhile attending his second year at CalArts in 1992, McCracken created a short film, \"Whoopass Stew!\", about a trio of child superheroes known as the Whoopass Girls, which was only shown at festivals. Following the name change to \"The Powerpuff Girls\", McCracken submitted his student film to Cartoon Network, who aired the series' refined pilot, \"Meat Fuzzy Lumpkins\", in its animation showcase program \"World Premiere Toons\" on February 20, 1995, along with its follow-up, \"Crime 101\", on January 28, 1996. Network executives gave McCracken the greenlight for a full series, which debuted as a Cartoon Cartoon on November 18, 1998.\n\"The Powerpuff Girls\" aired on Cartoon Network for six seasons, three specials, and a feature film, with the final episode airing on March 25, 2005. A total of 78 episodes were produced, in addition to the two pilots, a Christmas special, the film, a tenth anniversary special, and a special episode in computer animation. Various spin-off media include an anime, three CD soundtracks, a home video collection, comic books, a series of video games, a 2016 reboot series, and an upcoming reboot series, as well as various licensed merchandise. The series has been nominated for six Emmy Awards, nine Annie Awards, and a Kids' Choice Award during its run.\nPremise.\nThe show revolves around the adventures of three kindergarten-aged girls with an array of various superpowers: Blossom (pink), Bubbles (blue), and Buttercup (green). The plot of an episode is usually some humorous variation of standard superhero and tokusatsu shows, with the girls using their powers to defend their town from villains and giant monsters. In addition, the girls have to deal with the normal issues that young children face, such as sibling rivalries, loose teeth, personal hygiene, going to school, bed wetting, or dependence on a security blanket. Episodes often contain hidden references to older pop culture (especially noticeable in the episode \"Meet the Beat Alls\", which is a homage to the Beatles). The cartoon always tries to keep different ideas within each episode with some small tributes and parodies thrown in.\nThe show is set mainly in the city of Townsville, USA. Townsville is depicted as a major American city, with a cityscape consisting of several major skyscrapers. In his review of \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\", movie critic Bob Longino of \"The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\" said, \"the intricate drawings emanate 1950s futuristic pizzazz like a David Hockney scenescape,\" and that the show is \"one of the few American creations that is both gleeful pop culture and exquisite high art.\"\nCharacters.\nAs depicted in the opening sequence of each episode, the Powerpuff Girls Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup were created by Professor Utonium in an attempt to create the \"perfect little girl\" using a mixture of \"sugar, spice, and everything nice\". However, he accidentally spilled a mysterious substance called \"Chemical X\" into the mixture, creating three girls and granting them superpowers, including flight, superhuman strength, superhuman speed, superhuman senses, limited invulnerability, x-ray vision, red heat vision, energy projection, space survivability, and thermal resistance. In the original concept, the accidental substance was a can of \"Whoopass\", which was replaced by \"Chemical X\" in the television show.\nThe three girls all have abnormally large eyes inspired by Margaret Keane's art, and stubby arms and legs, and lack of noses, ears, fingers, flat feet, toes, and necks. McCracken preferred them to look more symbolic of actual children rather than going for a \"realistic\" look, meaning fewer body parts were needed. Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup normally wear dresses that match the colors of their eyes with black stripes, as well as white stockings and black Mary Janes. They individually represent body, mind and spirit, and despite being the same age, they adopt the characteristics of the oldest, middle and youngest child. The closing theme song offers a nutshell description of their personalities: \"Blossom, commander and the leader. Bubbles, she is the joy and the laughter. Buttercup, she is the toughest fighter.\"\nProduction.\nDuring Craig McCracken's first year in the character animation program of CalArts, he wanted to produce an animated short film based on a wrestler-type character he made named \"El Fuego\". In June 1991, he drew three girls with large eyes, visually inspired by the paintings of Margaret Keane, on a small sheet of orange construction paper as a birthday card design for his brother. Looking for some \"diversity and balance\" in the drawing, he had created a blonde, a redhead, and a brunette. He liked how \"cute\" they looked and turned them into superheroes, thus replacing the aforementioned wrestler. The following year, the girls starred on McCracken's animated short \"Whoopass Stew! The Whoopass Girls in: A Sticky Situation\". Initially, McCracken wanted to animate all four \"Whoopass Girls\" shorts, but only one was produced. McCracken's shorts were selected to be shown at Spike and Mike's Sick and Twisted Festival of Animation in 1994.\nWhile he was working on \"2 Stupid Dogs\" in 1992, McCracken's \"Whoopass Girls\" short was picked up for a series by Cartoon Network. The name \"Whoopass\" was dropped for inclusion as part of the \"What a Cartoon!\" animated shorts showcase. McCracken explained that Cartoon Network executives believed no one would make a children's show with the word \"ass\" in it, so the title changed to \"The Powerpuff Girls\" and the \"can of whoopass\" was renamed \"Chemical X\". McCracken's new short, titled \"The Powerpuff Girls in: Meat Fuzzy Lumpkins\", aired as part the network's \"World Premiere Toon-In\" on February 20, 1995. The short was not as popular as \"Dexter's Laboratory\", a project McCracken and former classmate Genndy Tartakovsky (who also directed many episodes of \"The Powerpuff Girls\") worked on together; being the most popular of the shorts, \"Dexter's Laboratory\" was the first to be greenlit by the network. Furthermore, McCracken's cartoon did not do well with a test audience composed by 11-year-old boys; \"They were saying, 'This is stupid, little girls can't be heroes'\", he recalled in 1999. They also found the girls' designs to be disturbing, which caused McCracken to panic and attempt to redesign them in a more realistic style. However, Cartoon Network executive Mike Lazzo convinced McCracken to stay true to his original vision, and allowed him to produce a second \"Powerpuff Girls\" short titled \"Crime 101\", which aired on \"What a Cartoon!\" in early 1996. Veteran ABC announcer Ernie Anderson, who narrated the pilot episodes and died of cancer in 1997, was replaced by Tom Kenny when it became a series.\nFollowing the second short, Cartoon Network picked up \"The Powerpuff Girls\" for a regular animated series. McCracken said that the show did not go through a large development process, but he was advised to change the name of the three main characters to Pink, Blue and Green, since the network executives found it hard to differentiate them by Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup. Instead, he put together a bible for the show, explaining the essential aspects of the characters. \"The Powerpuff Girls\" series debuted on November 18, 1998, and was the highest-rated premiere in Cartoon Network's history at the time. During its run, the series consistently scored the highest rating for an original series each week for the network across a wide range of demographics\u2014from young children to adults. In October 2000, Cartoon Network credited the series for its Friday night prime time ratings win among cable networks. By the end of 2000, merchandising based on the series encompassed a whole variety of products, including T-shirts, toys, video games, lunchboxes, and dishware. Concerning the show's success, Craig McCracken has stated, \"I thought it would get on Cartoon Network and college kids would watch it and there would be a few random T-shirts out there in the rave scene or in record shops. But I had no idea that it would take off to this extent.\" The cost per each episode was $500,000. A theatrical film based on the show, \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\", was also commissioned that year and was released July 3, 2002. The film received positive reviews from critics but was a commercial failure, earning $16 million worldwide against its $11 million budget. The production of the film also marked the series' switch from traditional cel animation to the digital ink and paint technique.\nFollowing the series' fourth season, the closing of Hanna-Barbera Productions and the death of its executive William Hanna in 2001, along with the muted reception to \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\", McCracken left the series to focus on developing his next animated series for the network, \"Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends\", leaving Chris Savino to take his place while production of \"The Powerpuff Girls\" was moved to Cartoon Network Studios. The show's last original run episode was on March 25, 2005; in all, six seasons were made. Cartoon Network had offered to give McCracken and Savino a seventh season of the series, but they believed six was enough, and that the series had run its course. \nAll of the original episodes were hand-drawn and produced at the Korean studio Rough Draft Studios, except the \"What a Cartoon!\" shorts, with the first one being animated at Animal House in Japan and the second being animated at Fil Cartoons in the Philippines. James L. Venable, Thomas Chase, &amp; Steve Rucker composed the opening theme of the series, and Scottish band Bis performed the ending theme song, as played during the credits. The opening theme uses a sped-up drum break sample of \"Funky Drummer\" performed by Clyde Stubblefield.\nTenth anniversary special.\nIn August 2008, McCracken revealed on his DeviantArt account, as had been announced in that year's Comic Con, that he was working with Cartoon Network on a new half-hour \"The\" \"Powerpuff Girls\" special to celebrate the series' tenth anniversary. Titled \"The Powerpuff Girls Rule!!!\", it aired on the Pan-Euro Cartoon Network on November 29, 2008, during the Powerpuff Girls Birthday Marathon, and in the United States on January 19, 2009, as part of its 10th anniversary marathon. Originally an idea for season 4, the special was meant to be the final episode of the series, but Cartoon Network was against giving their series a definitive ending at the time. Unlike all the previous episodes, the special was animated using Adobe Flash at Cartoon Network Studios. It also provides a glimpse of Sara Bellum's face as an easter egg, which at the time could be captured with a TiVo digital video recorder.\n2014 special.\nOn January 28, 2013, a CGI special titled \"Powerpuff Girls: Dance Pantsed\" was announced to premiere that year, though it was later delayed to January 20, 2014. Former Beatle Ringo Starr promoted the special on Cartoon Network singing a new original song \"I Wish I Was a Powerpuff Girl\" with previews leading up to the airdate. Ringo also voiced a new character named Fibonacci Sequins in the episode. The special was directed by Dave Smith, who directed episodes for the series in the past, and featured the original cast members reprising their roles. This \"Powerpuff Girls\" special marked the first time that series creator Craig McCracken had no input. The episode's plot has Mojo Jojo kidnap Fibonacci along with an opera singer and a badger. The girls rescue all of them, and the Powerpuff Girls defeat Mojo yet again. Not deterred, he then goes on to invent an evil video game called \"Dance Pants R-EVILution\" (a parody of the video game \"Dance Dance Revolution\") to take over Townsville. Common Sense Media gave the special 3/5 stars citing the \"tasteful update of the original animation style\" however recommends it for older kids around the age of 7. Geeked Out Nation gave the show a B rank and described it as \"...a good special with the return of the characters that many of us grew up [with]\", while they said that the special has few flaws. \"Den of Geek\" gave the special a 2.5 out 5 said \"The Powerpuff reboot needs those paddles to jump-start it. I want more. But I want better.\"\nReception.\nCritical reception.\nIn a 2000 \"Entertainment Weekly\" review, Marc Bernardin complimented the show on its \"spot-on pop-culture acumen\" and \"unparalleled sense of fun\", giving it a warm welcome from earlier \"lame\" superhero cartoons that he grew up with. Peter Marks of \"The New York Times\" noted the show's use of adult humor and pop culture references, declaring it \"the sort of playful satire that can appeal as much to a viewer of 37 as 7.\" Joly Herman of Common Sense Media described the show as a \"cute, highly stylized series [that] thrills the senses with its strange characters, funny situations, and lots of lowbrow humor\". She went on to say, however, that the show does go from innocent to violent in no time and that there is not much protecting young viewers against the violent undertones. Robert Lloyd of the \"LA Times\" said that the series might be \"transgressive\" based on little violence, but \"also cute.\" In another review, he had called it \"perfectly drawn, perfectly written and perfectly voiced.\"\nThe show began airing at the height of the \"Girl power\" trend in entertainment media. The Powerpuff Girls were often compared to the likes of Sailor Moon, Lara Croft, and Buffy the Vampire Slayer, who are also strong and heroic female leads. Craig McCracken argued that he did not create the show to fill a gap in the market encompassed by the \"Girl Power\" slogan, but that its true vehicle was \"good, strong characters\" that made for good storytelling. However, he did believe that it gained momentum from being considered a \"girl power\" cartoon, and that it became successful among boys and girls for the inclusion of action scenes. Terrence Briggs of \"Animation World Network\" noted that, \"at the very least, \"Powerpuff Girls\" works as an interesting comic deviation from the more sexual presences\" of other fictional heroines.\n\"TV Guide\" chose the Powerpuff Girls as No. 13 in a list of the 50 Greatest cartoon characters of all time. \"IGN\" ranked the series 18th in its Top 25 Primetime Animated Series of All Time list in 2006. \"Entertainment Weekly\" gave it the number one spot in its list of \"10 Best Cartoon Network Shows\" in 2012.\nAwards and nominations.\n\"The Powerpuff Girls\" has won three Primetime Emmys, two Annie Awards, and including those five wins, has been nominated a total of sixteen times for various awars.\nOther media.\nFilm.\n\"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\" was released in the United States on July 3, 2002, by Warner Bros. Pictures. The movie, a prequel to the series, tells the story of how the Powerpuff Girls were created, and how Mojo Jojo became a supervillain. The movie received a rating of 63% at review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, as well as some criticism for the violence involved. In all, the movie grossed $16 million worldwide with an $11 million budget.\nAnime adaptation.\nIn April 2005, plans for a Japanese anime series based on the cartoon, \"Demashita! Powerpuff Girls Z\", were announced. The series premiered in Japan the following year with 52 half-hour episodes, airing each Saturday from 2006 to 2007. It was made as a way to exploit the popularity that \"PPG\" was having on Japanese satellite television; however, in order to broadcast it on a channel like TV Tokyo, it had to be produced locally.\n\"Powerpuff Girls Z\" deviates from the original series in terms of genre and animation style. It features junior high school students Momoko Akatsutsumi (Hyper Blossom), Miyako Gotokuji (Rolling Bubbles), and Kaoru Matsubara (Powered Buttercup) as the three heroes.\nMcCracken told NPR's \"Talk of the Nation\" that he had little involvement in this version: \"I said, well, as long you keep that core foundation the same, feel free to reinterpret or re-imagine it in a way that you feel is going to better play in your marketplace [...] once we did the initial development on it, I kind of gave them my blessing and said, you guys can go off and make this show [...] I was really just there in the initial conception of it.\"\nAviation.\nDelta Express promoted the series by having a Boeing 737-232 jet painted with a special livery featuring the characters Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup on its exterior. The plane's inaugural flight was held at Logan International Airport in Boston, Massachusetts, on July 17, 2000. It was approved to serve in 21 airports. In 2002 the aircraft was repainted with a different \"Powerpuff Girls\" theme to promote \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\".\nCancelled live-action adaptation.\nOn August 24, 2020, a live-action television series based on \"The Powerpuff Girls\" was announced to be in development at The CW. According to \"Variety\", it would depict Blossom, Bubbles and Buttercup as \"disillusioned twentysomethings\" resentful at losing their childhood to fighting crime and faced with the choice of reuniting \"when the world needs them more than ever.\" The project, produced by Warner Bros. Television Studios, was being written by Heather Regnier and Diablo Cody, who were also serving as executive producers with Greg Berlanti, Sarah Schechter and David Madden. Craig McCracken was not involved; however, he declared his liking of Berlanti's superhero shows and admitted he was \"curious\" to see what they would do with their adaptation. Genndy Tartakovsky, who directed and produced several episodes of the original show, also expressed a similar sentiment, suggesting that the idea was \"strong\" and could work if there's \"good people attached to it\".\nA pilot was officially ordered on February 9, 2021, and Maggie Kiley was hired as the director. \"Variety\" later reported that Chloe Bennet, Dove Cameron and Yana Perrault were cast as Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup. On March 30, 2021, following the title change to \"Powerpuff\", Donald Faison was cast in the role of Professor \"Drake\" Utonium. On April 1, Nicholas Podany was cast as Joseph \"Jojo\" Mondel Jr., the son of Mojo Jojo. On April 7, production on the pilot began. On April 9, Robyn Lively was cast as Sara Bellum and Tom Kenny was confirmed to be reprising his role as the Narrator from the original series. On May 24, The CW announced that the pilot would be reworked off-cycle, with the cast and crew remaining on board. The script was later leaked to overwhelmingly negative reviews on social media. Mark Pedowitz, the head of The CW, stated that the script would be largely rewritten. On August 11, Bennet dropped out of the project due to scheduling conflicts. In May 2022, it was said to be in \"some stage\" of redevelopment. However, on May 18, 2023, The CW announced that the series had been cancelled by its new majority owners, Nexstar Media Group, and that the rights had been returned to Warner Bros. On July 5, it was reported that the series was no longer in development at Warner Bros. Television. On March 6, 2025, a full-length trailer of the series' pilot was leaked by Lost Media Busters on YouTube. It was later taken down by Warner Bros. Entertainment that same day.\nMerchandise.\nIn 2001, Warner Bros. Consumer Products deemed \"The Powerpuff Girls\" \ntheir flagship brand, given the success of the show's merchandise. The International Licensing Industry Merchandisers Association (LIMA) named it License of the Year at their 2001 awards ceremony. The array of products was so extensive in 2002 that, according to Janan Sheria of the \"Dayton Daily News\", even people without cable television could recognize the Powerpuff Girls. The franchise made nearly $1 billion in retail sales by 2002, according to Cartoon Network.\nBeginning in 1999, Trendmasters made Powerpuff Girls dolls, playsets, and action figures, aimed primarily at girls ages 6\u201311. Craig McCracken and Genndy Tartakovsky were initially involved in the conception of these toys. From August 21 to October 1, 2000, Subway promoted the series with four toys in their kids' meals. A set of six kids' meal toys was available as part of an April 2001 Dairy Queen promotion, which also included a sweepstakes offering the \"Powerpuff Girls\" VHS \"Boogie Frights\". Jack in the Box released six \"Powerpuff Girls\" toys in July 2002 as a tie-in for \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\". On February 10, 2003, Burger King began a four-week promotion featuring \"The Powerpuff Girls\" and \"Dragon Ball Z\" toys as well as special codes to redeem online for Cartoon Network's Cartoon Orbit. In the United Kingdom the characters of Buttercup and Mojo Jojo were given away in Kellogg's cereal boxes as part of the Cartoon Network Wobble Heads in 2003.\nFrom 2000 to 2006, DC published a series of seventy comics based on the television show. Golden Books also published a series of \"Powerpuff Girls\"-themed activity books and storybooks, including one written and illustrated by Craig McCracken, titled \"Big, Terrible Trouble?\". Around 400,000 total units of these books had been sold by 2001. From 2013 to 2017, IDW Publishing published a range of comics based on the series. In 2014, that company published a variant cover which showed aged-up versions of Powerpuff Girls with breasts and dressed in latex. The cover was designed by an artist working for Cartoon Network who was \"thinking of it more along the lines of 'female empowerment' than the kind of thing you guys are talking about\". Cartoon Network said in a statement: \"We recognise some fans' reaction to the cover and, as such, will no longer be releasing it at comic book shops.\"\nOn October 12, 2023, Dynamite announced a deal with Warner Bros. Discovery to create a new line of comics based on various properties, including \"The Powerpuff Girls\". The first issue was released in July 17, 2024.\nMusic.\nThree CD soundtracks were officially released for the series. The first, titled \"Heroes &amp; Villains\", features original songs about the \"Powerpuff Girls\" characters by a number of artists, including the new wave group Devo, Bis, The Apples in Stereo and Frank Black. Mark Mothersbaugh, who originally sought out to be the series' composer, produced the album along with Bob Casale, his bandmate of Devo. The album did well, topping the \"Billboard\"'s children's music chart for six weeks. Another album titled \"The City of Soundsville\" features electronica-style character themes and also did well with critics. The third album, titled \"Power Pop\", features a more teen-oriented variety of pop songs. This third and final album was considered a \"big disappointment\" and was not received as well as the previous albums. The British girl group Sugababes also released a song called \"Angels with Dirty Faces\" to promote \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\". The song received generally positive reviews from critics and peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart. The music video hearkens to \"Nano of the North\", an episode from the fourth season of \"The Powerpuff Girls\", in which each Sugababes member portrays a Powerpuff Girl.\nParodies.\nA crossover parody of \"The Powerpuff Girls\" and \"2 Broke Girls\" was done in the second season of Cartoon Network's TV series \"MAD\", known as \"2 Broke Powerpuff Girls\". The episode, which aired on January 30, 2012, is of Bubbles and Buttercup, who are broke and work for \"Him\" in a diner after the show got placed on permanent hiatus. Tara Strong (Bubbles) and Tom Kane (\"Him\") reprised their roles here. The \"MAD\" episode with the parody ranked #26/30 for the week with 1.903\u00a0million viewers.\nVideo games.\nSeveral video games were made for this show all being action in genre. \"The Powerpuff Girls: Bad Mojo Jojo\", released on November 14, 2000, follows Blossom as she tries to beat Mojo Jojo. The game was called \"simple and boring\" by GameSpot and was a failure critically. \"The Powerpuff Girls: Paint the Townsville Green\", another game released in November 2000, follows Buttercup as she fights crime. \"The Powerpuff Girls: Battle HIM\" follows Bubbles in her fight against HIM and was released in February 2001. \"The Powerpuff Girls: Chemical X-traction\" was released in October 2001, where the girls battle enemies in a variety of settings in order to reclaim Chemical X and track down Mojo Jojo, who fed the material to all the villains in Townsville. \"IGN\" gave the game a positive review while giving the PSone version a 2.0/10 bad review. \"The Powerpuff Girls: Relish Rampage\" was released in November 2002. All three girls are playable in a 3D world, and the game received mixed reviews. \"The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo A-Go-Go\" released in 2001 centers around the name of the Powerpuff Girls' mission to stop Mojo Jojo and his minions. The game received mixed reviews. \"The Powerpuff Girls: HIM and Seek\" was released in 2002 where the girls battle their variety of enemies through Townsville while on a scavenger hunt. The game received mostly positive reviews. PC games were also made for the series. These include: \"The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo Clone Zone\", \"The Powerpuff Girls: Princess Snorebucks\", \"The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo's Pet Project\", and \"The Powerpuff Girls: Gamesville\". The girls, with a skin that changes them to The Rowdyruff Boys, are featured in the platform fighter \"MultiVersus\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51680", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51680", "title": "Paula Danziger", "text": "American children's book author\nPaula Danziger (August 18, 1944 \u2013 July 8, 2004) was an American children's author who wrote more than 30 books, including her 1974 debut \"The Cat Ate My Gymsuit\", for children's and young adult audiences. At the time of her death, all her books were still in print; they had been published in 53 countries and translated into 14 languages.\nEducation and early career.\nThe Danziger family lived in Nutley, New Jersey, and Hollidaysburg, Pennsylvania, before settling in Metuchen, New Jersey, when Paula was in sixth grade. In an interview with \"BookPage\", she said: \"At age 12, I was put on tranquilizers when I should have gotten help. There was nothing major and awful. I just didn't feel [my family] was supportive and emotionally generous. My father was a very unhappy person, very sarcastic, and my mother [was] very nervous and worried about what people thought. They weren't monsters, but it wasn't a good childhood.\" She graduated from Metuchen High School.\nShe was encouraged to study nursing in college but instead studied to become a teacher at Montclair State University, where she was mentored by poet John Ciardi. After earning a bachelor's degree in education, Danziger taught junior high school English while pursuing a master's degree. After being injured in an automobile accident, she had trouble writing, as she was only able to write backwards. She was able to regain the ability to write normally, but she remained able to write backwards for the rest of her life. This sequence of events prompted her to do what she really want to do in life; she began writing.\nFollowing the success of \"The Cat Ate My Gymsuit\", Danziger left teaching to write full-time in 1978. She maintained homes in New York City and in Bearsville, New York. For several years, she had a flat in London, where she was known for presenting a regular item about children's literature on the BBC's Saturday-morning show \"Live &amp; Kicking\" in the 1990s.\nDeath.\nOn June 9, 2004, she experienced chest pain while her niece, Carrie Danziger, was visiting. After trying to hide her discomfort and phoning a neighbor about her concern, she ultimately went to a hospital, where she was diagnosed as having suffered a heart attack. She remained in the hospital and died from complications of the heart attack at St. Luke's Hospital in Manhattan on July 8, 2004.\nFollowing a memorial service at Riverside Memorial Chapel in New York City, Paula was buried in the Woodstock Artists Cemetery in Woodstock, New York. She was survived by her brother Barry, her niece Carrie, and three nephews.\nWriting career.\nDanziger's debut novel was \"The Cat Ate My Gymsuit\", whose characters were largely based on her childhood experiences. She continued writing books for teens through the 1980s, expanding to books for younger readers with the Amber Brown series, whose protagonist is based on Danziger's niece Carrie. She frequently gave lectures and speeches, wearing elaborate costumes and calling herself a children's Dame Edna Everage. She is quoted as saying that her alternative career choice would have been to be a comedian.\nShe collaborated with Ann M. Martin twice, with \"P.S. Longer Letter Later\" (1998) and \"Snail Mail No More\" (2000). The two would send correspondence to each other as if they were the main characters.\nPaula Danziger and her fellow author Bruce Coville read their work to each other over the phone beginning in 1992, continuing for over a decade as a two-person writers' group and later including author Elizabeth Levy. Following Danziger's passing, Coville and Levy continued her \"Amber Brown\" series, beginning with \"Amber Brown is Tickled Pink\" (2012), which told the story of the remarriage of the title character's mother.\nAwards.\nPaula Danziger's works were nominated for and won many US state-level children's book awards, including the Massachusetts Children's Book Award for \"The Cat Ate My Gymsuit\" in 1979 and the California Young Reader Medal for \"There's a Bat in Bunk Five\" in 1984. Four of her works were named IRA-CBC Children's Choices: \"The Pistachio Prescription\" in 1979, \"The Cat Ate My Gymsuit\" and \"Can You Sue Your Parents for Malpractice?\" in 1980, and \"There's a Bat in Bunk Five\" in 1981. \nThe Society of Children's Book Writers and Illustrators awards the Amber Brown Grant, which provides an all-expenses-paid, full-day visit by a well-respected children's author or illustrator, a stipend to assist in creating the event, and $250 worth of books by the visiting author, to one or two schools annually in her honor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
