{"id": "44833", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44833", "title": "Manuel I Komnenos", "text": "Byzantine emperor from 1143 to 1180\nManuel I Komnenos (; 28 November 1118 \u2013 24 September 1180), Latinized as Comnenus, also called Porphyrogenitus (; \"born in the purple\"), was a Byzantine emperor of the 12th century who reigned over a crucial turning point in the history of Byzantium and the Mediterranean. His reign saw the last flowering of the Komnenian restoration, during which the Byzantine Empire experienced a resurgence of military and economic power and enjoyed a cultural revival.\nEager to restore his empire to its past glories as the great power of the Mediterranean world, Manuel pursued an energetic and ambitious foreign policy. In the process he made alliances with Pope Adrian IV and the resurgent West. He invaded the Norman Kingdom of Sicily, although unsuccessfully, being the last Eastern Roman emperor to attempt reconquests in the western Mediterranean. The passage of the potentially dangerous Second Crusade through his empire was adroitly managed. Manuel established a Byzantine protectorate over the Crusader states of Outremer. Facing Muslim advances in the Holy Land, he made common cause with the Kingdom of Jerusalem and participated in a combined invasion of Fatimid Egypt. Manuel reshaped the political maps of the Balkans and the eastern Mediterranean, placing the kingdoms of Hungary and Outremer under Byzantine hegemony and campaigning aggressively against his neighbours both in the west and in the east.\nHowever, towards the end of his reign, Manuel's achievements in the east were compromised by a serious defeat at Myriokephalon, which in large part resulted from his arrogance in attacking a well-defended Seljuk position. Although the Byzantines recovered and Manuel concluded an advantageous peace with Sultan Kilij Arslan II, Myriokephalon proved to be the final, unsuccessful effort by the empire to recover the interior of Anatolia from the Turks.\nCalled \"ho Megas\" (, translated as \"the Great\") by the Greeks, Manuel is known to have inspired intense loyalty in those who served him. He also appears as the hero of a history written by his secretary, John Kinnamos, in which every virtue is attributed to him. Manuel, who was influenced by his contact with western Crusaders, enjoyed the reputation of \"the most blessed emperor of Constantinople\" in parts of the Latin world as well. Some historians have been less enthusiastic about him, however, asserting that the great power he wielded was not his own personal achievement, but that of the Komnenos dynasty he represented. Further, it has also been argued that since Byzantine imperial power declined catastrophically after Manuel's death, it is only natural to look for the causes of this decline in his reign.\nYouth.\nManuel Komnenos was born on 28 November 1118 in the Purple Chamber of the Great Palace of Constantinople. He was the eighth child and fourth son of John II Komnenos, the newly-crowned emperor of the Byzantine Empire, and Irene of Hungary. Manuel's eldest brother, Alexios, was crowned co-emperor, and Niketas Choniates narrates that in 1123 John raised Manuel and Manuel's other older brothers, Andronikos and Isaac, to the rank of \"sebastokratores\".\nManuel was raised alongside his cousin Andronikos, with whom he became close. He did not receive a formal education, and was trained to be a soldier. He accompanied his father on military expeditions against the Anatolian Turks. On one occasion he led his personal attendants in a counterattack, which reversed the course of an engagement which was favouring the enemy. This occurred during the unsuccessful Siege of Neocaesarea (1140), against the Danishmendid Turks. Manuel favourably impressed his father by his courage and fortitude, John praising him as the 'Saviour of the Romans', though he also criticised his rashness.\nAs part of his policy concerning the crusader states, John II groomed Manuel to marry Princess Constance of Antioch. John hoped that Manuel would become the master of a large domain, consisting of Attalia, Cyprus, Cilicia and Antioch. The Antiochenes, though ready to swear fealty to the Byzantine emperor, proved reluctant to accept any real level of Byzantine control. Manuel's eldest brothers, Alexios and Andronikos, died in 1142.\nAccession.\nIn 1143 John II lay dying as a result of an infected wound; on his deathbed he chose Manuel as his successor, in preference to his elder surviving brother Isaac. John cited Manuel's courage and readiness to take advice, in contrast to Isaac's irascibility and unbending pride, as the reasons for his choice. After John died on 8 April 1143, Manuel was acclaimed emperor by the armies. Yet his succession was by no means assured: with his father's army in the wilds of Cilicia far from Constantinople, he recognised that it was vital he should return to the capital as soon as possible. He still had to take care of his father's funeral, and tradition demanded he organise the foundation of a monastery on the spot where his father died. Swiftly, he dispatched the \"megas domestikos\" John Axouch ahead of him, with orders to arrest his most dangerous potential rival, his brother Isaac, who was living in the Great Palace with instant access to the imperial treasure and regalia. Axouch arrived in the capital even before news of the emperor's death had reached it. He quickly secured the loyalty of the city, and when Manuel entered the capital in August 1143, he was crowned by the new patriarch, Michael II Kourkouas. A few days later, with nothing more to fear as his position as emperor was now secure, Manuel ordered the release of Isaac. Then he ordered two golden pieces to be given to every householder in Constantinople and 200 pounds of gold (including 200 silver pieces annually) to be given to the Byzantine Church.\nThe empire that Manuel inherited from his father was in a more stable position than it had been a century earlier. In the late 11th century, the Byzantine Empire had faced marked military and political decline, but this decline had been arrested and largely reversed by the leadership of Manuel's grandfather and father. Nevertheless, the empire continued to face formidable challenges. By 1071, the Normans of Sicily had removed southern Italy from the control of the Byzantine emperor. Following the Battle of Manzikert, also in 1071, the Seljuk Turks had done the same with most of Anatolia, retaining control of the central plateau thereafter. And in the Levant, a new force had appeared\u2014the Crusader states\u2014which presented the Byzantine Empire with new challenges. Now, more than at any time during the preceding centuries, the task facing the emperor was daunting indeed.\nSecond Crusade and Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon.\nPrince of Antioch.\nThe first test of Manuel's reign came in 1144, when he was faced with a demand by Raymond, Prince of Antioch, for the cession of Cilician territories. However, later that year the crusader County of Edessa was engulfed by the tide of a resurgent Islamic jihad under Imad ad-Din Zengi. Raymond realized that immediate help from the west was out of the question. With his eastern flank now dangerously exposed to this new threat, there seemed little option but for him to prepare for a humiliating visit to Constantinople. Swallowing his pride, he made the journey north to submit to Manuel and ask for protection. He was promised the support that he had requested, and his allegiance to Byzantium was secured.\nExpedition against Konya.\nIn 1146 Manuel assembled his army at the military base Lopadion and set out on a punitive expedition against Mas'ud, the Sultan of R\u00fbm, who had been repeatedly violating the frontiers of the Empire in western Anatolia and Cilicia. There was no attempt at a systematic conquest of territory, but Manuel's army defeated the Turks at Acro\u00ebnus, before capturing and destroying the fortified town of Philomelion, removing its remaining Christian population. The Byzantine forces reached Masud's capital, Konya (Iconium), and ravaged the area around the city, but could not assault its walls. Among Manuel's motives for mounting this razzia there included a wish to be seen in the West as actively espousing the crusading ideal; Kinnamos also attributed to Manuel a desire to show off his martial prowess to his new bride. While on this campaign Manuel received a letter from Louis VII of France announcing his intention of leading an army to the relief of the crusader states.\nArrival of the Crusaders.\nManuel was prevented from capitalising on his conquests by events in the Balkans that urgently required his presence. In 1147 he granted a passage through his dominions to two armies of the Second Crusade under Conrad III of Germany and Louis VII of France. At this time, there were still members of the Byzantine court who remembered the passage of the First Crusade, a defining event in the collective memory of the age that had fascinated Manuel's aunt, Anna Komnene.\nMany Byzantines feared the Crusade, a view endorsed by the numerous acts of vandalism and theft practised by the unruly armies as they marched through Byzantine territory. Byzantine troops followed the Crusaders, attempting to police their behaviour, and further troops were assembled in Constantinople, ready to defend the capital against any acts of aggression. This cautious approach was well advised, but still the numerous incidents of covert and open hostility between the Franks and the Greeks on their line of march, for which it seems both sides were to blame, precipitated conflict between Manuel and his guests. Manuel took the precaution\u2014which his grandfather had not taken\u2014of making repairs to the city walls, and he pressed the two kings for guarantees concerning the security of his territories. Conrad's army was the first to enter the Byzantine territory in the summer of 1147, and it figures more prominently in the Byzantine sources, which imply that it was the more troublesome of the two.[a] Indeed, the contemporary Byzantine historian Kinnamos describes a full-scale clash between a Byzantine force and part of Conrad's army, outside the walls of Constantinople. The Byzantines defeated the Germans and, in Byzantine eyes, this reverse caused Conrad to agree to have his army speedily ferried across to Damalis on the Asian shore of the Bosphoros.\nAfter 1147, however, the relations between the two leaders became friendlier. By 1148 Manuel had seen the wisdom of securing an alliance with Conrad, whose sister-in-law Bertha of Sulzbach he had earlier married; he actually persuaded the German king to renew their alliance against Roger II of Sicily. Unfortunately for the Byzantine emperor, Conrad died in 1152, and despite repeated attempts, Manuel could not reach an agreement with his successor, Frederick Barbarossa.[b]\nCyprus invaded.\nManuel's attention was again drawn to Antioch in 1156, when Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon, the new Prince of Antioch, claimed that the Byzantine emperor had reneged on his promise to pay him a sum of money and vowed to attack the Byzantine province of Cyprus. Raynald arrested the governor of the island, John Komnenos, who was a nephew of Manuel, and the general Michael Branas. The Latin historian William of Tyre deplored this act of war against fellow Christians and described the atrocities committed by Raynald's men in considerable detail. Having ransacked the island and plundered all its wealth, Raynald's army mutilated the survivors before forcing them to buy back their flocks at exorbitant prices with what little they had left. Thus enriched with enough booty to make Antioch wealthy for years, the invaders boarded their ships and set sail for home. Raynald also sent some of the mutilated hostages to Constantinople as a vivid demonstration of his disobedience and his contempt for the Byzantine emperor.\nManuel responded to this outrage in a characteristically energetic way. In the winter of 1158\u201359, he marched to Cilicia at the head of a huge army; the speed of his advance (Manuel had hurried on ahead of the main army with 500 cavalry) was such that he managed to surprise the Armenian Thoros of Cilicia, who had participated in the attack on Cyprus. Thoros fled into the mountains, and Cilicia swiftly fell to Manuel.\nManuel in Antioch.\nMeanwhile, news of the advance of the Byzantine army soon reached Antioch. Raynald knew that he had no hope of defeating the emperor, and in addition knew that he could not expect any aid from King Baldwin III of Jerusalem. Baldwin did not approve of Raynald's attack on Cyprus, and in any case had already made an agreement with Manuel. Thus isolated and abandoned by his allies, Raynald decided that abject submission was his only hope. He appeared dressed in a sack with a rope tied around his neck, and begged for forgiveness. Manuel at first ignored the prostrate Raynald, chatting with his courtiers; William of Tyre commented that this ignominious scene continued for so long that all present were \"disgusted\" by it. Eventually, Manuel forgave Raynald on condition that he would become a vassal of the Empire, effectively surrendering the independence of Antioch to Byzantium. Coming before Manuel as a supplicant Raynald limited the emperor's options for punishment, and by submitting to Byzantium, the increasing pressure on Antioch from Baldwin III was relieved. \nPeace having been restored, a grand ceremonial procession was staged on 12 April 1159 for the triumphant entry of the Byzantine army into the city, with Manuel riding through the streets on horseback, while the Prince of Antioch and the King of Jerusalem followed on foot. Manuel dispensed justice to the citizens and presided over games and tournaments for the crowd. In May, at the head of a united Christian army, he started on the road to Edessa, but he abandoned the campaign when he secured the release by Nur ad-Din, the ruler of Syria, of 6,000 Christian prisoners captured in various battles since the second Crusade. Despite the glorious end of the expedition, modern scholars argue that Manuel ultimately achieved much less than he had desired in terms of imperial restoration.[c]\nUpon hearing rumours of conspiracies, Manuel headed back to Constantinople at a rush. He attempted to negotiate passage through the Sultanate of Rum but this was denied by Kilij Arslan II. Manuel proceeded anyway and when the army was nearly back in Byzantine territory near Kotyaion, the army was attacked by Seljuk forces. Manuel's passage through Seljuk territory started the 1159-1160 Seljuk-Byzantine war, and may have been intended to force the relatively new sultan into a client relationship with the empire.\nItalian campaign.\nRoger II of Sicily.\nIn 1147 Manuel was faced with war by Roger II of Sicily, whose fleet had captured the Byzantine island of Corfu and plundered Thebes and Corinth. However, despite being distracted by a Cuman attack in the Balkans, in 1148 Manuel enlisted the alliance of Conrad III of Germany, and the help of the Venetians, who quickly defeated Roger with their powerful fleet. In 1149, Manuel recovered Corfu and prepared to take the offensive against the Normans, while Roger II sent George of Antioch with a fleet of 40 ships to pillage Constantinople's suburbs. Manuel had already agreed with Conrad on a joint invasion and partition of southern Italy and Sicily. The renewal of the German alliance remained the principal orientation of Manuel's foreign policy for the rest of his reign, despite the gradual divergence of interests between the two empires after Conrad's death.\nRoger died in February 1154 and was succeeded by William I, who faced widespread rebellions against his rule in Sicily and Apulia, leading to the presence of Apulian refugees at the Byzantine court. Conrad's successor, Frederick Barbarossa, launched a campaign against the Normans, but his expedition stalled. These developments encouraged Manuel to take advantage of the multiple instabilities on the Italian peninsula. He sent Michael Palaiologos and John Doukas, both of whom held the high imperial rank of \"sebastos\", with Byzantine troops, ten ships and large quantities of gold to invade Apulia in 1155. The two generals were instructed to enlist the support of Frederick, but he declined because his demoralised army longed to get back north of the Alps as soon as possible.[b] Nevertheless, with the help of disaffected local barons, including Count Robert of Loritello, Manuel's expedition achieved astonishingly rapid progress as the whole of southern Italy rose up in rebellion against the Sicilian Crown and the untried William I. There followed a string of spectacular successes as numerous strongholds yielded either to force or the lure of gold.\nPapal-Byzantine alliance.\nThe city of Bari, which had been the capital of the Byzantine Catapanate of Italy for centuries before the arrival of the Normans, opened its gates to the Emperor's army, and the overjoyed citizens tore down the Norman citadel. After the fall of Bari, the cities of Trani, Giovinazzo, Andria, Taranto and Brindisi were also captured. William arrived with his army, including 2,000 knights, but was heavily defeated.\nEncouraged by the success, Manuel dreamed of the restoration of the Roman Empire, at the cost of union between the Orthodox and the Catholic Church, a prospect which would frequently be offered to the Pope during negotiations and plans for alliance. If there was ever a chance of reuniting the eastern and western churches, and coming to reconciliation with the Pope permanently, this was probably the most favourable moment. The Papacy was never on good terms with the Normans, except when under duress by the threat of direct military action. Having the \"civilised\" Byzantines on its southern border was infinitely preferable to the Papacy than having to constantly deal with the troublesome Normans of Sicily. It was in the interest of Pope Adrian IV to reach a deal if at all possible, since doing so would greatly increase his own influence over the entire Orthodox Christian population. Manuel offered a large sum of money to the Pope for the provision of troops, with the request that the Pope grant the Byzantine emperor lordship of three maritime cities in return for assistance in expelling William from Sicily. Manuel also promised to pay 5,000 pounds of gold to the Pope and the Curia. Negotiations were hurriedly carried out, and an alliance was formed between Manuel and Hadrian.\nAt this point, just as the war seemed decided in his favour, events turned against Manuel. Byzantine commander Michael Palaiologos alienated allies with his attitude, stalling the campaign as Count Robert III of Loritello refused to speak to him. Although the two were reconciled, the campaign had lost some of its momentum: Michael was soon recalled to Constantinople, and his loss was a major blow to the campaign. The turning point was the Battle of Brindisi, where the Normans launched a major counter-attack by both land and sea. At the approach of the enemy, the mercenaries that had been hired with Manuel's gold demanded huge increases in their pay. When this was refused, they deserted. Even the local barons started to melt away, and soon John Doukas was left hopelessly outnumbered. The arrival of Alexios Komnenos Bryennios with some ships failed to retrieve the Byzantine position.[d] The naval battle was decided in favour of the Normans, while John Doukas and Alexios Bryennios (along with four Byzantine ships) were captured. Manuel then sent Alexios Axouch to Ancona to raise another army, but by this time William had already retaken all of the Byzantine conquests in Apulia. The defeat at Brindisi put an end to the restored Byzantine reign in Italy; in 1158 the Byzantine army left Italy and never returned again. Both Nicetas Choniates and Kinnamos, the major Byzantine historians of this period, agree, however, that the peace terms Axouch secured from William allowed Manuel to extricate himself from the war with dignity, despite a devastating raid by a Norman fleet of 164 ships (carrying 10,000 men) on Euboea and Almira in 1156.\nFailure of the Church union.\nDuring the Italian campaign, and afterwards, during the struggle of the Papal Curia with Frederick, Manuel tried to sway the popes with hints of a possible union between the Eastern and Western churches. Although in 1155 Pope Adrian IV had expressed his eagerness to prompt the reunion of the churches,[e] hopes for a lasting Papal-Byzantine alliance came up against insuperable problems. Adrian IV and his successors demanded recognition of their religious authority over all Christians everywhere and sought superiority over the Byzantine emperor; they were not at all willing to fall into a state of dependence from one emperor to the other. Manuel, on the other hand, wanted an official recognition of his secular authority over both East and West. Such conditions would not be accepted by either side. Even if a pro-western emperor such as Manuel agreed, the Greek citizens of the empire would have rejected outright any union of this sort, as they did almost three hundred years later when the Orthodox and Catholic churches were briefly united under the pope. In spite of his friendliness towards the Roman Church and his cordial relations with all the popes, Manuel was never honoured with the title of \"augustus\" by the popes. And although he twice sent embassies to Pope Alexander III (in 1167 and 1169) offering to reunite the Greek and Latin churches, Alexander refused, under pretext of the troubles that would follow union.\nThe final results of the Italian campaign were limited in terms of the advantages gained by the Empire. The city of Ancona became a Byzantine base in Italy, accepting Manuel as sovereign. The Normans of Sicily had been damaged and now came to terms with the Empire, ensuring peace for the rest of Manuel's reign. The Empire's ability to get involved in Italian affairs had been demonstrated. However, given the enormous quantities of gold which had been lavished on the project, it also demonstrated the limits of what money and diplomacy alone could achieve. The expense of Manuel's involvement in Italy must have cost the treasury a great deal (probably more than 2.16 million \"hyperpyra\" or 30,000 pounds of gold), and yet it produced only limited solid gains.\nByzantine policy in Italy after 1158.\nAfter 1158, under the new conditions, the aims of the Byzantine policy changed. Manuel now decided to oppose the objective of the Hohenstaufen dynasty to directly annex Italy, which Frederick believed should acknowledge his power. When the war between Frederick Barbarossa and the northern Italian communes started, Manuel actively supported the Lombard League with money subsidies, agents, and, occasionally, troops. The walls of Milan, demolished by the Germans, were restored with Manuel's aid. Ancona remained important as a centre of Byzantine influence in Italy. The Anconitans made a voluntary submission to Manuel, and the Byzantines maintained representatives in the city. Frederick's defeat at the Battle of Legnano, on 29 May 1176, seemed rather to improve Manuel's position in Italy. According to Kinnamos, Cremona, Pavia and a number of other \"Ligurian\" cities went over to Manuel; his relations were also particularly favourable in regard to Genoa and Pisa, but not to Venice. In March 1171 Manuel had suddenly broken with Venice, ordering all 20,000 Venetians on imperial territory to be arrested and their property confiscated. Venice, incensed, sent a fleet of 120 ships against Byzantium. Due to an epidemic, and pursued by 150 Byzantine ships, the fleet was forced to return without great success. In all probability, friendly relations between Byzantium and Venice were not restored in Manuel's lifetime.\nBalkan frontier.\nOn his northern frontier Manuel expended considerable effort to preserve the conquests made by Basil II over one hundred years earlier and maintained, sometimes tenuously, ever since. Due to distraction from his neighbours on the Balkan frontier, Manuel was kept from his main objective, the subjugation of the Normans of Sicily. Relations had been good with the Serbs and Hungarians since 1129, so the Serb rebellion came as a shock. The Serbs of Rascia, being so induced by Roger II of Sicily, invaded Byzantine territory in 1149.\nManuel forced the rebellious Serbs, and their leader, Uro\u0161 II, to vassalage (1150\u20131152). He then made repeated attacks upon the Hungarians with a view to annexing their territory along the Sava. In the wars of 1151\u20131153 and 1163\u20131168 Manuel led his troops into Hungary and a spectacular raid deep into enemy territory yielded substantial war booty. In 1167, Manuel sent 15,000 men under the command of Andronikos Kontostephanos against the Hungarians, scoring a decisive victory at the Battle of Sirmium and enabling the Empire to conclude a very advantageous peace with the Kingdom of Hungary by which Syrmia, Bosnia and Dalmatia were ceded. By 1168 nearly the whole of the eastern Adriatic coast lay in Manuel's hands.\nEfforts were also made towards a diplomatic annexation of Hungary. The Hungarian heir B\u00e9la, younger brother of the Hungarian king Stephen III, was sent to Constantinople to be educated in the emperor's court. Manuel intended the youth to marry his daughter, Maria, and to make him his heir, thus securing the union of Hungary with the Empire. At court B\u00e9la assumed the name Alexius and received the title of \"despot\", which had previously been applied only to the emperor himself. However, two unforeseen dynastic events drastically altered the situation. In 1169, Manuel's young wife gave birth to a son, thus depriving B\u00e9la of his status as heir of the Byzantine throne (although Manuel would not renounce the Croatian lands he had taken from Hungary). Then, in 1172, Stephen died childless, and B\u00e9la went home to take his throne. Before leaving Constantinople, he swore a solemn oath to Manuel that he would always \"keep in mind the interests of the emperor and of the Romans\". B\u00e9la III kept his word: as long as Manuel lived, he made no attempt to retrieve his Croatian inheritance, which he only afterwards reincorporated into Hungary.\nRelations with Kievan Rus' (Russia).\nManuel Komnenos attempted to draw the Russian principalities into his net of diplomacy directed against Hungary, and to a lesser extent Norman Sicily. This polarised the Russian princes into pro- and anti-Byzantine camps. In the late 1140s three princes were competing for primacy in Russia: prince Iziaslav II of Kiev was related to G\u00e9za II of Hungary and was hostile to Byzantium; Prince Yuri Dolgoruki of Suzdal was Manuel's ally (\"symmachos\"), and Vladimirko of Galicia (Principality of Halych) is described as Manuel's vassal (\"hypospondos\"). Galicia was situated on the northern and north-eastern borders of Hungary and, therefore, was of great strategic importance in the Byzantine-Hungarian conflicts. Following the deaths of both Iziaslav and Vladimirko, the situation became reversed; when Yuri of Suzdal, Manuel's ally, took over Kiev and Yaroslav, the new ruler of Galicia, adopted a pro-Hungarian stance.\nIn 1164\u201365 Manuel's cousin Andronikos, the future emperor, escaped from captivity in Byzantium and fled to the court of Yaroslav in Galicia. This situation, holding out the alarming prospect of Andronikos making a bid for Manuel's throne sponsored by both Galicia and Hungary, spurred the Byzantines into an unprecedented flurry of diplomacy. Manuel pardoned Andronikos and persuaded him to return to Constantinople in 1165. A mission to Kiev, then ruled by Prince Rostislav, resulted in a favourable treaty and a pledge to supply the Empire with auxiliary troops; Yaroslav of Galicia was also persuaded to renounce his Hungarian connections and return fully into the imperial fold. As late as 1200 the princes of Galicia were providing invaluable services against the enemies of the Empire, at that time the Cumans.\nThe restoration of relations with Galicia had an immediate benefit for Manuel when, in 1166, he dispatched two armies to attack the eastern provinces of Hungary in a vast pincer movement. One army crossed the Walachian Plain and entered Hungary through the Transylvanian Alps (Southern Carpathians), while the other army made a wide circuit to Galicia and, with Galician aid, crossed the Carpathian Mountains. Since the Hungarians had most of their forces concentrated on the Sirmium and Belgrade frontier, they were caught off guard by the Byzantine invasion; this resulted in the Hungarian province of Transylvania being thoroughly ravaged by the Byzantine armies.\nInvasion of Egypt.\nAlliance with the Kingdom of Jerusalem.\nControl of Egypt was a decades-old dream of the crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem, and its king Amalric I needed all the military and financial support he could get for his planned campaign. Amalric also realised that if he were to pursue his ambitions in Egypt, he might have to leave Antioch to the hegemony of Manuel, who had paid 100,000 dinars for the release of Bohemond III. In 1165, he sent envoys to the Byzantine court to negotiate a marriage alliance (Manuel had already married Amalric's cousin Maria of Antioch in 1161). After a long interval of two years, Amalric married Manuel's grandniece Maria Komnene in 1167, and \"swore all that his brother Baldwin had sworn before.\"[f] A formal alliance was negotiated in 1168, whereby the two rulers arranged for a conquest and partition of Egypt, with Manuel taking the coastal area, and Amalric the interior. In the autumn of 1169 Manuel sent a joint expedition with Amalric to Egypt: a Byzantine army and a naval force of 20 large warships, 150 galleys, and 60 transports, under the command of the \"megas doux\" Andronikos Kontostephanos, joined forces with Amalric at Ascalon. William of Tyre, who negotiated the alliance, was impressed in particular by the large transport ships that were used to transport the cavalry forces of the army.\nAlthough such a long-range attack on a state far from the centre of the Empire may seem extraordinary (the last time the Empire had attempted anything on this scale was the failed invasion of Sicily over one hundred and twenty years earlier), it can be explained in terms of Manuel's foreign policy, which was to use the Latins to ensure the survival of the Empire. This focus on the bigger picture of the eastern Mediterranean and even further afield thus led Manuel to intervene in Egypt: it was believed that in the context of the wider struggle between the crusader states and the Islamic powers of the east, control of Egypt would be the deciding factor. It had become clear that the ailing Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt held the key to the fate of the crusader states. If Egypt came out of its isolation and joined forces with the Muslims under Nur ad-Din, the crusader cause was in trouble.\nA successful invasion of Egypt would have several further advantages for the Byzantine Empire. Egypt was a rich province, and in the days of the Roman Empire it had supplied much of the grain for Constantinople before it was lost to the Arabs in the 7th century. The revenues that the Empire could have expected to gain from the conquest of Egypt would have been considerable, even if these would have to be shared with the Crusaders. Furthermore, Manuel may have wanted to encourage Amalric's plans, not only to deflect the ambitions of the Latins away from Antioch, but also to create new opportunities for joint military ventures that would keep the King of Jerusalem in his debt, and would also allow the Empire to share in territorial gains.\nFailure of the expedition.\nThe joined forces of Manuel and Amalric laid siege to Damietta on 27 October 1169, but the siege was unsuccessful due to the failure of the Crusaders and the Byzantines to co-operate fully. According to Byzantine forces, Amalric, not wanting to share the profits of victory, dragged out the operation until the emperor's men ran short of provisions and were particularly affected by famine; Amalric then launched an assault, which he promptly aborted by negotiating a truce with the defenders. On the other hand, William of Tyre remarked that the Greeks were not entirely blameless. Whatever the truth of the allegations of both sides, when the rains came, both the Latin army and the Byzantine fleet returned home, although half of the Byzantine fleet was lost in a sudden storm.\nDespite the bad feelings generated at Damietta, Amalric still refused to abandon his dream of conquering Egypt, and he continued to seek good relations with the Byzantines in the hopes of another joined attack, which never took place. In 1171 Amalric came to Constantinople in person, after Egypt had fallen to Saladin. Manuel was thus able to organise a grand ceremonial reception which both honoured Amalric and underlined his dependence: for the rest of Amalric's reign, Jerusalem was a Byzantine satellite, and Manuel was able to act as a protector of the Holy Places, exerting a growing influence in the Kingdom of Jerusalem. In 1177, a fleet of 150 ships was sent by Manuel I to invade Egypt, but returned home after appearing off Acre due to the refusal of Count Philip of Flanders and many important nobles of the Kingdom of Jerusalem to help.\nKilij Arslan II and the Seljuk Turks.\nManuel\u2019s father John II Komnenos had kept the Sultanate of Rum in check and within the Byzantine orbit, although the sultan Mas\u2019ud had become increasingly assertive in the second half of the 1130s. Manuel had engaged in a punitive expedition against Konya in 1146 to secure his position as John's successor among the aristocrats and army. The accession of Kilij Arslan II to the sultanate in 1156 did not technically change the state of Seljuk submission to the empire, although in practice the new sultan was untried and had yet to come to any agreement with Manuel. Conflict came in 1159. In 1158 Manuel had gone to Antioch. In spring 1159, news of conspiracies in the capital reached the emperor and he decided he had to return. Manuel either had to traverse mountainous Isauria to get back, or pass through the Sultanate. Manuel sought permission to bring his army back via the faster route through Turkish territory, but Kilij Arslan denied it. Manuel\u2019s army made the march anyway, intending to accomplish two goals at once: re-assert nominal lordship over the sultanate, and return to Constantinople via the faster, easier route. The Turks were taken by surprise, but by the time the army reached the border area around Kotyaion, they were prepared and attacked Manuel\u2019s column. The scale of the attack is impossible to determine, but it was at least significant enough that Manuel felt the need to avenge it. Kilij Arslan dispatched ambassadors to make peace but Manuel rebuffed them and personally led two raids against the Sultanate. The sultan then escalated the conflict by sacking Laodikeia, a key communications hub in the upper Maender valley. Manuel prepared a major campaign to take Konya, and John Kontostephanos was dispatched to raise troops from Cilicia and a nominal contingent from the crusader states. Kontostephanos led these troops against the Sultanate from the south and won a victory. Preferring to leave a compliant Sultanate on the plateau rather than administer it directly, Manuel called off the campaign against Konya and in either 1160 or 1161 Kilij Arslan came to Constantinople to do homage and secure the peace.\nKilij Arslan II used the peace with Byzantium, and the power vacuum caused by the death in 1174 of Nur ad-Din Zangi the ruler of Syria, to expel the Danishmends from their Anatolian emirates. When the Seljuk sultan refused to cede some of the territory he had taken from the Danishmends to the Byzantines, as he was obliged to do as part of his treaty obligations, Manuel decided that it was time to deal with the Turks once and for all. Therefore, he assembled the full imperial army and marched against the Seljuk capital, Iconium (Konya). Manuel's strategy was to prepare the advanced bases of Dorylaeum and Sublaeum, and then to use them to strike as quickly as possible at Iconium.\nYet Manuel's army of 35,000 men was large and unwieldy\u2014according to a letter that Manuel sent to King Henry II of England, the advancing column was long. Manuel marched against Iconium via Laodicea, Chonae, Lampe, Celaenae, Choma and Antioch. Just outside the entrance to the pass at Myriokephalon, Manuel was met by Turkish ambassadors, who offered peace on generous terms. Most of Manuel's generals and experienced courtiers urged him to accept the offer. The younger and more aggressive members of the court urged Manuel to attack, however, and he took their advice and continued his advance.\nManuel made serious tactical errors, such as failing to properly scout out the route ahead. These failings caused him to lead his forces straight into a classic ambush. On 17 September 1176 Manuel was checked by Seljuk Sultan Kilij Arslan II at the Battle of Myriokephalon (in highlands near the Tzibritze pass), in which his army was ambushed while marching through the narrow mountain pass. The Byzantines were hemmed in by the narrowness of the pass, which allowed the Seljuks to concentrate their attacks on part of the Byzantine army, especially the baggage and siege train, without the rest being able to intervene. The army's siege equipment was quickly destroyed, and Manuel was forced to withdraw\u2014without siege engines, the conquest of Iconium was impossible. According to Byzantine sources, Manuel lost his nerve both during and after the battle, fluctuating between extremes of self-delusion and self-abasement; according to William of Tyre, he was never the same again.\nThe terms by which Kilij Arslan II allowed Manuel and his army to leave were that he should remove his frontier forts and garrisons at Dorylaeum and Sublaeum. Since the Sultan had already failed to keep his side of the earlier treaty of 1162, however, Manuel only ordered the fortifications of Sublaeum to be dismantled, but not the fortifications of Dorylaeum. Nevertheless, defeat at Myriokephalon was an embarrassment for both Manuel personally and also for his empire. The Komnenian emperors had worked hard since the Battle of Manzikert, over a century earlier, to restore the reputation of the empire. Yet because of his overconfidence, Manuel had demonstrated to the world that Byzantium still could not decisively defeat the Seljuks, despite the advances made during the past century. In Western opinion, Myriokephalon cut Manuel down to a humbler size: not that of Emperor of the Romans but that of King of the Greeks.\nThe defeat at Myriokephalon has often been depicted as a catastrophe in which the entire Byzantine army was destroyed. Manuel himself compared the defeat to Manzikert; it seemed to him that the Byzantine defeat at Myriokephalon complemented the destruction at Manzikert. In reality, although a defeat, it was not particularly costly and did not significantly diminish the fighting ability of the Byzantine army. Most of the casualties were borne by the right wing, largely composed of allied troops commanded by Baldwin of Antioch, and also by the baggage train, which was the main target of the Turkish ambush.\nThe limited losses inflicted on native Byzantine troops were quickly recovered, and in the following year Manuel's forces defeated a force of \"picked Turks\". John Komnenos Vatatzes, who was sent by the Emperor to repel the Turkish invasion, not only brought troops from the capital but also was able to gather an army along the way. Vatatzes caught the Turks in an ambush as they were crossing the Meander River; the subsequent Battle of Hyelion and Leimocheir effectively destroyed them as a fighting force. This is an indication that the Byzantine army remained strong and that the defensive program of western Asia Minor was still successful. After the victory on the Meander, Manuel himself advanced with a small army to drive the Turks from Panasium, south of Cotyaeum.\nIn 1178, however, a Byzantine army retreated after encountering a Turkish force at Charax, allowing the Turks to capture many livestock. The city of Claudiopolis in Bithynia was besieged by the Turks in 1179, forcing Manuel to lead a small cavalry force to save the city, and then, even as late as 1180, the Byzantines succeeded in scoring a victory over the Turks.\nThe continuous warfare had a serious effect upon Manuel's vitality; he declined in health and in 1180 succumbed to a slow fever. Furthermore, like Manzikert, the balance between the two powers began to gradually shift\u2014Manuel never again attacked the Turks, and after his death they began to move further west, deeper into Byzantine territory.\nDoctrinal controversies (1156\u20131180).\nThree major theological controversies occurred during Manuel's reign. In 1156\u20131157 the question was raised whether Christ had offered Himself as a sacrifice for the sins of the world to the Father and to the Holy Spirit only, or also to the Logos (i.e., to Himself). In the end a synod held at Constantinople in 1157 declared the doctrine of a single sacrifice to the Holy Trinity, producing a formula: \"The precious blood of the Only Begotten was offered not only to the Father but also to the Son and the Holy Ghost, the one Godhead\", despite the dissent of Patriarch of Antioch-elect Soterichos Panteugenos, who was subsequently dismissed.\nTen years later, a controversy arose as to whether the saying of Christ, \"My Father is greater than I\", referred to his divine nature, to his human nature, or to the union of the two. Demetrius of Lampe, a Byzantine diplomat recently returned from the West, ridiculed the way the verse was interpreted there, that Christ was inferior to his father in his humanity but equal in his divinity. Manuel, on the other hand, perhaps with an eye on the project for Church union, found that the formula made sense, and prevailed over a majority in a synod convened on 2 March 1166 to decide the issue, where he had the support of the patriarch Luke Chrysoberges and later Patriarch Michael III. Those who refused to submit to the synod's decisions had their property confiscated or were exiled.[g] The political dimensions of this controversy are apparent from the fact that a leading dissenter from the Emperor's doctrine was his nephew Alexios Kontostephanos.\nA third controversy sprung up in 1180, when Manuel objected to the formula of solemn abjuration, which was exacted from Muslim converts. One of the more striking anathemas of this abjuration was that directed against the deity worshipped by Muhammad and his followers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And before all, I anathematize the God of Muhammad about whom he [Muhammad] says, \"He is God alone, God made of solid, hammer-beaten metal; He begets not and is not begotten, nor is there like unto Him any one.\"\nThe emperor ordered the deletion of this anathema from the Church's catechetical texts, a measure that provoked vehement opposition from both the patriarch and bishops.\nChivalric narrations.\nManuel is representative of a new kind of Byzantine ruler who was influenced by his contact with western Crusaders. He arranged jousting matches, even participating in them, an unusual and discomforting sight for the Byzantines. Endowed with a fine physique, Manuel has been the subject of exaggeration in the Byzantine sources of his era, where he is presented as a man of great personal courage. According to the story of his exploits, which appear as a model or a copy of the romances of chivalry, such was his strength and exercise in arms that Raymond of Antioch was incapable of wielding his lance and buckler. In a famous tournament, he is said to have entered the lists on a fiery courser, and to have overturned two of the stoutest Italian knights. In one day, he is said to have slain forty Turks with his own hand, and in a battle against the Hungarians he allegedly snatched a banner, and was the first, almost alone, who passed a bridge that separated his army from the enemy. On another occasion, he is said to have cut his way through a squadron of five hundred Turks, without receiving a wound; he had previously posted an ambuscade in a wood and was accompanied only by his brother and Axouch.\nFamily.\nManuel had two wives. His first marriage, in 1146, was to Bertha of Sulzbach, a sister-in-law of Conrad III of Germany. She died in 1160. Children:\nManuel's second marriage was to Maria of Antioch (nicknamed \"Xene\"), a daughter of Raymond and Constance of Antioch, in 1161 or 1162. By this marriage, Manuel had one son:\nManuel had several illegitimate children:\nBy Theodora Vatatzina:\nBy Maria Taronitissa, the wife of John Doukas Komnenos:\nBy other lovers:\nAssessments.\nForeign and military affairs.\nAs a young man, Manuel had been determined to restore by force of arms the predominance of the Byzantine Empire in the Mediterranean countries. By the time he died in 1180, 37 years had passed since that momentous day in 1143 when, amid the wilds of Cilicia, his father had proclaimed him emperor. These years had seen Manuel involved in conflict with his neighbours on all sides. Manuel's father and grandfather before him had worked patiently to undo the damage done by the battle of Manzikert and its aftermath. Thanks to their efforts, the empire Manuel inherited was stronger and better organised than at any time for a century. While it is clear that Manuel used these assets to the full, it is not so clear how much he added to them, and there is room for doubt as to whether he used them to best effect.\nManuel had proven himself to be an energetic emperor who saw possibilities everywhere, and whose optimistic outlook had shaped his approach to foreign policy. However, in spite of his military prowess Manuel achieved but a slight degree of his object of restoring the Byzantine Empire. Retrospectively, some commentators have criticised some of Manuel's aims as unrealistic, in particular citing the expeditions he sent to Egypt as proof of dreams of grandeur on an unattainable scale. His greatest military campaign, his grand expedition against the Turkish Sultanate of Iconium, ended in humiliating defeat, and his greatest diplomatic effort apparently collapsed, when Pope Alexander III became reconciled to the German emperor Frederick Barbarossa at the Peace of Venice. Historian Mark C. Bartusis argues that Manuel (and his father as well) tried to rebuild a national army, but his reforms were adequate for neither his ambitions nor his needs; the defeat at Myriokephalon underscored the fundamental weakness of his policies. According to Edward Gibbon, Manuel's victories were not productive of any permanent or useful conquest.\nHis advisors on western church affairs included the Pisan scholar Hugh Eteriano.\nInternal affairs.\nChoniates criticised Manuel for raising taxes and pointed to Manuel's reign as a period of excess; according to Choniates, the money thus raised was spent lavishly at the cost of his citizens. Whether one reads the Greek encomiastic sources, or the Latin and oriental sources, the impression is consistent with Choniates' picture of an emperor who spent lavishly in all available ways, rarely economising in one sector in order to develop another. Manuel spared no expense on the army, the navy, diplomacy, ceremonial, palace-building, the Komnenian family, and other seekers of patronage. A significant amount of this expenditure was pure financial loss to the Empire, like the subsidies poured into Italy and the crusader states, and the sums spent on the failed expeditions of 1155\u20131156, 1169 and 1176.\nThe problems this created were counterbalanced to some extent by his successes, particularly in the Balkans; Manuel extended the frontiers of his Empire in the Balkan region, ensuring security for the whole of Greece and Bulgaria. Had he been more successful in all his ventures, he would have controlled not only the most productive farmland around the Eastern Mediterranean and Adriatic seas, but also the entire trading facilities of the area. Even if he did not achieve his ambitious goals, his wars against Hungary (1149\u20131155, 1162\u20131167) brought him control of the Dalmatian coast, the rich agricultural region of Sirmium, and the Danube trade route from Hungary to the Black Sea. His Balkan expeditions are said to have taken great booty in slaves and livestock; Kinnamos was impressed by the amount of arms taken from the Hungarian dead after the battle of 1167. And even if Manuel's wars against the Turks probably realised a net loss, his commanders took livestock and captives on at least two occasions.\nThis allowed the Western provinces to flourish in an economic revival that had begun in the time of his grandfather Alexios I and continued till the close of the century. Indeed, it has been argued that Byzantium in the 12th century was richer and more prosperous than at any time since the Persian invasion during the reign of Herakleios, some five hundred years earlier. There is good evidence from this period of new construction and new churches, even in remote areas, strongly suggesting that wealth was widespread. Trade was also flourishing; it has been estimated that the population of Constantinople, the biggest commercial centre of the Empire, was between half a million and one million during Manuel's reign, making it by far the largest city in Europe. A major source of Manuel's wealth was the \"kommerkion\", a customs duty levied at Constantinople on all imports and exports. The \"kommerkion\" was stated to have collected 20,000 \"hyperpyra\" each day.\nFurthermore, Constantinople was undergoing expansion. The cosmopolitan character of the city was being reinforced by the arrival of Italian merchants and Crusaders en route to the Holy Land. The Venetians, the Genoese, and others opened up the ports of the Aegean to commerce, shipping goods from the Crusader kingdoms of Outremer and Fatimid Egypt to the west and trading with Byzantium via Constantinople. These maritime traders stimulated demand in the towns and cities of Greece, Macedonia, and the Greek Islands, generating new sources of wealth in a predominantly agrarian economy. Thessalonica, the second city of the Empire, hosted a famous summer fair that attracted traders from across the Balkans and even further afield to its bustling market stalls. In Corinth, silk production fuelled a thriving economy. All this is a testament to the success of the Komnenian Emperors in securing a \"Pax Byzantina\" in these heartland territories.\nLegacy.\nTo the rhetors of his court, Manuel was the \"divine emperor\". A generation after his death, Choniates referred to him as \"the most blessed among emperors\", and a century later John Stavrakios described him as \"great in fine deeds\". John Phokas, a soldier who fought in Manuel's army, characterised him some years later as the \"world saving\" and glorious emperor. Manuel would be remembered in France, Italy, and the Crusader states as the most powerful sovereign in the world. A Genoese analyst noted that with the passing of \"Lord Manuel of divine memory, the most blessed emperor of Constantinople ... all Christendom incurred great ruin and detriment.\" William of Tyre called Manuel \"a wise and discreet prince of great magnificence, worthy of praise in every respect\", \"a great-souled man of incomparable energy\", whose \"memory will ever be held in benediction.\" Manuel was further extolled by Robert of Clari as \"a right worthy man, [...] and richest of all the Christians who ever were, and the most bountiful.\"\nA telling reminder of the influence that Manuel held in the Crusader states in particular can still be seen in the church of the Holy Nativity in Bethlehem. In the 1160s the nave was redecorated with mosaics showing the councils of the church. Manuel was one of the patrons of the work. On the south wall, an inscription in Greek reads: \"the present work was finished by Ephraim the monk, painter and mosaicist, in the reign of the great emperor Manuel Porphyrogennetos Komnenos and in the time of the great king of Jerusalem, Amalric.\" That Manuel's name was placed first was a symbolic, public recognition of Manuel's overlordship as leader of the Christian world. Manuel's role as protector of the Orthodox Christians and Christian holy places in general is also evident in his successful attempts to secure rights over the Holy Land. Manuel participated in the building and decorating of many of the basilicas and Greek monasteries in the Holy Land, including the church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem, where thanks to his efforts the Byzantine clergy were allowed to perform the Greek liturgy each day. All this reinforced his position as overlord of the Crusader states, with his hegemony over Antioch and Jerusalem secured by agreement with Raynald, Prince of Antioch, and Amalric, King of Jerusalem respectively. Manuel was also the last Byzantine emperor who, thanks to his military and diplomatic success in the Balkans, could call himself \"ruler of Dalmatia, Bosnia, Croatia, Serbia, Bulgaria and Hungary\".\nManuel died on 24 September 1180, having just celebrated the betrothal of his son Alexios II to the daughter of the king of France. He was laid to rest alongside his father in the Pantokrator Monastery in Constantinople. Thanks to the diplomacy and campaigning of Alexios, John and Manuel, the empire was a great power, economically prosperous, and secure on its frontiers; but there were serious problems as well. Internally, the Byzantine court required a strong leader to hold it together, and after Manuel's death stability was seriously endangered from within. Some of the foreign enemies of the Empire were lurking on the flanks, waiting for a chance to attack, in particular the Turks in Anatolia, whom Manuel had ultimately failed to defeat, and the Normans in Sicily, who had already tried but failed to invade the Empire on several occasions. Even the Venetians, the single most important western ally of Byzantium, were on bad terms with the empire at Manuel's death in 1180. Given this situation, it would have taken a strong emperor to secure the Empire against the foreign threats it now faced, and to rebuild the depleted imperial treasury. But Manuel's son was a minor, and his unpopular regency government was overthrown in a violent \"coup d'\u00e9tat\". This troubled succession weakened the dynastic continuity and solidarity on which the strength of the Byzantine state had come to rely.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n^\u00a0a:\u00a0The mood that prevailed before the end of 1147 is best conveyed by a verse encomium to Manuel (one of the poems included in a list transmitted under the name of Theodore Prodromos in \"Codex Marcianus graecus XI.22\" known as \"Manganeios Prodromos\"), which was probably an imperial commission, and must have been written shortly after the Germans had crossed the Bosporus. Here Conrad is accused of wanting to take Constantinople by force, and to install a Latin patriarch (\"Manganeios Prodromos\", no 20.1).\n^\u00a0b:\u00a0According to Paul Magdalino, one of Manuel's primary goals was a partition of Italy with the German empire, in which Byzantium would get the Adriatic coast. His unilateral pursuit, however, antagonized the new German emperor, Frederick Barbarossa, whose own plans for imperial restoration ruled out any partnership with Byzantium. Manuel was thus obliged to treat Frederick as his main enemy, and to form a web of relationships with other western powers, including the papacy, his old enemy, the Norman kingdom, Hungary, several magnates and cities throughout Italy, and, above all, the crusader states.\n^\u00a0c:\u00a0Magdalino underscores that, whereas John had removed the Rupenid princes from power in Cilicia twenty years earlier, Manuel allowed Toros to hold most of his strongholds he had taken, and effectively restored only the coastal area to imperial rule. From Raynald, Manuel secured recognition of imperial suzerainty over Antioch, with the promise to hand over the citadel, to instal a patriarch sent from Constantinople (not actually implemented until 1165\u201366), and to provide troops for the emperor's service, but nothing seems to have been said about the reversion of Antioch to direct imperial rule. According to Magdalino, this suggests that Manuel had dropped this demand on which both his grandfather and father insisted. For his part, historian Zachary Nugent Brooke believes that the victory of Christianity against Nur ad-Din was made impossible, since both Greeks and Latins were concerned primarily with their own interests. He characterises the policy of Manuel as \"short-sighted\", because \"he lost a splendid opportunity of recovering the former possessions of the Empire, and by his departure threw away most of the actual fruits of his expedition\". According to Piers Paul Read, Manuel's deal with Nur ad-Din was for the Latins another expression of Greeks' perfidy.\n Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.\n Parameter #1 (name of content note) and parameter #2 (text of content note) must both be entered.\n^\u00a0f:\u00a0This probably meant that Amalric repeated Baldwin's assurances regarding the status of Antioch as an imperial fief.\n^\u00a0g:\u00a0According to Michael Angold, after the controversy of 1166 Manuel took his responsibilities very seriously, and tightened his grip over the church. 1166 was also the year in which Manuel first referred in his legislation to his role as the disciplinarian of the church (\"epistemonarkhes\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44834", "revid": "4460044", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44834", "title": "Byzantine Emperor", "text": ""}
{"id": "44836", "revid": "19469161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44836", "title": "Speech act", "text": "Utterance that serves a performative function\nIn the philosophy of language and linguistics, a speech act is an utterance considered as an instance of action in a social context rather than as the mere expression of a proposition. To say \"I resign\", \"I apologise\" or \"You're fired\" is, in suitable circumstances, to perform the very act of resigning, apologising or dismissing, not simply to describe it. Speech-act theory therefore treats speaking a language as a kind of rule-governed social behaviour in which people make claims, issue orders, ask questions, make promises and so on by means of utterances.\nFollowing J. L. Austin and John R. Searle, many accounts distinguish at least three levels of act in ordinary utterances: the locutionary act of producing a meaningful expression, the illocutionary act performed in saying something (such as asserting, warning, requesting or promising), and the perlocutionary act consisting in its further effects on an audience, such as persuading, amusing or alarming them. Later work has added notions such as metalocutionary acts, which organise or comment on the discourse itself, and has analysed performative utterances and indirect speech acts, in which one kind of act is performed by way of another.\nAs a systematic theory, the contemporary notion of speech acts originates in Austin's 1955 Harvard lectures published as \"How to Do Things with Words\", and in Searle's subsequent development of explicit rules and taxonomies for illocutionary acts. Historical research has identified important predecessors and parallels, including the later philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein, the accounts of \"social acts\" in the work of Thomas Reid and Adolf Reinach, and early-20th-century linguistic theories of \"Sprechhandlung\" (\"speech action\"), as well as earlier reflections in Hegel on speaking as a form of acting.\nSpeech-act theory now plays a central role in pragmatics, discourse analysis and communication studies, and has been taken up in a wide range of other fields. In language acquisition it is used to describe how children learn to perform basic communicative acts such as requesting, greeting and protesting; in computer science and information systems it underpins models of human\u2013computer interaction, workflow and multi-agent system communication that treat messages as illocutionary moves creating and discharging commitments; in political science and international relations it informs theories of securitization and the construction of security; and in law, economic sociology and finance it has been applied to the performative role of legal norms and mathematical models in shaping social and economic practices.\nHistory.\nFor much of the early analytic and positivist philosophy of language, language was treated mainly as a vehicle for representing facts and for stating propositions that are either true or false; the action-character of ordinary utterances was largely downplayed or bracketed. J. L. Austin explicitly criticised this presupposition at the beginning of \"How to Do Things with Words\", noting that philosophers had often assumed that the business of a \"statement\" is simply to \"state some fact\".\nA major precursor of speech act theory in the analytic tradition is the later philosophy of Ludwig Wittgenstein, who urged that instead of asking for the abstract meaning of an expression one should look at its use within a practice, and who described speaking a language as engaging in a family of \"language-games\". On this view, understanding an utterance requires seeing it as a rule-governed move within a social activity, not merely as a bearer of truth-conditions. Subsequent surveys of speech act theory often take this shift to \"meaning-as-use\" as part of the background to contemporary work on speech acts and pragmatics.\nThe contemporary use of the expression \"speech act\" is usually traced to the work of the Oxford philosopher J. L. Austin. In his 1955 Harvard lectures, posthumously published as \"How to Do Things with Words\", Austin introduced the distinction between locutionary, illocutionary and perlocutionary acts and drew attention to \"performative\" utterances such as \"I apologize\" or \"I promise\", in which saying something is already doing something. Austin's analyses encouraged philosophers and linguists to treat a wide range of utterances\u2014requests, orders, apologies, warnings, declarations and so on\u2014as actions performed in accordance with socially recognised rules or \"felicity conditions\".\nAustin's student John R. Searle further systematised these ideas in \"Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language\" (1969) and in later writings, developing explicit rules for the performance of illocutionary acts and proposing influential taxonomies of their types. Subsequent work by Searle and others connected speech act theory with accounts of intentionality, social ontology and discourse structure, and it became a central framework in philosophy of language, pragmatics, communication studies, legal theory and artificial intelligence.\nHistorical research has shown that Austin and Searle were not the first to analyse what are now called speech acts. In the Scottish common-sense tradition, Thomas Reid distinguished \"solitary\" mental operations from essentially \"social\" acts of mind\u2014such as asking, commanding and promising\u2014which require expression to another person and generate obligations between speaker and hearer. Within early phenomenology, Adolf Reinach's 1913 essay \"Die apriorischen Grundlagen des b\u00fcrgerlichen Rechtes\" developed a detailed ontology of \"social acts\"\u2014promising, claiming, commanding and related performances\u2014that bring about new normative relations when successfully performed. Reinach's work, together with that of Reid and others, has been recognised as an early, systematic speech-act theory developed independently of the later Oxford tradition.\nComparable ideas were developed in early-20th-century linguistics. The Slovene philologist Stanislav \u0160krabec analysed performative uses of tense and aspect and discussed utterances in which, as later theorists would say, \"saying so makes it so\", such as judicial pronouncements and explicit permissions. The psychologist and linguist Karl B\u00fchler employed the terms \"Sprechhandlung\" (\"speech action\") and \"Theorie der Sprechakte\" (\"theory of speech acts\") in his 1930s work on the functions of language, especially in \"Sprachtheorie\" (1934), which has been read as an important forerunner of later speech act theorising.\nBeyond these relatively direct predecessors, some scholars have also emphasised the roots of speech-act thinking in classical German philosophy. In his lectures on the philosophy of right, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel describes speaking as a form of acting (\"sprechen ist so nicht blo\u00df sprechen, sondern handeln\"), linking utterance to the actualisation or transformation of social reality. These earlier reflections on \"social\" or \"performative\" uses of language are brought together in historical reconstructions of speech act theory that place Austin and Searle within a broader, multi-stranded tradition.\nTypes of speech act.\nFollowing J. L. Austin's distinction in \"How to Do Things with Words\", many philosophers and linguists analyse ordinary utterances as involving at least three kinds of act: a locutionary act (producing a meaningful linguistic expression), an illocutionary act (performing an action such as asserting, questioning, or promising in saying that expression), and often a perlocutionary act (bringing about further effects on an addressee, such as convincing or alarming them). Later theories refine this framework but usually retain some version of the threefold distinction.\nIn this tradition, speech acts can be described on multiple, partly overlapping levels:\nIllocutionary acts.\nThe notion of an illocutionary act is central in speech-act theory, since it corresponds to the basic kind of social action a speaker performs by means of an utterance. Austin's examples include acts of stating, warning, ordering, and promising, each governed by appropriate \"felicity conditions\" that must obtain if the act is to succeed (for instance, that the speaker has the requisite authority to pronounce a couple married).\nSearle develops Austin's insights by treating \"speech act\" and \"illocutionary act\" largely interchangeably and by offering a systematic taxonomy of basic illocutionary types (such as assertives, directives, commissives, expressives and declarations) characterised in part by the psychological states they express (beliefs, desires, intentions, and so on). Whereas Austin tends to emphasise the conventional procedures associated with illocutionary acts, Searle and later authors highlight the role of underlying mental states and inferential recognition in individuating and understanding them.\nPerlocutionary acts.\nWhile illocutionary acts are primarily defined in terms of the speaker's communicative intention and the conventional force of an utterance, perlocutionary acts concern the actual effects that utterances have on hearers and other addressees. These effects can involve changes in belief, emotion or behaviour: an assertion may convince someone, a warning may alarm them, a request may prompt them to act, and so on. Because perlocutionary effects depend on the audience and context, the same utterance may have different, even unintended, consequences for different hearers.\nPerformative speech acts.\nA particularly clear class of illocutionary acts is found in performative utterances, where the act named by a verb is performed in uttering a sentence containing that verb in an appropriate form and context. Typical examples include \"I promise to pay you back\", \"I apologise for being late\", \"I sentence you to ten years' imprisonment\", or \"I hereby name this ship \"Sojourner\"\". In such cases the utterance does not merely describe a promise, apology, sentence, or naming; it \"constitutes\" one, provided the relevant felicity conditions are satisfied.\nAustin argued that performative utterances are not aptly evaluated as true or false, but rather as \"happy\" (felicitous) or \"unhappy\" (infelicitous), depending on whether those conditions are met\u2014for instance, whether the speaker is authorised to perform the act, whether the procedure is correctly executed, and whether the participants have the appropriate intentions. Subsequent work has refined this idea by distinguishing explicit performatives (such as \"I promise\u2026\") from cases where the same act is performed without using a corresponding performative verb (as when saying \"I'll be there at six\" functions as a promise in the right context).\nLinguists sometimes use the term \"performative speech act\" more narrowly for utterances that contain a first-person singular present-tense performative verb and pass the so-called \"hereby test\" (\"I hereby promise/apologise/declare\u2026\"). Expressions like \"I intend to go\" or \"I hope to go\", although they use first-person present-tense verbs, normally report mental states rather than perform conventional acts of promising or vowing, and so are not standardly treated as explicit performatives.\nIndirect speech acts.\nIn many cases, speakers perform speech acts indirectly: they use one sentence type to perform an illocutionary act that is different from the one conventionally associated with that form. For example, the question \"Can you close the window?\" is typically used not to inquire about the hearer's ability but to make a request, and the declarative \"It's cold in here\" may be understood, in context, as prompting someone to close a window or turn up the heat.\nIndirect speech acts are especially common for making requests and refusals. When asked \"Would you like to meet for coffee?\", a reply such as \"I have class\" is ordinarily taken as a polite rejection rather than as a bare report about one's schedule. Many languages make routine use of conventionalised indirect request forms (for example, English \"Could you\u2026?\", \"Would you mind\u2026?\"), which have become standard ways of mitigating the social imposition associated with directives. They may also rely on non-verbal cues: for instance, fieldwork on Jordanian shops and streets describes vendors using music, scents and other environmental signals, alongside verbal formulas, to attract customers and invite purchases without issuing explicit commands.\nSuch cases pose a classic problem for theories of communication: how do hearers reliably identify the intended illocution when the literal sentence meaning points to another act? In a seminal proposal, Searle argued that indirect speech acts can be derived by a sequence of inferences based on Grice's Cooperative Principle and conversational maxims: the hearer reasons from the literal meaning and contextual information to the hypothesis that a request, offer, refusal, and so on, is being performed. Subsequent work in pragmatics, politeness theory and experimental psycholinguistics has questioned whether a single inferential pattern can account for all indirect speech acts and has proposed alternative models for how hearers recover indirect meanings.\nMore generally, speakers need not explicitly use verbs such as \"apologise\", \"promise\" or \"praise\" in order to perform those actions; whether an utterance counts as an apology, a promise or a compliment depends on its conventional form and on how it is understood in context.\nExamples.\nSpeech acts are commonplace in everyday interactions and are important for communication, as well as present in many different contexts. Examples of these include:\nFelicity conditions and misfires.\nIn \"How to Do Things with Words\", Austin introduced the notion of \"felicity conditions\" for the conventional procedures he took to underlie many performative utterances and other illocutionary acts. On his account, the success or \"happiness\" of a speech act depends not only on the conventional meaning of the words uttered but also on background features of the context of utterance: there must be an accepted procedure for performing the act, the circumstances and participants must be appropriate to that procedure (for instance, a legally authorised official pronouncing a couple married), and the procedure must be carried out correctly and completely, with participants having the requisite thoughts, feelings and intentions and, where relevant, engaging in the expected subsequent conduct. Felicity conditions are thus pragmatic constraints on when an utterance of a given type counts as a valid performance of a particular kind of act, rather than as a mere emission of words or as a statement that can simply be evaluated for truth or falsity.\nAustin calls failures of felicity \"infelicities\" and divides them into two main classes, \"misfires\" and \"abuses\". In cases of misfire the purported speech act does not come off at all: the conventional procedure is not properly invoked or executed, so that, although words are spoken, no marriage is contracted, no bet is laid, no christening or declaration succeeds. This may happen, for example, because the speaker lacks the relevant authority, because some presupposed condition is not met (such as there being an appropriate object or addressee), or because participants fail to complete the required sequence of actions. By contrast, abuses are cases in which the conventional act is successfully performed but is defective because some sincerity or subsequent-conduct condition is violated\u2014for instance, when a speaker promises without intending to keep the promise, makes a bet without intending to pay, or issues an apology without regret. In such cases there is still a promise, bet or apology, but it is an insincere or otherwise defective one; sincerity is treated as a paradigm felicity condition that an act of a given type ought, but need not, satisfy.\nSearle generalised Austin's ideas by analysing felicity conditions as sets of constitutive rules associated with each basic type of illocutionary act. For a paradigmatic case such as promising, he distinguishes four kinds of condition: a \"propositional content condition\" restricting what may be promised; \"preparatory conditions\" concerning the relationship between speaker, hearer and situation (for example, that the hearer prefers the promised action to its absence, and that the act is not already certain to occur); a \"sincerity condition\" requiring the speaker to intend to carry out the promised action; and an \"essential condition\" according to which the utterance counts as undertaking an obligation. Violations of content or preparatory conditions are typically treated as yielding failed or infelicitous attempts to perform the act (a kind of misfire), whereas violations of the sincerity condition generate insincere but nonetheless binding promises, orders or apologies (a kind of abuse).\nLater work extends the idea of felicity conditions beyond explicit performatives to speech acts more generally, including assertions, questions and indirect speech acts, and links them to norms governing what speakers may do with words in different social settings. On this view, felicity conditions articulate the normative background that allows utterances to create or modify obligations, entitlements and other elements of social reality, and they can be used to explain how power relations, institutional roles and patterns of uptake affect which acts can be successfully performed. Contemporary discussions debate how far such conditions can be captured in finite lists for each illocutionary type and to what extent they should instead be seen as defeasible, context-sensitive constraints on when speakers are entitled to perform particular acts and when hearers are entitled to treat those acts as successful and binding.\nIn language development.\nIn 1975 John Dore proposed that children's utterances were realizations of one of nine primitive speech acts:\nFormalization.\nThere is no agreed formalization of Speech Act theory. In 1985, John Searle and D. Vandervecken attempted to give some grounds of an illocutionary logic. Other attempts have been proposed by Per Martin-L\u00f6f for a treatment of the concept of assertion inside intuitionistic type theory, and by Carlo Dalla Pozza, with a proposal of a formal pragmatics connecting propositional content (given with classical semantics) and illocutionary force (given by intuitionistic semantics). Up to now the main basic formal applications of speech act theory are to be found in the field of human\u2013computer interaction in chatboxes and other tools. Recent work in artificial intelligence proposes a Bayesian approach to formalize speech acts \nIn computer science.\nIn computer science and information systems, speech act theory has been used to model human\u2013computer interaction, office work, multi-agent system communication and other forms of computer-mediated interaction by treating messages as illocutionary actions that change the social state of an interaction rather than merely transmitting data.\nHuman\u2013computer interaction and dialogue systems.\nEarly work on computational models of speech acts in human\u2013computer interaction proposed representing dialogue as a sequence of illocutionary moves, with explicit changes of conversational state associated with each move. In 1991, Morelli, Bronzino and Goethe described a computational speech-act model of human\u2013computer conversations for medical decision support, in which user inputs and system replies are typed as requests, assertions, confirmations and other speech-act categories that drive the underlying expert system. \nLater work has used speech-act based models to support automated classification and retrieval of conversations: for example, Twitchell \"et al.\" modelled conversations in e-mail and chat as sequences of speech acts in order to classify threads and retrieve segments relevant to particular tasks.\nMore recent natural-language processing research treats speech-act recognition as a text classification problem. Qadir and Riloff, for example, train statistical classifiers to recognise sentences in online message boards as instances of Searle's main speech-act categories (commissives, directives, expressives and representatives). Related work has applied machine-learning methods to classify speech acts in online chat and other forms of computer-mediated communication.\n\"Conversation for action\" and workflow modelling.\nAnother influential application of speech act theory is the \"conversation for action\" framework developed by Terry Winograd and Fernando Flores in \"Understanding Computers and Cognition: A New Foundation for Design\". They analyse everyday coordination of work as networks of conversations in which participants make requests, offers, promises and declarations, and represent these conversations using a state-transition diagram that tracks the illocutionary status of each commitment (for example, whether a request has been accepted, fulfilled or declined). In this view, a computer process can track the social state of a transaction\u2014such as which commitments have been made or discharged\u2014even when it does not model in detail the external world that the commitments concern.\nThe conversation-for-action model has influenced computer-supported cooperative work, workflow management and business process modelling. For example, Medina-Mora \"et al.\" propose \"action workflow\" as an office-automation architecture in which work is coordinated through structured conversations for action, and Auram\u00e4ki, Lehtinen and Lyytinen use a speech-act based office modelling approach (SAMPO) to analyse office activities as chains of commitments created and modified by speech acts. This line of work is sometimes described as the Language/action perspective on information systems design.\nRules and protocol design.\nIn specifying communication protocols for distributed and multi-agent systems, computer scientists have drawn on John Searle's distinction between \"regulative\" and \"constitutive\" rules. Regulative rules prescribe or constrain behaviour in an activity that could in principle exist without them (for example, traffic regulations), whereas constitutive rules do not merely regulate but help to define an activity, such as the rules of games or institutional practices. Within the language\u2013action and multi-agent systems traditions, interaction protocols are often described as constitutive rules that create and shape social realities such as commitments, permissions and institutional facts, rather than as mere constraints on message passing.\nMulti-agent systems.\nIn multi-agent systems, communication between software agents is commonly modelled using speech-act labels that express the intended illocutionary force of a message. A message with the performative \"inform\", for example, is understood as an attempt to add some content to the recipient's knowledge base, whereas a performative such as \"request\" or \"query\" asks another agent to perform an action or provide information. Early agent communication languages such as KQML and the FIPA Agent Communication Language define sets of performatives (such as \"inform\", \"request\" and \"query\") together with a formal semantics inspired by Searle's analysis of speech acts.\nThe semantics of KQML and FIPA ACL are often described as \"mentalist\" or \"psychological\", because they interpret communicative acts in terms of the beliefs, desires and intentions that agents are presumed to have. Munindar P. Singh has argued that such mentalist semantics are ill-suited to open systems, and has instead advocated a \"social semantics\" in which communication creates and manipulates publicly observable social commitments between agents, without making strong assumptions about internal mental states. Andrew J. I. Jones and co-authors have likewise criticised psychological approaches to agent communication, arguing for semantics grounded in social and institutional facts. A later collection of manifestos on agent communication reports a broad consensus in favour of commitment-based social semantics for open multi-agent systems and questions the adequacy of the original FIPA ACL semantics for such settings.\nIn political science.\nIn political science, the Copenhagen School adopts speech act as a form of felicitous speech act (or simply 'facilitating conditions'), whereby the speaker, often politicians or players, act in accordance to the truth but in preparation for the audience to take action in the directions of the player that are driven or incited by the act. This forms an observable framework under a specified subject matter from the player, and the audience who are 'under-theorised [would] remain outside of the framework itself, and would benefit from being both brought in and drawn out.' It is because the audience would not be informed of the intentions of the player, except to focus on the display of the speech act itself. Therefore, in the perspective of the player, the truth of the subject matter is irrelevant except the result produced via the audience.\nThe study of speech acts is prevalent in legal theory since laws themselves can be interpreted as speech acts. Laws issue out a command to their constituents, which can be realized as an action. When forming a legal contract, speech acts can be made when people are making or accepting an offer. Considering the theory of freedom of speech, some speech acts may not be legally protected. For example, a death threat is a type of speech act and is considered to exist outside of the protection of freedom of speech as it is treated as a criminal act.\nIn economic sociology.\nIn a sociological perspective, Nicolas Brisset adopts the concept of speech act in order to understand how economic models participate in the making and the spreading of representations inside and outside of the scientific field. Brisset argues that models perform actions in different fields (scientific, academic, practical, and political). This multiplicity of fields induces a variety of felicity conditions and types of performed actions. This perspective is a criticism of the essentialism of philosophical modelling studies. This approach is largely inspired by the work of Pierre Bourdieu and Quentin Skinner.\nIn finance, it is possible to understand mathematical models as speech acts: in 2016 the notion of \"financial Logos\" was defined as the speech act of mathematical modelling of financial risks. The action of the financial Logos on financial practices is the framing of financial decision-making by risk modelling.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44837", "revid": "1315591313", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44837", "title": "Limit inferior and limit superior", "text": "Bounds of a sequence\nIn mathematics, the limit inferior and limit superior of a sequence can be thought of as limiting (that is, eventual and extreme) bounds on the sequence. They can be thought of in a similar fashion for a function (see limit of a function). For a set, they are the infimum and supremum of the set's limit points, respectively. In general, when there are multiple objects around which a sequence, function, or set accumulates, the inferior and superior limits extract the smallest and largest of them; the type of object and the measure of size is context-dependent, but the notion of extreme limits is invariant. \nLimit inferior is also called infimum limit, limit infimum, liminf, inferior limit, lower limit, or inner limit; limit superior is also known as supremum limit, limit supremum, limsup, superior limit, upper limit, or outer limit.\nThe limit inferior of a sequence formula_1 is denoted by\nformula_2\nand the limit superior of a sequence formula_1 is denoted by\nformula_4\nDefinition for sequences.\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;limit inferior of a sequence (\"x\"\"n\") is defined by\nformula_5\nor\nformula_6\nSimilarly, the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;limit superior of (\"x\"\"n\") is defined by\nformula_7\nor\nformula_8\nAlternatively, the notations formula_9 and formula_10 are sometimes used.\nThe limits superior and inferior can equivalently be defined using the concept of subsequential limits of the sequence formula_1. An element formula_12 of the extended real numbers formula_13 is a \"subsequential limit\" of formula_1 if there exists a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers formula_15 such that formula_16. If formula_17 is the set of all subsequential limits of formula_1, then \nformula_19 \nand \nformula_20\nIf the terms in the sequence are real numbers, the limit superior and limit inferior always exist, as the real numbers together with \u00b1\u221e (i.e. the extended real number line) are complete. More generally, these definitions make sense in any partially ordered set, provided the suprema and infima exist, such as in a complete lattice.\nWhenever the ordinary limit exists, the limit inferior and limit superior are both equal to it; therefore, each can be considered a generalization of the ordinary limit which is primarily interesting in cases where the limit does \"not\" exist. In general, have\nformula_21\nThe limits inferior and superior are related to big-O notation in that they bound a sequence only \"in the limit\"; the sequence may exceed the bound. However, with big-O notation the sequence can only exceed the bound in a finite prefix of the sequence, whereas the limit superior of a sequence like e\u2212\"n\" may actually be less than all elements of the sequence. The only promise made is that some tail of the sequence can be bounded above by the limit superior plus an arbitrarily small positive constant, and bounded below by the limit inferior minus an arbitrarily small positive constant.\nThe limit superior and limit inferior of a sequence are a special case of those of a function (see below).\nThe case of sequences of real numbers.\nIn mathematical analysis, limit superior and limit inferior are important tools for studying sequences of real numbers. Since the supremum and infimum of an unbounded set of real numbers may not exist (the reals are not a complete lattice), it is convenient to consider sequences in the affinely extended real number system: we add the positive and negative infinities to the real line to give the complete totally ordered set [\u2212\u221e,\u221e], which is a complete lattice.\nInterpretation.\nConsider a sequence formula_1 consisting of real numbers. Assume that the limit superior and limit inferior are real numbers (so, not infinite).\nProperties.\nThe relationship of limit inferior and limit superior for sequences of real numbers is as follows:\nformula_36\nAs mentioned earlier, it is convenient to extend formula_37 to formula_38 Then, formula_39 in formula_40 converges if and only if\nformula_41\nin which case formula_42 is equal to their common value. (Note that when working just in formula_43 convergence to formula_44 or formula_45 would not be considered as convergence.) Since the limit inferior is at most the limit superior, the following conditions hold formula_46\nIf formula_47 and formula_48, then the interval formula_49 need not contain any of the numbers formula_50 but every slight enlargement formula_51 for arbitrarily small formula_52 will contain formula_23 for all but finitely many indices formula_54 In fact, the interval formula_49 is the smallest closed interval with this property. We can formalize this property like this: there exist subsequences formula_56 and formula_57 of formula_23 (where formula_59 and formula_60 are increasing) for which we have formula_61\nOn the other hand, there exists a formula_62 so that for all formula_63 formula_64\nTo recapitulate:\nConversely, it can also be shown that: \nIn general,formula_83The liminf and limsup of a sequence are respectively the smallest and greatest cluster points. \nAnalogously, the limit inferior satisfies superadditivity:formula_88In the particular case that one of the sequences actually converges, say formula_89 then the inequalities above become equalities (with formula_90 or formula_91 being replaced by formula_92). \nhold whenever the right-hand side is not of the form formula_96\nIf formula_97 exists (including the case formula_98) and formula_99 then formula_100 provided that formula_101 is not of the form formula_96\n The value of this limit inferior is conjectured to be 2 \u2013 this is the twin prime conjecture \u2013 but as of \u00a02014[ [update]] has only been proven to be less than or equal to 246. The corresponding limit superior is formula_110, because there are arbitrarily large gaps between consecutive primes.\nReal-valued functions.\nAssume that a function is defined from a subset of the real numbers to the real numbers. As in the case for sequences, the limit inferior and limit superior are always well-defined if we allow the values +\u221e and \u2212\u221e; in fact, if both agree then the limit exists and is equal to their common value (again possibly including the infinities). For example, given formula_111, we have formula_112 and formula_113. The difference between the two is a rough measure of how \"wildly\" the function oscillates, and in observation of this fact, it is called the oscillation of \"f\" at 0. This idea of oscillation is sufficient to, for example, characterize Riemann-integrable functions as continuous except on a set of measure zero. Note that points of nonzero oscillation (i.e., points at which \"f\" is \"badly behaved\") are discontinuities which, unless they make up a set of zero, are confined to a negligible set.\nThe limit superior of a real-valued function defined on an interval containing a point formula_114 is\nformula_115\nand the limit inferior is\nformula_116\nMoreover, there are one-sided versions for functions which are defined on intervals having formula_92 as an endpoint:\nformula_118\nformula_119\nformula_120\nformula_121\nFunctions from topological spaces to complete lattices.\nFunctions from metric spaces.\nThere is a notion of limsup and liminf for functions defined on a metric space whose relationship to limits of real-valued functions mirrors that of the relation between the limsup, liminf, and the limit of a real sequence. Take a metric space formula_122, a subspace formula_123 contained in formula_122, and a function formula_125. Define, for any point formula_92 of the closure of formula_123,\nformula_128\nand\nformula_129\nwhere formula_130 denotes the metric ball of radius formula_25 about formula_92.\nNote that as \"\u03b5\" shrinks, the supremum of the function over the ball is non-increasing (strictly decreasing or remaining the same), so we have\nformula_133\nand similarly\nformula_134\nThe definition of limsup and liminf in a metric spaces can be equivalently reformulated as follows:\nFunctions from topological spaces.\nThis finally motivates the definitions for general topological spaces. Take \"X\", \"E\" and \"a\" as before, but now let \"X\" be a topological space. In this case, we replace metric balls with neighborhoods:\nformula_143\nformula_144\nSequences of sets.\nThe power set \u2118(\"X\") of a set \"X\" is a complete lattice that is ordered by set inclusion, and so the supremum and infimum of any set of subsets (in terms of set inclusion) always exist. In particular, every subset \"Y\" of \"X\" is bounded above by \"X\" and below by the empty set \u2205 because \u2205 \u2286 \"Y\" \u2286 \"X\". Hence, it is possible (and sometimes useful) to consider superior and inferior limits of sequences in \u2118(\"X\") (i.e., sequences of subsets of \"X\").\nThere are two common ways to define the limit of sequences of sets. In both cases:\nThe difference between the two definitions involves how the topology (i.e., how to quantify separation) is defined. In fact, the second definition is identical to the first when the discrete metric is used to induce the topology on \"X\".\nGeneral set convergence.\nA sequence of sets in a metrizable space formula_122 approaches a limiting set when the elements of each member of the sequence approach the elements of the limiting set. In particular, if formula_146 is a sequence of subsets of formula_147 then:\nThe limit formula_165 exists if and only if formula_166 and formula_167 agree, in which case formula_168 The outer and inner limits should not be confused with the set-theoretic limits superior and inferior, as the latter sets are not sensitive to the topological structure of the space.\nSpecial case: discrete metric.\nThis is the definition used in measure theory and probability. Further discussion and examples from the set-theoretic point of view, as opposed to the topological point of view discussed below, are at set-theoretic limit.\nBy this definition, a sequence of sets approaches a limiting set when the limiting set includes elements which are in all except finitely many sets of the sequence \"and\" does not include elements which are in all except finitely many complements of sets of the sequence. That is, this case specializes the general definition when the topology on set \"X\" is induced from the discrete metric.\nSpecifically, for points \"x\", \"y\" \u2208 \"X\", the discrete metric is defined by\nformula_169\nunder which a sequence of points (\"x\"\"k\") converges to point \"x\" \u2208 \"X\" if and only if \"x\"\"k\" = \"x\" for all but finitely many \"k\". Therefore, \"if the limit set exists\" it contains the points and only the points which are in all except finitely many of the sets of the sequence. Since convergence in the discrete metric is the strictest form of convergence (i.e., requires the most), this definition of a limit set is the strictest possible.\nIf (\"X\"\"n\") is a sequence of subsets of \"X\", then the following always exist:\nObserve that \"x\" \u2208 lim\u2009sup\u2009\"X\"\"n\" if and only if \"x\" \u2209 lim\u2009inf\u2009\"X\"\"n\"c.\nIn this sense, the sequence has a limit so long as every point in \"X\" either appears in all except finitely many \"X\"\"n\" or appears in all except finitely many \"X\"\"n\"c.\nUsing the standard parlance of set theory, set inclusion provides a partial ordering on the collection of all subsets of \"X\" that allows set intersection to generate a greatest lower bound and set union to generate a least upper bound. Thus, the infimum or meet of a collection of subsets is the greatest lower bound while the supremum or join is the least upper bound. In this context, the inner limit, lim\u2009inf\u2009\"X\"\"n\", is the largest meeting of tails of the sequence, and the outer limit, lim\u2009sup\u2009\"X\"\"n\", is the smallest joining of tails of the sequence. The following makes this precise. \nformula_170\nThe sequence (\"I\"\"n\") is non-decreasing (i.e. \"I\"\"n\" \u2286 \"I\"\"n\"+1) because each \"I\"\"n\"+1 is the intersection of fewer sets than \"I\"\"n\". The least upper bound on this sequence of meets of tails is \nformula_171\nSo the limit infimum contains all subsets which are lower bounds for all but finitely many sets of the sequence.\nformula_172\nThe sequence (\"J\"\"n\") is non-increasing (i.e. \"J\"\"n\" \u2287 \"J\"\"n\"+1) because each \"J\"\"n\"+1 is the union of fewer sets than \"J\"\"n\". The greatest lower bound on this sequence of joins of tails is \nformula_173\nSo the limit supremum is contained in all subsets which are upper bounds for all but finitely many sets of the sequence.\nExamples.\nThe following are several set convergence examples. They have been broken into sections with respect to the metric used to induce the topology on set \"X\".\nformula_174\nThe \"odd\" and \"even\" elements of this sequence form two subsequences, ({0}, {0}, {0}, ...) and ({1}, {1}, {1}, ...), which have limit points 0 and 1, respectively, and so the outer or superior limit is the set {0,1} of these two points. However, there are no limit points that can be taken from the (\"X\"\"n\") sequence as a whole, and so the interior or inferior limit is the empty set { }. That is,\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"X\"\"n\" = {0,1}\n* lim\u2009inf\u2009\"X\"\"n\" = { }\nHowever, for (\"Y\"\"n\") = ({0}, {0}, {0}, ...) and (\"Z\"\"n\") = ({1}, {1}, {1}, ...):\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"Y\"\"n\" = lim\u2009inf\u2009\"Y\"\"n\" = lim\u2009\"Y\"\"n\" = {0}\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"Z\"\"n\" = lim\u2009inf\u2009\"Z\"\"n\" = lim\u2009\"Z\"\"n\" = {1}\nformula_175\nAs in the previous two examples,\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"X\"\"n\" = {0,1}\n* lim\u2009inf\u2009\"X\"\"n\" = { }\nThat is, the four elements that do not match the pattern do not affect the lim\u2009inf and lim\u2009sup because there are only finitely many of them. In fact, these elements could be placed anywhere in the sequence. So long as the \"tails\" of the sequence are maintained, the outer and inner limits will be unchanged. The related concepts of \"essential\" inner and outer limits, which use the essential supremum and essential infimum, provide an important modification that \"squashes\" countably many (rather than just finitely many) interstitial additions.\nformula_176\nThe \"odd\" and \"even\" elements of this sequence form two subsequences, ({0}, {1/2}, {2/3}, {3/4}, ...) and ({1}, {1/2}, {1/3}, {1/4}, ...), which have limit points 1 and 0, respectively, and so the outer or superior limit is the set {0,1} of these two points. However, there are no limit points that can be taken from the (\"X\"\"n\") sequence as a whole, and so the interior or inferior limit is the empty set { }. So, as in the previous example,\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"X\"\"n\" = {0,1}\n* lim\u2009inf\u2009\"X\"\"n\" = { }\nHowever, for (\"Y\"\"n\") = ({0}, {1/2}, {2/3}, {3/4}, ...) and (\"Z\"\"n\") = ({1}, {1/2}, {1/3}, {1/4}, ...):\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"Y\"\"n\" = lim\u2009inf\u2009\"Y\"\"n\" = lim\u2009\"Y\"\"n\" = {1}\n* lim\u2009sup\u2009\"Z\"\"n\" = lim\u2009inf\u2009\"Z\"\"n\" = lim\u2009\"Z\"\"n\" = {0}\nIn each of these four cases, the elements of the limiting sets are not elements of any of the sets from the original sequence.\n* For example, an LTI system that is the cascade connection of several stable systems with an undamped second-order LTI system (i.e., zero damping ratio) will oscillate endlessly after being perturbed (e.g., an ideal bell after being struck). Hence, if the position and velocity of this system are plotted against each other, trajectories will approach a circle in the state space. This circle, which is the \u03a9 limit set of the system, is the outer limit of solution trajectories of the system. The circle represents the locus of a trajectory corresponding to a pure sinusoidal tone output; that is, the system output approaches/approximates a pure tone.\nGeneralized definitions.\nThe above definitions are inadequate for many technical applications. In fact, the definitions above are specializations of the following definitions.\nDefinition for a set.\nThe limit inferior of a set \"X\"\u00a0\u2286\u2009\"Y\" is the infimum of all of the limit points of the set. That is,\nformula_177\nSimilarly, the limit superior of \"X\" is the supremum of all of the limit points of the set. That is,\nformula_178\nNote that the set \"X\" needs to be defined as a subset of a partially ordered set \"Y\" that is also a topological space in order for these definitions to make sense. Moreover, it has to be a complete lattice so that the suprema and infima always exist. In that case every set has a limit superior and a limit inferior. Also note that the limit inferior and the limit superior of a set do not have to be elements of the set.\nDefinition for filter bases.\nTake a topological space \"X\" and a filter base \"B\" in that space. The set of all cluster points for that filter base is given by\nformula_179\nwhere formula_180 is the closure of formula_181. This is clearly a closed set and is similar to the set of limit points of a set. Assume that \"X\" is also a partially ordered set. The limit superior of the filter base \"B\" is defined as\nformula_182\nwhen that supremum exists. When \"X\" has a total order, is a complete lattice and has the order topology,\nformula_183\nSimilarly, the limit inferior of the filter base \"B\" is defined as\nformula_184\nwhen that infimum exists; if \"X\" is totally ordered, is a complete lattice, and has the order topology, then\nformula_185\nIf the limit inferior and limit superior agree, then there must be exactly one cluster point and the limit of the filter base is equal to this unique cluster point.\nSpecialization for sequences and nets.\nNote that filter bases are generalizations of nets, which are generalizations of sequences. Therefore, these definitions give the limit inferior and limit superior of any net (and thus any sequence) as well. For example, take topological space formula_122 and the net formula_187, where formula_188 is a directed set and formula_189 for all formula_190. The filter base (\"of tails\") generated by this net is formula_191 defined by\nformula_192\nTherefore, the limit inferior and limit superior of the net are equal to the limit superior and limit inferior of formula_191 respectively. Similarly, for topological space formula_122, take the sequence formula_1 where formula_196 for any formula_197. The filter base (\"of tails\") generated by this sequence is formula_198 defined by\nformula_199\nTherefore, the limit inferior and limit superior of the sequence are equal to the limit superior and limit inferior of formula_198 respectively.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44838", "revid": "20530117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44838", "title": "Limit inferior", "text": ""}
{"id": "44839", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44839", "title": "Manuel II Palaiologos", "text": "Byzantine emperor from 1391 to 1425\nManuel II Palaiologos or Palaeologus (, ; 27 June 1350 \u2013 21 July 1425) was Byzantine emperor from 1391 to 1425. Shortly before his death he was tonsured a monk and received the name Matthaios (). Manuel was a vassal of the Ottoman Empire, which sometimes threatened to capture his territory outright. Accordingly he continued his father's practice of soliciting Western European aid against the Ottomans, and personally visited several foreign courts to plead his cause. These efforts failed, although an Ottoman civil war and Byzantine victories against Latin neighbors helped Manuel's government survive and slightly expand its influence. His wife Helena Draga\u0161 saw to it that their sons, John VIII and Constantine XI, became emperors. He is commemorated by the Greek Orthodox Church on 21 July.\nLife.\nManuel II Palaiologos was the second son of Emperor John V Palaiologos and his wife Helena Kantakouzene. Granted the title of \"despot\u0113s\" by his father, the future Manuel II traveled west to seek support for the Byzantine Empire in 1365 and in 1370, serving as governor in Thessalonica from 1369. The failed attempt at usurpation by his older brother Andronikos IV Palaiologos in 1373 led to Manuel's being proclaimed his father's heir and he was proclaimed emperor on 25 September 1373. In 1382 Manuel II Palaiologos set himself up as emperor in his own right in Thessalonica.\nIn 1376\u20131379 and again in 1390, Manuel and his father were supplanted by Andronikos IV and then his son John VII, but Manuel personally defeated his nephew in 1390 with help from the Republic of Venice and the Ottoman Sultan Bayezid I. After the conflict Manuel was sent to Prousa (Bursa) as an honorary hostage of Bayezid, who forced him to participate in the Ottoman campaign that reduced Philadelpheia, the last Byzantine enclave in Anatolia.\nSiege of Constantinople and letters to European courts.\nHaving heard of his father's death in February 1391, Manuel II Palaiologos fled the Ottoman court and secured the capital against any potential claim by his nephew John VII. Following Manuel's joint marriage-coronation in 1392 with Helena Draga\u0161, the daughter of fellow Ottoman vassal Constantine Draga\u0161, the Sultan was initially content to leave New Rome in comparative peace. However, in 1393 a large insurrection erupted in Bulgaria which, although successfully put down by the Ottomans, caused Bayezid to lapse into an episode of paranoia in which he believed his various Christian vassals were plotting against him. Bayezid called all his Christian vassals to a meeting at Serres, with the intention of massacring them, a decision he relented on only at the last moment. The episode is said to have left all of the Christian vassal rulers shaken and convinced Manuel that continued appeasement towards the Ottomans was not a guarantee of his own personal safety or the continued survival of the empire and that efforts must be made to obtain Western aid.\nSultan Bayezid I blockaded Constantinople from 1394 to 1402. In the meantime, an anti-Ottoman crusade led by the Hungarian King Sigismund of Luxemburg failed at the Battle of Nicopolis on 25 September 1396. Manuel II had sent 10 ships to help in that Crusade. In October 1397, Theodore Kantakouzenos, Manuel's uncle, alongside John of Natala arrived at the court of Charles VI of France, bearing the Emperor's letters (dated 1 July 1397) requesting the French king's military aid. In addition, Charles also provided funds for the two nobles to treat with King Richard II of England in April 1398, with the aim of soliciting further aid. However, the latter was too preoccupied by domestic troubles at this point to provide any support.\nHowever, the two nobles returned home with the Marshal of France Jean II Le Maingre who was sent from Aigues-Mortes with six ships carrying 1,200 men to assist Manuel II. The Marshal encouraged the latter to go personally to seek assistance against the Ottoman Empire from the courts of western Europe. After some five years of siege, Manuel II entrusted the city to his nephew, aided by a French garrison of 300 men led by Seigneur and embarked (along with a suite of 40 people) on a long trip abroad along with the Marshal.\nEmperor's trip to the West.\nOn 10 December 1399, Manuel II embarked on his trip by starting to sail to the Morea, where he left his wife and children with his brother Theodore I Palaiologos to be protected from his nephew's intentions. He later landed in Venice in April 1400, then he went to Padua, Vicenza and Pavia, until he reached Milan, where he met Duke Gian Galeazzo Visconti, and his close friend Manuel Chrysoloras. Afterwards, he met Charles VI of France at Charenton on 3 June 1400. During his stay in France, Manuel II continued to contact European monarchs.\nAccording to Michel Pintoin who chronicled the visit to Paris:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Then, the king raised his hat, and the emperor raised his imperial cap \u2013 he had no\nhat \u2013 and both greeted one another in the most honourable way. When he had welcomed [the emperor], the king accompanied him into Paris, riding side by side. They were followed by the Princes of the Blood who, once the banquet in the royal palace finished, escorted [the emperor] to the lodgings which had been prepared for him in the Louvre castle].\nIn December 1400, he embarked to England to meet Henry IV of England who received him at Blackheath on the 21st of that month, making him the only Byzantine emperor ever to visit England, where he stayed at Eltham Palace until mid-February 1401, and a joust took place in his honour. In addition, he received \u00a32,000, acknowledging receipt of the funds in a Latin document sealed with his own golden bull.\nThomas Walsingham wrote about Manuel II's visit to England:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the same time the Emperor of Constantinople visited England to ask for help against the Turks. The king with an imposing retinue, met him at Blackheath on the feast of St Thomas [21 December], gave so great a hero an appropriate welcome and escorted him to London. He entertained him there royally for many days, paying the expenses of the emperor's stay, and by grand presents showing respect for a person of such eminence.\nMoreover, Adam of Usk reported:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the feast of St Thomas the apostle [21 December], the emperor of the Greeks visited the king of England in London to seek help against the Saracens, and was honourably received by him, staying with him for two whole months at enormous expense to the king, and being showered with gifts at his departure. This emperor and his men always went about dressed uniformly in long robes cut like tabards which were all of one colour, namely white, and disapproved greatly of the fashions and varieties of dress worn by the English, declaring that they signified inconstancy and fickleness of heart. No razor ever touched the heads or beards of his priests. These Greeks were extremely devout in their religious services, having them chanted variously by knights or by clerics, for they were sung in their native tongue. I thought to myself how sad it was that this great Christian leader from the remote east had been driven by the power of the infidels to visit distant islands in the west in order to seek help against them.\nHowever, Manuel II sent a letter to his friend Manuel Chrysoloras, describing his visit to England:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now what is the reason for the present letter? A large number of letters have come to us from all over bearing excellent and wonderful promises, but most important is the ruler with whom we are now staying, the king of Britain the Great, of a second civilized world, you might say, who abounds in so many good qualities and is adorned with all sorts of virtues. His reputation earns him the admiration of people who have not met him, while for those who have once seen him, he proves brilliantly that Fame is not really a goddess, since she is unable to show the man to be as great as does actual experience. This ruler, then, is most illustrious because of his position, most illustrious too, because of his intelligence; his might amazes everyone, and his understanding wins him friends; he extends his hand to all and in every way he places himself at the service of those who need help. And now, in accord with his nature, he has made himself a virtual haven for us in the midst of a twofold tempest, that of the season and that of fortune, and we have found refuge in the man himself and his character. His conversation is quite charming; he pleases us in every way; he honours us to the greatest extent and loves us no less. Although he has gone to extremes in all he has done for us, he seems almost to blush in the belief\u2014in this he is alone\u2014that he might have fallen considerably short of what he should have done. This is how magnanimous the man is.\nManuel II later returned to France with high hopes of substantial help and funds for Constantinople. In the meantime, he sent delegations with relics including pieces of the tunic of Christ and a piece of the Holy Sponge to Pope Boniface IX and Antipope Benedict XIII, Queen Margaret I of Denmark, king Martin of Aragon and king Charles III of Navarre to seek further assistance. He eventually left France on 23 November 1402, and finally returned to Constantinople in June 1403.\nRenewed Ottoman sieges.\nThe Ottomans under Bayezid I were themselves crushingly defeated by Timur at the Battle of Ankara in 1402. As the sons of Bayezid I struggled with each other over the succession in the Ottoman Interregnum, John VII was able to secure the return of the European coast of the Sea of Marmara and of Thessalonica to the Byzantine Empire in the Treaty of Gallipoli. When Manuel II returned home in 1403, his nephew duly surrendered control of Constantinople and received as a reward the governorship of newly recovered Thessalonica. The treaty also regained from the Ottomans Mesembria (1403\u20131453), Varna (1403\u20131415), and the Marmara coast from Scutari to Nicomedia (between 1403\u20131421).\nHowever, Manuel II kept contact with Venice, Genoa, Paris and Aragon, by sending envoy Manuel Chrysoloras in 1407\u20138, pursuing to form a coalition against the Ottomans.\nOn 25 July 1414, with a fleet consisting of four galleys and two other vessels carrying contingents of infantry and cavalry, departed Constantinople for Thessalonica. The purpose of this force soon became clear when he made an unannounced stop at Thasos, a normally unimportant island which was then under threat from a son of the lord of Lesbos, Francesco Gattilusio. It took Manuel three months to reassert imperial authority on the island. Only then did he continue on to Thessalonica, where he was warmly met by his son Andronicus, who then governed the city.\nIn the spring of 1415, he and his soldiers left for the Peloponnese, arriving at the little port of Kenchreai on Good Friday, 29 March. Manuel II Palaiologos used his time there to bolster the defences of the Despotate of Morea, where the Byzantine Empire was actually expanding at the expense of the remnants of the Latin Empire. Here Manuel supervised the building of the \"Hexamilion\" (six-mile wall) across the Isthmus of Corinth, intended to defend the Peloponnese from the Ottomans.\nManuel II stood on friendly terms with the victor in the Ottoman civil war, Mehmed I (1402\u20131421), but his attempts to meddle in the next contested succession led to a new assault on Constantinople by Murad II (1421\u20131451) in 1422. During the last years of his life, Manuel II relinquished most official duties to his son and heir John VIII Palaiologos, and went back to the West searching for assistance against the Ottomans, this time to the King Sigismund of Hungary, staying for two months in his court of Buda. Sigismund (after suffering a defeat against the Turks in the Battle of Nicopolis in 1396) never rejected the possibility of fighting against the Ottoman Empire. However, with the Hussite wars in Bohemia, it was impossible to count on the Czech or German armies, and the Hungarian ones were needed to protect the Kingdom and control the religious conflicts. Unhappily Manuel returned home with empty hands from the Hungarian Kingdom, and in 1424 he and his son were forced to sign an unfavourable peace treaty with the Ottoman Turks, whereby the Byzantine Empire had to pay tribute to the sultan.\nDeath.\nManuel II was paralyzed by a stroke on 1 October 1422, but his mind was unaffected and he continued to rule for three more years. He lived his last few days as a monk, taking the name of Matthew. He died on 21 July 1425, aged 75, and was buried at the Pantokrator Monastery in Constantinople.\nWritings.\nManuel II was the author of numerous works of varied character, including letters, poems, a Saint's Life, treatises on theology and rhetoric, and an epitaph for his brother Theodore I Palaiologos and a mirror of princes for his son and heir John. This mirror of princes has special value, because it is the last sample of this literary genre bequeathed to us by Byzantines.\nFamily.\nBy his wife Helena Dragas, the daughter of the Serbian prince Constantine Dragas, Manuel II Palaiologos had several children, including:\nPope Benedict XVI controversy.\nIn a lecture delivered on 12 September 2006, Pope Benedict XVI quoted from a dialogue believed to have occurred in 1391 between Manuel II and a Persian scholar and recorded in a book by Manuel II (Dialogue 7 of \"Twenty-six Dialogues with a Persian\") in which the Emperor stated: \"Show me just what Muhammad brought that was new and there you will find things only evil and inhuman, such as his command to spread by the sword the faith he preached.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44840", "revid": "45555970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44840", "title": "Byzantine emperor", "text": ""}
{"id": "44844", "revid": "36504275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44844", "title": "Deixis", "text": "Words requiring context to understand their meaning\nIn linguistics, deixis () is the use of words or phrases to refer to a particular time (e.g. \"then\"), place (e.g. \"here\"), or person (e.g. \"you\") relative to the context of the utterance. Deixis exists in all known natural languages and is closely related to anaphora, with a sometimes unclear distinction between the two. In linguistic anthropology, deixis is seen as the same as, or a subclass of, indexicality.\nThe term's origin is . To this, Chrysippus (c.\u2009279\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009206 BCE) added the specialized meaning \"point of reference\", which is the sense in which the term is used in contemporary linguistics.\nTypes.\nThere are three main types of deictic words, as described by Charles J. Fillmore: personal, spatial, and temporal. In some languages, these may overlap, such as spatial and personal deixis in many signed pronouns. Some linguists consider social deixis to be a fourth type.\nPersonal.\nPersonal deictic words, called personal pronouns in English, refer to the grammatical persons involved in an utterance. These can include the first person (speaker), second person (addressee), third, and in some languages fourth and fifth person. Personal deixis may give further information about the referent, such as gender. Examples of personal deixis include:\n\"I\" am going to the cinema.\nWould \"you\" like to have dinner?\n\"They\" tried to hurt \"me\", but \"she\" helped me.\nSpatial.\nSpatial, or place, deixis is used to refer to spatial locations relative to an utterance. Similarly to personal deixis, the locations may be either those of the speaker and addressee or those of persons or objects being referred to. Spatial demonstratives include locative adverbs (e.g. \"here\" and \"there)\" and demonstratives (e.g. \"this\", \"these\", \"that\", and \"those)\" although those are far from exclusive. Spatial demonstratives are often relative to the location of the speaker such as:\nThe shop is \"across the street\".\nwhere \"across the street\" is understood to mean \"across the street from where I [the speaker] am right now.\"\nWords relating to spatial deixis can be proximal (near, such as English [right] \"here\" or \"this\"), medial (near the addressee, such as English [over] \"there\" or \"that\"), distal (far, such as English [out] \"there\" or \"that\"), far-distal (far from both the speaker and addressee, such as archaic English \"yon\" and \"yonder).\" The Malagasy language has seven degrees of distance combined with two degrees of visibility, while many Inuit languages have even more complex systems.\nTemporal.\nTemporal, or time, deixis is used to refer to time relevant to the utterance. This includes temporal adverbs (e.g. \"then\" and \"soon\"), nouns (e.g. \"tomorrow\") and use of grammatical tense. Temporal deixis can be relative to the time when an utterance is made (the speaker\u2019s \"now\") or the time when the utterance is heard or seen (the addressee\u2019s \"now\"). Although these are often the same time, they can differ in cases such as a voice recording or written text. For example:\nIt is raining \"now\", but I hope \"when\" you read this it will be sunny.\nTenses are usually separated into absolute (deictic) and relative tenses. For example, simple English past tense is absolute, such as \"He \"went.\"\" whereas the pluperfect is relative to some other deictically specified time, as in \"When I got home, he \"had gone\".\"\nDiscourse deixis.\nDiscourse deixis, also referred to as text deixis, refers to the use of expressions within an utterance to refer to parts of the discourse that contain the utterance\u2014including the utterance itself. For example, in \"\"This\" is a great story.\" \"this\" refers to an upcoming portion of the discourse.\nSwitch reference is a type of discourse deixis, and a grammatical feature found in some languages, which indicates whether the argument of one clause is the same as the argument of the previous clause. In some languages, this is done through same subject markers and different subject markers. In the translated example \"John punched Tom, and left-[same subject marker],\" it is John who left, and in \"John punched Tom, and left-[different subject marker],\" it is Tom who left.\nDiscourse deixis has been observed in internet language, particularly with the use of iconic language forms resembling arrows.\nSocial deixis.\nSocial deixis concerns the social information that is encoded within various expressions, such as relative social status and familiarity. These include T\u2013V distinctions and honorifics.\nDeictic center.\nA deictic center, sometimes referred to as an origo, is a set of theoretical points that a deictic expression is 'anchored' to, such that the evaluation of the meaning of the expression leads one to the relevant point. As deictic expressions are frequently egocentric, the center often consists of the speaker at the time and place of the utterance and, additionally, the place in the discourse and relevant social factors. However, deictic expressions can also be used in such a way that the deictic center is transferred to other participants in the exchange or to persons\u200a/\u200aplaces\u200a/\u200aetc. being described in a narrative. For example, in the sentence;\nI am standing here now.\nthe deictic center is simply the person at the time and place of speaking. \nIf, for example, two people in London and New York are talking over the phone, the Londoner can say both of the two sentences below, with equal validity:\nWe are leaving [New York] next week. \nWe are coming [to London] next week.\nwhere the deictic center is in New York and London, respectively. \nSimilarly, when telling a story about someone, the deictic center is likely to switch to third-person pronouns. So then in the sentence;\nThey then ran twenty feet to the left.\nit is understood that the center is with the persons being spoken of, and thus, \"to the left\" refers not to the speaker's left, but to the object of the story's left - the persons referred to as 'they' at the time immediately before they ran twenty feet.\nUsages.\nIt is helpful to distinguish between two usages of deixis, gestural and symbolic, as well as non-deictic usages of frequently deictic words. Gestural deixis refers, broadly, to deictic expressions whose understanding requires some sort of audio-visual information. A simple example is when an object is pointed at and referred to as \"this\" or \"that\". However, the category can include other types of information than pointing, such as direction of gaze, tone of voice, and so on. Symbolic usage, by contrast, requires generally only basic spatio-temporal knowledge of the utterance. So, for example\nI broke \"this\" finger.\nrequires being able to see which finger is being held up, whereas\nI love \"this\" city.\nrequires only knowledge of the current location. In a similar vein,\nI went to \"this\" city one time ...\nis a non-deictic usage of \"this\", which does not identify anywhere specifically. Rather, it is used as an indefinite article, much the way \"a\" could be used in its place.\nDistinction with similar terms.\nThe distinction between deixis and anaphora is unclearly defined. Generally, an anaphoric reference refers to something within a text that has been previously identified. For example, in \"Susan dropped the plate. \"It\" shattered loudly,\" the word \"it\" refers to the phrase, \"the plate\". An expression can be both deictic and anaphoric at the same time, for example \"I was born in London, and I have lived \"here/there\" all my life.\" \"here\" or \"there\" function anaphorically in their reference to London, and deictically in that the choice between \"here\" or \"there\" indicates whether the speaker is or is not currently in London.\nThe terms deixis and indexicality are frequently used almost interchangeably, and both deal with essentially the same idea of contextually-dependent references. However, the two terms have different histories and traditions. In the past, deixis was associated specifically with spatiotemporal reference, and indexicality was used more broadly. More importantly, each is associated with a different field of study. Deixis is associated with linguistics, and indexicality is associated with philosophy as well as pragmatics.\nDeictic field and narration.\nIn linguistics, psychology, and literary theory, the concepts of deictic field and deictic shift are sometimes deployed in the study of narrative media. These terms provide a theoretical framework for helping literary analysts to conceptualize the ways in which readers redirect their attention away from their immediate surroundings as they become immersed in the reality generated by the text.\nDeixis.\nThe term \"deixis\" refers to the ways in which language encodes contextual information into its grammatical system. More broadly, deixis refers to the inherent ambiguity of certain linguistic expressions and the interpretive processes that communicants must perform in order to disambiguate these words and phrases. Such ambiguity can only be resolved by analyzing the context in which the utterance occurs. To understand deixis, one must first understand that language grammaticalizes context-dependent features such as person, space, and time. When language is oriented toward its context, certain expressions in speech emerge that differentiate the \"here\" and \"now\" (proximal deixis) from the \"then\" and \"there\" (distal deixis). According to Karl Buhler, an Austrian psychologist who was one of the earliest to present a theory of deixis, \"When philosophers, linguists, and narrative theorists attempt to understand the role of subjectivity in language and conversely, the role of language in subjectivity, they invariably notice a certain aspect of language which seems to depend on extralinguistic, subjective, occasion-specific considerations.\" Within the context of narrative, deixis reflects those aspects of storytelling by which the audience is pragmatically directed to understand the perspective of the narrator or the perspective of the story's characters in relation to their own story-external vantage point. Essentially, deictic expressions help form the layers of narrative that direct the audience to either the narratorial discourse or to the story world. \"Deixis (adjectival form, deictic) is a psycholinguistic term for those aspects of meaning associated with self-world orientation\". Deixis is an integral component of the lens by which the audience perceives the narrative.\nLabov's narrative model.\nWilliam Labov argues that stories of personal experience can be divided into distinct sections, each of which serves a unique function within the narrative progression. Labov schematizes the organization of natural narrative using the following conceptual units: abstract, orientation, complicating action, resolution, evaluation, and coda. Generally, anecdotal narratives tend to arrange these units in the order outlined; however, this is not an inflexible, structural progression that defines how every narrative must develop. For instance, sentences and phrasal items that serve an evaluative function can be interspersed throughout a narrative. Some stretches of narrative discourse also feature overlap among these Labovian categories. Each of Labov's narrative divisions serves a characteristic purpose typified by a particular section's grammatical construction and functional role within the unfolding narrative, but the boundaries of such divisions are not always clear-cut.\nAs a feature of natural language, deixis is an important element of oral narrative and can be realized in different ways in each of Labov's categories. According to Galbraith, \"All language use depends on some felt relevance to situation, on the attention of participants, and their ability to lift out the topic...Like zero in mathematics and the dark space in the theater, deixis orients us within a situation without calling attention to itself\". Two of Labov's categories that often feature deixis prominently are the \"orientation\" and the \"coda\". The orientation typically occurs near the beginning of a narrative and serves to introduce the characters, settings, and events. Given its presentative quality, the orientation shifts the deictic center away from the speaker's here-and-now into the spatiotemporal coordinates of the story, which logically must occur at a time prior to the story's enunciation. The coda occurs toward the end of a narrative and functions as a means of terminating the flow of story events. By doing so, the coda reorients the speakers and listeners out of the story world and back into the communicative present.\nDeictic center.\nThe deictic center\u2014sometimes called the \"origo\" or zero-point\u2014represents the originating source in relation to which deictic expressions gain their context-dependent meaning. Often the deictic center is the speaker: thus, any tokens of \"I\" in the speaker's discourse must deictically refer back to the speaker as center; likewise, the word \"you\" must project outward from this center toward the addressee. Any participants not part of this communicative channel will be referred to in the third person. The theory of deixis is therefore egocentric in that the indexical anchorage of deictic expressions is a function of this zero-point of subjectivity. The \"I\"-center serves as the perceptual vantage point that surveys relations among salient contextual entities and events. Such a center, therefore, determines which deictic expressions are pragmatically licensed by a context that has been naturally delimited through this perceptual and evaluative locus. Thus, the appropriateness of a proximal \"this\" over a distal \"that\" is determined by the nearness of an object or a location in relation to the deictic zero-point.\nA deictic field contains the range of bounded participants and objects, spatial locations and landmarks, and temporal frames that point back to some deictic center as the source for their pragmatic demarcation. The deictic field radiates out from the deictic center, and the boundaries of such a field enclose the scope of objects, spaces, and events that constitute a set from which deictic expressions might seek out a potential referent. These fields function as cognitive frames that participants in a discourse can use to conceptualize their contextual surroundings in relation to each interlocutor's (alternating) function as deictic center across communicative turns. Within the context of literature, the presence of multiple deictic fields in a text can be fruitfully analyzed using the cognitive principle of deictic shift (discussed below).\nDeictic shift theory.\nDeictic shift theory (DST) refers to a range of immersion processes by which readers imaginatively project hypothetical deictic centers that are anchored to communicative and experiential loci within a narrative. Such cognitive framing, theorists of DST argue, form a necessary part of the reader's involvement in narrative, whereby through a process of frame shifting the reader constructs a story world by interpreting the (deictic) cues instantiated in the text. Deictic shifting can be accomplished in several ways. The most basic shift involves the reader's initial immersion into the world of the story. Here the deictic center moves out of the here-and-now of the reader's physical environment and becomes anchored to some text-internal perceptual or presentative instance, in most cases the deictic center of a character or a narrator. Deictic shifts at the level of narration include those cues that implicate a covert or overt narrator\u2014specifically, story commentary or instances when the narrator refers to himself or herself as an \"I.\" Such instances of commentary and evaluation often reflect the perceptual field, as well as the interpretive and ideological stance, of the narrator as they present the story's events.\nWithin the world of the story, deictic shifts occur in a number of ways. A fundamental shift occurs when the deictic center moves from one character to another\u2014for instance, in cases of omniscient thought report. Here the reader must adjust the deictic center accordingly and interprets the lens of the current focal window through the experiential subjectivity of the character-locus. Other forms of story-internal deictic shifts involve the cognitive framing associated with embedded narratives and other discourse-types: stories-within-stories, letters in epistolary fiction, diary entries, etc.\n\"Within literary scholarship, it is often noted that first and second person pronouns (and less so, and differently, third) facilitate readerly identification with the textually inscribed position (the position of the character or narrator designated by that pronoun), and evoke a sense of readerly conceptual immersion in the fictional world of the story, contributing to the ways in which the scene is imaginatively 'realized' in the mind of the reader, particularly the perspective from which the scene is conceptually visualized. Cognitive poetics and cognitive narratology have employed deictic shift theory, largely based on the work of Duchan, Bruder and Hewitt, to attempt to offer a cognitive account of how these interpretative effects are created. DST proposes that readers conceptually project to the contextual locus of the speaker of deictic cues in order to comprehend them, offering a model of how the deictic referents determining such contextual coordinates are processed by readers, and how this contributes to readers' conceptualization of the world of the story\" (Deictic shifting in literature: Experimental analysis).\nDeixis in narratology.\nBuhler applied the theory of deixis to narratives. He proposed the concept of Zeigfeld, or deictic field, which operates in three modes: the first, \"ad oculos\", \"operates in the here-and-now of the speaker's sensible environment;\" the second, \"anaphora\", \"operates in the context of the discourse itself considered as a structured environment;\" and the third, what Buhler calls \"deixis at phantasma\", operates in the context \"of imagination and long-term memory.\" Buhler's model attempts \"to describe the psychological and physical process whereby the live deictic field of our own bodily orientation and experience\" is \"transposed into an imaginative construction.\" According to Buhler, \"the body-feeling representation, or K\u00f6rpertastbild (what psychologists would probably now call the body schema), becomes loosened from its involvement with the HERE//NOW/I deictic coordinates of waking life in our immediate environment, and becomes available to translation into an environment we construct both conceptually and orientationally\"; this deictic coordinate system is used \"in the constructive environment to orient ourselves within 'the somewhere-realm of pure imagination and the there-and-there in memory'\".\nKatie Hamburger, a German narrative theorist, studied and theorized how deictic words are used in literature. In her work \"The Logic of Literature\", she argued that there are two realms of language act: reality statement and fiction (Galbraith, 24-25). Reality statements are by someone and about something. \"Acts of fictional narration, on the other hand, transfer their referentiality from the actuality of the historical world to the entertained reality of the fictive world, and transfer the subjectivity of the speaker to the subjectivity of the story world characters\". Hamburger argued that this transfer occurs due to the use of deictic adverbs, and psychological verbs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44845", "revid": "50781315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44845", "title": "Alessandro Manzoni", "text": "Italian poet and novelist (1785\u20131873)\nAlessandro Francesco Tommaso Antonio Manzoni (, , ; 7 March 1785 \u2013 22 May 1873) was an Italian philosopher, poet, playwright, and novelist.\nHe is famous for the novel \"The Betrothed\" (orig. ) (1827), generally ranked among the masterpieces of world literature. The novel is also a symbol of the Italian Risorgimento, both for its patriotic message and because it was a fundamental milestone in the development of the modern, unified Italian language. Manzoni also contributed to the stabilization of the modern Italian language and helped to ensure linguistic unity throughout Italy.\nHe was an influential proponent of Liberal Catholicism in Italy. He is also considered one of the three crowns of Romanticism in Italy, within Ugo Foscolo and Giacomo Leopardi, despite their differences.\nHe is often associated as the moral and cultural leader of the Italian unification with his younger contemporary Leopardi, though his work and thinking often contrast with the latter.\nEarly life.\nManzoni was born in Milan, Italy, on 7 March 1785. Pietro, his father, aged about fifty, belonged to an old family of Lecco, originally feudal lords of Barzio, in the Valsassina. However, his biological father was likely Giovanni Verri, brother of the influential Enlightenment thinkers Pietro and Alessandro Verri, and a habitu\u00e9, along with his brothers and Giulia Beccaria, of the dazzling liberal Societ\u00e0 del Caff\u00e8. The poet's maternal grandfather, Cesare Beccaria, was a well-known author and philosopher, and his mother Giulia had literary talent as well. The young Alessandro spent his first two years in \"cascina Costa\" in Galbiate and he was wet-nursed by Caterina Panzeri, as attested by a memorial tablet affixed in the place. In 1792 his parents broke their marriage and his mother began a relationship with the writer Carlo Imbonati, moving to England and later to Paris.\nAs a boy, Alessandro rarely saw his mother. He seems to have had a cool and distant relationship with his father. At the age of six, he was sent away from home to begin his schooling in a variety of religious boarding schools operated by the Somaschi and Barnabite fathers. From an early age, Alessandro was drawn to literature, to poetry in particular, and to the ideals of liberty, reason and atheism. Among his first poems was one from this period entitled \"The Triumph of Liberty\" (1801), a poem of considerable merit in praise of the French Revolution. In 1804 Manzoni began to frequent the circle of Neoclassical poets gathered around Vincenzo Monti, whom he had already known and admired for some time before; Monti's influence is especially apparent in the poems of Manzoni's classicist period, most notably \"Adda\" (1803), and \"Urania\" (1807).\nHis friendship with the scholars Francesco Lomonaco and Vincenzo Cuoco, who had fled Bourbon Naples after the fall of the Parthenopean Republic, further contributed to his revolutionary leanings and introduced him to historical studies and the philosophical ideas of Giambattista Vico. In 1804 Cuoco entrusted the nineteen year old Manzoni with the editing of his novel \"Platone in Italia\".\nManzoni sojourned in Venice from the fall of 1803 to the spring of the following year. Here he attended salon hosted by Isabella Teotochi Albrizzi and made the acquaintance of Ippolito Pindemonte and Ugo Foscolo. Upon the death of his father in 1807, he joined the freethinking household of his mother at Auteuil, and came into contact with the group of philosophers known as the \"Id\u00e9ologues\", among whom he made many friends, notably Claude Charles Fauriel. He established close ties with the intellectual leader of the \"Id\u00e9ologues\", Antoine Destutt de Tracy, whose daughter he was at a certain point supposed to marry. Through Fauriel and Madame de Condorcet, Manzoni met some of the leading intellectual figures of Paris, among them Augustin Thierry, Fran\u00e7ois Guizot, Pierre Jean Georges Cabanis, and Benjamin Constant. He became a close friend of Victor Cousin, Marcellin de Fresne and Marquis Jean-Baptiste de Montgrand, who later translated into French Manzoni's \"Inni Sacri\" an \"The Betrothed\". \nIn 1806\u20131807, while at Auteuil, Manzoni published his first works, the neoclassical poem \"Urania\", inspired by Monti's \"Musogonia\", and an elegy in blank verse, on the death of Count Carlo Imbonati. In the notes to his \"Sepolcri\", Foscolo highly praised Manzoni's ode \"In morte di Carlo Imbonati\" as the \"poetry of a young talent born for literature and warm with love of country\".\n1808\u20131821.\nIn 1808, Manzoni married Henriette Blondel, daughter of a Genevese banker. She came from a Calvinist family, but in 1810 she became a Roman Catholic. Her conversion profoundly influenced her husband. That same year he experienced a religious crisis which led him from agnosticism to an austere form of Catholicism. The Manzoni family returned to Milan in June 1810. On his return to Milan Manzoni fell in with the circle of progressive young artists and intellectuals gathered around the poet Carlo Porta, the \"Cameretta Portiana\". In honor of Porta Manzoni wrote his only poem in the Lombard language. In 1814 he settled with his wife in the house in Via Morone, Milan, where he continued to live until his death. The family divided its time between Milan and the country estate that Carlo Imbonati had left to his mother Giulia at Brusuglio, some six miles west of Milan. Manzoni's marriage proved a happy one, and he led for many years a retired domestic life, divided between literature and the picturesque husbandry of Lombardy.\nIn 1812 Manzoni began a collection of lyrics known as the \"Sacred Hymns\" (Inni Sacri), which were published along with other of his religious poems in 1815. This sequence of hymns was supposed to cover the major festivals of the ecclesiastical year, a sort of Catholic Fasti, and were to number at least twelve, but Manzoni ultimately only completed five of them. The collection was received warmly by Goethe, who saw the young Italian poet restoring vitality to jejune religious topics, and by Stendhal, who claimed to see in Manzoni a talent to rival Lord Byron. \nHis intellectual energy in this period of his life was also devoted to the composition of a scholarly treatise on Catholic morality, \"Osservazioni sulla morale cattolica\", written in response to Jean Charles L\u00e9onard de Sismondi, who \"attributed the moral corruption of the Italians to the papacy\". Two patriotic lyrics, celebrating the Milanese insurrection of 1814 and the Rimini Proclamation of 1815, belong to the same epoch. In 1818 he had to sell his paternal inheritance, as his money had been lost to a dishonest agent. His characteristic generosity was shown at this time in his dealings with his peasants, who were heavily indebted to him. He not only cancelled on the spot the record of all sums owed to him, but bade them keep for themselves the whole of the coming maize harvest. \nWhile he shared many of the cultural and political aims of the Milanese Romantic circles, Manzoni was always cautious in his overt pronouncements. He declined invitations to contribute to the most prominent of the Italian Romantic literary magazine, the influential though short-lived \"Il Conciliatore\" (1 Sept. 1818\u00a0\u2013 10 Oct. 1819). In his only public statement on the subject, \"Lettera sul Romanticismo\", published in 1823, he expressed agreement with the Romantics' condemnation of the use of classical mythology, slavish imitation of ancient authors, and normative rules such as the classical unities, but he rejected the excesses of northern European Romantics.\nIn 1819, Manzoni published his first tragedy, \"Il Conte di Carmagnola\", which, boldly violating all classical conventions, excited a lively controversy. The protagonist of the play is the Renaissance condottiero Francesco Bussone, falsely accused of betrayal by the Venetian Senate, condemned to death, and executed. Though written in verse, the tragedy follows Romantic canons, disregarding the pseudo-Aristotelian unities of time and place and including choruses with the function of commenting on the action, as had been theorized by the German Romantic poet Schlegel. Manzoni's theatrical reform caused a great stir both in Italy and abroad; it is worth mentioning that his attacks on the dramatic unities in \"Prefazione al Carmagnola\" (1820) and \"Lettre \u00e0 M. Chauvet\" (1823), published in the French edition of the tragedy, antedate Hugo's \"Pr\u00e9face \u00e0 Cromwell\" (1827) by at least seven years. The tragedy was severely criticized in a \"Quarterly Review\" article to which Goethe replied in its defence, \"one genius,\" as Angelo de Gubernatis remarks, \"having divined the other.\"\nManzoni was enthused by the Piedmontese revolution of March 1821. On this occasion he wrote one of his most famous poems, the ode \"March 1821\". First published only in 1848, the ode expresses Manzoni's enthusiasm over the news of the Turin insurrection an enthusiasm that led him to imagine the triumphal entry of the Piedmontese into Lombardy. \nThe death of Napoleon in 1821 inspired Manzoni's powerful stanzas \"Il Cinque maggio\" (\"The Fifth of May\"), one of the most popular lyrics in the Italian language. The ode is a poetic meditation on destiny, and on the mystery of the great figures that from time to time burst onto the stage of history. The poetry is pervaded with a profound Christian spirit, perhaps even purer and intenser than the spirit of his more definitely religious works. The poem was immensely successful throughout Europe and was translated into German by Goethe. The political events of that year, and the imprisonment of many of his friends, weighed much on Manzoni's mind, and the historical studies in which he sought distraction during his subsequent retirement at Brusuglio suggested his great work.\n\"The Betrothed\".\nManzoni started work on the novel in 1821, but he began the actual composition of \"Fermo e Lucia\" on 24 April 1821, after reading the novels of Walter Scott, mainly in French translations. Round the episode of the Innominato, historically identified with Francesco Bernardino Visconti, the first manuscript of the novel \"The Betrothed\" (in Italian \"I promessi sposi\") began to grow into shape, and was completed in September 1823. The work was published, after being deeply reshaped by the author and revised by friends in 1825\u20131827, at the rate of a volume a year; it at once raised its author to the first rank of literary fame. It is generally agreed to be his greatest work, and the paradigm of modern Italian language.\nSet in Lombardy under Spanish rule in the 17th century, the novel narrates the story of two fianc\u00e9s, Renzo Tramaglino and Lucia Mondella, who endure famine, war, and plague as well as corruption in Church and State before they are finally united. \"The Betrothed\" is very much a realist novel: the two protagonists are ordinary people, the style and the language are plain and everyday, and the narrative situations are drawn from everyday life. The novel is particularly notable for its strong characterization: Manzoni is able to unfold a character in all particulars, to display it in all its aspects, to follow it through its different phases. The story of Renzo and Lucia is interwoven with the great historic events of the 17th century (the Thirty Years' War, the famine of 1628, and the plague of 1630) in a vast social panorama whose protagonists are at the same time Cardinal Federico Borromeo, the most noble religious figure of the time, the Unnamed (Francesco Bernardino Visconti), the most feared outlaw of his day, and many other individuals both named or left anonymous in the novel.\nImmediately hailed as a work of genius, the novel went through 68 editions and sold over 60,000 copies in the next fourteen years. It was soon translated into French, German and English. Such international writers as Goethe, Edgar Allan Poe and Stendhal, and the influential Italian critics Niccol\u00f2 Tommaseo, Silvio Pellico, Pietro Giordani and Francesco de Sanctis praised the work. In an enthusiastic review published in 1838 on \"The Monthly Chronicle\" Mary Shelley called Manzoni \"a man of first-rate genius\" \nThe Penguin Companion to European Literature notes that 'the book's real greatness lies in its delineation of character...in the heroine, Lucia, in Padre Cristoforo, the Capuchin friar, and the saintly cardinal (Borromeo) of Milan, he has created three living examples of that pure and wholehearted Christianity which is his ideal. But his psychological penetration extends also to those who fall short of this standard, whether through weakness or perversity, and the novel is rich in pictures of ordinary men and women, seen with a delightful irony and disenchantment which always stops short of cynicism, and which provides a perfect balance for the evangelical fervour of his ideal'. According to Peter Brooks \"\"The Betrothed\" is the most original and powerful of European historical novels in the tradition of Walter Scott (...) It ranks with \"The Charterhouse of Parma\" and \"War and Peace\" as a drama of life lived within the dynamics of history\".\nFollowing a stay in Florence in 1827 Manzoni began a thorough linguistic revision of \"The Betrothed\". His aim was to bring the novel's language closer to the kind of Florentine dialect spoken by the educated classes. He enlisted the help of two Florentine friends, Gaetano Cioni and Giovanni Battista Niccolini, to whom he gave copies of his novel, asking them to make corrections in the margin wherever the language was not in conformity with modern, cultured Florentine. The revised edition of his masterpiece was published in serialised from 1840 to 1842. It was integrated by 450 pictures by the famous illustrator Francesco Gonin.\nAs an appendix to the second edition of the \"The Betrothed\", Manzoni published in 1842 the \"Storia della colonna infame\" (History of the infamous column). The essay recounts the trial of Health Commissioner Guglielmo Piazza and barber Gian Giacomo Mora during the plague of 1630. Both men were sentenced to death as \"untori\" (people suspected of spreading the plague by smearing a poisonous substance on walls). The essay denounces the torture used, and the absurdity of the time's criminal legislation, as well as superstition and ignorance. Manzoni took its inspiration from Pietro Verri's \"Notes on torture\", and Cesare Beccaria's more extensive and more famous \"On Crimes and Punishments\". The essay's intention was to underscore the individual responsibilities and the perverse passions of those magistrates who knew very well they were sentencing innocent persons to death. The \"Storia della colonna infame\" was highly regarded by French writers Alphonse de Lamartine and Augustin Thierry. It provided the source of inspiration for Leonardo Sciascia's novel \"Morte dell'Inquisitore\".\n\"Adelchi\" and later works.\nIn 1822, Manzoni had published his second tragedy, \"Adelchi\", turning on the overthrow by Charlemagne of the Lombard domination in Italy, and containing many veiled allusions to the existing Austrian rule. Manzoni published together with the \"Adelchi\" his \"Discourse on a few items of Longobard history in Italy\", the best of his historical essays. Both the \"Adelchi\" and \"Il Conte di Carmagnola\" were quickly translated and circulated in France, Germany and England and won Manzoni the praise of Gy\u00f6rgy Luk\u00e1cs, who considered him \"the most important exponent of historical drama at the time in Western Europe.\"\nIn 1826 Manzoni befriended the Catholic philosopher Antonio Rosmini. The novelist maintained constant contact with the philosopher through correspondence and visits. Rosmini played the same r\u00f4le of confidant and critic in Manzoni's later life, that Fauriel had played during Manzoni's youth. His ties with Rosmini prompted Manzoni to devote himself to philosophical studies. After 1827, Manzoni wrote mainly essays on philosophy, history, politics and economics, literature, and above all language \u2013 most notably \"Sentir messa\" (1836), and the unfinished treatises \"Saggio comparativo sulla rivoluzione francese del 1789 e la rivoluzione italiana del 1859\", begun in 1862, and \"Della lingua italiana\", which were published posthumously.\nPolitics and economics.\nManzoni favored the Italian unification and on February 1860 he was made a senator by the King of Italy Victor Emmanuel II. Before and after his embracing an austere Catholicism upon marrying Henriette Blondel, Manzoni's politics can be broadly described as progressive liberal.\nSince his French trip, Manzoni's liberalism included a profound understanding of economics. He was well acquainted with authors such as Jean-Baptiste Say and Adam Smith and left numerous notes on the economic treatises and essays he was reading. His understanding of economics came to surface in his grand historical novel \"The Betrothed\", particularly in Chapter 12, where he deals with the famine in Lombardy. Economist and President of the Italian Republic Luigi Einaudi praised the chapter and the whole of \"The Betrothed\" as \"one of the best treatises on political economy ever written\". Economic historian Deirdre N. McCloskey likewise described it as \"a lecture in Economics 101\".\nFamily, death and legacy.\nOn 25 December 1833, Manzoni's wife Henriette died, a loss which was followed nine months later by the death of his eldest daughter, Giulietta, wife of Massimo d'Azeglio. In the mid-1830s he attended the \"Salotto Maffei\", a salon in Milan hosted by Clara Maffei, and in 1837 he married again, to Teresa Borri, widow of Count Decio Stampa. The new Mrs. Manzoni's nature was not the docile and conciliating one of Henriette, and she didn't get along very well either with her mother-in-law nor with step-children. In 1845, Teresa bore twins, one of whom was stillborn, and the other of whom lived only a few hours. \nIn 1860 King Victor Emmanuel II named Manzoni a senator. Owing to his prestige in the field of studies on the problem of language \u2013 something that had engaged his attention while he was writing the novel on up to his \"Lettera a Giacinto Carena sulla lingua italiana\" (Letter to Giacinto Carena on the Italian language, 1846) \u2013 Manzoni was appointed chairman of a commission dealing with this subject by the minister of public education, Emilio Broglio. In this capacity, he wrote a report entitled \"Dell'unit\u00e0 della lingua e dei mezzi per diffonderla\" (On the unity of the language and on the means for achieving it, 1868), in which he proposed that Florentine should be taught in schools, and a modern Florentine dictionary published. The report was published the same year in the March issue of the \"Nuova Antologia\" and in \"La Perseveranza\" of 5 March. The Minister of Education decided to adopt Manzoni's recommendations and under his auspices the \"Nuovo Vocabolario\" \"della lingua italiana\" was begun in accordance with Manzoni's criterion, namely the acceptance of the living usage of Florence.\nThe last years of the writer's life were marred by the death of his mother (1841), his second wife (1861), six of his children, and his closest friends, Charles Fauriel (1844), Tommaso Grossi (1853) and Antonio Rosmini (1855). The death of his eldest son, Pier Luigi, on 28 April 1873, was the final blow which hastened his end. He was already weakened as he had fallen on 6 January while exiting the San Fedele church, hitting his head on the steps, and he died after 5 months of cerebral meningitis, a complication of the trauma.\nHis funeral was celebrated in the Milan Cathedral with almost royal pomp. Manzoni's remains, after they lay in state for some days, were followed to the Cimitero Monumentale in Milan by a vast cortege, including the royal princes and all the great officers of state. A monument to Manzoni by Francesco Barzaghi, was erected in the Piazza San Fedele in 1883; however his noblest monument was Giuseppe Verdi's \"Requiem\", written in 1874 to honour his memory. Natalia Ginzburg wrote a biographical study of Manzoni and his family based on Manzoni family letters (\"La famiglia Manzoni\", 1983; Eng. trans. \"The Manzoni Family\", 1987).\nAt first misunderstood by Catholic integralists due to his liberal leanings, Manzoni has since been revered as one of the most important modern Catholic authors. His treatise \"Osservazioni sulla morale cattolica\" was quoted by Pope Pius XI in his encyclical on Christian Education \"Divini Illius Magistri\": \"20. It is worthy of note how a layman, an excellent writer and at the same time a profound and conscientious thinker, has been able to understand well and express exactly this fundamental Catholic doctrine: 'The Church does not say that morality belongs purely, in the sense of exclusively, to her; but that it belongs wholly to her. She has never maintained that outside her fold and apart from her teaching, man cannot arrive at any moral truth; she has on the contrary more than once condemned this opinion because it has appeared under more forms than one. She does however say, has said, and will ever say, that because of her institution by Jesus Christ, because of the Holy Ghost sent her in His name by the Father, she alone possesses what she has had immediately from God and can never lose, the whole of moral truth, omnem veritatem, in which all individual moral truths are included, as well those which man may learn by the help of reason, as those which form part of revelation or which may be deduced from it'\".Pope Francis loved Manzoni's masterpiece \"The Betrothed\". First introduced to him by his grandmother, he stated to have read it at least three times during his life and asked engaged couples to read the novel for edification before marriage.\nManzoni's works have exerted enormous influence on Italian culture. Giovanni Rosini and Cletto Arrighi borrowed his characters; Cesare Cant\u00f9, Cesare Balbo, Niccol\u00f2 Tommaseo, and Massimo D'Azeglio adopted his Christian and conciliatory ideology, D'Azeglio's \"Ettore Fieramosca\" (1833) proving a best-seller. Numerous writers, among them Grossi, Rovani, Nievo, Verga, Fogazzaro, and subsequently Bacchelli, followed in his footsteps. Amilcare Ponchielli's first opera (1856) is based on Manzoni's novel \"The Betrothed\". \n\"Manzoni is for literate Italians a cultural titan akin to Dante, Verdi, Leopardi, Ungaretti\". The language employed in his masterpiece, \"The Betrothed\" has shaped the language which, after the unification of Italy (1861), became the chief model of standard educated Italian. \"The Betrothed\" forms an indispensable part of the curriculum in Italian high schools and has shaped Italians' ways of thinking, often in unconscious ways, more than any other novel. Verbal borrowings from it have become embedded in everyday language, as well as constantly resurfacing in films, books, and journalism.\nNobility.\nOn 23 February 1691 Pietro Antonio Manzoni, Alessandro's great-grandfather, purchased the autonomous municipality of Moncucco as a fief (created on that occasion and dependent on Mirasole, a farmstead-castle near Caltignaga), ensuring the noble title to his family: \"Signore di Moncucco di Mirasole\" (Lord of Moncucco of Mirasole). In 1753 the fief passed to his son Alessandro Valeriano and in 1773 to the latter's second-born son, Pietro (presumed father of Alessandro).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44846", "revid": "32010320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44846", "title": "1730s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 1730s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1739 BC to December 31, 1730 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44848", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44848", "title": "Edward II of England", "text": "King of England from 1307 to 1327\nEdward II (25 April 1284\u00a0\u2013 21 September 1327), also known as Edward of Caernarfon or Caernarvon, was King of England from 1307 until he was deposed in January 1327. The fourth son of Edward I, Edward became the heir to the throne following the death of his older brother Alphonso. Beginning in 1300, Edward accompanied his father on campaigns in Scotland, and in 1306 he was knighted in a grand ceremony at Westminster Abbey. Edward succeeded to the throne the next year, following his father's death. In 1308, he married Isabella, daughter of the powerful King Philip IV of France, as part of a long-running effort to resolve the tensions between the English and French crowns.\nEdward had a close and controversial relationship with Piers Gaveston, who had joined his household in 1300. The precise nature of Edward and Gaveston's relationship is uncertain; they may have been friends, lovers, or sworn brothers. Gaveston's arrogance and power as Edward's favourite provoked discontent both among the barons and the French royal family, and Edward was forced to exile him. On Gaveston's return, the barons pressured the King into agreeing to wide-ranging reforms called the Ordinances of 1311. The newly empowered barons banished Gaveston, to which Edward responded by revoking the reforms and recalling his favourite. Led by Edward's cousin Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster, a group of the barons seized and executed Gaveston in 1312, beginning several years of armed confrontation. English forces were pushed back in Scotland, where Edward was decisively defeated by Robert the Bruce at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314. Widespread famine followed, and criticism of the King's reign mounted.\nThe Despenser family, in particular Hugh Despenser the Younger, became close friends and advisers to Edward, but in 1321 Lancaster and many of the barons seized the Despensers' lands and forced the King to exile them. In response, Edward led a short military campaign, capturing and executing Lancaster. Edward and the Despensers strengthened their grip on power, revoking the 1311 reforms, executing their enemies and confiscating estates. Unable to make progress in Scotland, Edward finally signed a truce with Robert. Opposition to the regime grew, and when Isabella was sent to France to negotiate a peace treaty in 1325, she turned against Edward and refused to return. Isabella allied herself with the exiled Roger Mortimer, and invaded England with a small army in 1326. Edward's regime collapsed and he fled into Wales, where he was captured in November. Edward was forced to relinquish his crown in January 1327 in favour of his son, Edward III of England, and he died in Berkeley Castle on 21 September, probably murdered on the orders of the new regime.\nEdward's relationship with Gaveston inspired Christopher Marlowe's 1592 play \"Edward II\", along with other plays, films, novels and media. Many of these have focused on the possible sexual relationship between the two men. Edward's contemporaries criticised his performance as a king, noting his failures in Scotland and the oppressive regime of his later years, although 19th-century academics have argued that the growth of parliamentary institutions during his reign was a positive development for England over the longer term. Debate has continued into the 21st century as to whether Edward was a lazy and incompetent king, or simply a reluctant and ultimately unsuccessful ruler.\nBackground.\nEdward II was the fourth son of Edward I, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and ruler of Gascony in south-western France (which he held as the feudal vassal of the King of France), and Eleanor, Countess of Ponthieu in northern France. Eleanor was from the Castilian royal family. Edward\u00a0I proved a successful military leader, leading the suppression of the baronial revolts in the 1260s and joining the Ninth Crusade. During the 1280s he conquered North Wales, removing the native Welsh princes from power and, in the 1290s, he intervened in Scotland's civil war, claiming suzerainty over the country. He was considered an extremely successful ruler by his contemporaries, largely able to control the powerful earls that formed the senior ranks of the English nobility. The historian Michael Prestwich describes Edward\u00a0I as \"a king to inspire fear and respect\", while John Gillingham characterises him as an \"efficient bully\".\nDespite Edward I's successes, when he died in 1307 he left a range of challenges for his son to resolve. One of the most critical was the problem of English rule in Scotland, where Edward\u00a0I's long but ultimately inconclusive military campaign was ongoing when he died. His control of Gascony created tension with the French kings. They insisted that the English kings give homage to them for the lands; the English kings saw this demand as insulting to their honour, and the issue remained unresolved. Edward\u00a0I also faced increasing opposition from his barons over the taxation and requisitions required to resource his wars, and left his son debts of around \u00a3200,000 on his death.\nEarly life (1284\u20131307).\nBirth.\nEdward II was born in Caernarfon Castle in north Wales on 25 April 1284, less than a year after Edward\u00a0I had conquered the region, and as a result is sometimes called Edward of Caernarfon. The King probably chose the castle deliberately as the location for Edward's birth as it was an important symbolic location for the native Welsh, associated with Roman imperial history, and it formed the centre of the new royal administration of North Wales. Edward's birth brought predictions of greatness from contemporary prophets, who believed that the Last Days of the world were imminent, declaring him a new King Arthur, who would lead England to glory. David Powel, a 16th-century clergyman, suggested that the baby was offered to the Welsh as a prince \"that was borne in Wales and could speake never a word of English\", but there is no evidence to support this account.\nEdward's name was English in origin, linking him to the Anglo-Saxon saint Edward the Confessor, and was chosen by his father instead of the more traditional Norman and Castilian names selected for Edward's brothers: John and Henry, who had died before Edward was born, and Alphonso, who died in August 1284, leaving Edward as the heir to the throne. Although Edward was a relatively healthy child, there were enduring concerns throughout his early years that he too might die and leave his father without a male heir. After his birth, Edward was looked after by a wet nurse called Mariota or Mary Maunsel for a few months until she fell ill, when Alice de Leygrave became his foster mother. He would have barely known his natural mother, Eleanor, who was in Gascony with his father during his earliest years. An official household, complete with staff, was created for the new baby, under the direction of a clerk, Giles of Oudenarde.\nChildhood, personality and appearance.\nSpending increased on Edward's personal household as he grew older and, in 1293, William of Blyborough took over as its administrator. Edward was probably given a religious education by the Dominican friars, whom his mother invited into his household in 1290. He was assigned one of his grandmother's followers, Guy Ferre, as his \"magister\", who was responsible for his discipline, training him in riding and military skills. It is uncertain how well educated Edward was; there is little evidence for his ability to read and write, although his mother was keen that her other children be well educated, and Ferre was himself a relatively learned man for the period. Edward likely mainly spoke Anglo-Norman French in his daily life, in addition to some English and possibly Latin.\nEdward had a normal upbringing for a member of a royal family. He was interested in horses and horsebreeding, and became a good rider; he also liked dogs, in particular greyhounds. In his letters, he shows a quirky sense of humour, joking about sending unsatisfactory animals to his friends, such as horses who disliked carrying their riders, or lazy hunting dogs too slow to catch rabbits. He was not particularly interested in hunting or falconry, both popular activities in the 14th century. He enjoyed music, including Welsh music and the newly invented crwth instrument, as well as musical organs. He did not take part in jousting, either because he lacked the aptitude or because he had been banned from participating for his personal safety, but he was certainly enthusiastic in his support of the sport.\nEdward grew up to be tall and muscular, and was considered good-looking by the standards of the period. He had a reputation as a competent public speaker and was known for his generosity to household staff. Unusually, he enjoyed rowing, as well as hedging and ditching, and enjoyed associating with labourers and other lower-class workers. This behaviour was not considered normal for the nobility of the period and attracted criticism from contemporaries.\nIn 1290, Edward's father had confirmed the Treaty of Birgham, in which he promised to marry his six-year-old son to the young Margaret of Norway, who had a potential claim to the crown of Scotland. Margaret died later that year, bringing an end to the plan. Edward's mother, Eleanor, died shortly afterwards, followed by his grandmother, Eleanor of Provence. Edward\u00a0I was distraught at his wife's death and held a huge funeral for her; his son inherited the County of Ponthieu from Eleanor. Next, a French marriage was considered for the young Edward, to help secure a lasting peace with France, but King PhilipIV's refusal to release fortresses in Gascony offered by EdwardI provoked the Gascon War in 1294. The idea was replaced with the proposal of a marriage to a daughter of the rebellious Guy, Count of Flanders, but this too failed after King Philip was able to have the proposed bride sent to Paris.\nEarly campaigns in Scotland.\nBetween 1297 and 1298, Edward was left as regent in charge of England while the King campaigned in Flanders against Philip\u00a0IV, who had occupied part of the English king's lands in Gascony. On his return, Edward\u00a0I signed a peace treaty, under which he took Philip's sister Margaret as his wife and agreed that Prince Edward would in due course marry Philip's daughter, Isabella, who was then only two years old. In theory, this marriage would mean that the disputed Duchy of Gascony would be inherited by a descendant of both Edward and Philip, providing a possible end to the long-running tensions. The young Edward seems to have got on well with his new stepmother, who gave birth to two sons, Thomas of Brotherton in 1300 and Edmund of Woodstock in 1301. As king, Edward later provided his half-brothers with financial support and titles.\nEdward I returned to Scotland once again in 1300, and this time took his son with him, making him the commander of the rearguard at the siege of Caerlaverock Castle. In the spring of 1301, the King declared Edward the Prince of Wales, granting him the earldom of Chester and lands across North Wales; he seems to have hoped that this would help pacify the region, and that it would give his son some financial independence. Edward received homage from his Welsh subjects and then joined his father for the 1301 Scottish campaign; he took an army of around 300 soldiers north with him and captured Turnberry Castle. Prince Edward also took part in the 1303 campaign during which he besieged Brechin Castle, deploying his own siege engine in the operation. In the spring of 1304, Edward conducted negotiations with the rebel Scottish leaders on the King's behalf and, when these failed, he joined his father for the siege of Stirling Castle.\nIn 1305, Edward and his father quarrelled, probably over the issue of money. The prince had an altercation with Bishop Walter Langton, who served as the royal treasurer, apparently over the amount of financial support Edward received from the Crown. The King defended his treasurer, and banished Prince Edward and his companions from his court, cutting off their financial support. After some negotiations involving family members and friends, father and son were reconciled.\nThe Scottish conflict flared up once again in 1306, when Robert the Bruce killed his rival John Comyn\u00a0III of Badenoch and declared himself King of the Scots. Edward I mobilised a fresh army, but decided that, this time, his son would be formally in charge of the expedition. Prince Edward was made the duke of Aquitaine and then, along with many other young men, he was knighted in a lavish ceremony at Westminster Abbey called the Feast of the Swans. Amid a huge feast in the neighbouring hall, reminiscent of Arthurian legends and crusading events, the assembly took a collective oath to defeat Bruce. It is unclear what role Prince Edward's forces played in the campaign that summer, which, under the orders of Edward\u00a0I, saw a punitive, brutal retaliation against Bruce's faction in Scotland. Edward returned to England in September, where diplomatic negotiations to finalise a date for his wedding to Isabella continued.\nPiers Gaveston and sexuality.\nDuring this time, Edward became close to Piers Gaveston. Gaveston was the son of one of the King's household knights whose lands lay adjacent to Gascony, and had himself joined Prince Edward's household in 1300, possibly on Edward I's instruction. The two got on well; Gaveston became a squire and was soon being referred to as a close companion of Edward, before being knighted by the King during the Feast of the Swans in 1306. The King then exiled Gaveston to Gascony in 1307 for reasons that remain unclear. According to one chronicler, Edward had asked his father to allow him to give Gaveston the County of Ponthieu, and the King responded furiously, pulling his son's hair out in great handfuls, before exiling Gaveston. The official court records, however, show Gaveston being only temporarily exiled, supported by a comfortable stipend; no reason is given for the order, suggesting that it may have been an act aimed at punishing the prince.\nThe possibility that Edward had a sexual relationship with Gaveston or his later favourites has been extensively discussed by historians, complicated by the scarcity of surviving evidence to determine for certain the details of their relationships. Homosexuality was fiercely condemned by the Church in 14th-century England, which equated it with heresy. Both men had sexual relationships with their wives, who bore them children; Edward also had an illegitimate son, and may have had an affair with his niece, Eleanor de Clare.\nThe contemporary evidence supporting their homosexual relationship comes primarily from an anonymous chronicler in the 1320s who described how Edward \"felt such love\" for Gaveston that \"he entered into a covenant of constancy, and bound himself with him before all other mortals with a bond of indissoluble love, firmly drawn up and fastened with a knot.\" The first specific suggestion that Edward engaged in sex with men was recorded in 1334, when Adam Orleton, the Bishop of Winchester, was accused of having stated in 1326 that Edward was a \"sodomite\", although Orleton defended himself by arguing that he had meant that Edward's adviser, Hugh Despenser the Younger, was a sodomite, rather than the late king. The Meaux Chronicle from the 1390s simply notes that Edward gave himself \"too much to the vice of sodomy\".\nAlternatively, Edward and Gaveston may have simply been friends with a close working relationship. Contemporary chronicler comments are vaguely worded; Orleton's allegations were at least in part politically motivated, and are very similar to the highly politicised sodomy allegations made against Pope Boniface\u00a0VIII and the Knights Templar in 1303 and 1308, respectively. Later accounts by chroniclers of Edward's activities may trace back to Orleton's original allegations, and were certainly adversely coloured by the events at the end of Edward's reign. Such historians as Michael Prestwich and Seymour Phillips have argued that the public nature of the English royal court would have made it unlikely that any homosexual affairs would have remained discreet; neither the contemporary Church, Edward's father nor his father-in-law appear to have made any adverse comments about Edward's sexual behaviour.\nA more recent theory, proposed by the historian Pierre Chaplais, suggests that Edward and Gaveston entered into a bond of adoptive brotherhood. Compacts of adoptive brotherhood, in which the participants pledged to support each other in a form of \"brotherhood-in-arms\", were not unknown between close male friends in the Middle Ages. Many chroniclers described Edward and Gaveston's relationship as one of brotherhood, and one explicitly noted that Edward had taken Gaveston as his adopted brother. Chaplais argues that the pair may have made a formal compact in either 1300 or 1301, and that they would have seen any later promises they made to separate or to leave each other as having been made under duress, and therefore invalid.\nEarly reign (1307\u20131311).\nCoronation and marriage.\nEdward I mobilised another army for the Scottish campaign in 1307, which Prince Edward was due to join that summer, but the elderly king had been increasingly unwell and died on 7 July at Burgh by Sands. Edward travelled from London immediately after the news reached him, and on 20 July he was proclaimed king. He continued north into Scotland and on 4 August received homage from his Scottish supporters at Dumfries, before abandoning the campaign and returning south. Edward promptly recalled Piers Gaveston, who was then in exile, and made him Earl of Cornwall, before arranging his marriage to the wealthy Margaret de Clare. Edward also arrested his old adversary Bishop Langton, and dismissed him from his post as treasurer. Edward\u00a0I's body was kept at Waltham Abbey for several months before being taken for burial to Westminster, where Edward erected a simple marble tomb for his father.\nIn 1308, Edward's marriage to Isabella of France proceeded. Edward crossed the English Channel to France in January, leaving Gaveston as his \"custos regni\" in charge of the kingdom. This arrangement was unusual, and involved unprecedented powers being delegated to Gaveston, backed by a specially engraved Great Seal. Edward probably hoped that the marriage would strengthen his position in Gascony and bring him much needed funds. The final negotiations, however, proved challenging: Edward and Philip\u00a0IV did not like each other, and the French king drove a hard bargain over the size of Isabella's dower and the details of the administration of Edward's lands in France. As part of the agreement, Edward gave homage to Philip for the Duchy of Aquitaine and agreed to a commission to complete the implementation of the 1303 Treaty of Paris.\nThe pair were married in Boulogne on 25 January. Edward gave Isabella a psalter as a wedding gift, and her father gave her gifts worth over 21,000\u00a0livres and a fragment of the True Cross. The pair returned to England in February, where Edward had ordered Westminster Palace to be lavishly restored in readiness for their coronation and wedding feast, complete with marble tables, forty ovens and a fountain that produced wine and pimento, a spiced medieval drink. After some delays, the ceremony went ahead on 25 February at Westminster Abbey, under the guidance of Henry Woodlock, the Bishop of Winchester. As part of the coronation, Edward swore to uphold \"the rightful laws and customs which the community of the realm shall have chosen\". It is uncertain what this meant: It might have been intended to force Edward to accept future legislation, it may have been inserted to prevent him from overturning any future vows he might take, or it may have been an attempt by the king to ingratiate himself with the barons. The event was marred by the large crowds of eager spectators who surged into the palace, knocking down a wall and forcing Edward to flee by the back door.\nIsabella was only twelve at the time of her wedding, young even by the standards of the period, and Edward probably had sexual relations with mistresses during their first few years together. During this time he fathered an illegitimate son, Adam, who was born possibly as early as 1307. Edward and Isabella's first son, the future Edward\u00a0III, was born in 1312 amid great celebrations, and three more children followed: John in 1316, Eleanor in 1318 and Joan in 1321.\nTensions over Gaveston.\nGaveston's return from exile in 1307 was initially accepted by the barons, but opposition quickly grew. He appeared to have an excessive influence on royal policy, leading to complaints from one chronicler that there were \"two kings reigning in one kingdom, the one in name and the other in deed\". Accusations, probably untrue, were levelled at Gaveston that he had stolen royal funds and had purloined Isabella's wedding presents. Gaveston had played a key role at Edward's coronation, provoking fury from both the English and the French contingents about the earl's ceremonial precedence and magnificent clothes, and about Edward's apparent preference for Gaveston's company over that of Isabella at the feast.\nParliament met in February 1308 in a heated atmosphere. Edward was eager to discuss the potential for governmental reform, but the barons were unwilling to begin any such debate until the problem of Gaveston had been resolved. Violence seemed likely, but the situation was resolved through the mediation of the moderate Henry de Lacy, 3rd Earl of Lincoln, who convinced the barons to back down. A fresh parliament was held in April, where the barons once again criticised Gaveston, demanding his exile, this time supported by Isabella and the French monarchy. Edward resisted, but finally acquiesced, agreeing to send Gaveston to Aquitaine, under threat of excommunication by the Archbishop of Canterbury should he return. At the last moment, Edward changed his mind and instead sent Gaveston to Dublin, appointing him as the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.\nEdward called for a fresh military campaign for Scotland, but this idea was quietly abandoned, and instead the king and the barons met in August 1308 to discuss reform. Behind the scenes, Edward started negotiations to convince both Pope Clement\u00a0V and Philip\u00a0IV to allow Gaveston to return to England, offering in exchange to suppress the Knights Templar in England, and to release Bishop Langton from prison. Edward called a new meeting of members of the Church and key barons in January 1309, and the leading earls then gathered in March and April, possibly under the leadership of Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster. Another parliament followed, which refused to allow Gaveston to return to England, but offered to grant Edward additional taxes if he agreed to a programme of reform.\nEdward sent assurances to the Pope that the conflict surrounding Gaveston's role was at an end. On the basis of these promises, and procedural concerns about how the original decision had been taken, the Pope agreed to annul the Archbishop's threat to excommunicate Gaveston, thus opening the possibility of Gaveston's return. Gaveston arrived back in England in June, where he was met by Edward. At the parliament the next month, Edward made a range of concessions to placate those opposed to Gaveston, including agreeing to limit the powers of the royal steward and the marshal of the royal household, to regulate the Crown's unpopular powers of purveyance, and to abandon recently enacted customs legislation; in return, parliament agreed to fresh taxes for the war in Scotland. Temporarily, at least, Edward and the barons appeared to have come to a successful compromise.\nOrdinances of 1311.\nFollowing his return, Gaveston's relationship with the major barons became increasingly difficult. He was considered arrogant, and he took to referring to the earls by offensive names, including calling one of their more powerful members the \"dog of Warwick\". The Earl of Lancaster and Gaveston's enemies refused to attend parliament in 1310 because Gaveston would be present. Edward was facing increasing financial problems, owing \u00a322,000 to his Frescobaldi Italian bankers, and facing protests about how he was using his right of prises to acquire supplies for the war in Scotland. His attempts to raise an army for Scotland collapsed and the earls suspended the collection of the new taxes.\nThe king and parliament met again in February 1310, and the proposed discussions of Scottish policy were replaced by debate of domestic problems. Edward was petitioned to abandon Gaveston as his counsellor and instead adopt the advice of 21 elected barons, termed Ordainers, who would carry out a widespread reform of both the government and the royal household. Under huge pressure, he agreed to the proposal and the Ordainers were elected, broadly evenly split between reformers and conservatives. While the Ordainers began their plans for reform, Edward and Gaveston took a new army of around 4,700 men to Scotland, where the military situation had continued to deteriorate. Robert the Bruce declined to give battle and the campaign progressed ineffectually over the winter until supplies and money ran out in 1311, forcing Edward to return south.\nBy now the Ordainers had drawn up their Ordinances for reform and Edward had little political choice but to give way and accept them in October. The Ordinances of 1311 contained clauses limiting the king's right to go to war or to grant land without parliament's approval, giving parliament control over the royal administration, abolishing the system of prises, excluding the Frescobaldi bankers, and introducing a system to monitor the adherence to the Ordinances. In addition, the Ordinances exiled Gaveston once again, this time with instructions that he should not be allowed to live anywhere within Edward's lands, including Gascony and Ireland, and that he should be stripped of his titles. Edward retreated to his estates at Windsor and Kings Langley; Gaveston left England, possibly for northern France or Flanders.\nMid-reign (1311\u20131321).\nDeath of Gaveston.\nTensions between Edward and the barons remained high, and the earls opposed to the king kept their personal armies mobilised late into 1311. By now Edward had become estranged from his cousin, the Earl of Lancaster, who was also the Earl of Leicester, Lincoln, Salisbury and Derby, with an income of around \u00a311,000 a year from his lands, almost double that of the next wealthiest baron. Backed by the earls of Arundel, Gloucester, Hereford, Pembroke and Warwick, Lancaster led a powerful faction in England, but he was not personally interested in practical administration, nor was he a particularly imaginative or effective politician.\nEdward responded to the baronial threat by revoking the Ordinances and recalling Gaveston to England, being reunited with him at York in January 1312. The barons were furious and met in London, where Gaveston was excommunicated by the Archbishop of Canterbury and plans were put in place to capture Gaveston and prevent him from fleeing to Scotland. Edward, Isabella and Gaveston left for Newcastle, pursued by Lancaster and his followers. Abandoning many of their belongings, the royal party fled by ship and landed at Scarborough, where Gaveston stayed while Edward and Isabella returned to York. After a short siege, Gaveston surrendered to the earls of Pembroke and Surrey, on the promise that he would not be harmed. He had with him a huge collection of gold, silver and gems, probably part of the royal treasury, which he was later accused of having stolen from Edward.\nOn the way back from the north, Pembroke stopped in the village of Deddington in the Midlands, putting Gaveston under guard there while he went to visit his wife. The Earl of Warwick took this opportunity to seize Gaveston, taking him to Warwick Castle, where the Earl of Lancaster and the rest of his faction assembled on 18 June. At a brief trial, Gaveston was declared guilty of being a traitor under the terms of the Ordinances; he was beheaded on Blacklow Hill the following day, under the authority of Lancaster. Gaveston's body was not buried until 1315, when his funeral was held in King's Langley Priory.\nTensions with Lancaster and France.\nReactions to the death of Gaveston varied considerably. Edward was furious and deeply upset over what he saw as the murder of Gaveston; he made provisions for Gaveston's family, and intended to take revenge on the barons involved. The earls of Pembroke and Surrey were embarrassed and angry about Warwick's actions, and shifted their support to Edward in the aftermath. To Lancaster and his core of supporters, the execution had been both legal and necessary to preserve the stability of the kingdom. Civil war again appeared likely, but in December, the Earl of Pembroke negotiated a potential peace treaty between the two sides, which would pardon the opposition barons for the killing of Gaveston, in exchange for their support for a fresh campaign in Scotland. Lancaster and Warwick, however, did not give the treaty their immediate approval, and further negotiations continued through most of 1313.\nMeanwhile, the Earl of Pembroke had been negotiating with France to resolve the long-standing disagreements over the administration of Gascony, and as part of this Edward and Isabella agreed to travel to Paris in June 1313 to meet with Philip\u00a0IV. Edward probably hoped both to resolve the problems in the south of France and to win Philip's support in the dispute with the barons; for Philip it was an opportunity to impress his son-in-law with his power and wealth. It proved a spectacular visit, including a grand ceremony in which the two kings knighted Philip's sons and two hundred other men in Notre-Dame de Paris, large banquets along the River Seine, and a public declaration that both kings and their queens would join a crusade to the Levant. Philip gave lenient terms for settling the problems in Gascony, and the event was spoiled only by a serious fire in Edward's quarters.\nOn his return from France, Edward found his political position greatly strengthened. After intense negotiation, the earls, including Lancaster and Warwick, came to a compromise in October 1313, fundamentally very similar to the draft agreement of the previous December. Edward's finances improved, thanks to parliament agreeing to the raising of taxes, a loan of 160,000\u00a0florins (\u00a325,000) from the Pope, \u00a333,000 borrowed from Philip, and further loans organised by Edward's new Italian banker, Antonio Pessagno. For the first time in his reign, Edward's government was well funded.\nBattle of Bannockburn.\nBy 1314, Robert the Bruce had recaptured most of the castles in Scotland once held by Edward, pushing raiding parties into northern England as far as Carlisle. In response, Edward planned a major military campaign with the support of Lancaster and the barons, mustering a large army between 15,000 and 20,000 strong. Meanwhile, Robert had besieged Stirling Castle, a key fortification in Scotland; its English commander had stated that unless Edward arrived by 24 June, he would surrender. News of this reached the king in late May, and he decided to speed up his march north from Berwick-upon-Tweed to relieve the castle. Robert, with between 5,500 and 6,500 troops, predominantly spearmen, prepared to prevent Edward's forces from reaching Stirling.\nThe battle began on 23 June as the English army attempted to force its way across the high ground of the Bannock Burn, which was surrounded by marshland. Skirmishing between the two sides broke out, resulting in the death of Sir Henry de Bohun, whom Robert killed in personal combat. Edward continued his advance the following day, and encountered the bulk of the Scottish army as they emerged from the woods of New Park. Edward appears not to have expected the Scots to give battle here, and as a result had kept his forces in marching, rather than battle, order, with the archers\u2014who would usually have been used to break up enemy spear formations\u2014at the back of his army, rather than the front. His cavalry found it hard to operate in the cramped terrain and were crushed by Robert's spearmen. The English army was overwhelmed and its leaders were unable to regain control.\nEdward stayed behind to fight, but it became obvious to the Earl of Pembroke that the battle was lost and he dragged the king away from the battlefield, hotly pursued by the Scottish forces. Edward only just escaped the heavy fighting, making a vow to found a Carmelite religious house at Oxford if he survived. The historian Roy Haines describes the defeat as a \"calamity of stunning proportions\" for the English, whose losses in the battle were huge. In the aftermath of the defeat, Edward retreated to Dunbar, then travelled by ship to Berwick, and then back to York; in his absence, Stirling Castle quickly fell.\nFamine and criticism.\nAfter the fiasco of Bannockburn, the Earls of Lancaster and Warwick saw their political influence increase, and they pressured Edward to re-implement the Ordinances of 1311. Lancaster became the head of the royal council in 1316, promising to take forward the Ordinances through a new reform commission, but he appears to have abandoned this role soon afterwards, partially because of disagreements with the other barons, and possibly because of ill-health. Lancaster refused to meet with Edward in parliament for the next two years, bringing effective governance to a standstill. This stymied any hopes for a fresh campaign into Scotland and raised fears of civil war. After much negotiation, once again involving the Earl of Pembroke, Edward and Lancaster finally agreed to the Treaty of Leake in August 1318, which pardoned Lancaster and his faction and established a new royal council, temporarily averting conflict.\nEdward's difficulties were exacerbated by prolonged problems in English agriculture, part of a wider phenomenon in northern Europe known as the Great Famine. It began with torrential rains in late 1314, followed by a very cold winter and heavy rains the following spring that killed many sheep and cattle. The bad weather continued, almost unabated, into 1321, resulting in a string of bad harvests. Revenues from the exports of wool plummeted and the price of food rose, despite attempts by Edward's government to control prices. Edward called for hoarders to release food, and tried to encourage both internal trade and the importation of grain, but with little success. The requisitioning of provisions for the royal court during the famine years only added to tensions.\nMeanwhile, Robert the Bruce exploited his victory at Bannockburn to raid northern England, initially attacking Carlisle and Berwick, and then reaching further south into Lancashire and Yorkshire, even threatening York itself. Edward undertook an expensive but unsuccessful campaign to stem the advance in 1319, but the famine made it increasingly difficult to keep his garrisons supplied with food. Meanwhile, a Scottish expedition led by Robert's brother Edward Bruce successfully invaded Ireland in 1315. Edward Bruce declared himself the High King of Ireland. He was finally defeated in 1318 by Edward\u00a0II's Irish justiciar, Edmund Butler, at the Battle of Faughart, and Edward Bruce's severed head was sent back to Edward\u00a0II. Revolts also broke out in Lancashire and Bristol in 1315, and in Glamorgan in Wales in 1316, but were suppressed.\nThe famine and the Scottish policy were felt to be a punishment from God, and complaints about Edward multiplied, one contemporary poem describing the \"Evil Times of Edward\u00a0II\". Many criticised Edward's \"improper\" and ignoble interest in rural pursuits. In 1318, a mentally ill man named John of Powderham appeared in Oxford, claiming that he was the real Edward\u00a0II, and that Edward was a changeling, swapped at birth. John was duly executed, but his claims resonated with those criticising Edward for his lack of regal behaviour and steady leadership. Opposition also grew around Edward's treatment of his royal favourites.\nEdward had managed to retain some of his previous advisers, despite attempts by the Ordainers to remove them, and divided the extensive de\u00a0Clare inheritance among two of his new favourites, the former household knights Hugh Audley and Roger Damory, instantly making them extremely rich. Many of the moderates who had helped deliver the peaceful compromise in 1318 now began to turn against Edward, making violence ever more likely.\nLater reign (1321\u20131326).\nThe Despenser War.\nThe long-threatened civil war finally broke out in England in 1321, triggered by the tension between many of the barons and the royal favourites, the Despenser family. Hugh Despenser the Elder had served both Edward and his father, while Hugh Despenser the Younger had married into the wealthy de\u00a0Clare family, become the King's chamberlain, and acquired Glamorgan in the Welsh Marches in 1317. Hugh the Younger subsequently expanded his holdings and power across Wales, mainly at the expense of the other Marcher Lords. The Earl of Lancaster and the Despensers were fierce enemies, and Lancaster's antipathy was shared by most of the Despensers' neighbours, including the Earl of Hereford, the Mortimer family and the recently elevated Hugh Audley and Roger Damory. Edward, however, increasingly relied on the Despensers for advice and support, and he was particularly close to Hugh the Younger, whom one chronicler noted he \"loved\u00a0... dearly with all his heart and mind\".\nIn early 1321, Lancaster mobilised a coalition of the Despensers' enemies across the Marcher territories. Edward and Hugh the Younger became aware of these plans in March and headed west, hoping that negotiations led by the moderate Earl of Pembroke would defuse the crisis. This time, Pembroke made his excuses and declined to intervene, and war broke out in May. The Despensers' lands were quickly seized by a coalition of the Marcher Lords and the local gentry, and Lancaster held a high-level gathering of the barons and clergy in June which condemned the Despensers for having broken the Ordinances. Edward attempted reconciliation, but in July the opposition occupied London and called for the permanent removal of the Despensers. Fearing that he might be deposed if he refused, Edward agreed to exile the Despensers and pardoned the Marcher Lords for their actions.\nEdward began to plan his revenge. With the help of Pembroke, he formed a small coalition of his half-brothers, a few of the earls and some of the senior clergy, and prepared for war. Edward started with Bartholomew de Badlesmere, 1st Baron Badlesmere, and Isabella was sent to Bartholomew's stronghold, Leeds Castle, to deliberately create a \"casus belli\". Bartholomew's wife, Margaret, took the bait and her men killed several of Isabella's retinue, giving Edward an excuse to intervene. Lancaster refused to help Bartholomew, his personal enemy, and Edward quickly regained control of south-east England. Alarmed, Lancaster now mobilised his own army in the north of England, and Edward mustered his own forces in the south-west. The Despensers returned from exile and were pardoned by the royal council.\nIn December, Edward led his army across the River Severn and advanced into the Welsh Marches, where the opposition forces had gathered. The coalition of Marcher Lords crumbled and the Mortimers surrendered to Edward, but Damory, Audley, and the Earl of Hereford marched north in January to join Lancaster, who had laid siege the king's castle at Tickhill. Bolstered by fresh reinforcements from the Marcher Lords, Edward pursued them, meeting Lancaster's army on 10 March at Burton-on-Trent. Lancaster, outnumbered, retreated without a fight, fleeing north. Andrew Harclay cornered Lancaster at the Battle of Boroughbridge, and captured the earl. Edward and Hugh the Younger met Lancaster at Pontefract Castle, where, after a summary trial, the earl was found guilty of treason and beheaded.\nEdward and the Despensers.\nEdward punished Lancaster's supporters through a system of special courts across the country, with the judges instructed in advance how to sentence the accused, who were not allowed to speak in their own defence. Many of these so-called \"Contrariants\" were simply executed, and others were imprisoned or fined, with their lands seized and their surviving relatives detained. The Earl of Pembroke, whom Edward now mistrusted, was arrested; he was released only after pledging all his possessions as collateral for his own loyalty. Edward was able to reward his loyal supporters, especially the Despenser family, with the confiscated estates and new titles. The fines and confiscations made Edward rich: almost \u00a315,000 was brought in during the first few months, and by 1326, Edward's treasury contained \u00a362,000. A parliament was held at York on 2 May 1322 at which the Ordinances were formally revoked through the Statute of York, and fresh taxes agreed for a new campaign against the Scots.\nThe English campaign against Scotland was planned on a massive scale, with a force of about 23,000 men. Edward advanced through Lothian towards Edinburgh, but Robert the Bruce declined to meet him in battle, drawing Edward further into Scotland. Plans to resupply the campaign by sea failed, and the large army rapidly ran out of food. Edward was forced to retreat south of the border, pursued by Scottish raiding parties. Edward's illegitimate son, Adam, died during the campaign, and the raiding parties almost captured Isabella, who was staying at Tynemouth and was forced to flee by sea. Edward planned a fresh campaign, backed by a round of further taxes, but confidence in his Scottish policy was diminishing. Andrew Harclay, instrumental in securing Edward's victories the previous year and recently made the Earl of Carlisle, independently negotiated a peace treaty with Robert the Bruce, proposing that Edward would recognise Robert as the King of Scotland and that, in return, Robert would cease to interfere in England. Edward was furious and immediately executed Harclay, but agreed to a thirteen-year truce with Robert.\nHugh Despenser the Younger lived and ruled in grand style, playing a leading role in Edward's government, and executing policy through a wide network of family retainers. Supported by Chancellor Robert Baldock and Lord Treasurer Walter Stapledon, the Despensers accumulated land and wealth, using their position in government to provide superficial cover for what historian Seymour Phillips describes as \"the reality of fraud, threats of violence and abuse of legal procedure\". Meanwhile, Edward faced growing opposition. Miracles were reported around the late Earl of Lancaster's tomb, and at the gallows used to execute members of the opposition in Bristol. Law and order began to break down, encouraged by the chaos caused by the seizure of lands. The old opposition consisting of Marcher Lords' associates attempted to free the prisoners Edward held in Wallingford Castle, and Roger Mortimer, one of the most prominent of the imprisoned Marcher Lords, escaped from the Tower of London and fled to France.\nWar with France.\nThe disagreements between Edward and the French Crown over the Duchy of Gascony led to the War of Saint-Sardos in 1324. Charles, Edward's brother-in-law, had become King of France in 1322, and was more aggressive than his predecessors. In 1323, he insisted that Edward come to Paris to give homage for Gascony, and demanded that Edward's administrators in Gascony allow French officials there to carry out orders given in Paris. Matters came to a head in October when a group of Edward's soldiers hanged a French sergeant for attempting to build a new fortified town in the Agenais, a contested section of the Gascon border. Edward denied any responsibility for this incident, but relations between Edward and Charles soured. In 1324, Edward dispatched the Earl of Pembroke to Paris to broker a solution, but the earl died suddenly of an illness along the way. Charles mobilised his army and ordered the invasion of Gascony.\nEdward's forces in Gascony were around 4,400 strong, but the French army, commanded by Charles of Valois, numbered 7,000. Valois took the Agenais and then advanced further and cut off the main city of Bordeaux. In response, Edward ordered the arrest of any French persons in England and seized Isabella's lands, on the basis that she was of French origin. In November 1324 he met with the earls and the English Church, who recommended that Edward should lead a force of 11,000 men to Gascony. Edward decided not to go personally, sending instead the Earl of Surrey. Meanwhile, Edward opened up fresh negotiations with the French king. Charles advanced various proposals, the most tempting of which was the suggestion that if Isabella and Prince Edward were to travel to Paris, and the prince was to give homage to Charles for Gascony, he would terminate the war and return the Agenais. Edward and his advisers had concerns about sending the prince to France, but agreed to send Isabella on her own as an envoy in March 1325.\nFall from power (1326\u20131327).\nRift with Isabella.\nIsabella, with Edward's envoys, carried out negotiations with the French in late March. The negotiations proved difficult, and they arrived at a settlement only after Isabella personally intervened with her brother, Charles. The terms favoured the French Crown: In particular, Edward would give homage in person to Charles for Gascony. Concerned about the consequences of war breaking out once again, Edward agreed to the treaty but decided to give Gascony to his son, Edward, and sent the prince to give homage in Paris. The young Prince Edward crossed the English Channel and completed the bargain in September.\nEdward now expected Isabella and their son to return to England, but instead she remained in France and showed no intention of making her way back. Until 1322, Edward and Isabella's marriage appears to have been successful, but by the time Isabella left for France in 1325, it had deteriorated. Isabella appears to have disliked Hugh Despenser the Younger intensely, not least because of his abuse of high-status women. Isabella was embarrassed that she had fled from Scottish armies three times during her marriage to Edward, and she blamed Hugh for the final occurrence in 1322. When Edward had negotiated the recent truce with Robert the Bruce, he had severely disadvantaged a range of noble families who owned land in Scotland, including the Beaumonts, close friends of Isabella. She was also angry about the arrest of her household and seizure of her lands in 1324. Finally, Edward had taken away her children and given custody of them to Hugh Despenser's wife.\nBy February 1326 it was clear that Isabella was involved in a relationship with an exiled Marcher Lord, Roger Mortimer. It is unclear when Isabella first met Mortimer or when their relationship began, but they both wanted to see Edward and the Despensers removed from power. Edward appealed for his son to return, and for Charles to intervene on his behalf, but this had no effect.\nEdward's opponents began to gather around Isabella and Mortimer in Paris, and Edward became increasingly anxious about the possibility that Mortimer might invade England. Isabella and Mortimer turned to William I, Count of Hainaut, and proposed a marriage between Prince Edward and William's daughter, Philippa. In return for the advantageous alliance with the English heir to the throne, and a sizeable dower for the bride, William offered 132 transport vessels and eight warships to assist in the invasion of England. Prince Edward and Philippa were betrothed on 27 August, and Isabella and Mortimer prepared for their campaign.\nInvasion.\nDuring August and September 1326, Edward mobilised his defences along the coasts of England to protect against the possibility of an invasion either by France or by Roger Mortimer. Fleets were gathered at the ports of Portsmouth in the south and Orwell on the east coast, and a raiding force of 1,600 men was sent across the English Channel into Normandy as a diversionary attack. Edward issued a nationalistic appeal for his subjects to defend the kingdom, but with little impact. The regime's hold on power at the local level was fragile, the Despensers were widely disliked, and many of those Edward entrusted with the defence of the kingdom proved incompetent or promptly turned against the regime. Some 2,000 men were ordered to gather at Orwell to repel any invasion, but only 55 appear to have actually arrived.\nRoger Mortimer, Isabella and thirteen-year-old Prince Edward, accompanied by King Edward's half-brother Edmund of Woodstock, landed in Orwell on 24 September with a small force of men and met with no resistance. Instead, enemies of the Despensers moved rapidly to join them, including Edward's other half-brother, Thomas of Brotherton; Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster, who had inherited the earldom from his brother Thomas; and a range of senior clergy. Ensconced in the residence halls of the fortified and secure Tower of London, Edward attempted to garner support from within the capital. The city of London rose against his government, and on 2 October he left London, taking the Despensers with him. London descended into anarchy, as mobs attacked Edward's remaining officials and associates, killing his former treasurer Walter Stapledon in St Paul's Cathedral, and taking the Tower and releasing the prisoners inside.\nEdward continued west up the Thames Valley, reaching Gloucester between 9 and 12 October; he hoped to reach Wales and from there mobilise an army against the invaders. Mortimer and Isabella were not far behind. Proclamations condemned the Despensers' recent regime. Day by day they gathered new supporters. Edward and the younger Despenser crossed over the border and set sail from Chepstow, probably aiming first for Lundy and then for Ireland, where the king hoped to receive refuge and raise a fresh army. Bad weather drove them back, though, and they landed at Cardiff. Edward retreated to Caerphilly Castle and attempted to rally his remaining forces.\nEdward's authority collapsed in England where, in his absence, Isabella's faction took over the administration with the support of the Church. Her forces surrounded Bristol, where Hugh Despenser the Elder had taken shelter; he surrendered and was promptly executed. Edward and Hugh the Younger fled their castle around 2 November, leaving behind jewellery, considerable supplies, and at least \u00a313,000 in cash, possibly once again hoping to reach Ireland, but on 16 November they were betrayed and captured by a search party north of Caerphilly. Edward was escorted first to Monmouth Castle, and from there back into England, where he was held at the Earl of Lancaster's fortress at Kenilworth. Edward's final remaining forces, by now besieged in Caerphilly Castle, surrendered after four months in March\u00a01327.\nAbdication.\nIsabella and Mortimer rapidly took revenge on the former regime. Hugh Despenser the Younger was put on trial, declared a traitor and sentenced to be disembowelled, castrated and quartered; he was duly executed on 24 November 1326. Edward's former chancellor, Robert Baldock, died in Fleet Prison; the Earl of Arundel was beheaded. Edward's position, however, was problematic; he was still married to Isabella and, in principle, he remained the king, but most of the new administration had much to lose were he to be released and potentially regain power.\nThere was no established procedure for removing an English king. Adam Orleton, the bishop of Hereford, made a series of public allegations about Edward's conduct as king, and in January 1327 a parliament convened at Westminster at which the question of Edward's future was raised; Edward refused to attend the gathering. Parliament, initially ambivalent, responded to the London crowds that called for the king's son Edward to take the throne. On 12 January the leading barons and clergy agreed that Edward\u00a0II should be removed and replaced by his son. The following day it was presented to an assembly of the barons, where it was argued that Edward's weak leadership and personal faults had led the kingdom into disaster, and that he was incompetent to lead the country.\nShortly after this, a representative delegation of barons, clergy and knights was sent to Kenilworth to speak to the king. On 20 January 1327, the Earl of Lancaster and the bishops of Winchester and Lincoln met privately with Edward in the castle. They informed Edward that if he were to resign as monarch, his son Edward would succeed him, but if he failed to do so, his son might be disinherited as well, and the crown given to an alternative candidate. In tears, Edward agreed to abdicate, and on 21 January, Sir William Trussell, representing the kingdom as a whole, withdrew his homage and formally ended Edward's reign. A proclamation was sent to London, announcing that Edward, now known as Edward of Caernarvon, had freely resigned his kingdom and that his son Edward would succeed him. The coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 1 February 1327.\nDeath (1327).\nDeath and aftermath.\nThose opposed to the new government began to make plans to free Edward, and Roger Mortimer decided to move him to the more secure location of Berkeley Castle in Gloucestershire, where Edward arrived around 5 April 1327. Once at the castle, he was kept in the custody of Mortimer's son-in-law, Thomas de Berkeley, 3rd Baron Berkeley, and John Maltravers, who were given \u00a35 a day for Edward's maintenance. It is unclear how well cared for Edward was; the records show luxury goods being bought on his behalf, but some chroniclers suggest that he was often mistreated. A poem, the \"Lament of Edward\u00a0II\", has been attributed to Edward during his imprisonment by some scholars, but this is disputed.\nConcerns continued to be raised over fresh plots to liberate Edward, some involving the Dominican order and former household knights, and one such attempt got at least as far as breaking into the prison within the castle. As a result of these threats, Edward was moved around to other locations in secret for a period, before returning to permanent custody at the castle in late summer 1327. The political situation remained unstable, and new plots appear to have been formed to free him.\nOn 23 September Edward III was informed that his father had died at Berkeley Castle during the night of 21 September. Most historians agree that Edward\u00a0II did die at Berkeley on that date, although there is a minority view that he died much later. His death was, as Mark Ormrod notes, \"suspiciously timely\", as it simplified Mortimer's political problems considerably, and most historians believe that Edward was probably murdered on the orders of the new regime, although it is impossible to be certain. Several of the individuals suspected of involvement in the death, including Sir Thomas Gurney, Maltravers and William Ockley, later fled. If Edward died from natural causes, his death may have been hastened by depression following his imprisonment.\nThe rule of Isabella and Mortimer did not last long after the announcement of Edward's death. They made peace with the Scots in the Treaty of Northampton, but this move was highly unpopular. Isabella and Mortimer both amassed and spent great wealth, and criticism of them mounted. Relations between Mortimer and Edward\u00a0III became strained and in 1330 the king conducted a \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" at Nottingham Castle. He arrested Mortimer and then executed him on fourteen charges of treason, including the murder of Edward\u00a0II. Edward\u00a0III's government sought to blame Mortimer for all the recent problems, effectively politically rehabilitating Edward\u00a0II. Edward\u00a0III placed his mother under arrest, but she was released soon after.\nBurial and cult.\nEdward's body was embalmed at Berkeley Castle, where it was viewed by local leaders from Bristol and Gloucester. It was then taken to Gloucester Abbey on 21 October, and on 20 December, Edward was buried by the high altar, the funeral having probably been delayed to allow Edward\u00a0III to attend in person. Gloucester was probably chosen because other abbeys had refused or been forbidden to take the king's body, and because it was close to Berkeley. The funeral was a grand affair and cost \u00a3351 in total, complete with gilt lions, standards painted with gold leaf and oak barriers to manage the anticipated crowds. Edward\u00a0III's government probably hoped to put a veneer of normality over the recent political events, increasing the legitimacy of the young king's own reign.\nA temporary wooden effigy with a copper crown was made for the funeral; this is the first known use of a funeral effigy in England, and was probably necessary because of the condition of the King's body, as he had been dead for three months. Edward's heart was removed, placed in a silver container, and later buried with Isabella at Newgate Church in London. His tomb includes a very early example of an English alabaster effigy, with a tomb chest and a canopy made of oolite and Purbeck stone. Edward was buried in the shirt, coif and gloves from his coronation, and his effigy depicts him as king, holding a sceptre and orb, and wearing a strawberry-leaf crown. The effigy features a pronounced lower lip, and may be a close likeness of Edward.\nEdward II's tomb rapidly became a popular site for visitors, probably encouraged by the local monks, who lacked an existing pilgrimage attraction. Visitors donated extensively to the abbey, allowing the monks to rebuild much of the surrounding church in the 1330s. Miracles reportedly took place at the tomb, and modifications had to be made to enable visitors to walk around it in larger numbers. The chronicler Geoffrey le Baker depicted Edward as a saintly, tortured martyr, and Richard\u00a0II gave royal support for an unsuccessful bid to have Edward canonised in 1395. The tomb was opened by officials in 1855, uncovering a wooden coffin, still in good condition, and a sealed lead coffin inside it. The tomb remains in what is now Gloucester Cathedral, and was extensively restored in 2007 and 2008 at a cost of over \u00a3100,000.\nControversies.\nControversy rapidly surrounded Edward's death. With Mortimer's execution in 1330, rumours began to circulate that Edward had been murdered at Berkeley Castle. Accounts that he had been killed by the insertion of a red-hot iron or poker into his anus slowly began to spread, possibly as a result of deliberate propaganda; chroniclers in the mid-1330s and 1340s disseminated this account further, supported in later years by Geoffrey le Baker's colourful account of the killing. It became incorporated into most later histories of Edward, typically being linked to his possible homosexuality. Most historians now dismiss this account of Edward's death, querying the logic in his captors murdering him in such an easily detectable fashion.\nAnother set of theories surround the possibility that Edward did not really die in 1327. These theories typically involve the \"Fieschi Letter\", sent to Edward\u00a0III by an Italian priest called Manuel Fieschi, who claimed that Edward escaped Berkeley Castle in 1327 with the help of a servant and ultimately retired to become a hermit in the Holy Roman Empire. The body buried at Gloucester Cathedral was said to be that of the porter of Berkeley Castle, killed by the assassins and presented by them to Isabella as Edward's corpse to avoid punishment. The letter is often linked to an account of Edward\u00a0III meeting with a man called William the Welshman in Antwerp in 1338, who claimed to be Edward\u00a0II. Some parts of the letter's content are considered broadly accurate by historians, although other aspects of its account have been criticised as implausible. A few historians have supported versions of its narrative. Paul C. Doherty questions the veracity of the letter and the identity of William the Welshman, but nonetheless has suspicions that Edward may have survived his imprisonment. The popular historian Alison Weir believes the events in the letter to be essentially true, using the letter to argue that Isabella was innocent of murdering Edward. and Natalie Fryde has claimed that Edward's survival is \"a possibility\". The historian Ian Mortimer suggests that the story in Fieschi's letter is broadly accurate, but argues that it was in fact Mortimer and Isabella who had Edward secretly released, and who then faked his death, a fiction later maintained by Edward\u00a0III when he came to power. Ian Mortimer's account was criticised by most scholars when it was first published, in particular by historian David Carpenter, who argues that there is no \"convincing evidence for Edward\u2019s survival, let alone for it being the result of a Mortimer plot\u201d.\nEdward as king.\nKingship, government and law.\nEdward was ultimately a failure as a king; the historian Michael Prestwich observes that he \"was lazy and incompetent, liable to outbursts of temper over unimportant issues, yet indecisive when it came to major issues\", echoed by Roy Haines' description of Edward as \"incompetent and vicious\", and as \"no man of business\". Edward did not just delegate routine government to his subordinates, but also higher level decision making, and Pierre Chaplais argues that he \"was not so much an incompetent king as a reluctant one\", preferring to rule through a powerful deputy, such as Piers Gaveston or Hugh Despenser the Younger. Edward's willingness to promote his favourites had serious political consequences, although he also attempted to buy the loyalty of a wider grouping of nobles through grants of money and fees. He could take a keen interest in the minutiae of administration, however, and on occasion engaged in the details of a wide range of issues across England and his wider domains.\nOne of Edward's persistent challenges through most of his reign was a shortage of money; of the debts he inherited from his father, around \u00a360,000 was still owing in the 1320s. Edward worked his way through many treasurers and other financial officials, few of whom stayed long, raising revenues through often unpopular taxes, and requisitioning goods using his right of prise. He also took out many loans, first through the Frescobaldi family, and then through his banker Antonio Pessagno. Edward took a strong interest in financial matters towards the end of his reign, distrusting his own officials and directly cutting back on the expenses of his own household.\nEdward was responsible for implementing royal justice through his network of judges and officials. It is uncertain to what extent Edward took a personal interest in dispensing justice, but he appears to have involved himself to some degree during the first part of his reign, and to have increasingly intervened in person after 1322. Edward made extensive use of Roman civil law during his reign when arguing in defence of his causes and favourites, which may have attracted criticism from those who perceived this as abandoning the established principles of English common law. Edward was also criticised by contemporaries for allowing the Despensers to exploit the royal justice system for their own ends; the Despensers certainly appear to have abused the system, although just how widely is unclear. Amid the political turbulence, armed gangs and violence spread across England under Edward's reign, destabilising the position of many of the local gentry; much of Ireland similarly disintegrated into anarchy.\nUnder Edward's rule, parliament's importance grew as a means of making political decisions and answering petitions, although as the historian Claire Valente notes, the gatherings were \"still as much an event as an institution\". After 1311, parliament began to include, in addition to the barons, the representatives of the knights and burgesses, who in later years would constitute the \"commons\". Although parliament often opposed raising fresh taxes, active opposition to Edward came largely from the barons, rather than parliament itself, although the barons did seek to use the parliamentary meetings as a way of giving legitimacy to their long-standing political demands. After resisting it for many years, Edward began intervening in parliament in the second half of his reign to achieve his own political aims. It remains unclear whether he was deposed in 1327 by a formal gathering of parliament or simply a gathering of the political classes alongside an existing parliament.\nCourt.\nEdward's royal court was itinerant, travelling around the country with him. When housed in Westminster Palace, the court occupied a complex of two halls, seven chambers and three chapels, along with other smaller rooms, but, due to the Scottish conflict, the court spent much of its time in Yorkshire and Northumbria. At the heart of the court was Edward's royal household, in turn divided into the \"hall\" and the \"chamber\"; the size of the household varied over time, but in 1317 was around five hundred people, including household knights, squires, and kitchen and transport staff. The household was surrounded by a wider group of courtiers, and appears to have also attracted a circle of prostitutes and criminal elements.\nMusic and minstrels were very popular at Edward's court, but hunting appears to have been a much less important activity, and there was little emphasis on chivalric events. Edward was interested in buildings and paintings, but less so in literary works, which were not extensively sponsored at court. There was an extensive use of gold and silver plates, jewels and enamelling at court, which would have been richly decorated. Edward kept a camel as a pet and, as a young man, took a lion with him on campaign to Scotland. The court could be entertained in exotic ways: by an Italian snake-charmer in 1312, and the following year by 54 nude French dancers.\nReligion.\nEdward's approach to religion was normal for the period, and the historian Michael Prestwich describes him as \"a man of wholly conventional religious attitudes\". There were daily chapel services and almsgiving at his court, and Edward blessed the sick, although he did this less often than his predecessors. Edward remained close to the Dominican Order, which had helped to educate him, and followed their advice in asking for papal permission to be anointed with the Holy Oil of St. Thomas of Canterbury in 1319; this request was refused, causing the king some embarrassment. Edward supported the expansion of the universities during his reign, establishing King's Hall in Cambridge to promote training in religious and civil law, Oriel College in Oxford and a short-lived university in Dublin.\nEdward enjoyed a good relationship with Pope Clement\u00a0V, despite the king's repeated intervention in the operation of the English Church, including punishing bishops with whom he disagreed. With Clement's support, Edward attempted to gain the financial support of the English Church for his military campaigns in Scotland, including taxation and borrowing money against the funds gathered for the crusades. The Church did relatively little to influence or moderate Edward's behaviour during his reign, possibly because of the bishops' self-interest and concern for their own protection.\nPope John XXII, elected in 1316, sought Edward's support for a new crusade, and was also inclined to support him politically. In 1317, in exchange for papal support in his war with Scotland, Edward agreed to recommence paying the annual Papal tribute, which had been first agreed to by King John in 1213; Edward soon ceased the payments, however, and never offered his homage, another part of the 1213 agreement. In 1325 Edward asked Pope John to instruct the Irish Church to openly preach in favour of his right to rule the island, and to threaten to excommunicate any contrary voices.\nLegacy.\nHistoriography.\nNo chronicler for this period is entirely trustworthy or unbiased, often because their accounts were written to support a particular cause, but it is clear that most contemporary chroniclers were highly critical of Edward. The \"Polychronicon\", \"Vita Edwardi Secundi\", \"Vita et Mors Edwardi Secundi\" and the \"Gesta Edwardi de Carnarvon\" for example all condemned the king's personality, habits and choice of companions. Other records from his reign show criticism by his contemporaries, including the Church and members of his own household. Political songs were written about him, complaining about his failure in war and his oppressive government. Later in the 14th century, some chroniclers, such as Geoffrey le Baker and Thomas Ringstead, rehabilitated Edward, presenting him as a martyr and a potential saint, although this tradition died out in later years.\nHistorians in the 16th and 17th centuries focused on Edward's relationship with Gaveston, drawing comparisons between Edward's reign and the events surrounding the relationship of Jean Louis de Nogaret de La Valette, Duke of \u00c9pernon, and Henry\u00a0III of France, and between George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham, and Charles I of England. In the first half of the 19th century, popular historians such as Charles Dickens and Charles Knight popularised Edward's life with the Victorian public, focusing on the king's relationship with his favourites and, increasingly, alluding to his possible homosexuality. From the 1870s onwards, open academic discussion of Edward's sexuality was circumscribed by changing English values. By the start of the 20th century, English schools were being advised by the government to avoid overt discussion of Edward's personal relationships in history lessons. Views on his sexuality have continued to develop over the years.\nBy the end of the 19th century, more administrative records from the period had become available to historians such as William Stubbs, Thomas Tout and J. C. Davies, who focused on the development of the English constitutional and governmental system during his reign. Although critical of what they regarded as Edward\u00a0II's inadequacies as a king, they also emphasised the growth of the role of parliament and the reduction in personal royal authority under Edward, which they perceived as positive developments. During the 1970s the historiography of Edward's reign shifted away from this model, supported by the further publishing of records from the period in the last quarter of the 20th century. The work of Jeffrey Denton, Jeffrey Hamilton, John Maddicott and Seymour Phillips re-focused attention on the role of the individual leaders in the conflicts. With the exceptions of Hilda Johnstone's work on Edward's early years and Natalie Fryde's study of Edward's final years, the focus of the major historical studies for several years was on the leading magnates rather than Edward himself, until substantial biographies of the king were published by Roy Haines and Seymour Phillips in 2003 and 2011.\nCultural references.\nSeveral plays have shaped Edward's contemporary image. Christopher Marlowe's play \"Edward\u00a0II\" was first performed around 1592 and focuses on Edward's relationship with Piers Gaveston, reflecting 16th-century concerns about the relationships between monarchs and their favourites. Marlowe presents Edward's death as a murder, drawing parallels between the killing and martyrdom; although Marlowe does not describe the actual nature of Edward's murder in the script, it has usually been performed following the tradition that Edward was killed with a red-hot poker. The character of Edward in the play, who has been likened to Marlowe's contemporaries James\u00a0VI of Scotland and Henry\u00a0III of France, may have influenced William Shakespeare's portrayal of Richard\u00a0II. In the 17th century, the playwright Ben Jonson picked up the same theme for his unfinished work, \"Mortimer His Fall\".\nThe filmmaker Derek Jarman adapted the Marlowe play into a film in 1991, creating a postmodern pastiche of the original, depicting Edward as a strong, explicitly homosexual leader, ultimately overcome by powerful enemies. In Jarman's version, Edward finally escapes captivity, following the tradition in the Fieschi letter. Edward's current popular image was also shaped by his contrasting appearance in Mel Gibson's 1995 film \"Braveheart\", where he is portrayed as weak and implicitly homosexual, wearing silk clothes and heavy makeup, shunning the company of women and incapable of dealing militarily with the Scots. The film received extensive criticism, both for its historical inaccuracies and for its negative portrayal of homosexuality.\nEdward's life has also been used in a wide variety of other media. In the Victorian era, the painting \"Edward\u00a0II and Piers Gaveston\" by Marcus Stone strongly hinted at a homosexual relationship between the pair, while avoiding making this aspect explicit. It was initially shown at the Royal Academy in 1872 but was marginalised in later decades as the issue of homosexuality became more sensitive. More recently, the director David Bintley used Marlowe's play as the basis for the ballet \"Edward\u00a0II\", first performed in 1995; the music from the ballet forms a part of composer John McCabe's symphony \"Edward\u00a0II\", produced in 2000. Novels such as John Penford's 1984 \"The Gascon\" and Chris Hunt's 1992 \"Gaveston\" have focused on the sexual aspects of Edward and Gaveston's relationship, while Stephanie Merritt's 2002 \"Gaveston\" transports the story into the 20th century.\nIssue.\nEdward II had four children with Isabella:\nEdward also fathered the illegitimate Adam FitzRoy (c.\u20091307\u20131322), who accompanied his father in the Scottish campaigns of 1322 and died shortly afterwards.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44849", "revid": "2782220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44849", "title": "Brad Pitt", "text": "American actor (born 1963)\nWilliam Bradley Pitt (born December 18, 1963) is an American actor and film producer. In a film career spanning more than thirty years, Pitt has received numerous accolades, including two Academy Awards, two British Academy Film Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, two Primetime Emmy Awards and one Volpi Cup. His films as a leading actor have grossed over $7.5billion worldwide.\nPitt first gained recognition as a cowboy hitchhiker in the Ridley Scott road film \"Thelma &amp; Louise\" (1991). Pitt emerged as a star taking on leading man roles in films such as the drama \"A River Runs Through It\" (1992), the western \"Legends of the Fall\" (1994), the horror film \"Interview with the Vampire\" (1994), the crime thriller \"Seven\" (1995), the cult film \"Fight Club\" (1999), and the crime comedy \"Snatch\" (2000). Pitt found greater commercial success starring in Steven Soderbergh's heist film \"Ocean's Eleven\" (2001), and reprised his role in its sequels. He cemented his leading man status starring in blockbusters such as the historical epic \"Troy\" (2004), the romantic crime film \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\" (2005), the horror \"World War Z\" (2013), and the sports drama \"F1\" (2025).\nPitt won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for playing a stuntman in Quentin Tarantino's \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" (2019). He was Oscar-nominated for his roles in the science fiction drama \"12 Monkeys\" (1995), the fantasy romance \"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button\" (2008) and the sports drama \"Moneyball\" (2011). He also starred in acclaimed films such as \"Babel\" (2006), \"The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford\" (2007), \"Burn After Reading\" (2008), \"Inglourious Basterds\" (2009), \"The Tree of Life\" (2011), \"Fury\" (2014), \"The Big Short\" (2015), and \"Ad Astra\" (2019).\nIn 2001, Pitt co-founded the production company Plan B Entertainment. As a producer, he won the Academy Award for Best Picture for \"12 Years a Slave\" (2013) and was nominated for \"Moneyball\" (2011) and \"The Big Short\" (2015). One of the most influential celebrities, Pitt appeared on \"Forbes\"' annual Celebrity 100 list from 2006 to 2008, and the \"Time\" 100 list in 2007. Regarded as a sex symbol, Pitt was named \"People's\" Sexiest Man Alive in 1995 and 2000. Pitt's relationships have also been subject to widespread media attention, particularly his marriages to actresses Jennifer Aniston and Angelina Jolie, the latter of whom he shares six children with.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Bradley Pitt was born on December 18, 1963, in Shawnee, Oklahoma, to William Alvin Pitt, the proprietor of a trucking company, and Jane Etta (n\u00e9e\u00a0Hillhouse; 1940\u20132025), a school counselor. The family soon moved to Springfield, Missouri, where he lived together with his younger siblings, Doug Pitt (born 1966) and Julie Neal (n\u00e9e\u00a0Pitt) (born 1969). Born into a conservative Christian household, he was raised as Southern Baptist and later \"oscillate[d] between agnosticism and atheism\". He later reconciled his belief in spirituality. Pitt has described Springfield as \"Mark Twain country, Jesse James country\", having grown up with \"a lot of hills, a lot of lakes\".\nPitt attended Kickapoo High School, where he was a member of the golf, swimming, and tennis teams. He participated in the school's Key and Forensics clubs, in school debates, and in musicals. Following his graduation from high school, Pitt enrolled in the University of Missouri in 1982, majoring in journalism with a focus on advertising. As graduation approached, Pitt did not feel ready to settle down. He loved films\u2014\"a portal into different worlds for me\"\u2014and, since films were not made in Missouri, he decided to go to where they were made. Two weeks short of completing the coursework for a degree, Pitt left the university and moved to Los Angeles, where he took acting lessons and worked odd jobs. He has named Gary Oldman, Sean Penn, and Mickey Rourke as his early acting heroes.\nCareer.\nEarly work (1987\u20131993).\nWhile struggling to establish himself in Los Angeles, Pitt took lessons from acting coach Roy London. His acting career began in 1987, with uncredited parts in the films \"No Way Out\" (1987), \"No Man's Land\" (1987) and \"Less than Zero\" (1987). In May 1987, he made his television debut in a two-episode role on the NBC soap opera \"Another World\". In November of the same year, Pitt had a guest appearance on the CBS sitcom \"Trial and Error\" and the ABC sitcom \"Growing Pains\". He appeared in four episodes of the CBS primetime series \"Dallas\" between December 1987 and February 1988 as Randy, the boyfriend of Jenna Wade's daughter Charlotte (played by Shalane McCall). Later in 1988, Pitt made a guest appearance on the Fox police drama \"21 Jump Street\". In the same year, the Yugoslavian\u2013American co-production \"The Dark Side of the Sun\" (1988) was his first leading film role, starring as a young American taken by his family to the Adriatic to find a remedy for a skin condition. The film was shelved at the outbreak of the Croatian War of Independence, and was not released until 1997. Pitt made two motion picture appearances in 1989: the first in a supporting role in the comedy \"Happy Together\"; the second a featured role in the horror film \"Cutting Class\", the first of Pitt's films to reach theaters. He made guest appearances on television series \"Head of the Class\", \"Freddy's Nightmares\", \"Thirtysomething\", and (for a second time) \"Growing Pains\".\nPitt was cast as Billy Canton, a drug addict who takes advantage of a young runaway (played by Juliette Lewis) in the 1990 NBC television movie \"Too Young to Die?\", the story of an abused teenager sentenced to death for a murder. Ken Tucker of \"Entertainment Weekly\" wrote: \"Pitt is a magnificent slimeball as her hoody boyfriend; looking and sounding like a malevolent John Cougar Mellencamp, he's really scary.\" The same year, Pitt co-starred in six episodes of the short-lived Fox drama \"Glory Days\" and took a supporting role in the HBO television film \"The Image\". His next appearance came in the 1991 film \"Across the Tracks\"; Pitt portrayed Joe Maloney, a high school runner with a criminal brother, played by Ricky Schroder. The same year he featured in a Levi's jeans TV commercial based around the song \"20th Century Boy\" which played in the background.\nAfter years of supporting roles in film and frequent television guest appearances, Pitt attracted wider recognition in his supporting role in Ridley Scott's 1991 road film \"Thelma &amp; Louise\". He played J.D., a small-time criminal who befriends Thelma (Geena Davis). His love scene with Davis has been cited as the event that defined Pitt as a sex symbol. After \"Thelma &amp; Louise\", Pitt starred in the 1991 film \"Johnny Suede\", a low-budget picture about an aspiring rock star, and the 1992 live-action/animated fantasy film \"Cool World\", although neither furthered his career, having poor reviews and box office performance.\nPitt took on the role of Paul Maclean in the 1992 biographical film \"A River Runs Through It\", directed by Robert Redford. His portrayal of the character was described by \"People\"'s Janet Mock as a career-making performance, proving that Pitt could be more than a \"cowboy-hatted hunk.\" He has admitted to feeling under pressure when making the film and thought it was one of his \"weakest performances\u00a0... It's so weird that it ended up being the one that I got the most attention for.\" Pitt believed that he benefited from working with such a talented cast and crew. He compared working with Redford to playing tennis with a superior player, saying \"when you play with somebody better than you, your game gets better.\" In 1993, Pitt reunited with Juliette Lewis for the road film \"Kalifornia\". He played Early Grayce, a serial killer and the abusive husband of Lewis' character, in a performance described by Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" as \"outstanding, all boyish charm and then a snort that exudes pure menace.\" Pitt also garnered attention for a brief appearance in the cult hit \"True Romance\" as a stoner named Floyd, providing comic relief to the action film. He capped the year by winning a ShoWest Award for Male Star of Tomorrow.\nBreakthrough (1994\u20131998).\nIn 1994, Pitt portrayed the vampire Louis de Pointe du Lac in the horror film \"Interview with the Vampire: The Vampire Chronicles\", based on Anne Rice's 1976 novel of the same name. He was part of an ensemble cast that included Tom Cruise, Kirsten Dunst, Christian Slater, and Antonio Banderas. Despite his winning two MTV Movie Awards at the 1995 ceremony, his performance was poorly received. According to the \"Dallas Observer\", \"Brad Pitt\u00a0[...] is a large part of the problem [in the film]. When directors play up his cocky, hunkish, folksy side\u00a0[...] he's a joy to watch. But there's nothing about him that suggests inner torment or even self-awareness, which makes him a boring Louis.\"\nFollowing the release of \"Interview with the Vampire\", Pitt starred in \"Legends of the Fall\" (1994), based on a novel by the same name by Jim Harrison, set in the American West during the first four decades of the twentieth century. Portraying Tristan Ludlow, son of Colonel William Ludlow (Anthony Hopkins) a Cornish immigrant, Pitt received his first Golden Globe Award nomination, in the Best Actor category. Aidan Quinn and Henry Thomas co-starred as Tristan's brothers. Although the film's reception was mixed, many film critics praised Pitt's performance. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" said, \"Pitt's diffident mix of acting and attitude works to such heartthrob perfection it's a shame the film's superficiality gets in his way.\" The \"Deseret News\" predicted that \"Legends of the Fall\" would solidify Pitt's reputation as a lead actor.\nIn 1995, Pitt starred alongside Morgan Freeman, Gwyneth Paltrow, and Kevin Spacey in the crime thriller \"Seven\", playing a detective on the trail of a serial killer who preys on people he considers guilty of the Seven Deadly Sins. Pitt called it a great movie and declared the part would expand his acting horizons. He expressed his intent to move on from \"this 'pretty boy' thing\u00a0[...] and play someone with flaws.\" His performance was critically well received, with \"Variety\" saying that it was screen acting at its best, further remarking on Pitt's ability to turn in a \"determined, energetic, creditable job\" as the detective. \"Seven\" earned $327\u00a0million at the international box office. Following the success of \"Seven\", Pitt played psychotic anarchist Jeffrey Goines in Terry Gilliam's 1995 science fiction film \"12 Monkeys\". The movie received predominantly positive reviews, with Pitt praised in particular. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" called \"Twelve Monkeys\" \"fierce and disturbing\" and remarked on Pitt's \"startlingly frenzied performance\", concluding that he \"electrifies Jeffrey with a weird magnetism that becomes important later in the film.\" He won a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor for the film and received his first Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor.\nThe following year, he appeared in the legal drama \"Sleepers\" (1996), based on Lorenzo Carcaterra's novel of the same name. The film received mixed reviews. In the 1997 film \"The Devil's Own\" Pitt starred, opposite Harrison Ford, as Irish Republican Army terrorist Rory Devany, a role for which he was required to learn an Irish accent. Critical opinion was divided on his accent; \"Pitt finds the right tone of moral ambiguity, but at times his Irish brogue is too convincing\u00a0\u2013 it's hard to understand what he's saying\", wrote the \"San Francisco Chronicle.\" \"The Charleston Gazette\" opined that it had favored Pitt's accent over the movie. \"The Devil's Own\" grossed $140\u00a0million worldwide.\nLater that year, he led as Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer in the Jean-Jacques Annaud film \"Seven Years in Tibet\". Pitt trained for months for the role, which demanded significant mountain climbing and trekking practice, including rock climbing in California and the European Alps with his co-star David Thewlis. Pitt had the lead role in 1998's fantasy romance film \"Meet Joe Black\". He portrayed a personification of death inhabiting the body of a young man to learn what it is like to be human. The film received mixed reviews, and many were critical of Pitt's performance. According to Mick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\", Pitt was unable to \"make an audience believe that he knows all the mysteries of death and eternity.\" Roger Ebert remarked, \"Pitt is a fine actor, but this performance is a miscalculation.\"\nRise to prominence (1999\u20132003).\nIn 1999, Pitt portrayed Tyler Durden in \"Fight Club\", a film adaptation of Chuck Palahniuk's novel of the same name, directed by David Fincher. Pitt prepared for the part with lessons in boxing, taekwondo, and grappling. To look the part, Pitt consented to the removal of pieces of his front teeth which were restored when filming ended. While promoting \"Fight Club\", Pitt said that the film explored not taking one's aggressions out on someone else but to \"have an experience, take a punch more and see how you come out on the other end.\" \"Fight Club\" premiered at the 1999 Venice International Film Festival. Despite divided critical opinion on the film as a whole, Pitt's performance was widely praised. Paul Clinton of CNN noted the risky yet successful nature of the film, while \"Variety\" remarked upon Pitt's ability to be \"cool, charismatic and more dynamically physical, perhaps than [...] his breakthrough role in \"Thelma and Louise\"\". In spite of a worse-than-expected box office performance, \"Fight Club\" became a cult classic after its DVD release in 2000.\nPitt was cast as an Irish Traveller boxer with a barely intelligible accent in Guy Ritchie's 2000 gangster film \"Snatch\". Several reviewers were critical of \"Snatch\"; however, most praised Pitt. Mick LaSalle of the \"San Francisco Chronicle\" said Pitt was \"ideally cast as an Irishman whose accent is so thick even Brits can't understand him\", going on to say that, before \"Snatch\", Pitt had been \"shackled by roles that called for brooding introspection, but recently he has found his calling in black comic outrageousness and flashy extroversion;\" while Amy Taubin of \"The Village Voice\" claimed that \"Pitt gets maximum comic mileage out of a one-joke role\".\nThe following year Pitt starred opposite Julia Roberts in the romantic comedy \"The Mexican\", a film that garnered a range of reviews but enjoyed box office success. Pitt's next role, in 2001's $143\u00a0million-grossing Cold War thriller \"Spy Game\", was as Tom Bishop, an operative of the CIA's Special Activities Division, mentored by Robert Redford's character. Mark Holcomb of Salon.com enjoyed the film, although he noted that neither Pitt nor Redford provided \"much of an emotional connection for the audience\".\nOn November 22, 2001, Pitt made a guest appearance in the eighth season of the television series \"Friends\", playing a man with a grudge against Rachel Green, played by Jennifer Aniston, to whom Pitt was married at the time. For this performance he was nominated for an Emmy Award in the category of Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. In December 2001, Pitt played Rusty Ryan in the heist film \"Ocean's Eleven\", a remake of the 1960 Rat Pack original. He joined an ensemble cast including George Clooney, Matt Damon, Andy Garc\u00eda, and Julia Roberts. Well received by critics, \"Ocean's Eleven\" was highly successful at the box office, earning $450\u00a0million worldwide.\nPitt appeared in two episodes of MTV's reality series \"Jackass\" in February 2002, first running through the streets of Los Angeles with several cast members in gorilla suits, and in a subsequent episode participating in his own staged abduction. In the same year, Pitt had a cameo role in George Clooney's directorial debut \"Confessions of a Dangerous Mind\". He took on his first voice-acting roles in 2003, speaking as the titular character of the DreamWorks animated film \"\" and playing Boomhauer's brother, Patch, in an episode of the animated television series \"King of the Hill\".\nWorldwide recognition (2004\u20132008).\nPitt had two major film roles in 2004, starring as Achilles in \"Troy\", and reprising his role, Rusty Ryan, in the sequel \"Ocean's Twelve\". He spent six months sword training before the filming of \"Troy\", based on the \"Iliad\". An on-set injury to his Achilles tendon delayed production on the picture for several weeks. Stephen Hunter of \"The Washington Post\" stated that Pitt excelled at such a demanding role. \"Troy\" was the first film produced by Plan B Entertainment, a film production company he had founded two years earlier with Jennifer Aniston and Brad Grey, CEO of Paramount Pictures. \"Ocean's Twelve\" earned $362\u00a0million worldwide, and Pitt and Clooney's dynamic was described by CNN's Paul Clinton as \"the best male chemistry since Paul Newman and Robert Redford.\" In 2005, Pitt starred as John Smith in the Doug Liman-directed action comedy \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\", in which a bored married couple discover that each is an assassin for a competing agency. The feature received reasonable reviews but was generally lauded for the chemistry between Pitt and Angelina Jolie, who played his character's wife Jane Smith. The \"Star Tribune\" noted that \"while the story feels haphazard, the movie gets by on gregarious charm, galloping energy and the stars' thermonuclear screen chemistry\". \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\" earned $478\u00a0million worldwide, making it one of the biggest hits of 2005.\nFor his next film, Pitt starred opposite Cate Blanchett in Alejandro Gonz\u00e1lez I\u00f1\u00e1rritu's multi-narrative drama \"Babel\" (2006). Pitt's performance was critically well-received, and the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\" said that he was credible and gave the film visibility. Pitt later said he regarded taking the part as one of the best decisions of his career. The film was screened at a special presentation at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival and was later featured at the 2006 Toronto International Film Festival. \"Babel\" received seven Academy and Golden Globe award nominations, winning the Best Drama Golden Globe, and earned Pitt a nomination for the Best Supporting Actor Golden Globe. That same year, Pitt's company Plan B Entertainment produced \"The Departed\", which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Pitt was credited on-screen as a producer; however, only Graham King was ruled eligible for the Oscar win.\nReprising his role as Rusty Ryan in a third picture, Pitt starred in 2007's \"Ocean's Thirteen\". While less lucrative than the first two films, this sequel earned $311\u00a0million at the international box office. Pitt's next film role was as American outlaw Jesse James in the 2007 Western drama \"The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford\", adapted from Ron Hansen's 1983 novel of the same name. Directed by Andrew Dominik and produced by Pitt's company Plan B Entertainment, the film premiered at the 2007 Venice Film Festival, with Pitt playing a \"scary and charismatic\" role, according to Lewis Beale of \"Film Journal International\", and earning Pitt the Volpi Cup award for Best Actor at the 64th Venice International Film Festival. He eventually collected the award one year later at the 2008 festival. As of January 2019, it was his own favorite of his films.\nPitt's next appearance was in the 2008 black comedy \"Burn After Reading\", his first collaboration with the Coen brothers. The film received a positive reception from critics, with \"The Guardian\" calling it \"a tightly wound, slickly plotted spy comedy\", noting that Pitt's performance was one of the funniest. He was later cast as Benjamin Button, the lead in David Fincher's 2008 film \"The Curious Case of Benjamin Button\", a loosely adapted version of a 1921 short story by F. Scott Fitzgerald. The story follows a man who is born an octogenarian and ages in reverse, with Pitt's \"sensitive\" performance making \"Benjamin Button\" a \"timeless masterpiece\", according to Michael Sragow of \"The Baltimore Sun\". The performance earned Pitt his first Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, as well as a fourth Golden Globe and second Academy Award nomination, all in the category for Best Actor. The film received thirteen Academy Award nominations, and grossed $329\u00a0million at the box office worldwide.\nArtistic resurgence and production success (2009\u20132018).\nPitt's next leading role came in 2009 with the Quentin Tarantino-directed war film \"Inglourious Basterds\", which premiered at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival. Pitt played Lieutenant Aldo Raine, an American resistance fighter battling Nazis in German-occupied France. The film was a box office hit, taking $311\u00a0million worldwide, and garnered generally favorable reviews. The film received multiple awards and nominations, including eight Academy Award nominations and seven MTV Movie Award nominations, including Best Male Performance for Pitt. He next voiced the superhero character Metro Man in the 2010 animated feature \"Megamind\". Pitt produced and appeared in Terrence Malick's experimental drama \"The Tree of Life\", co-starring Sean Penn, which won the Palme d'Or at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival. In a performance that attracted strong praise, he portrayed the Oakland Athletics general manager Billy Beane in the drama \"Moneyball\", which is based on the 2003 written by Michael Lewis. \"Moneyball\" received six Academy Award nominations including Best Picture and Best Actor for Pitt.\nHis next role was as mob hitman Jackie Cogan in Andrew Dominik's 2012 \"Killing Them Softly\", based on the novel \"Cogan's Trade\" by George V. Higgins. In 2013, Pitt starred in \"World War Z\", a thriller about a zombie apocalypse, based on Max Brooks's novel of the same name. Pitt also produced the film. \"World War Z\" grossed $540\u00a0million at the box office worldwide, becoming Pitt's then highest grossing picture, until it was overtaken by \"F1\" in 2025 which grossed nearly $600 million worldwide. Next in 2013, he produced, and played a small role in, \"12 Years a Slave\", a historical drama based on the autobiography of Solomon Northup. The film received critical acclaim and was nominated for nine Academy Awards, winning three, including Best Picture. Also in 2013, Pitt had a supporting role in Ridley Scott's \"The Counselor\". Plan B Entertainment landed its first television series on the 2013\u20132014 schedule, as their joint venture with ABC Studios, the sci-fi/fantasy drama \"Resurrection\", was picked up by ABC.\nPitt starred in \"Fury\", a World War II film directed and written by David Ayer, and co-starring Shia LaBeouf, Logan Lerman, Jon Bernthal, Michael Pe\u00f1a, and Jason Isaacs. The film was released on October 17, 2014. By the end of its run, \"Fury\" proved to be a commercial and critical success; it grossed more than $211\u00a0million worldwide and received highly positive reviews from critics. \nIn 2015, Pitt starred opposite his wife, Jolie, in her third directorial effort, \"By the Sea\", a romantic drama about a marriage in crisis, based on her screenplay. The film was their first collaboration since 2005's \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\". Pitt's next role came with the biographical comedy-drama \"The Big Short\", which he also produced and also co-starred alongside Christian Bale, Steve Carell, and Ryan Gosling. The film was a commercial and critical success. It went on to gross over $102 million worldwide and received positive reviews from critics. The film was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, earning Pitt his third Academy Award nomination as producer. In 2016, Pitt starred in Robert Zemeckis's romantic thriller \"Allied\", in which he plays an assassin who falls in love with a French spy (played by Marion Cotillard) during a mission to kill a German official in World War II. In 2017, he starred in the Netflix satirical war comedy \"War Machine\", which he also produced. Pitt played a recurring role as a weatherman on the late-night talk show \"The Jim Jefferies Show\" throughout 2017.\nA 2017 sequel to \"World War Z\" was announced in 2016, then briefly delayed, then its director confirmed to be David Fincher, and finally shelved because of budget problems.\nEstablished actor (2019\u2013present).\nPitt starred as Cliff Booth, a stunt double, opposite Leonardo DiCaprio, in Quentin Tarantino's 2019 film \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\", reuniting with DiCaprio after \"The Departed\", which Pitt produced and DiCaprio starred in. For his performance in the film, he received awards for Best Supporting Actor at the Academy Awards, Golden Globe Awards, BAFTA Awards, Screen Actors Guild Awards, and Critics' Choice Movie Awards. This is the second Academy Award for Brad Pitt, his first that he received for acting. In 2019, he also starred in James Gray's deep space epic \"Ad Astra\", in which he played Roy McBride, a space engineer searching the galaxy for his father. Pitt's performance was praised as one of his career-best turn, delivering a performance \"that weaponizes passivity into a lethal form of self-defense\". In 2020, Pitt portrayed Dr. Anthony Fauci in the cold open on \"Saturday Night Live\", earning him a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series nomination.\nIn 2021, Pitt entered the recording business by creating a company with French record producer Damien Quintard. Set in Pitt's Chateau Miraval in South of France, Miraval Studios re-opened in 2022 after two decades of inactivity. The previous version of the studio was one of the most iconic studios in the world, producing the records for Pink Floyd, the Cranberries, AC/DC, Sade and Muse, among others. In 2022, Pitt starred in \"Bullet Train\", directed by David Leitch, and reunited with his \"Once Upon a Time in Hollywood\" co-star Margot Robbie in \"Babylon\", directed by Damien Chazelle. He reteamed with George Clooney in \"Wolfs\", a comedy-thriller written and directed by Jon Watts, which was released in September 2024. In 2025, Pitt produced and starred in the Formula One racing film \"F1\", directed by Joseph Kosinski, for which he earned $30 million.\"F1\" quickly became Apple's biggest hit at the box office, and Pitt's highest-grossing film.\nActing credits and accolades.\nOver his career, Pitt has received numerous awards including two Academy Awards (as a producer and actor), two BAFTA Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, two Primetime Emmy Awards, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards.\nPitt has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances:\nPhilanthropy and activism.\nPitt visited the University of Missouri campus in October 2004 to encourage students to vote in the 2004 U.S. presidential election, in which he supported John Kerry. Later in October, he publicly supported the principle of public funding for embryonic stem-cell research. \"We have to make sure that we open up these avenues so that our best and our brightest can go find these cures that they believe they will find\", he said. In support of this he endorsed Proposition 71, a California ballot initiative intended to provide state government funding for stem-cell research.\nPitt supports One Campaign, an organization aimed at combating AIDS and poverty in the developing world. He narrated the 2005 PBS public television series \"Rx for Survival: A Global Health Challenge\", which discusses current global health issues. The following year Pitt and Jolie flew to Haiti, where they visited a school supported by Y\u00e9le Ha\u00efti, a charity founded by Haitian-born hip hop musician Wyclef Jean. In May 2007, Pitt and Jolie donated $1\u00a0million to three organizations in Chad and Sudan dedicated to those affected by the crisis in the Darfur region. Along with Clooney, Damon, Don Cheadle, David Pressman, and Jerry Weintraub, Pitt is one of the founders of Not On Our Watch, an organization that focuses global attention on stopping \"mass atrocities\".\nPitt has a sustained interest in architecture, even taking time away from film to study computer-aided design at the Los Angeles offices of renowned architect Frank Gehry. He narrated \"e2 design\", a PBS television series focused on worldwide efforts to build environmentally friendly structures through sustainable architecture and design. In 2000, he co-authored an architectural book on the Blacker House with the architects Thomas A. Heinz and Randell Makinson. In 2006, he founded the Make It Right Foundation, organizing housing professionals in New Orleans to finance and construct 150\u00a0sustainable, affordable new houses in New Orleans's Ninth Ward following the devastation caused by Hurricane Katrina.\nThe project involves 13 architectural firms and the environmental organization Global Green USA, with several of the firms donating their services. Pitt and philanthropist Steve Bing have each committed $5\u00a0million in donations. The first six homes were completed in October 2008, and in September 2009 Pitt received an award in recognition of the project from the U.S. Green Building Council, a non-profit trade organization that promotes sustainability in how buildings are designed, built and operated. Pitt met with U.S. President Barack Obama and Speaker of the House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi in March 2009 to promote his concept of \"green housing\" as a national model and to discuss federal funding possibilities.\nIn September 2006, Pitt and Jolie established a charitable organization, the Jolie-Pitt Foundation, to aid humanitarian causes around the world. The foundation made initial donations of $1\u00a0million each to Global Action for Children and Doctors Without Borders, followed by an October 2006 donation of $100,000 to the Daniel Pearl Foundation, an organization created in memory of the late American journalist Daniel Pearl. According to federal filings, Pitt and Jolie invested $8.5\u00a0million into the foundation in 2006; it gave away $2.4\u00a0million in 2006 and $3.4\u00a0million in 2007. In June 2009, the Jolie-Pitt Foundation donated $1\u00a0million to a U.N. refugee agency to help Pakistanis displaced by fighting between troops and Taliban militants. In January 2010, the foundation donated $1\u00a0million to Doctors Without Borders for emergency medical assistance to help victims of the Haiti earthquake.\nPitt is a supporter of same-sex marriage. In an October 2006 interview with \"Esquire\", Pitt said that he would marry Jolie when everyone in America is legally able to marry. In September 2008, he donated $100,000 to the campaign against California's 2008 ballot proposition Proposition 8, an initiative to overturn the state Supreme Court decision that had legalized same-sex marriage. In March 2012, Pitt was featured in a performance of Dustin Lance Black's play, \"8\"\u00a0\u2013 a staged reenactment of the federal trial that overturned California's Prop 8 ban on same-sex marriage\u00a0\u2013 as Judge Vaughn Walker. In September 2012, Pitt reaffirmed his support for Obama, saying, \"I am an Obama supporter and I'm backing his U.S. election campaign.\" In October 2020, he narrated an advertisement for Joe Biden's 2020 presidential campaign.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and marriages.\nFrom the late 1980s to early 1990s, Pitt was romantically involved with several of his co-stars, including Shalane McCall (\"Dallas\"), Robin Givens (\"Head of the Class\"), Jill Schoelen (\"Cutting Class\"), Geena Davis (\"Thelma &amp; Louise\"), and Juliette Lewis (\"Too Young to Die?\" and \"Kalifornia\"). McCall and Lewis were 15 and 17 respectively when Pitt started dating them. Subsequently, Pitt had a much-publicized romance and engagement to his \"Seven\" co-star, Gwyneth Paltrow, whom he dated from 1994 to 1997.\nPitt met actress Jennifer Aniston in 1998; they married in a private wedding ceremony in Malibu on July 29, 2000. In January 2005, Pitt and Aniston announced they had decided to separate. Two months later, Aniston filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Pitt and Aniston's divorce was finalized by the Los Angeles Superior Court on October 2, 2005. Despite media reports that Pitt and Aniston had an acrimonious relationship, Pitt said in a February 2009 interview that he and Aniston \"check in with each other\", adding that they were both big parts of each other's lives.\nDuring Pitt's divorce proceedings, his involvement with his \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith\" co-star Angelina Jolie attracted media attention. Jolie and Pitt stated that they fell in love on the set and that there was no infidelity. In April 2005, one month after Aniston filed for divorce, a set of paparazzi photographs emerged showing Pitt, Jolie, and her son Maddox at a beach in Kenya; the press interpreted the pictures as evidence of a relationship between Pitt and Jolie. Throughout 2005, the two were seen together with increasing frequency, and the entertainment media dubbed the couple \"Brangelina\". On January 11, 2006, Jolie confirmed to \"People\" that she was pregnant with Pitt's child, thereby publicly acknowledging their relationship for the first time. Pitt and Jolie announced their engagement in April 2012 after seven years together. They were legally married on August 14, 2014, and had their wedding in a private ceremony at the Ch\u00e2teau Miraval, France, on August 23, 2014. On September 19, 2016, Jolie filed for divorce from Pitt, citing irreconcilable differences. On April 12, 2019, the divorce became legal. After Pitt sued Jolie for selling her share of a winery they owned to a third party, she filed a countersuit, in which she alleged that he physically and verbally abused her and their children during a plane flight in 2016.\nIn 2022, he began dating Ines de Ramon (b. 1992), a jewelry executive and the ex-wife of actor Paul Wesley.\nChildren.\nIn July 2005, Pitt accompanied Jolie to Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, where she adopted her second child, a girl named Zahara. On December 3, 2005, Pitt was in the process of becoming the adoptive father of Jolie's daughter, and Jolie's first adopted child, a boy named Maddox. On January 19, 2006, a California judge granted Jolie's request to change the children's surnames from \"Jolie\" to \"Jolie-Pitt\". The adoptions were finalized soon after.\nJolie gave birth to their daughter Shiloh in Swakopmund, Namibia, on May 27, 2006. Pitt confirmed that she would qualify for a Namibian passport. The couple sold the first pictures of their daughter through the distributor Getty Images; the North American rights were purchased by \"People\" for over $4.1\u00a0million, while \"Hello!\" obtained the British rights for approximately $3.5\u00a0million. The proceeds from the sale were donated to charities serving African children. Madame Tussauds in New York unveiled a wax figure of the two-month-old; it marked the first time an infant had been honoured with a statue in the museum.\nOn March 15, 2007, Jolie adopted a 3-year-old boy, Pax, from an orphanage in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Pitt adopted the boy in the United States on February 21, 2008. At the Cannes Film Festival in May 2008, Jolie confirmed that she was expecting twins. She gave birth to son and daughter, Knox and Vivienne, on July 12, 2008, in Nice, France. The rights for the first images of the twins were jointly sold to \"People\" and \"Hello!\" for $14\u00a0million\u2014the most expensive celebrity pictures ever taken. The couple donated the proceeds to the Jolie-Pitt Foundation.\nSince Jolie filed for divorce from Pitt on September 19, 2016, they have been embroiled in a custody battle over their children. Jolie had full custody until May 2021 when Pitt was granted joint custody, over four and a half years after proceedings began. However, in July, Los Angeles superior court judge John W. Ouderkirk was removed from the case due to concerns over his impartiality as he did not sufficiently disclose business relationships with Pitt's lawyers. This resulted in the custody arrangement reverting to a previous November 2018 agreement where Jolie has primary physical custody while Pitt has \"custodial time\" with their minor children.\nIn 2025 Pitt's 18-year-old second-eldest daughter with Jolie changed her name legally from Shiloh Nouvel Jolie-Pitt to Shiloh Nouvel Jolie (Shi Joli for short). Zahara Marley Jolie and Vivienne Marceline Jolie are also reported to have dropped \"-Pitt\" from the surnames they use, but it is not known if this was changed in law.\nAbuse allegation.\nIn September 2016, the FBI and the Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services investigated Pitt for child abuse following an incident on a plane, where Pitt was accused by an anonymous person of being \"verbally abusive\" and \"physical\" towards one of his children. Pitt was not criminally charged for the incident by the Los Angeles County Department of Children and Family Services, or by the FBI.\nIn 2022, Jolie filed a countersuit against Pitt during a legal battle over their formerly co-owned vineyard. Jolie's lawyers stated that during negotiations, Pitt had asked Jolie to sign \"a nondisclosure agreement prohibiting her from speaking outside of court about his abuse of her and their children.\" Her complaint stated that he grabbed and shook her during the plane ride, strangled one of their children, and struck another in the face, among other allegations.\nOn the release of Pitt's 2025 film \"F1\", to much praise from most sources, Angelica Jade Basti\u00e9n wrote an article published in \"Vulture\" criticizing his \"rehabilitation\", saying, \"It isn't that people don't believe what happened to Jolie on that plane\u2014they just don't care.\"\nAlcohol and drug use.\nIn September 2016, Pitt got sober and began attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. In December 2019, he wrote an article for \"Interview\" in which he talked with his \"Legends of the Fall\" and \"Meet Joe Black\" costar and fellow recovering alcoholic Anthony Hopkins about their experiences with addiction and recovery. Pitt credits fellow actor Bradley Cooper with helping him in his sobriety.\nPitt has admitted to using cannabis in the late 1990s as a way to deal with his increasing fame. According to Pitt: \"I was hiding out from the celebrity thing; I was smoking way too much dope; I was sitting on the couch and just turning into a doughnut.\" He reduced his cannabis use and focused on his work after a trip to Morocco, where he witnessed extreme poverty and suffering.\nFace blindness.\nIn 2022, Pitt said that he had struggled for years to recognize people's faces due to prosopagnosia (face blindness), for which he has not been formally diagnosed. In a 2013 interview, he said that his inability to recognize people's faces had become so severe that he often wanted to stay home.\nArtworks.\nPitt has an interest in art, learned pottery, and has created sculptures. Nine of his sculptures were exhibited together with works by musician Nick Cave and artist Thomas Houseago at the Sara Hild\u00e9n Art Museum in Tampere, Finland, in 2022 and 2023.\nPublic image.\nPitt has been frequently cited as one of the most attractive actors of all time and has been described as a sex symbol by many sources, including \"Empire\", who named him one of the 25 sexiest stars in film history in 1995. The same year, he was named \"People\"'s Sexiest Man Alive, an accolade he received again in 2000. Pitt appeared on \"Forbes\"' annual Celebrity 100 list of the 100 most powerful celebrities from 2006 to 2008 placing at numbers 20, 5 and 10, respectively. In 2007, he appeared on the \"Time\" 100 list, a compilation of the 100 most influential people in the world, as selected annually by \"Time\" magazine. The magazine credited Pitt for using \"his star power to get people to look at places and stories that cameras don't usually catch\". He was again included on the \"Time\" 100 in 2009, this time in the \"Builders and Titans\" list. As of 2025[ [update]], Pitt's films have grossed over $7.5billion worldwide, according to \"The Numbers\".\nBeginning in 2005, Pitt's relationship with Angelina Jolie became one of the world's most reported celebrity stories. After Jolie was confirmed to be pregnant in early 2006, the intense media hype surrounding the couple reached what Reuters, in a story titled \"The Brangelina fever,\" called \"the point of insanity\". To avoid media attention, the couple flew to Namibia for the birth of their daughter, which was described by a paparazzi blog as \"the most anticipated baby since Jesus Christ.\" Similarly, intense media interest greeted the announcement of Jolie's second pregnancy two years later; for the two weeks Jolie spent in a seaside hospital in Nice, reporters and photographers camped outside on the promenade to report on the birth.\nIn a 2006 global industry survey by ACNielsen in 42 international markets, Pitt, together with Jolie, were found to be the favorite celebrity endorsers for brands and products worldwide. Pitt has appeared in several television commercials. For the U.S. market, he starred in a Heineken commercial aired during the 2005 Super Bowl; it was directed by David Fincher, who had directed Pitt in \"Seven\" and \"Fight Club\". Other commercial appearances came in television spots including Acura Integra, in which he was featured opposite Russian model Tatiana Sorokko, as well as SoftBank, and Edwin Jeans. On June 2, 2015, the minor planet 29132 Bradpitt was named in his honor.\nPitt does not use social media and has no accounts on any social media platform.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44850", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44850", "title": "Kidinnu", "text": "4th century BC Chaldean astronomer and mathematician\nKidinnu (also \"Kidunnu\"; possibly fl. 4th century BC; possibly died 14 August 330\u00a0BC) was a Chaldean astronomer and mathematician. Strabo of Amaseia called him Kidenas, Pliny the Elder called him Cidenas, and Vettius Valens called him Kidynas.\nSome cuneiform and classical Greek and Latin texts mention an astronomer with this name, but it is not clear if they all refer to the same individual:\nThe following information is an excerpt of the overview of a century of scholarship in the sources referenced below.\nThe meaning of \"tersitu\" is not known definitively. Already Franz Xaver Kugler proposed that the word can be interpreted here as \"table\"; in another context it seems to mean something like \"tool\", but in yet another it refers to a blue enamel paste. P. Schnabel, in a series of papers (1923\u20131927), interpreted the phrase as an assignment of authorship. He argued that Naburimannu developed the Babylonian System A of calculating Solar System ephemerides, and that later Kidinnu developed the Babylonian System B. A Greco-Roman tradition, mentioned above, attributes to Kidinnu the discovery that 251 synodic months equals 269 anomalistic months. This relationship is implicit in System B, and is therefore another reason to believe that Kidinnu was involved in developing the lunar theory of System B. However, the conclusion that Kidinnu is the main creator of System B is uncertain. Babylonian astronomers before Kidinnu's time apparently already knew the Saros cycle (old eclipse observations were collected in tables organised according to the Saros cycle since the late 5th century BC) and the Metonic cycle (the dates of the lunar calendar in the Saros tables follow a regular 19-year pattern of embolismic months at least since 498\u00a0BC); both cycles are also used in System B. Schnabel computed specific years (first 314\u00a0BC and later 379\u00a0BC) for the origin of the System B lunar theory, but Franz Xaver Kugler and Otto E. Neugebauer later disproved Schnabel's calculations. Schnabel also asserted that Kidinnu discovered precession when distinguishing between sidereal and tropical years; Neugebauer contested this and current scholarship considers this conclusion to be unfounded.\nThe lunation length used in System B has also been attributed to Kidinnu. It is 29 days + 191 time degrees + 1/72 of a time degree (\"barley corn\") = 29d 31:50:8:20 (sexagesimal) = 29d + 12h + 793/1080h (Hebrew \"helek\") = 29.53059414...d. Being a rounded value in the archaic unit of \"barley corns\" it may be even more ancient. In any case, it is very accurate, within about \u2153 of a second per month. Hipparchus confirmed this value for the lunation length. Ptolemy accepted and used it, as mentioned above. Hillel II first used it in the Hebrew calendar, and it has been used for that purpose ever since.\nThe existing evidence makes it difficult to put Kidinnu at a time and place. Schnabel placed Kidinnu in Sippar, but Otto E. Neugebauer showed that Schnabel based this conclusion on a misreading of the cuneiform tablet. Classical sources like Strabo mention different \"schools\" and \"doctrines\" followed in different places (Babylon, Borsippa, Sippar, Uruk). System A and B have been used contemporaneously, and tablets for both systems have been found in both Babylon and Uruk. Tablets based on System B, associated with Kidinnu, have been found mostly in Uruk, but the earlier tablets came predominantly from Babylon. The oldest preserved tablet using System B comes from Babylon and dates from 258 to 257\u00a0BC. This is in the Seleucid era, but it is plausible that the traditional Chaldean astronomical systems had been developed before the Hellenistic period. The Alexander chronicle mentioned above suggests that the famous astronomer Kidinnu died in Babylon in 330\u00a0BC, \"if\" it refers to the same Kidinnu who was mentioned on the ephemeris tablets centuries later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44851", "revid": "1313200564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44851", "title": "Radical Party", "text": "Radical Party may refer to any of a number of political parties professing the progressive-liberal ideology known as Radicalism:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEurope.\nIn the western Mediterranean European countries, Radicalism was one of the major political movements between 1848 and 1940. Such parties were often labelled 'Democratic', 'Radical democratic', or 'Radical liberal' parties:\nIn the Dutch-speaking, German-speaking and Nordic countries, the English or French term Radical was represented by terms that literally translated as 'Free-Minded' (or, alternatively, as 'Freethinker' or 'Rationalist'), including:\nIn south-eastern Europe, Radicalism was also a historically important political movement:\nIn Central and Eastern Europe, Radicalism was less potent but nonetheless prominent political force:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44852", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44852", "title": "1050s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1050s BC is a decade that lasted from 1059 BC to 1050 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44853", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44853", "title": "1090s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1090s BC is a decade that lasted from 1099 BC to 1090 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44854", "revid": "13008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44854", "title": "1120s BC", "text": "The 1120s BC is a decade that lasted from 1129 BC to 1120 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44855", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44855", "title": "1130s BC", "text": "The 1130s BC is a decade that lasted from 1139 BC to 1130 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44856", "revid": "20867061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44856", "title": "Mustafa Kemal", "text": ""}
{"id": "44857", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44857", "title": "1140s BC", "text": "The 1140s BC is a decade that lasted from 1149 BC to 1140 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44858", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44858", "title": "1150s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1150s BC is a decade that lasted from 1159 BC to 1150 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44859", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44859", "title": "1520s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1520s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1529 BC to December 31, 1520 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44860", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44860", "title": "1530s BC", "text": "The 1530s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1539 BC to December 31, 1530 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\nDecade"}
{"id": "44861", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44861", "title": "1070s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1070s BC is a decade that lasted from 1079 BC to 1070 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44862", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44862", "title": "1080s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1080s BC was a decade that lasted from 1089 BC to 1080 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44863", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44863", "title": "1060s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1060s BC is a decade that lasted from 1069 BC to 1060 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44864", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44864", "title": "1160s BC", "text": "The 1160s BC is a decade that lasted from 1169 BC to 1160 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44865", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44865", "title": "1040s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1040s BC is a decade that lasted from 1049 BC to 1040 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44866", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44866", "title": "1030s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1030s BC is a decade that lasted from 1039 BC to 1030 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44868", "revid": "46628330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44868", "title": "1020s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1020s BC is a decade that lasted from 1029 BC to 1020 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44869", "revid": "44573545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44869", "title": "1010s BC", "text": "Decade\nThe 1010s BC is a decade that lasted from 1019 BC to 1010 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44870", "revid": "639767", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44870", "title": "1170s BC", "text": "The 1170s BC is a decade that lasted from 1179 BC to 1170 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44871", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44871", "title": "1180s BC", "text": "The 1180s BC is a decade that lasted from 1189 BC to 1180 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44872", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44872", "title": "1190s BC", "text": "The 1190s BC is a decade that lasted from 1199 BC to 1190 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44873", "revid": "50434010", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44873", "title": "1200s BC (decade)", "text": "The 1200s BC is a decade that lasted from 1209 BC to 1200 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44874", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44874", "title": "1210s BC", "text": "The 1210s BC is a decade that lasted from 1219 BC to 1210 BC.\nDecade"}
{"id": "44875", "revid": "43717394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44875", "title": "1000s BC (decade)", "text": "Decade\nThe 1000s BC is a decade that lasted from 1009 BC to 1000 BC. \nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44877", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44877", "title": "1220s BC", "text": "The 1220s BC is a decade that lasted from 1229 BC to 1220 BC.\nDecade\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44878", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44878", "title": "1740s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThe 1740s BC was a decade lasting from January 1, 1749 BC to December 31, 1740 BC.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44880", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44880", "title": "1604 BC", "text": ""}
{"id": "44882", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44882", "title": "Engine department", "text": "Organizational unit aboard a ship\nAn engine department or engineering department is an organizational unit aboard a ship that is responsible for the operation, maintenance, and repair of the propulsion systems and the support systems for crew, passengers, and cargo. These include the ship engine, fuel oil, lubrication, water distillation, separation process, lighting, air conditioning, and refrigeration.\nHistory.\nThe engine department emerged with the arrival of marine engines for propulsion, largely during the later half of the 19th century. Due to advances in marine technology during the 20th century, the engine department aboard merchant ships is considered equally important as the deck department, since trained engine officers are required to handle the machinery on a ship.\nThe engine department takes care of the engine room aboard a ship. Rotations vary depending on the vessel or company. Whoever is on a rotation has to stand watch to look over the engine and its components. There are different crew members for watch rotation.\nStaffing.\nTypically, a ship's engine department is run by the engine officers but staffed with other occupational specialties of the seafarer's trade like:\nRequirements.\nIn order to be a watch officer and have the license for it, there are 3 basic requirements and they are age, seagoing service, and education/training on stcw's. Some basic USCG stcw requirements go further into seagoing service, approved trainings such as; engine resource management, gas/steam turbine plants, control systems, etc., and finally the competencies which include \"Evidence of Standard of competence\".\nDefunct positions within the engine department include the fireman, who was a rating responsible for shoveling coal into the boiler furnaces of steam engines, and the coal trimmer, a rating that loaded coal in the bunkers and transported the coal from the bunkers to the firemen.\nModern times.\nNowadays, due to the increase in automation on merchant vessels, and the increase in the unattended machinery spaces (UMS) aboard them, the number of seafaring engine officers has decreased drastically on board merchant ships. Today, the engine department usually consists of the following number of engine officers and ratings:\nAdditionally, many vessels also carry a specific type of engine officer known as an electro-technical officer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44883", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44883", "title": "Welding", "text": "Fabrication process for joining materials\n \nWelding is a fabrication process that joins materials, usually metals or thermoplastics, primarily by using high temperature to melt the parts together and allow them to cool, causing fusion. Common alternative methods include solvent welding (of thermoplastics) using chemicals to melt materials being bonded without heat, and solid-state welding processes which bond without melting, such as pressure, cold welding, and diffusion bonding.\nMetal welding is distinct from lower temperature bonding techniques such as brazing and soldering, which do not melt the base metal (parent metal) and instead require flowing a filler metal to solidify their bonds.\nIn addition to melting the base metal in welding, a filler material is typically added to the joint to form a pool of molten material (the weld pool) that cools to form a joint that can be stronger than the base material. Welding also requires a form of shield to protect the filler metals or melted metals from being contaminated or oxidized.\nMany different energy sources can be used for welding, including a gas flame (chemical), an electric arc (electrical), a laser, an electron beam, friction, and ultrasound. While often an industrial process, welding may be performed in many different environments, including in open air, under water, and in outer space. Welding is a hazardous undertaking and precautions are required to avoid burns, electric shock, vision damage, inhalation of poisonous gases and fumes, and exposure to intense ultraviolet radiation.\nUntil the end of the 19th century, the only welding process was forge welding, which blacksmiths had used for millennia to join iron and steel by heating and hammering. Arc welding and oxy-fuel welding were among the first processes to develop late in the century, and electric resistance welding followed soon after. Welding technology advanced quickly during the early 20th century, as world wars drove the demand for reliable and inexpensive joining methods. Following the wars, several modern welding techniques were developed, including manual methods like shielded metal arc welding, now one of the most popular welding methods, as well as semi-automatic and automatic processes such as gas metal arc welding, submerged arc welding, flux-cored arc welding and electroslag welding. Developments continued with the invention of laser beam welding, electron beam welding, magnetic pulse welding, and friction stir welding in the latter half of the century. Today, as the science continues to advance, robot welding is commonplace in industrial settings, and researchers continue to develop new welding methods and gain greater understanding of weld quality.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"weld\" is derived from the Middle English verb \"well\" (; plural/present tense: ) or \"welling\" (), meaning 'to heat' (to the maximum temperature possible); 'to bring to a boil'. The modern word was probably derived from the past-tense participle \"welled\" (), with the addition of \"d\" for this purpose being common in the Germanic languages of the Angles and Saxons. It was first recorded in English in 1590. A fourteenth century translation of the Christian Bible into English by John Wycliffe translates Isaiah 2:4 as \" (they shall beat together their swords into plowshares). In the 1590 version this was changed to \"...thei shullen welle togidere her swerdes in-to scharris...\"\" (they shall weld together their swords into plowshares), suggesting this particular use of the word probably became popular in English sometime between these periods.\nThe Old English word for welding iron was ('to bring together') or ('to bring together hot').\nThe word is related to the Old Swedish word , meaning 'to boil', which could refer to joining metals, as in (literally 'to boil iron'). Sweden was a large exporter of iron during the Middle Ages, so the word may have entered English from the Swedish iron trade, or may have been imported with the thousands of Viking settlements that arrived in England before and during the Viking Age, as more than half of the most common English words in everyday use are Scandinavian in origin.\nHistory.\nThe history of joining metals goes back several millennia. Fusion welding processes that join metals by melting them were not widely used in pre-industrial welding. Early welding techniques used pressure to join to the metals, often with heat not sufficient to fully melt the base metals. One notable exception was a technique to join sections of large statues. In Greek and Roman lost-wax casting, the statues were cast as smaller pieces and molten bronze was poured into the joints with temperatures sufficient to create fusion welds.\nThe earliest known welding dates to the Bronze Age. Gold is soft enough to be pressure welded with little to no heat, and archaeologists have found small boxes made by pressure welding overlapping sheets of gold. In the Iron Age, Mediterranean societies developed forge welding. In forge welding, metal is heated to the point that it becomes soft enough for a blacksmith to hammer separate pieces together. Very early notable examples are the iron objects found with Tutankhamun including an iron headrest and dagger. The dagger was forged from meteoric iron at temperatures below . Typically, wrought iron is forged at around . The ancient Greek historian Herodotus credits Glaucus of Chios with discovering \"iron welding\". Glaucus is known for an iron pedestal welded to hold a silver krater at Delphi.\nThe Middle Ages brought advances in forge welding, in which blacksmiths pounded heated metal repeatedly until bonding occurred. In Europe and Africa, forging shifted from open charcoal fires to bloomeries. China developed the blast furnace late in the first millennia. Forge welding was used in the construction of the Iron pillar of Delhi, erected in Delhi, India about 310 AD and weighing 5.4\u00a0metric tons. In 1540, Vannoccio Biringuccio published \"De la pirotechnia\", which includes descriptions of the forging operation. Renaissance craftsmen were skilled in the process, and the industry continued to grow during the following centuries.\nIn 1800, Sir Humphry Davy discovered the short-pulse electrical arc and presented his results in 1801. In 1802, Russian scientist Vasily Petrov created the continuous electric arc, and subsequently published \"News of Galvanic-Voltaic Experiments\" in 1803, in which he described experiments carried out in 1802. Of great importance in this work was the description of a stable arc discharge and the indication of its possible use for many applications, one being melting metals. In 1808, Davy, who was unaware of Petrov's work, rediscovered the continuous electric arc. In 1881\u201382 inventors Nikolai Benardos (Russian) and Stanis\u0142aw Olszewski (Polish) created the first electric arc welding method known as carbon arc welding using carbon electrodes. The advances in arc welding continued with the invention of metal electrodes in the late 1800s by a Russian, Nikolai Slavyanov (1888), and an American, C. L. Coffin (1890). Around 1900, A. P. Strohmenger released a coated metal electrode in Britain, which gave a more stable arc. In 1905, Russian scientist Vladimir Mitkevich proposed using a three-phase electric arc for welding. Alternating current welding was invented by C. J. Holslag in 1919, but did not become popular for another decade.\nResistance welding was also developed during the final decades of the 19th century, with the first patents going to Elihu Thomson in 1885, who produced further advances over the next 15 years. Thermite welding was invented in 1893, and around that time another process, oxyfuel welding, became well established. Acetylene was discovered in 1836 by Edmund Davy, but its use was not practical in welding until about 1900, when a suitable torch was developed. At first, oxyfuel welding was one of the more popular welding methods due to its portability and relatively low cost. As the 20th century progressed, however, it fell out of favor for industrial applications. It was largely replaced with arc welding, as advances in metal coverings (known as flux) were made. Flux covering the electrode primarily shields the base material from impurities, but also stabilizes the arc and can add alloying components to the weld metal.\nWorld War I caused a major surge in the use of welding, with the various military powers attempting to determine which of the several new welding processes would be best. The British primarily used arc welding, even constructing a ship, the \"Fullagar\" with an entirely welded hull. Arc welding was first applied to aircraft during the war as well, as some German airplane fuselages were constructed using the process.\nDuring the middle of the century, many new welding methods were invented, including the introduction of automatic welding in 1920, in which electrode wire was fed continuously. Shielding gas received much attention, as scientists attempted to protect welds from the effects of oxygen and nitrogen in the atmosphere. Porosity and brittleness were the primary problems, and the solutions that developed included the use of hydrogen, argon, and helium as welding atmospheres. Testing methods were introduced for weld integrity. First vibration testing was done using a hammer and stethoscope; later, X-ray tests were developed to see into the weld. During the 1930s, further advances allowed for the welding of reactive metals like aluminum and magnesium. This in conjunction with developments in automatic welding, alternating current, and fluxes fed a major expansion of arc welding during the 1930s. Russian inventor Konstantin Khrenov implemented the first underwater electric arc welding. In 1930, Kyle Taylor was responsible for the release of stud welding, which soon became popular in shipbuilding and construction. Submerged arc welding was invented the same year. During World War II, submerged arc welding was widely used for ship-building because it allowed certain types of welds to be done twenty times faster than earlier techniques.\nImprovements to welding processes opened up new possibilities for construction. Previously, large metal structures had been made from metals joined mechanically with rivets, along with bolts, screws, and belts. These connected but unfused metal structures had inherent weaknesses. The steamboat \"Sultana\" killed over a thousand passengers when its riveted boiler failed under pressure. The \"unsinkable\" \"Titanic\" sank due in part to failures in its riveted hull. In 1930, the first all-welded merchant vessel, M/S \"Carolinian\", was launched. The strength of welded steel also allowed for the creation of entirely new types of ships, notably the liquefied natural gas (LNG) tanker. The ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code, created in response to deadly boiler failures was used to develop the spherical tanks that contain LNG during transport. Also noteworthy is the first welded road bridge in the world, the Maurzyce Bridge in Poland (1928). Early skyscrapers and steel truss bridges were built from riveted steel beams. Welding allows for stronger and lighter structures and greater range of shapes. The Sydney Opera House's icon shape is built on a stud-welded steel frame.\nGas tungsten arc welding, after decades of development, was finally perfected in 1941, and gas metal arc welding followed in 1948, allowing for fast welding of non-ferrous materials but requiring expensive shielding gases. Shielded metal arc welding was developed during the 1950s, using a flux-coated consumable electrode, and it quickly became the most popular metal arc welding process. In 1957, the flux-cored arc welding process debuted, in which the self-shielded wire electrode could be used with automatic equipment, resulting in greatly increased welding speeds, and that same year, plasma arc welding was invented by Robert Gage. Electroslag welding was introduced in 1958, and it was followed by its cousin, electrogas welding, in 1961. In 1953, the Soviet scientist N. F. Kazakov proposed the diffusion bonding method.\nOther recent developments in welding include the 1958 breakthrough of electron beam welding, making deep and narrow welding possible through the concentrated heat source. Following the invention of the laser in 1960, laser beam welding debuted several decades later, and has proved to be especially useful in high-speed, automated welding. Magnetic pulse welding (MPW) has been industrially used since 1967. Friction stir welding was invented in 1991 by Wayne Thomas at The Welding Institute (TWI, UK) and found high-quality applications all over the world. All of these four new processes continue to be quite expensive due to the high cost of the necessary equipment, and this has limited their applications.\nProcesses.\nWelding joins two pieces of metal using heat, pressure, or both. The most common modern welding methods use heat sufficient to melt the base metals to be joined and the filler metal. This includes gas welding and all forms of arc welding. The area where the base and filler metals melt is called the weld pool or puddle. The weld pool must be protected from oxygen in the air that will oxidize with the molten metal and from other gases that could contaminate the weld. Most welding methods involve pushing the puddle along a joint to create a weld bead. Overlapping pieces of metal can be joined by forming the weld pool within a hole made in the topmost piece of base metal to form a plug weld. \nSolid-state welding processes join two pieces of metal using pressure. Electric resistance welding is a common industrial process that combines heat and pressure to join overlapping base metals without any filler material. \nGas welding.\nGas welding, also known as oxyacetylene welding, uses an open flame to generate heat and shield the weld. Compared to arc welding, the flame is less concentrated and lower in temperature, about 3100\u00a0\u00b0C (5600\u00a0\u00b0F) near the torch tip. This causes slower weld cooling, which can lead to greater residual stresses and weld distortion, though it eases the welding of high alloy steels. The diffuse outer envelope of the flame consumes oxygen before it can reach the molten weld pool. When working with easily oxidized metals, such as stainless steel, flux can be brushed onto the base metals.\nThe equipment is relatively inexpensive and simple, consisting of a torch, hoses, pressure regulators, a tank of oxygen, and a tank of fuel (usually acetylene). It is one of the oldest and most versatile welding processes, but it has become less popular in industrial applications. It is still widely used for welding pipes and tubes, as well as repair work. A similar process, generally called oxyfuel cutting, is used to cut metals. Oxyfuel equipment can also be used to heat metal before bending or straightening.\nArc welding.\nAll arc welding processes use a welding power supply to create and maintain an electric arc between an electrode and the base material to melt metals at the welding point. They can use alternating current (AC) or direct current (DC). For DC welding, the electrode can be connected to the machine's positive terminal (DCEP) or negative terminal (DCEN), changing the current's direction. The process and type of electrode used will typically determine the current. \nShielding gas prevents oxygen in the atmosphere from entering the molten weld pool. In some processes, the shielding gas is delivered from gas cylinders containing inert or semi-inert gas. In others, a flux coating on a consumable electrode disintegrates to create the gas. Filler material is typically added to the molten weld pool and is necessary for processes that use a consumable electrode.\nArc welding processes.\nOne of the most common types of arc welding is shielded metal arc welding (SMAW); it is also known as manual metal arc welding (MMAW) or stick welding. Electric current is used to strike an arc between the base material and consumable electrode rod, which is made of filler material (typical steel) and is covered with a flux that protects the weld area from oxidation and contamination by producing carbon dioxide (CO2) gas during the welding process. The electrode core itself acts as filler material, making a separate filler unnecessary.\nThe process is versatile and can be performed with relatively inexpensive equipment, making it well suited to shop jobs and field work. An operator can become reasonably proficient with a modest amount of training and can achieve mastery with experience. Weld times are rather slow, since the consumable electrodes must be frequently replaced and because slag, the residue from the flux, must be chipped away after welding. Furthermore, the process is generally limited to welding ferrous materials, though special electrodes have made possible the welding of cast iron, stainless steel, aluminum, and other metals.\nGas metal arc welding (GMAW), also known as metal inert gas or MIG welding, is a semi-automatic or automatic process that uses a continuous wire feed as an electrode and an inert or semi-inert gas mixture to protect the weld from contamination. Since the electrode is continuous, welding speeds are greater for GMAW than for SMAW.\nA related process, flux-cored arc welding (FCAW), uses similar equipment but uses wire consisting of a tubular steel electrode surrounding a powder fill material. This cored wire is more expensive than the standard solid wire and can generate fumes and/or slag, but it permits even higher welding speed and greater metal penetration. As the electrode is consumed, the flux disintegrates to create shielding gas and a protective layer of slag similar to stick welding. Some flux-cored machines have a nozzle that uses a shielding gas to supplement the protection from the flux. This is called dual shield welding, and uses a specialized gas shielded flux-core wire.\nGas tungsten arc welding (GTAW), or tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding, is a manual welding process that uses a non-consumable tungsten electrode, an inert or semi-inert gas mixture, and a separate filler material. Especially useful for welding thin materials, this method is characterized by a stable arc and high-quality welds, but it requires significant operator skill and can only be accomplished at relatively low speeds.\nGTAW can be used on nearly all weldable metals, though it is most often applied to stainless steel and light metals. It is often used when quality welds are extremely important, such as in bicycle, aircraft and naval applications. A related process, plasma arc welding, also uses a tungsten electrode but uses plasma gas to make the arc. The arc is more concentrated than the GTAW arc, making transverse control more critical and thus generally restricting the technique to a mechanized process. Because of its stable current, the method can be used on a wider range of material thicknesses than can the GTAW process and it is much faster. It can be applied to all of the same materials as GTAW except magnesium, and automated welding of stainless steel is one important application of the process. A variation of the process is plasma cutting, an efficient steel cutting process.\nSubmerged arc welding (SAW) is a high-productivity welding method in which the arc is struck beneath a covering layer of flux. This increases arc quality since contaminants in the atmosphere are blocked by the flux. The slag that forms on the weld generally comes off by itself, and combined with the use of a continuous wire feed, the weld deposition rate is high. Working conditions are much improved over other arc welding processes, since the flux hides the arc and almost no smoke is produced. The process is commonly used in industry, especially for large products and in the manufacture of welded pressure vessels. Other arc welding processes include atomic hydrogen welding, electroslag welding (ESW), electrogas welding, and stud arc welding. ESW is a highly productive, single-pass welding process for thicker materials between 1 inch (25\u00a0mm) and 12 inches (300\u00a0mm) in a vertical or close to vertical position.\nArc welding power supplies.\nTo supply the electrical power necessary for arc welding processes, a variety of different power supplies can be used. The most common welding power supplies are constant current power supplies and constant voltage power supplies. In arc welding, the length of the arc is directly related to the voltage, and the amount of heat input is related to the current. Constant current power supplies are most often used for manual welding processes such as gas tungsten arc welding and shielded metal arc welding, because they maintain a relatively constant current even as the voltage varies. This is important because in manual welding, it can be difficult to hold the electrode perfectly steady, and as a result, the arc length and thus voltage tend to fluctuate. Constant voltage power supplies hold the voltage constant and vary the current, and as a result, are most often used for automated welding processes such as gas metal arc welding, flux-cored arc welding, and submerged arc welding. In these processes, arc length is kept constant, since any fluctuation in the distance between the wire and the base material is quickly rectified by a large change in current. For example, if the wire and the base material get too close, the current will rapidly increase, which in turn causes the heat to increase and the tip of the wire to melt, returning it to its original separation distance.\nThe type of current used plays an important role in arc welding. Consumable electrode processes such as shielded metal arc welding and gas metal arc welding generally use direct current, but the electrode can be charged either positively or negatively. In welding, the positively charged anode will have a greater heat concentration, and as a result, changing the polarity of the electrode affects weld properties. If the electrode is positively charged, the base metal will be hotter, increasing weld penetration and welding speed. Alternatively, a negatively charged electrode results in more shallow welds. Non-consumable electrode processes, such as gas tungsten arc welding, can use either type of direct current, as well as alternating current. However, with direct current, because the electrode only creates the arc and does not provide filler material, a positively charged electrode causes shallow welds, while a negatively charged electrode makes deeper welds. Alternating current rapidly moves between these two, resulting in medium-penetration welds. One disadvantage of AC, the fact that the arc must be re-ignited after every zero crossings, has been addressed with the invention of special power units that produce a square wave pattern instead of the normal sine wave, making rapid zero crossings possible and minimizing the effects of the problem.\nResistance welding.\nResistance welding generates heat from electrical resistance in the base metals. Two electrodes are simultaneously used to press the metal sheets together and to pass current through the sheets. The electrodes are made from highly conductive material, usually copper. The higher resistance in the base metals causes small pools of molten metal to form at the weld area as high current (1,000\u2013100,000 A) is passed through. \nResistance spot welding is a popular method used to join overlapping metal sheets of up to 3\u00a0mm thick. The advantages of the method include efficient energy use, limited workpiece deformation, high production rates, easy automation, and no required filler materials. Weld strength is significantly lower than with other welding methods, making the process suitable for only certain applications. It is used extensively in the automotive industry\u2014ordinary cars can have several thousand spot welds made by industrial robots. In general, resistance welding methods are efficient and cause little pollution, but their applications are somewhat limited and the equipment cost can be high. A specialized process called shot welding, can be used to spot weld stainless steel.\nSeam welding also relies on two electrodes to apply pressure and current to join metal sheets. However, instead of pointed electrodes, wheel-shaped electrodes roll along and often feed the workpiece, making it possible to make long continuous welds. In the past, this process was used in the manufacture of beverage cans, but now its uses are more limited. Other resistance welding methods include butt welding, flash welding, projection welding, and upset welding.\nEnergy beam welding.\nEnergy beam welding methods, namely laser beam welding and electron beam welding, are relatively new processes that have become quite popular in high production applications. The two processes are quite similar, differing most notably in their source of power. Laser beam welding employs a highly focused laser beam, while electron beam welding is done in a vacuum and uses an electron beam. Both have a very high energy density, making deep weld penetration possible and minimizing the size of the weld area. Both processes are extremely fast, and are easily automated, making them highly productive. The primary disadvantages are their very high equipment costs (though these are decreasing) and a susceptibility to thermal cracking. Developments in this area include laser-hybrid welding, which uses principles from both laser beam welding and arc welding for even better weld properties, laser cladding, and x-ray welding.\nSolid-state welding.\nLike forge welding (the earliest welding process discovered), some modern welding methods do not involve the melting of the materials being joined. One of the most popular, ultrasonic welding, is used to connect thin sheets or wires made of metal or thermoplastic by vibrating them at high frequency and under high pressure. The equipment and methods involved are similar to that of resistance welding, but instead of electric current, vibration provides energy input. When welding metals, the vibrations are introduced horizontally, and the materials are not melted; with plastics, which should have similar melting temperatures, vertically. Ultrasonic welding is commonly used for making electrical connections out of aluminum or copper, and it is also a very common polymer welding process.\nAnother common process, explosion welding, involves the joining of materials by pushing them together under extremely high pressure. The energy from the impact plasticizes the materials, forming a weld, even though only a limited amount of heat is generated. The process is commonly used for welding dissimilar materials, including bonding aluminum to carbon steel in ship hulls and stainless steel or titanium to carbon steel in petrochemical pressure vessels.\nOther solid-state welding processes include friction welding (including friction stir welding and friction stir spot welding), magnetic pulse welding, co-extrusion welding, cold welding, diffusion bonding, exothermic welding, high frequency welding, hot pressure welding, induction welding, and roll bonding.\nGeometry.\nWelds can be geometrically prepared in many different ways. The five basic types of weld joints are the butt joint, lap joint, corner joint, edge joint, and T-joint (a variant of this last is the cruciform joint). Other variations exist as well\u2014for example, double-V preparation joints are characterized by the two pieces of material each tapering to a single center point at one-half their height. Single-U and double-U preparation joints are also fairly common\u2014instead of having straight edges like the single-V and double-V preparation joints, they are curved, forming the shape of a U. Lap joints are also commonly more than two pieces thick\u2014depending on the process used and the thickness of the material, many pieces can be welded together in a lap joint geometry.\nMany welding processes require the use of a particular joint design; for example, resistance spot welding, laser beam welding, and electron beam welding are most frequently performed on lap joints. Other welding methods, like shielded metal arc welding, are extremely versatile and can weld virtually any type of joint. Some processes can also be used to make multipass welds, in which one weld is allowed to cool, and then another weld is performed on top of it. This allows for the welding of thick sections arranged in a single-V preparation joint, for example.\nAfter welding, a number of distinct regions can be identified in the weld area. The weld itself is called the fusion zone\u2014more specifically, it is where the filler metal was laid during the welding process. The properties of the fusion zone depend primarily on the filler metal used, and its compatibility with the base materials. It is surrounded by the heat-affected zone, the area that had its microstructure and properties altered by the weld. These properties depend on the base material's behavior when subjected to heat. The metal in this area is often weaker than both the base material and the fusion zone, and is also where residual stresses are found.\nQuality.\nMany distinct factors influence the strength of welds and the material around them, including the welding method, the amount and concentration of energy input, the weldability of the base material, filler material, and flux material, the design of the joint, and the interactions between all these factors.\nFor example, the factor of welding position influences weld quality, that welding codes &amp; specifications may require testing\u2014both welding procedures and welders\u2014using specified welding positions: 1G (flat), 2G (horizontal), 3G (vertical), 4G (overhead), 5G (horizontal fixed pipe), or 6G (inclined fixed pipe).\nTo test the quality of a weld, either destructive or nondestructive testing methods are commonly used to verify that welds are free of defects, have acceptable levels of residual stresses and distortion, and have acceptable heat-affected zone (HAZ) properties. Types of welding defects include cracks, distortion, gas inclusions (porosity), non-metallic inclusions, lack of fusion, incomplete penetration, lamellar tearing, and undercutting.\nThe metalworking industry has instituted codes and specifications to guide welders, weld inspectors, engineers, managers, and property owners in proper welding technique, design of welds, how to judge the quality of welding procedure specification, how to judge the skill of the person performing the weld, and how to ensure the quality of a welding job. Methods such as visual inspection, radiography, ultrasonic testing, phased-array ultrasonics, dye penetrant inspection, magnetic particle inspection, or industrial computed tomography can help with detection and analysis of certain defects.\nHeat-affected zone.\nThe heat-affected zone (HAZ) is a ring surrounding the weld in which the temperature of the welding process, combined with the stresses of uneven heating and cooling, alters the heat-treatment properties of the alloy. The effects of welding on the material surrounding the weld can be detrimental\u2014depending on the materials used and the heat input of the welding process used, the HAZ can be of varying size and strength. The thermal diffusivity of the base material plays a large role\u2014if the diffusivity is high, the material cooling rate is high and the HAZ is relatively small. Conversely, a low diffusivity leads to slower cooling and a larger HAZ. The amount of heat injected by the welding process plays an important role as well, as processes like oxyacetylene welding have an unconcentrated heat input and increase the size of the HAZ. Processes like laser beam welding give a highly concentrated, limited amount of heat, resulting in a small HAZ. Arc welding falls between these two extremes, with the individual processes varying somewhat in heat input. To calculate the heat input for arc welding procedures, the following formula can be used:\nformula_1\nwhere \"Q\" = heat input (kJ/mm), \"V\" = voltage (V), \"I\" = current (A), and \"S\" = welding speed (mm/min). The efficiency is dependent on the welding process used, with shielded metal arc welding having a value of 0.75, gas metal arc welding and submerged arc welding, 0.9, and gas tungsten arc welding, 0.8. Methods of alleviating the stresses and brittleness created in the HAZ include stress relieving and tempering.\nOne major defect concerning the HAZ is cracking at the junction of the weld face and the base metal. Due to the rapid expansion (heating) and contraction (cooling), the material may not have the ability to withstand the stress and could crack. One method to control the stress is to control the heating and cooling rate, such as pre-heating and post-heating \nLifetime extension with after treatment methods.\nThe durability and life of dynamically loaded, welded steel structures is determined in many cases by the welds, in particular the weld transitions. Through selective treatment of the transitions by grinding (abrasive cutting), shot peening, High-frequency impact treatment, Ultrasonic impact treatment, etc. the durability of many designs increases significantly.\nMetallurgy.\nMost solids used are engineering materials consisting of crystalline solids in which the atoms or ions are arranged in a repetitive geometric pattern which is known as a lattice structure. The only exception is material that is made from glass which is a combination of a supercooled liquid and polymers which are aggregates of large organic molecules.\nCrystalline solids cohesion is obtained by a metallic or chemical bond that is formed between the constituent atoms. Chemical bonds can be grouped into two types consisting of ionic and covalent. To form an ionic bond, either a valence or bonding electron separates from one atom and becomes attached to another atom to form oppositely charged ions. The bonding in the static position is when the ions occupy an equilibrium position where the resulting force between them is zero. When the ions are exerted in tension force, the inter-ionic spacing increases creating an electrostatic attractive force, while a repulsing force under compressive force between the atomic nuclei is dominant.\nCovalent bonding takes place when one of the constituent atoms loses one or more electrons, with the other atom gaining the electrons, resulting in an electron cloud that is shared by the molecule as a whole. In both ionic and covalent bonding the location of the ions and electrons are constrained relative to each other, thereby resulting in the bond being characteristically brittle.\nMetallic bonding can be classified as a type of covalent bonding for which the constituent atoms are of the same type and do not combine with one another to form a chemical bond. Atoms will lose an electron(s) forming an array of positive ions. These electrons are shared by the lattice which makes the electron cluster mobile, as the electrons are free to move as well as the ions. For this, it gives metals their relatively high thermal and electrical conductivity as well as being characteristically ductile.\nThree of the most commonly used crystal lattice structures in metals are the body-centred cubic, face-centred cubic and close-packed hexagonal. Ferritic steel has a body-centred cubic structure and austenitic steel, non-ferrous metals like aluminium, copper and nickel have the face-centred cubic structure.\nDuctility is an important factor in ensuring the integrity of structures by enabling them to sustain local stress concentrations without fracture. In addition, structures are required to be of an acceptable strength, which is related to a material's yield strength. In general, as the yield strength of a material increases, there is a corresponding reduction in fracture toughness.\nA reduction in fracture toughness may also be attributed to the embrittlement effect of impurities, or for body-centred cubic metals, from a reduction in temperature. Metals and in particular steels have a transitional temperature range where above this range the metal has acceptable notch-ductility while below this range the material becomes brittle. Within the range, the materials behavior is unpredictable. The reduction in fracture toughness is accompanied by a change in the fracture appearance. When above the transition, the fracture is primarily due to micro-void coalescence, which results in the fracture appearing fibrous. When the temperatures falls the fracture will show signs of cleavage facets. These two appearances are visible by the naked eye. Brittle fracture in steel plates may appear as chevron markings under the microscope. These arrow-like ridges on the crack surface point towards the origin of the fracture.\nFracture toughness is measured using a notched and pre-cracked rectangular specimen, of which the dimensions are specified in standards, for example ASTM E23. There are other means of estimating or measuring fracture toughness by the following: The Charpy impact test per ASTM A370; The crack-tip opening displacement (CTOD) test per BS 7448\u20131; The J integral test per ASTM E1820; The Pellini drop-weight test per ASTM E208.\nUnusual conditions.\nWhile many welding applications are done in controlled environments such as factories and repair shops, some welding processes are commonly used in a wide variety of conditions, such as open air, underwater, and vacuums (such as space). In open-air applications, such as construction and outdoors repair, shielded metal arc welding is the most common process. Processes that employ inert gases to protect the weld cannot be readily used in such situations, because unpredictable atmospheric movements can result in a faulty weld. Shielded metal arc welding is also often used in underwater welding in the construction and repair of ships, offshore platforms, and pipelines, but others, such as flux cored arc welding and gas tungsten arc welding, are also common. Welding in space is also possible\u2014it was first attempted in 1969 by Russian cosmonauts during the Soyuz 6 mission, when they performed experiments to test shielded metal arc welding, plasma arc welding, and electron beam welding in a depressurized environment. Further testing of these methods was done in the following decades, and today researchers continue to develop methods for using other welding processes in space, such as laser beam welding, resistance welding, and friction welding. Advances in these areas may be useful for future endeavours similar to the construction of the International Space Station, which could rely on welding for joining in space the parts that were manufactured on Earth.\nSafety issues.\nWelding can be dangerous and unhealthy if the proper precautions are not taken. Potential safety risks come from fumes, ultraviolet radiation, heat, electric currents, and vibrations. New technology, safe work practices, and proper protection reduce the risks of injury or death from welding.\nSince many common welding procedures involve an open flame or electric arc, the risk of burns and fire is significant; this is why it is classified as a hot work process. To prevent injury, welders wear personal protective equipment in the form of heavy leather gloves and protective long-sleeve jackets to avoid exposure to extreme heat and flames. Synthetic clothing such as polyester should not be worn. Wool is less flammable than cotton, but dense cotton fabrics such as denim are still sufficient for clothing. However, any molten material that splatters onto synthetic material will melt directly through the fabric resulting in severe burns.\nArc welding produces intense visible and ultraviolet light. Typical gas metal arc welding has an irradiance of 5W/m2 for the welder, which is many times brighter than sunlight. This can cause a condition called arc eye or flash burns, in which ultraviolet light causes inflammation of the cornea, and can burn the retinas of the eyes. Welding helmets with dark UV-filtering face plates are worn to prevent this exposure. Many helmets include an auto-darkening face plate, which instantly darkens upon exposure to the intense UV light. To protect bystanders, the welding area is often surrounded by translucent welding curtains. These curtains, made of a polyvinyl chloride plastic film, shield people outside the welding area from the UV light of the electric arc, but they cannot replace the filter glass used in helmets. The light can also burn exposed skin. Because of the less intense light produced in oxyfuel welding, goggles that use less UV filtering and do not protect the entire face are sufficient.\nDepending on the type of material, welding varieties, and other factors, welding can produce over 100\u00a0dB(A) of noise. Above 85\u00a0dB(A), earplugs should be worn. Long-term or continuous exposure to higher decibels can lead to noise-induced hearing loss. Processes that produce vibrations sufficient to numb a welder's hands are automated because PPE cannot offer sufficient protection.\nWelders are often exposed to dangerous gases and particulate matter. Processes like flux-cored arc welding and shielded metal arc welding produce smoke containing particles of various types of oxides. The size of the particles in question tends to influence the toxicity of the fumes, with smaller particles presenting a greater danger. This is because smaller particles can cross the blood\u2013brain barrier. Fumes and gases, such as carbon dioxide, ozone, and fumes containing heavy metals, can be dangerous to welders lacking proper ventilation and training. Exposure to manganese welding fumes, for example, even at low levels (&lt;0.2\u00a0mg/m3), may cause neurological problems or damage to the lungs, liver, kidneys, or central nervous system. Nano particles can become trapped in the alveolar macrophages of the lungs and induce pulmonary fibrosis. The use of compressed gases and flames in many welding processes poses an explosion and fire risk. Some common precautions include limiting the amount of oxygen in the air, and keeping combustible materials away from the workplace.\nThere are several technologies to mitigate dangers from welding fumes. Local exhaust ventilation (LEV) solutions remove fumes, smoke, and dust directly from the welding area. Forms of LEV include downdraft benches, fume hoods, and fume extraction welding guns. Downdraft benches have exhaust ducts beneath the metal welding table. Fume extraction guns have a vacuum hose that runs down to the welding nozzle. Movable fume hoods can positioned directly over the welding area. Even with ventilation, there are still respiratory risks that respirators can further reduce. Studies have shown that respirators, especially half-mask elastomeric respirators, significantly decrease particulate inhalation.\nCosts and trends.\nAs an industrial process, the cost of welding plays a crucial role in manufacturing decisions. Many different variables affect the total cost, including equipment cost, labor cost, material cost, and energy cost. Depending on the process, equipment cost can vary, from inexpensive for methods like shielded metal arc welding and oxyfuel welding, to extremely expensive for methods like laser beam welding and electron beam welding. Because of their high cost, they are only used in high production operations. Similarly, because automation and robots increase equipment costs, they are only implemented when high production is necessary. Labor cost depends on the deposition rate (the rate of welding), the hourly wage, and the total operation time, including time spent fitting, welding, and handling the part. The cost of materials includes the cost of the base and filler material, and the cost of shielding gases. Finally, energy cost depends on arc time and welding power demand.\nFor manual welding methods, labor costs generally make up the vast majority of the total cost. As a result, many cost-saving measures are focused on minimizing operation time. To do this, welding procedures with high deposition rates can be selected, and weld parameters can be fine-tuned to increase welding speed. Mechanization and automation are often implemented to reduce labor costs, but this frequently increases the cost of equipment and creates additional setup time. Material costs tend to increase when special properties are necessary, and energy costs normally do not amount to more than several percent of the total welding cost.\nIn recent years, in order to minimize labor costs in high production manufacturing, industrial welding has become increasingly more automated, most notably with the use of robots in resistance spot welding (especially in the automotive industry) and in arc welding. In robot welding, mechanized devices both hold the material and perform the weld and at first, spot welding was its most common application, but robotic arc welding increases in popularity as technology advances. Other key areas of research and development include the welding of dissimilar materials (such as steel and aluminum, for example) and new welding processes, such as friction stir, magnetic pulse, conductive heat seam, and laser-hybrid welding. Furthermore, progress is desired in making more specialized methods like laser beam welding practical for more applications, such as in the aerospace and automotive industries. Researchers also hope to better understand the often unpredictable properties of welds, especially microstructure, residual stresses, and a weld's tendency to crack or deform.\nThe trend of accelerating the speed at which welds are performed in the steel erection industry comes at a risk to the integrity of the connection. Without proper fusion to the base materials provided by sufficient arc time on the weld, a project inspector cannot ensure the effective diameter of the puddle weld therefore he or she cannot guarantee the published load capacities unless they witness the actual installation. This method of puddle welding is common in the United States and Canada for attaching steel sheets to bar joist and structural steel members. Regional agencies are responsible for ensuring the proper installation of puddle welding on steel construction sites. Currently there is no standard or weld procedure which can ensure the published holding capacity of any unwitnessed connection, but this is under review by the American Welding Society.\nGlass and plastic welding.\nGlasses and certain types of plastics are commonly welded materials. Unlike metals, which have a specific melting point, glasses and plastics have a melting range, called the glass transition. When heating the solid material past the glass-transition temperature (Tg) into this range, it will generally become softer and more pliable. When it crosses through the range, above the glass-melting temperature (Tm), it will become a very thick, sluggish, viscous liquid, slowly decreasing in viscosity as temperature increases. Typically, this viscous liquid will have very little surface tension compared to metals, becoming a sticky, taffy to honey-like consistency, so welding can usually take place by simply pressing two melted surfaces together. The two liquids will generally mix and join at first contact. Upon cooling through the glass transition, the welded piece will solidify as one solid piece of amorphous material.\nGlass welding.\nGlass welding is a common practice during glassblowing. It is used very often in the construction of lighting, neon signs, flashtubes, scientific equipment, and the manufacture of dishes and other glassware. It is also used during glass casting for joining the halves of glass molds, making items such as bottles and jars. Welding glass is accomplished by heating the glass through the glass transition, turning it into a thick, formable, liquid mass. Heating is usually done with a gas or oxy-gas torch, or a furnace, because the temperatures for melting glass are often quite high. This temperature may vary, depending on the type of glass. For example, lead glass becomes a weldable liquid at around , and can be welded with a simple propane torch. On the other hand, quartz glass (fused silica) must be heated to over , but quickly loses its viscosity and formability if overheated, so an oxyhydrogen torch must be used. Sometimes a tube may be attached to the glass, allowing it to be blown into various shapes, such as bulbs, bottles, or tubes. When two pieces of liquid glass are pressed together, they will usually weld very readily. Welding a handle onto a pitcher can usually be done with relative ease. However, when welding a tube to another tube, a combination of blowing and suction, and pressing and pulling is used to ensure a good seal, to shape the glass, and to keep the surface tension from closing the tube in on itself. Sometimes a filler rod may be used, but usually not.\nBecause glass is very brittle in its solid state, it is often prone to cracking upon heating and cooling, especially if the heating and cooling are uneven. This is because the brittleness of glass does not allow for uneven thermal expansion. Glass that has been welded will usually need to be cooled very slowly and evenly through the glass transition, in a process called annealing, to relieve any internal stresses created by a temperature gradient.\nThere are many types of glass, and it is most common to weld using the same types. Different glasses often have different rates of thermal expansion, which can cause them to crack upon cooling when they contract differently. For instance, quartz has very low thermal expansion, while soda-lime glass has very high thermal expansion. When welding different glasses to each other, it is usually important to closely match their coefficients of thermal expansion, to ensure that cracking does not occur. Also, some glasses will simply not mix with others, so welding between certain types may not be possible.\nGlass can also be welded to metals and ceramics, although with metals the process is usually more adhesion to the surface of the metal rather than a commingling of the two materials. However, certain glasses will typically bond only to certain metals. For example, lead glass bonds readily to copper or molybdenum, but not to aluminum. Tungsten electrodes are often used in lighting but will not bond to quartz glass, so the tungsten is often wetted with molten borosilicate glass, which bonds to both tungsten and quartz. However, care must be taken to ensure that all materials have similar coefficients of thermal expansion to prevent cracking both when the object cools and when it is heated again. Special alloys are often used for this purpose, ensuring that the coefficients of expansion match, and sometimes thin, metallic coatings may be applied to a metal to create a good bond with the glass.\nPlastic welding.\nPlastics are generally divided into two categories, which are \"thermosets\" and \"thermoplastics.\" A thermoset is a plastic in which a chemical reaction sets the molecular bonds after first forming the plastic, and then the bonds cannot be broken again without degrading the plastic. Thermosets cannot be melted, therefore, once a thermoset has set it is impossible to weld it. Examples of thermosets include epoxies, silicone, vulcanized rubber, polyester, and polyurethane.\nThermoplastics, by contrast, form long molecular chains, which are often coiled or intertwined, forming an amorphous structure without any long-range, crystalline order. Some thermoplastics may be fully amorphous, while others have a partially crystalline/partially amorphous structure. Both amorphous and semicrystalline thermoplastics have a glass transition, above which welding can occur, but semicrystallines also have a specific melting point which is above the glass transition. Above this melting point, the viscous liquid will become a free-flowing liquid (see rheological weldability for thermoplastics). Examples of thermoplastics include polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, polyvinylchloride (PVC), and fluoroplastics like Teflon and Spectralon.\nWelding thermoplastic with heat is very similar to welding glass. The plastic first must be cleaned and then heated through the glass transition, turning the weld-interface into a thick, viscous liquid. Two heated interfaces can then be pressed together, allowing the molecules to mix through intermolecular diffusion, joining them as one. Then the plastic is cooled through the glass transition, allowing the weld to solidify. A filler rod may often be used for certain types of joints. The main differences between welding glass and plastic are the types of heating methods, the much lower melting temperatures, and the fact that plastics will burn if overheated. Many different methods have been devised for heating plastic to a weldable temperature without burning it. Ovens or electric heating tools can be used to melt the plastic. Ultrasonic, laser, or friction heating are other methods. Resistive metals may be implanted in the plastic, which respond to induction heating. Some plastics will begin to burn at temperatures lower than their glass transition, so welding can be performed by blowing a heated, inert gas onto the plastic, melting it while, at the same time, shielding it from oxygen.\nSolvent welding.\nMany thermoplastics can also be welded using chemical solvents. When placed in contact with the plastic, the solvent will begin to soften it, bringing the surface into a thick, liquid solution. When two melted surfaces are pressed together, the molecules in the solution mix, joining them as one. Because the solvent can permeate the plastic, the solvent evaporates out through the surface of the plastic, causing the weld to drop out of solution and solidify. A common use for solvent welding is for joining PVC (polyvinyl chloride) or ABS (acrylonitrile butadiene styrene) pipes during plumbing, or for welding styrene and polystyrene plastics in the construction of models. Solvent welding is especially effective on plastics like PVC which burn at or below their glass transition, but may be ineffective on plastics like Teflon or polyethylene that are resistant to chemical decomposition.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44884", "revid": "26074453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44884", "title": "Vedic (disambiguation)", "text": "Vedic may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44885", "revid": "45911552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44885", "title": "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?", "text": "1962 play by Edward Albee\nWho's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? is a play by Edward Albee first staged in October\u00a01962. It examines the complexities of the marriage of middle-aged couple Martha and George. Late one evening, after a university faculty party, they receive unwitting younger couple Nick and Honey as guests, and draw them into their bitter and frustrated relationship.\nThe three-act play normally takes just under three hours to perform, with two 10\u00a0minute intermissions. The title is a pun on the song \"Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?\" from Walt Disney's \"Three Little Pigs\" (1933), substituting the name of the celebrated English author Virginia Woolf. Martha and George repeatedly sing this version of the song throughout the play.\n\"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" won both the 1963 Tony Award for Best Play and the 1962\u20131963 New York Drama Critics' Circle Award for Best Play. It is frequently revived on the modern stage. The film adaptation was released in 1966, written by Ernest Lehman, directed by Mike Nichols, and starring Richard Burton, Elizabeth Taylor, George Segal, and Sandy Dennis.\nPlot summary.\nAct One: \"Fun and Games\".\nGeorge is an associate professor of history, and his wife Martha is the daughter of the president of the college where George teaches. After they return home from a faculty party, Martha reveals she has invited a young married couple she met at the party over for a drink. (Also cut in the definitive edition: Just before the couple\u2014Nick and Honey\u2014arrive, George gives a vague warning about \"the bit with the kid\" that Martha appears to understand.)\nAs the four drink, Martha and George engage in scathing verbal abuse of each other in front of Nick and Honey. These interactions embarrass the younger couple, but they stay. At one point, Honey lets on that Martha told her about their son, which appears to unnerve George. After this, Martha's taunts and George's passive aggression only increase. When Martha launches into an embarrassing story about how she humiliated him with a sucker punch at a backyard party, George disappears. The story continues, with Nick and Honey laughing, until George appears with a rifle and fires at Martha. To their surprise, a Chinese parasol pops out of the gun barrel. Everyone finds this extremely funny, but Martha quickly resumes her taunting of George, which culminates in Martha relating how her father had thought that George would eventually rise to lead the college, but George's lack of ambition has made him pathetic to Martha, who calls him a \"great big fat flop\". George reacts violently by breaking a bottle. Honey, who has grown more and more deliriously drunk, quickly runs to the bathroom to vomit, leaving George alone with glass all over the room.\n(Traditionally, \"Walpurgisnacht\" is the name of an annual witches' meeting, satiric in the context of the play.)\nAct Two: \"Walpurgisnacht\".\nNick returns to find George alone. As they talk about their wives, Nick reveals that Honey once had a \"hysterical pregnancy\". George tells Nick about a time he went to a gin mill with some boarding school classmates, one of whom had accidentally killed his mother by shooting her. This friend was mocked for ordering \"bergin\" (bourbon). The following summer, the young friend was driving with his father and suddenly swerved to avoid a porcupine, accidentally killing his father. The boy was then sent to an asylum and became mute. As the story concludes, George and Nick discuss children, but the conversation turns insulting before Martha and Honey return.\nHoney calls for music, so they put on a record. Because George refuses to dance, Martha dances with Nick, taunting George by making the dance very sensual while she tells another embarrassing story about George: his efforts to publish a novel about a boy who accidentally killed both of his parents (with the insinuation that the deaths were actually murder), but Martha's father would not let it be published. George attacks Martha, but Nick separates them. Clearly not satisfied, George launches into a new \"game\" called \"Get the Guests\", in which George begins telling a story about a \"mousie\" that is a thinly veiled retelling of everything Nick told George about Honey, including her alcoholism and her \"hysterical pregnancy\", implying that Honey \"trapped\" Nick into marrying her by pretending to be pregnant. Honey, devastated, again runs to the bathroom to vomit.\nMartha begins to openly seduce Nick in the living room right in front of George, who blithely smiles and pretends to read a book. This greatly annoys Martha, who tells George that if he does nothing to stop her, she'll have sex with Nick. George is unmoved, so Martha goes upstairs with Nick. Immediately, an enraged George throws his book against the house's doorbell chimes, which ring out as he promises to make Martha \"regret this.\"\nIn some productions until 2006, Honey then returns, wondering who rang the doorbell. George then interrogates Honey about her pregnancy, then openly tells Honey that he is going to inform Martha that their son has died. In a 2006 revision by the author of the script, however, this scene is cut.\n(Exorcism is the expulsion or attempted expulsion of a supposed evil spirit from a person or place.)\nAct Three: \"The Exorcism\".\nMartha enters an empty living room and shouts for the others to come out of hiding. Nick joins her. The doorbell rings, and George enters carrying snapdragons and making literary jokes that Martha seems to actually enjoy. Martha and George then argue about whether the moon is up, an odd game whose metaphors reveal that Nick was too drunk to have sex with Martha upstairs.\nGeorge asks Nick to bring Honey back for the final game, \"Bringing Up Baby\". Nick and Honey sit helplessly as George, at last, talks openly about his and Martha's son. As he accuses Martha of being overbearing to their son, she protests, leading George to ask for her \"recitation\". Martha agrees, and begins to recall their son's beauty and talents and accuses George of ruining his life. As she speaks, George recites sections of the \"Libera me\" (part of the \"Requiem Mass\", the Latin mass for the dead) and \"Kyrie eleison\" (ancient Greek: \"Lord, have mercy\").\nThis continues until George informs Martha that the doorbell earlier was a messenger from Western Union arriving with a telegram that George says informed him that their son was dead, having been killed in a car crash when he swerved to avoid a porcupine\u2014the exact wording that George earlier used in a story about a completely different person. Martha demands proof, but George insists on the reality of the situation. Martha, distraught, collapses. It slowly dawns on Nick that the son George and Martha have been talking about is not real. The fictional son is a \"game\" the two have been playing since discovering early in their marriage that they are infertile. George has decided to \"kill\" him because Martha broke the game's single rule: not to mention the boy to anyone else.\nOvercome with pity, Nick and Honey leave. Martha suggests that they could invent a new imaginary child, but George insists they cannot. The play ends with George singing \"Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf?\", a joke song someone sang that night at the faculty party. Martha weakly replies, \"I am, George. I am.\"\nThemes.\nReality and illusion.\nAlbee has said that the title of the play \"means who's afraid of the big bad wolf ... who's afraid of living life without false illusions.\" Albee's interest in the theme of reality versus illusion is expressed in a number of his plays. In discussing \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" he cites Nietzsche's interpretation of the Apollonian/Dionysian dichotomy of ancient Greek drama, as described in \"The Birth of Tragedy\". Albee says,\nThere was a time when people believed in deities. And then revolutions came \u2013 industrial, French, Freudian, Marxist. God and absolutes vanished. Individuals find this very difficult and uncomfortable. All they have left is fantasy or the examination of the self.\nAccording to Lawrence Kingsley, Albee's characters create illusions to help them evade feelings of their own inadequacy \u2013 as \"George and Martha have evaded the ugliness of their marriage by taking refuge in illusion.\" The play demonstrates \"how his characters must rid themselves of falsehood and return to the world in which they must live.\"\nThe distinction between truth and illusion is at times deliberately unclear. The existence of the child, the \"murder\" by George of his parents, or Honey's \"pregnancy\" may be illusions, but they seem real to the characters. Illusions may be exorcised in the play, but no truth or apparent reality is supplied in its place. \"All truth\", George says, \"[becomes] relative\".\nCritique of societal expectations.\nChristopher Bigsby asserts that this play opposes the idea of a perfect American family and societal expectations as it \"attacks the false optimism and myopic confidence of modern society\". Albee takes a heavy-handed approach to displaying this contrast, making examples of every character and their expectations of the people around them. Societal norms of the 1950s consisted of a nuclear family: two parents and two (or more) children. This conception was picturesque in the idea that the father was the breadwinner, the mother a homemaker, and the children well-behaved.\n\"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" smashes these conventions and shows realistic families that are far from perfect and possibly ruined. The families of Honey and Martha were dominated by their fathers, with no sign of a mother figure in their lives. George and Martha's chance at a perfect family was ruined by infertility and George's failure to become a prominent figure at the university.\nInspirations.\nTitle.\nThe play's title alludes to the English novelist Virginia Woolf. She died by suicide at age 59 in 1941. She left behind a note in which she expressed love for her husband Leonard Woolf and sorrow for the anguish she was causing him. Twenty years later, playwright Edward Albee corresponded with him, asking permission to use his late wife's name in the title of a new play, according to literary critic Leon Edel, an acquaintance of Leonard Woolf. Woolf granted permission, according to Edel.\nEdward Albee's title also pokes fun at the song \"Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?\" from Walt Disney's animated version of \"The Three Little Pigs\". Because the rights to the Disney song are expensive, most stage versions, and the film, have Martha sing to the tune of \"Here We Go Round the Mulberry Bush\", a melody that fits the meter fairly well and is in the public domain. In the first few moments of the play, it is revealed that someone sang the song earlier in the evening at a party, although who first sang it (Martha or some other anonymous party guest) remains unclear. Martha repeatedly needles George over whether he found it funny.\nAlbee described the inspiration for the title:\nI was in there [\"at a saloon in New York\"] having a beer one night, and I saw \"Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" scrawled in soap, I suppose, on this mirror. When I started to write the play it cropped up in my mind again. And of course, \"who's afraid of Virginia Woolf\" means who's afraid of the big \"bad\" wolf \u2013 who's afraid of living life without false illusions. And it did strike me as being a rather typical, university intellectual joke.\nThe title phrase happened to appear five years before the play's premiere, in a 1957 issue of \"The New Yorker\":\nA coffee fiend we know dropped into an \"espresso\" joint in Greenwich Village the other day and found himself whiling away his time reading the graffiti on the wall beside his chair. Most of the stuff was pretty humdrum, but he was arrested by a legend, done in elegant calligraphy, that read, \"Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf?\"\n\"The New Yorker\" responded in 2013 by suggesting that perhaps the graffito that Albee saw was the same graffito that \"The New Yorker\" reported in 1957.\nCharacters.\nIn an interview, Albee said Martha and George were based on two of his friends, married New York socialites Willard Maas and Marie Menken. Maas was a professor of literature at Wagner College and Menken was an experimental filmmaker and painter. Maas and Menken were known for their infamous salons, where drinking would \"commence at 4\u00a0PM on Friday and end in the wee hours of night on Monday\" (according to Gerard Malanga, an Andy Warhol associate and friend to Maas). The primary conflict between George and Martha in \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" derived from Maas's and Menken's tempestuous and volatile relationship.\nProduction history.\nOriginal production.\nThe print edition of the play was published in 1962 and was one of the early releases of Atheneum Books. It sold over 70,000 copies in hard and soft cover editions.\n\"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" opened on Broadway at the Billy Rose Theatre on 13\u00a0October 1962. The original cast featured Uta Hagen as Martha, Arthur Hill as George, Melinda Dillon as Honey, and George Grizzard as Nick. It was directed by Alan Schneider. Subsequent cast members included Henderson Forsythe, Eileen Fulton, Nancy Kelly, Mercedes McCambridge, and Elaine Stritch.\nBecause of the play's unusual length (over three hours), the producers also cast a matinee company that performed twice a week, featuring Kate Reid as Martha, Shepperd Strudwick as George, Avra Petrides as Honey, and Bill Berger as Nick. As with the evening company, these matinee performances also sold out.\nThe play closed on 16\u00a0May 1964, after 5\u00a0previews and 664\u00a0performances. It opened in London in 1965, starring Constance Cummings and Ray McAnally. Virginia Woolf's widower Leonard attended a performance and enjoyed it, according to an acquaintance of his, literary critic Leon Edel.\nOriginal Broadway cast album.\nIn 1963, Columbia Masterworks released a four-LP boxed recording of the original Broadway cast performing the entire play, directed by Alan Schneider.\nThe release contained a 16\u00a0page booklet with photos from the original production, critical essays by Harold Clurman and Walter Kerr, cast and crew biographies, and a short article by Goddard Lieberson on the task of recording the play. The introduction is by Albee, in which he writes, \"I cannot conceive of anyone wanting to buy [this] massive album; but ... every playwright wants as much permanence for his work as he can get.\"\nThe recording was issued in both stereo (DOS\u00a0687) and monaural (DOL\u00a0287) formats. It was out of print for many years, was not released in other formats, and is highly prized among collectors, as a play with such adult themes had never been recorded for the general public before. It was finally re-released in 2014 by Masterworks Broadway.\nNotable productions.\nIn 1970, Henry Fonda and Richard Burton attempted to recruit Warren Beatty and Jon Voight for an all-male production, but Albee refused permission.\nColleen Dewhurst and Ben Gazzara starred in a 1976 Broadway revival.\nMike Nichols and Elaine May starred in a 1980 production in New Haven.\nDiana Rigg and David Suchet starred in a 1996 production of the play at the Almeida Theatre in London before transferring to the Aldwych Theatre in London's West End in 1997.\nPatrick Stewart and Mercedes Ruehl starred in a 2000\u20132001 production at The Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis.\nIn 2001, Howard University cast an all African American cast in a school production. They received permission from Albee to change some of the language to be more fitting to a black family in the 1960s. Albee attended one of the performances and said that he enjoyed it. This version was revived in 2025 by the Portland Stage Company in Maine with the same actor playing George as in the 2001 version.\nThe play was revived on Broadway at the Longacre Theatre, opening on 12\u00a0March 2005, in previews and closing on 4\u00a0September 2005, after 8\u00a0previews and 177\u00a0performances. Directed by Anthony Page, it starred Kathleen Turner as Martha and Bill Irwin as George, with Mireille Enos as Honey and David Harbour as Nick. Irwin won the 2005 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play for his role. The production transferred to London's West End at the Apollo Theatre with the entire original cast, running from 31\u00a0January to 13\u00a0May 2006. In January\u00a02007, the production played at the Kennedy Center in Washington, DC, for one month. On 6\u00a0February 2007, the production began a six-week run at the Ahmanson Theatre in Los Angeles.\nNotably, it was this 2005 production that led to the publication of a revised script \u2013 one that has been used ever since \u2013 although many of its revisions were introduced in earlier productions. Among the revisions was the removal of early references to George and Martha's son, as well as the reference to the fact that George felt that he helped cause his parents' death, which was originally the subject of his failed novel. A roughly 7\u00a0page scene with George and Honey at the end of Act\u00a0II has also been removed completely. These and other changes seem to be there to clarify plot points, but arguably rob the play of some of its ambiguity and tenuous relationship with realism.\nThe play toured in the US and played in San Francisco at the Golden Gate Theatre from 11\u00a0April \u2013 12\u00a0May 2007.\nOn 12\u00a0December 2010, the Steppenwolf Theatre in Chicago began performances of the play featuring Amy Morton as Martha, Tracy Letts (the Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright of \"\") as George, Carrie Coon, and Madison Dirks. The production was directed by Pam MacKinnon, who previously directed the premieres of Albee's \"Peter and Jerry\" and \"Occupant\". This production began previews on Broadway at the Booth Theatre on 27\u00a0September 2012, opening on 13\u00a0October, 50\u00a0years after the original Broadway opening. MacKinnon again directed, with the Steppenwolf cast reprising their roles. The production and cast received praise in \"The New York Times\" from reviewer Charles Isherwood. Letts won the 2013 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play.\nMeg Tilly returned to acting in 2011 to play Martha in a production by Blue Bridge Repertory Theatre. The show ran from 5\u00a0July \u2013 17\u00a0July 2011, in Victoria, British Columbia.\nOn 21\u00a0February 2017, a production directed by James Macdonald began at the Harold Pinter Theatre in London, featuring Imelda Staunton, Conleth Hill, Imogen Poots, and Luke Treadaway. It ran until 27\u00a0May 2017.\nA Broadway revival was scheduled to premiere on 9\u00a0April 2020, in a production directed by Joe Mantello and produced by Scott Rudin. It was canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic after 9\u00a0preview performances, without officially opening. It starred Laurie Metcalf, Rupert Everett, Russell Tovey, and Patsy Ferran. Eddie Izzard had been set to play George, but it was announced on 11\u00a0September 2019, that Everett would replace her.\nCurve (theatre) is set to stage a revival in Autumn 2025 starring Cathy Tyson.\nDance interpretation.\nIn 1995 and 1996, the Canadian One Yellow Rabbit troupe mounted a homage in dance to Albee, \"Permission\", in the form of an hour-long ballet inspired by \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf\". It was performed in Calgary, Toronto, Phoenix, Guadalajara, and Mexico City.\nSequels and parodies.\nIn 2018 the Elevator Repair Service premiered a sequel written by Kate Scelsa, titled \"Everyone's Fine with Virginia Woolf\". This play introduces new plot elements such as vampirism.\nMultiple television shows have episodes parodying the original play. Season 3, Episode 1 of \"American Dad!\" features a sub-plot in which the characters of Roger and Francine pretend to be a university professor and his wife. After inviting over a young couple, the two behave much like the characters of George and Martha. The episode concludes with Roger \"killing\" their imaginary child much like George does in the play.\nThe critically acclaimed \"Dinner Party\" episode of \"The Office\" (Season 4, Episode 13) was originally titled \"Virginia Woolf\" by writers Gene Stupnitsky and Lee Eisenberg. This episode is a parody in which Michael invites new couple Jim and Pam to a dinner party that slowly devolves into a chaotic exhibition of Michael's tense relationship with his girlfriend and former boss, Jan.\nSeason 2, Episode 4 of \"Our Flag Means Death\" is a parody in which the dysfunctional relationship of Anne Bonny and Mary Read is meant to parallel that of George and Martha, and whose antics instigate a reconciliation of Ed and Stede.\nSteven Soderbergh\u2019s 2025 film \"Black Bag\", written by David Koepp, is a spy-thriller with an intentional parallel to \"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf\". Married couple George and Kathryn, both spies in British intelligence, host a pair of couples, also co-workers and spies, for a dinner party. George investigates all five people during dinner, including his wife, as the source of an intelligence breach.\nAwards.\n\"Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?\" won both the 1963 Tony Award for Best Play and the 1962\u20131963 New York Drama Critics' Circle Award for Best Play. Its stars won the 1963 Tony Awards for Best Actor and Actress. It was selected for the 1963 Pulitzer Prize for Drama by that award's drama jury, but the award's advisory board \u2013 the trustees of Columbia University \u2013 objected to its profanity and sexual themes, and overruled the jury, awarding no Pulitzer Prize for drama in 1963.\nThe 2005 revival won the 2005 Tony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play for Bill Irwin's role.\nThe 2012 revival won the 2013 Tony Awards for Best Revival of a Play, Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Play (Letts), and Best Direction of a Play (MacKinnon).\nFilm.\nA film adaptation of the play was released in 1966. It was directed by Mike Nichols and starred Elizabeth Taylor as Martha, Richard Burton as George, George Segal as Nick, and Sandy Dennis as Honey. All four actors were nominated for Academy Awards: Taylor and Burton for Best Actress and Actor and Dennis and Segal for Supporting Oscars. Taylor won the Oscar for Best Actress but Burton was passed over that year in favor of Paul Scofield in \"A Man For All Seasons\". Dennis won Best Actress in a Supporting Role, while Segal lost to Walter Matthau in \"The Fortune Cookie\".\nJack Valenti identified the film as the first controversial film he had to deal with as president of the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA). It was the first to use the slang \"screw\" and the phrase \"hump the hostess\". As he said,\nIn company with the MPAA's general counsel, Louis Nizer, I met with Jack Warner, the legendary chieftain of Warner, and his top aide, Ben Kalmenson. We talked for three hours, and the result was deletion of 'screw' and retention of 'hump the hostess', but I was uneasy over the meeting.\nOriginal film soundtrack album.\nThe film was given a \"Deluxe Edition Two-Record Set\" soundtrack album release in 1967 by Warner Bros. Records, and was the first film to have its vocals be released in their entirety on an album, as the film at that time could not be shown on network television. It contains the vocals of the four actors performing in the film. The only music on the album is a song, \"Virginia Woolf Rock\", that plays while Martha and Nick are dancing (but plays a little differently than it does in the film).\nIn at least two instances alternative takes were used: Taylor's memorable \"Goddamn you!\" line is restored to \"Screw you!\", and some of the dialogue from the dancing sequence was lifted from another take. As Martha tells Nick and Honey her story about punching George in the stomach in front of her father, it is heard very clearly while in the film it becomes muffled as the camera follows George into another room to get a gun. The album also runs half an hour shorter than the film, since most pauses and long silences were removed, but virtually every line remains intact. The album's cover has the four main actors and the back cover has some background information about them, the five-month shooting schedule, and Albee, and a brief synopsis of the film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44886", "revid": "50169191", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44886", "title": "Pope Sixtus V", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 1585 to 1590\nPope Sixtus V (; 13 December 1521 \u2013 27 August 1590), born Felice Piergentile, was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 24 April 1585 to his death, in August 1590. As a youth, he joined the Franciscan order, where he displayed talents as a scholar and preacher, and enjoyed the patronage of Pius V, who made him a cardinal. As a cardinal, he was known as Cardinal Montalto.\nAs Pope, he energetically rooted out corruption and lawlessness across Rome, and launched a far-sighted rebuilding programme that continues to provoke controversy, as it involved the destruction of antiquities. The cost of these works was met by heavy taxation which caused much suffering. His foreign policy was regarded as over-ambitious; he excommunicated King Henry IV of France and renewed the excommunication of Queen Elizabeth I of England. He is recognized as a significant figure of the Counter-Reformation. He is the most recent pope to date to take on the pontifical name \"Sixtus\".\nEarly life.\nFelice Piergentile was born on 13 December 1521 at Grottammare, in the Papal States, to Francesco Piergentile (also known as Peretto di Montalto, from the city of origin Montalto delle Marche), and Mariana da Frontillo. His father had taken refuge in Grottammare to escape the oppression of the duke of Urbino, finding there a job as a gardener. Sixtus was the last pope from such a poor background until Pius X was elected in 1903.\nFelice later adopted \"Peretti\" as his family name in 1551, and as a cardinal was known as \"Cardinal Montalto\" (to reflect his affection for his homeland).\nFranciscan.\nAt the age of 9 years, Felice returned to Montalto to join his uncle in the Franciscan Convent of San Francesco delle Fratte. At the age of 12, he was initiated as a novice of the Franciscan Order, assuming the name of Fra Felice (Friar Felix) in 1535, maintaining his birth name. From this year, he started philosophical and theological studies, moving between different convents of the Order. He finally completed his studies in the Franciscan Magna Domus of Bologna on September 1544. Three years earlier he had been ordained as a deacon.\nAbout 1552 he was noticed by Cardinal Rodolfo Pio da Carpi, Protector of the Franciscan order, Cardinal Ghislieri (later Pope Pius V) and Cardinal Carafa (later Pope Paul IV), and from that time his advancement was assured. He was sent to Venice as inquisitor general of the Venetian Holy Inquisition, but was so severe and conducted matters in such a high-handed manner that he became embroiled in quarrels. In 1560, the Venetian government asked for his recall.\nAfter a brief term as procurator of his order, he was attached in 1565 to the papal legation to Spain headed by Cardinal Ugo Boncompagni (later Pope Gregory XIII) which was sent to investigate a charge of heresy levelled against Bartolom\u00e9 Carranza, Archbishop of Toledo. The violent dislike which Peretti conceived for Boncompagni had a marked influence on his subsequent actions. He hurried back to Rome upon the accession of Pius V, who made him apostolic vicar of his order and then, in 1570, cardinal.\nCardinal.\nDuring the pontificate of his political enemy Gregory XIII (1572\u20131585), Cardinal Montalto, as he was generally called, lived in enforced retirement, occupied with the care of his property, the Villa Montalto, erected by Domenico Fontana close to the cardinal's church on the Esquiline Hill, overlooking the ancient Baths of Diocletian. The first phase (1576\u20131580) of the building was enlarged after Peretti became pope and was able to clear buildings to open four new streets in 1585\u201386. The villa contained two residences, the \"Palazzo Sistino\" or \"Palazzo di Termini\" and the casino, called the \"Palazzetto Montalto e Felice\".\nThis clearance programme was an undoubted gain in the relief it brought to the congestion of the crowded medieval city. Clearly, however, Romans displaced by it were furious, and resentment was still felt centuries later until the decision was taken to build Roma Termini railway station, inaugurated by Pope Pius IX in 1863, on the site of the Villa, which became doomed to destruction.\nCardinal Montalto's other occupation at this period was with his studies, one of the fruits of which was an edition of the works of Ambrose. As pope he would personally supervise the printing of an improved edition of Jerome's Vulgate.\nPapacy.\nElection as pope.\nThough not neglecting to follow the course of affairs, Felice carefully avoided every occasion of offence. This discretion contributed not a little to his election to the papacy on 24 April 1585, with the title of Sixtus V to honour Pope Sixtus IV, also a Franciscan like himself. One of the things that commended his candidacy to certain cardinals may have been his physical vigour, which seemed to promise a long pontificate. His papal coronation was held on 1 May 1585 and he was crowned by the protodeacon Ferdinando de' Medici.\nReforms in the city of Rome.\nThe terrible condition in which Pope Gregory XIII had left the Papal States called for prompt and stern measures. Sixtus proceeded with an almost ferocious severity against the prevailing lawlessness. Thousands of brigands were brought to justice: within a short time, the country was again quiet and safe. It was claimed that there were more heads on spikes across the Ponte Sant'Angelo than melons for sale in the marketplace. And clergy and nuns were executed if they broke their vows of chastity.\nNext Sixtus set to work to repair the finances. By the sale of offices, the establishment of a new \"Monti\" and by levying new taxes, he accumulated a vast surplus, which he stored up against certain specified emergencies, such as a crusade or the defence of the Holy See. Sixtus prided himself upon his hoard, but the method by which it had been amassed was financially unsound: some of the taxes proved ruinous, and the withdrawal of so much money from circulation could not fail to cause distress.\nImmense sums were spent upon public works, in carrying through the comprehensive planning that had come to fruition during his retirement, bringing water to the waterless hills via his new aqueduct, the Acqua Felice which fed twenty-seven new fountains; laying out new arteries in Rome, which connected the great basilicas, even setting his engineer-architect Domenico Fontana to replan the Colosseum as a silk-spinning factory housing its workers.\nInspired by the ideal of the Renaissance city, Pope Sixtus V's ambitious urban reform programme transformed the old environment to emulate the \"long straight streets, wide regular spaces, uniformity and repetitiveness of structures, lavish use of commemorative and ornamental elements, and maximum visibility from both linear and circular perspective.\" The Pope set no limit to his plans, and achieved much in his short pontificate, always carried through at top speed: the completion of the dome of St. Peter's; the loggia of Sixtus in the Basilica di San Giovanni in Laterano; the chapel of the Praesepe in Santa Maria Maggiore; additions or repairs to the Quirinal, Lateran and Vatican palaces; the erection of four obelisks, including that in Saint Peter's Square; the opening of six streets; the restoration of the aqueduct of Septimius Severus (\"Acqua Felice\"); the integration of the Leonine City in Rome as XIV rione (Borgo).\nBesides numerous roads and bridges, he improved the city's air by financing the reclamation of the Pontine Marshes. Good progress was made, with more than reclaimed and opened to agriculture and manufacture. The project was abandoned upon his death.\nSixtus had no appreciation of antiquities, which were employed as raw material to serve his urbanistic and Christianising programs: Trajan's Column and the Column of Marcus Aurelius (at the time misidentified as the Column of Antoninus Pius) were made to serve as pedestals for the statues of SS Peter and Paul; the Minerva of the Capitol was converted into an emblem of \"Christian Rome\"; the Septizodium of Septimius Severus was demolished for building materials. When he was taken to a cross in a church in Rome that was supposedly miraculously bleeding, Sixtus suspected that it was a fake. He took an axe and said \"As Christ I adore you; as wood I cut you\". He split the cross and revealed that it contained sponges soaked in blood within it.\nThe spatial organization, monumental inscriptions and restorations throughout the city reinforced the control, surveillance, and authority that alluded to his power.\nChurch administration.\nThe subsequent administrative system of the Catholic Church owed much to Sixtus. He limited the College of Cardinals to seventy. He doubled the number of the congregations and enlarged their functions, assigning to them the principal role in the transaction of business (1588). He regarded the Jesuits with disfavour and suspicion. He considered radical changes to their constitution, but death prevented the execution of his purpose.\nIn 1588, he established the 15 congregations by his constitution \"Immensa Aeterni Dei\".\nSixtine Vulgate and Septuagint.\nIn May 1587, the Sixtine Septuagint was published under the auspices of Sixtus V.\nIn May 1590 the Sixtine Vulgate was issued. The edition was preceded by the Bull \"Aeternus ille\", in which the Pope declared the authenticity of the new Bible. The bull stipulated \"that it was to be considered as the authentic edition recommended by the Council of Trent, that it should be taken as the standard of all future reprints, and that all copies should be corrected by it.\" \"This edition was not to be reprinted for 10 years except at the Vatican, and after that any edition must be compared with the Vatican edition, so that \"not even the smallest particle should be altered, added or removed\" under pain of the \"greater excommunication.\" Jaroslav Pelikan, without giving any more details, says that this edition \"proved to be so defective that it was withdrawn\".\nConsistories.\nSixtus V created 33 cardinals in eight consistories during his reign, which included his grandnephew Alessandro Peretti di Montalto and his future successor Ippolito Aldobrandini who would later become Pope Clement VIII.\nBeatifications and canonizations.\nDuring his pontificate, Sixtus V beatified Ubaldesca Taccini (1587) and canonized one saint, Didacus of Alcal\u00e1 (10 July 1588).\nRoman Curia.\nIn 1588, Sixtus V published the bull \"Immensa Aeterni Dei\" which reorganised the Roman Curia into departments.\nForeign relations.\nIn his larger political relations, Sixtus entertained fantastic ambitions, such as the annihilation of the Turks, the conquest of Egypt, the transport of the Holy Sepulchre to Italy, and the accession of his nephew to the throne of France. The situation in which he found himself was difficult: he could not countenance the designs of those he considered as heretical princes, and yet he mistrusted King Philip II of Spain and viewed with apprehension any extension of his power.\nSixtus agreed to renew the excommunication of Queen Elizabeth I of England, and to grant a large subsidy to the Armada of Philip II, but, knowing the slowness of Spain, would give nothing until the expedition actually landed in England. This way, he saved a fortune that would otherwise have been lost in the failed campaign. Sixtus had Cardinal William Allen draw up the \"An Admonition to the Nobility and People of England and Ireland\", a proclamation to be published in England if the invasion had been successful. The extant document comprised all that could be said against Elizabeth I, and the indictment is therefore fuller and more forcible than any other put forward by the religious exiles, who were generally reticent in their complaints. Allen carefully consigned his publication to the fire, and it is only known of through one of Elizabeth's spies, who had stolen a copy.\nSixtus excommunicated King Henry III of Navarre, who was the heir presumptive to the throne of France, and contributed to the Catholic League, but he chafed under his forced alliance with King Philip II of Spain, and looked for an escape. The victories of Henry and the prospect of his conversion to Catholicism raised Sixtus V's hopes, and to a corresponding degree determined Philip II to tighten his grip upon his wavering ally. The Pope's negotiations with Henry's representative evoked a bitter and menacing protest and a categorical demand for the performance of promises. Sixtus took refuge in evasion and temporised until his death on 27 August 1590.\nContraception, abortion, and adultery.\nSixtus extended the penalty of excommunication relating to the Roman Catholic Church's teaching on contraception and on abortion. While the Church taught that abortion and contraception were gravely sinful actions, it did not apply to all mortal sins the additional penalty of excommunication.\nSome theologians argued that only after proof of the \"quickening\" (when the mother can feel the fetus's movement in her womb, usually about 20 weeks into gestation) that there was incontrovertible evidence that ensoulment had already occurred. Until Sixtus V, canon lawyers had applied the code from Gratian whereby excommunications were only given to abortions after the quickening. In 1588 the pope issued a papal bull, \"Effraenatam\" or \"Effrenatam\" (\"Without Restraint\"), which declared that the canonical penalty of excommunication would be levied for any form of contraception and for abortions at any stage in fetal development. The reasoning on the latter would be that the soul of the unborn child would be denied Heaven.\nSixtus also attempted in 1586 to introduce into the secular law in Rome the Old Testament penalty for adultery, which is death. The measure ultimately failed.\nDeath and legacy.\nAbout 5,000 bandits were executed by Sixtus V in the five years before his death in 1590, but there were reputedly 27,000 more at liberty throughout Central Italy.\nAs Sixtus V lay on his deathbed, he was loathed by his political subjects, but history has recognized him as one of the most important popes. On the negative side, he could be impulsive, obstinate, severe, and autocratic. On the positive side, he was open to large ideas and threw himself into his undertakings with energy and determination; this often led to success. His pontificate saw great enterprises and great achievements.\nThe pope became ill with a fever on 24 August which intensified the following day. Sixtus V died on 27 August 1590.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44887", "revid": "724850", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44887", "title": "Robert Schumann", "text": "German composer, pianist and critic (1810\u20131856)\nRobert Schumann (; ; 8 June 1810\u00a0\u2013 29 July 1856) was a German composer, pianist, and music critic of the early Romantic era. He composed in all the main musical genres of the time, writing for solo piano, voice and piano, chamber groups, orchestra, choir and the opera. His works typify the spirit of the Romantic era in German music.\nSchumann was born in Zwickau, Saxony, to an affluent middle-class family with no musical connections, and was initially unsure whether to pursue a career as a lawyer or to make a living as a pianist-composer. He studied law at the universities of Leipzig and Heidelberg but his main interests were music and Romantic literature. From 1829 he was a student of the piano teacher Friedrich Wieck, but his hopes for a career as a virtuoso pianist were frustrated by a worsening problem with his right hand, and he concentrated on composition. His early works were mainly piano pieces, including the large-scale , (Dances of the League of David), (Fantasy Pieces), and (Scenes from Childhood) (1834\u20131838). He was a co-founder of the (New Musical Journal) in 1834 and edited it for ten years. In his writing for the journal and in his music he distinguished between two contrasting aspects of his personality, dubbing these alter egos \"Florestan\" for his impetuous self and \"Eusebius\" for his gentle poetic side.\nDespite the bitter opposition of Wieck, who did not regard his pupil as a suitable husband for her, Schumann married Wieck's daughter Clara in 1840. In the years immediately following their wedding Schumann composed prolifically, writing, first, songs and song\u2010cycles including (\"Woman's Love and Life\") and (\"Poet's Love\"). He turned his attention to orchestral music in 1841, completing the first of his four symphonies. In the following year he concentrated on chamber music, writing three string quartets, a Piano Quintet and a Piano Quartet. During the rest of the 1840s, between bouts of mental and physical ill health, he composed a variety of piano and other pieces and went with his wife on concert tours in Europe. His only opera, \"Genoveva\" (1850), was not a success and has seldom been staged since.\nSchumann and his family moved to D\u00fcsseldorf in 1850 in the hope that his appointment as the city's director of music would provide financial security, but his shyness and mental instability made it difficult for him to work with his orchestra and he had to resign after three years. In 1853 the Schumanns met the twenty-year-old Johannes Brahms, whom Schumann praised in an article in the . The following year Schumann's always-precarious mental health deteriorated gravely. He threw himself into the River Rhine but was rescued and taken to a private sanatorium near Bonn, where he lived for more than two years, dying there at the age of 46.\nDuring his lifetime Schumann was recognised for his piano music \u2013 often subtly programmatic \u2013 and his songs. His other works were less generally admired, and for many years there was a widespread belief that those from his later years lacked the inspiration of his early music. More recently this view has been less prevalent, but it is still his piano works and songs from the 1830s and 1840s on which his reputation is primarily based. He had considerable influence in the nineteenth century and beyond. In the German-speaking world the composers Gustav Mahler, Richard Strauss, Arnold Schoenberg and more recently Wolfgang Rihm have been inspired by his music, as were French composers such as Georges Bizet, Gabriel Faur\u00e9, Claude Debussy and Maurice Ravel. Schumann was also a major influence on the Russian school of composers, including Anton Rubinstein and Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky.\nLife and career.\nChildhood.\nRobert Schumann was born in Zwickau, in the Kingdom of Saxony (today the German state of Saxony), into an affluent middle-class family. On 13 June 1810 the local newspaper, the (Zwickau Weekly Paper), carried the announcement, \"On 8 June to Herr August Schumann, notable citizen and bookseller here, a little son\". He was the fifth and last child of August Schumann and his wife, Johanna Christiane. August, not only a bookseller but also a lexicographer, author, and publisher of chivalric romances, made considerable sums from his German translations of writers such as Cervantes, Walter Scott and Lord Byron. Robert, his favourite child, was able to spend many hours exploring the classics of literature in his father's collection. Intermittently, between the ages of three and five-and-a-half, he was placed with foster parents, as his mother had contracted typhus.\nAt the age of six Schumann went to a private preparatory school, where he remained for four years. When he was seven he began studying general music and piano with the local organist, Johann Gottfried Kuntsch, and for a time he also had cello and flute lessons with one of the municipal musicians, Carl Gottlieb Meissner. Throughout his childhood and youth his love of music and literature ran in tandem, with poems and dramatic works produced alongside small-scale compositions, mainly piano pieces and songs. He was not a musical child prodigy like Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart or Felix Mendelssohn, but his talent as a pianist was evident from an early age: in 1850 the (Universal Musical Journal) printed a biographical sketch of Schumann which included an account from contemporary sources that even as a boy he possessed a special talent for portraying feelings and characteristic traits in melody:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Indeed, he could sketch the different dispositions of his intimate friends by certain figures and passages on the piano so exactly and comically that everyone burst into loud laughter at the accuracy of the portrait.\nFrom 1820 Schumann attended the Zwickau Lyceum, the local high school of about two hundred boys, where he remained till the age of eighteen, studying a traditional curriculum. In addition to his studies he read extensively: among his early enthusiasms were Schiller and Jean Paul. According to the musical historian George Hall, Paul remained Schumann's favourite author and exercised a powerful influence on the composer's creativity with his sensibility and vein of fantasy. Musically, Schumann got to know the works of Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, and of living composers Carl Maria von Weber, with whom August Schumann tried unsuccessfully to arrange for Robert to study. August was not particularly musical but he encouraged his son's interest in music, buying him a Streicher grand piano and organising trips to Leipzig for a performance of \"Die Zauberfl\u00f6te\" (The Magic Flute) and Carlsbad to hear the celebrated pianist Ignaz Moscheles.\nUniversity.\nAugust Schumann died in 1826; his widow was less enthusiastic about a musical career for her son and persuaded him to study for the law as a profession. After his final examinations at the Lyceum in March 1828 he entered Leipzig University. Accounts differ about his diligence as a law student. According to his roommate Emil Flechsig, he never set foot in a lecture hall, but he himself recorded, \"I am industrious and regular, and enjoy my jurisprudence\u00a0... and am only now beginning to appreciate its true worth\". Nonetheless reading and playing the piano occupied a good deal of his time, and he developed expensive tastes for champagne and cigars. Musically, he discovered the works of Franz Schubert, whose death in November 1828 caused Schumann to cry all night. The leading piano teacher in Leipzig was Friedrich Wieck, who recognised Schumann's talent and accepted him as a pupil.\nAfter a year in Leipzig Schumann convinced his mother that he should move to the University of Heidelberg which, unlike Leipzig, offered courses in Roman, ecclesiastical and international law (as well as reuniting Schumann with his close friend Eduard R\u00f6ller who was a student there). After matriculating at the university on 30 July 1829 he travelled in Switzerland and Italy from late August to late October. He was greatly taken with Rossini's operas and the of the soprano Giuditta Pasta; he wrote to Wieck, \"one can have no notion of Italian music without hearing it under Italian skies\". Another influence on him was hearing the violin virtuoso Niccol\u00f2 Paganini play in Frankfurt in April 1830. In the words of one biographer, \"The easy-going discipline at Heidelberg University helped the world to lose a bad lawyer and to gain a great musician\". Finally deciding in favour of music rather than the law as a career, he wrote to his mother on 30 July 1830 telling her how he saw his future: \"My entire life has been a twenty-year struggle between poetry and prose, or call it music and law\". He persuaded her to ask Wieck for an objective assessment of his musical potential. Wieck's verdict was that with the necessary hard work Schumann could become a leading pianist within three years. A six-month trial period was agreed.\n1830s.\nLater in 1830 Schumann published his Op. 1, a set of piano variations on a theme based on the name of its supposed dedicatee, Countess Pauline von Abegg (who was almost certainly a product of Schumann's imagination). The notes A-B\u266d-E-G-G (A-B-E-G-G in German nomenclature, which uses \"B\" for the note known elsewhere as B\u266d and \"H\" for the note known elsewhere as B[\u266e]), played in waltz tempo, make up the theme on which the variations are based. The use of a musical cryptogram became a recurrent characteristic of Schumann's later music. In 1831 he began lessons in harmony and counterpoint with Heinrich Dorn, musical director of the Saxon court theatre, and in 1832 he published his Op. 2, (Butterflies) for piano, a programmatic piece depicting twin brothers \u2013 one a poetic dreamer, the other a worldly realist \u2013 both in love with the same woman at a masked ball. Schumann had by now come to regard himself as having two distinct sides to his personality and art: he dubbed his introspective, pensive self \"Eusebius\" and the impetuous and dynamic alter ego \"Florestan\". Reviewing an early work of Chopin in 1831 he wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Eusebius dropped by one evening, not long ago. He entered quietly, his pale features brightened by that enigmatic smile with which he likes to excite curiosity. Florestan and I were seated at the piano. He, as you know, is one of those rare musical persons who seem to anticipate everything that is new, of the future and extraordinary.\u00a0... This time, however, there was a surprise in store even for him. With the words \"Hats off, gentlemen, a genius!\" Eusebius spread out before us a piece of music.\nSchumann's pianistic ambitions were ended by a growing paralysis in at least one finger of his right hand. The early symptoms had come while he was still a student at Heidelberg, and the cause is uncertain. He tried all the treatments then in vogue including allopathy, homeopathy, and electric therapy, but without success. The condition had the advantage of exempting him from compulsory military service \u2013 he could not fire a rifle \u2013 but by 1832 he recognised that a career as a virtuoso pianist was impossible and he shifted his main focus to composition. He completed further sets of small piano pieces and the first movement of a symphony (it was too thinly orchestrated according to Wieck and was never completed). An additional activity was journalism. From March 1834, along with Wieck and others, he was on the editorial board of a new music magazine, (New Leipzig Music Magazine), which was reconstituted under his sole editorship in January 1835 as the . Hall writes that it took \"a thoughtful and progressive line on the new music of the day\". Among the contributors were friends and colleagues of Schumann, writing under pen names: he included them in his (League of David) \u2013 a band of fighters for musical truth, named after the Biblical hero who fought against the Philistines \u2013 a product of the composer's imagination in which, blurring the boundaries of imagination and reality, he included his musical friends.\nDuring successive months in 1835 Schumann met three musicians whom he regarded with particular respect: Felix Mendelssohn, Chopin and Moscheles. Of these, he was most influenced in his compositions by Mendelssohn, although the latter's restrained classicism is reflected in Schumann's later works rather than in those of the 1830s. Early in 1835 he completed two substantial compositions: \"Carnaval\", Op. 9 and the Symphonic Studies, Op.13. These works grew out of his romantic relationship with Ernestine von Fricken, a fellow pupil of Wieck. The musical themes of \"Carnaval\" derive from the name of her home town, Asch. The Symphonic Studies are based on a melody said to be by Ernestine's father, Baron von Fricken, an amateur flautist. Schumann and Ernestine became secretly engaged, but in the view of the musical scholar Joan Chissell, during 1835 Schumann gradually found that Ernestine's personality was not as interesting to him as he first thought, and this, together with his discovery that she was an illegitimate, impecunious, adopted daughter of Fricken, brought the affair to a gradual end. According to the biographer Alan Walker, Ernestine may have been less than frank with Schumann about her background and he was hurt when he learnt the truth.\nSchumann felt a growing attraction to Wieck's daughter, the sixteen-year-old Clara. She was her father's star pupil, a piano virtuoso emotionally mature beyond her years, with a developing reputation. According to Chissell, her concerto debut at the Leipzig Gewandhaus on 9 November 1828, with Mendelssohn conducting, \"set the seal on all her earlier successes, and there was now no doubting that a great future lay before her as a pianist\". Schumann had watched her career approvingly since she was nine, but only now fell in love with her. His feelings were reciprocated: they declared their love to each other in January 1836. Schumann expected that Wieck would welcome the proposed marriage, but he was mistaken: Wieck refused his consent, fearing that Schumann would be unable to provide for his daughter, that she would have to abandon her career, and that she would be legally required to relinquish her inheritance to her husband. It took a series of acrimonious legal actions over the next four years for Schumann to obtain a court ruling that he and Clara were free to marry without her father's consent.\nProfessionally the later years of the 1830s were marked by an unsuccessful attempt by Schumann to establish himself in Vienna, and a growing friendship with Mendelssohn, who was by then based in Leipzig, conducting the Gewandhaus Orchestra. During this period Schumann wrote many piano works, including \"Kreisleriana\" (1837), \"Davidsb\u00fcndlert\u00e4nze\" (1837), (Scenes from Childhood, 1838) and (Carnival Prank from Vienna, 1839). In 1838 Schumann visited Schubert's brother Ferdinand and discovered several manuscripts including that of the Great C major Symphony. Ferdinand allowed him to take a copy away and Schumann arranged for the work's premiere, conducted by Mendelssohn in Leipzig on 21 March 1839. In the Schumann wrote enthusiastically about the work and described its \"\" \u2013 its \"heavenly length\" \u2013 a phrase that has become common currency in later analyses of the symphony.\nSchumann and Clara finally married on 12 September 1840, the day before her twenty-first birthday. Hall writes that marriage gave Schumann \"the emotional and domestic stability on which his subsequent achievements were founded\". Clara made some sacrifices in marrying Schumann: as a pianist of international reputation she was the better-known of the two but her career was continually interrupted by motherhood of their seven children. She inspired Schumann in his composing career, encouraging him to extend his range as a composer beyond solo piano works.\n1840s.\nDuring 1840 Schumann turned his attention to song, producing more than half his total output of , including the cycles (\"Myrtles\", a wedding present for Clara), (\"Woman's Love and Life\"), (\"Poet's Love\"), and settings of words by Joseph von Eichendorff, Heinrich Heine and others.\nIn 1841 Schumann focused on orchestral music. On 31 March his First Symphony, \"The Spring\", was premiered by Mendelssohn at a concert in the Gewandhaus at which Clara played Chopin's Second Piano Concerto and some of Schumann's works for solo piano. His next orchestral works were the Overture, Scherzo and Finale, the Phantasie for piano and orchestra (which later became the first movement of the Piano Concerto) and a new symphony (eventually published as the Fourth, in D minor). \nClara gave birth to a daughter in September 1841, the first of the Schumanns' seven children to survive. \nIn 1842 Schumann turned his attention to chamber music. He studied works by Haydn and Mozart, despite an ambivalent attitude to the former, writing: \"Today it is impossible to learn anything new from him. He is like a familiar friend of the house whom all greet with pleasure and with esteem, but who has ceased to arouse any particular interest\". He was stronger in his praise of Mozart: \"Serenity, repose, grace, the characteristics of the antique works of art, are also those of Mozart's school. The Greeks gave to 'The Thunderer' a radiant expression, and radiantly does Mozart launch his lightnings\". After his studies Schumann produced three string quartets, a Piano Quintet (premiered in 1843) and a Piano Quartet (premiered in 1844).\nIn early 1843 there was a setback to Schumann's career: he had a severe and debilitating mental crisis. This was not the first such attack, although it was the worst so far. Hall writes that he had been subject to similar attacks at intervals over a long period, and comments that the condition may have been congenital, affecting August Schumann and Emilie, the composer's sister. Later in the year, Schumann, having recovered, completed a successful secular oratorio, (Paradise and the Peri), based on an oriental poem by Thomas Moore. It was premiered at the Gewandhaus on 4 December and repeat performances followed at Dresden on 23 December, Berlin early the following year, and London in June 1856, when Schumann's friend William Sterndale Bennett conducted a performance given by the Philharmonic Society before Queen Victoria and the Prince Consort. Although neglected after Schumann's death it remained popular throughout his lifetime and brought his name to international attention. During 1843 Mendelssohn invited him to teach piano and composition at the new Leipzig Conservatory, and Wieck approached him with an offer of reconciliation. Schumann gladly accepted both, although the resumed relationship with his father-in-law remained polite rather than close.\nClara embarked on a concert tour of Russia In 1844; her husband joined her. They met the leading figures of the Russian musical scene, including Mikhail Glinka and Anton Rubinstein and were both immensely impressed by Saint Petersburg and Moscow. The tour was an artistic and financial success but it was arduous, and by the end Schumann was in a poor state both physically and mentally. After the couple returned to Leipzig in late May he sold the \"Neue Zeitschrift\", and in December the family moved to Dresden. Schumann had been passed over for the conductorship of the Leipzig Gewandhaus in succession to Mendelssohn, and he thought that Dresden, with a thriving opera house, might be the place where he could, as he now wished, become an operatic composer. His health remained poor. His doctor in Dresden reported complaints \"from insomnia, general weakness, auditory disturbances, tremors, and chills in the feet, to a whole range of phobias\".\nFrom the beginning of 1845 Schumann's health began to improve; he and Clara studied counterpoint together and both produced contrapuntal works for the piano. He added a slow movement and finale to the 1841 Phantasie for piano and orchestra, to create his Piano Concerto, Op. 54. The following year he worked on what was to be published as his Second Symphony, Op. 61. Progress on the work was slow, interrupted by further bouts of ill health. When the symphony was complete he began work on his opera, \"Genoveva\", which was not completed until August 1848.\nBetween 24 November 1846 and 4 February 1847 the Schumanns toured to Vienna, Berlin and other cities. The Viennese leg of the tour was not a success. The performance of Schumann's First Symphony and Piano Concerto at the on 1 January 1847 attracted a sparse and unenthusiastic audience, but in Berlin the performance of \"Das Paradies und die Peri\" was well received, and the tour gave Schumann the chance to see numerous operatic productions. In the words of \"Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians\", \"A regular if not always approving member of the audience at performances of works by Donizetti, Rossini, Meyerbeer, Hal\u00e9vy and Flotow, he registered his 'desire to write operas' in his travel diary\". The Schumanns suffered several blows during 1847, including the death of their first son, Emil, born the year before, and the deaths of their friends Felix and Fanny Mendelssohn. A second son, Ludwig, and a third, Ferdinand, were born in 1848 and 1849.\n1850s.\n\"Genoveva\", a four-act opera based on the medieval legend of Genevieve of Brabant, was premiered in Leipzig, conducted by the composer, in June 1850. There were two further performances immediately afterwards, but the piece was not the success Schumann had been hoping for. In a 2005 study of the composer, Eric Frederick Jensen attributes this to Schumann's operatic style: \"not tuneful and simplistic enough for the majority, not 'progressive' enough for the Wagnerians\". Franz Liszt, who was in the first-night audience, revived \"Genoveva\" at Weimar in 1855 \u2013 the only other production of the opera in Schumann's lifetime. Since then, according to \"Kobb\u00e9's Opera Book\", despite occasional revivals \"Genoveva\" has remained \"far from even the edge of the repertory\".\nWith a large family to support, Schumann sought financial security and with the support of his wife he accepted a post as director of music at D\u00fcsseldorf in April 1850. Hall comments that in retrospect it can be seen that Schumann was fundamentally unsuited for the post. In Hall's view, Schumann's diffidence in social situations, allied to mental instability, \"ensured that initially warm relations with local musicians gradually deteriorated to the point where his removal became a necessity in 1853\". During 1850 Schumann composed two substantial late works \u2013 the Third (\"Rhenish\") Symphony and the Cello Concerto. He continued to compose prolifically, and reworked some of his earlier works, including the D minor symphony from 1841, published as his Fourth Symphony (1851), and the 1835 \"Symphonic Studies\" (1852).\nIn 1853 the twenty-year-old Johannes Brahms called on Schumann with a letter of introduction from a mutual friend, the violinist Joseph Joachim. Brahms had recently written the first of his three piano sonatas, and played it to Schumann, who rushed excitedly out of the room and came back leading his wife by the hand, saying \"Now, my dear Clara, you will hear such music as you never heard before; and you, young man, play the work from the beginning\". Schumann was so impressed that he wrote an article \u2013 his last \u2013 for the titled \"\" (New Paths), extolling Brahms as a musician who was destined \"to give expression to his times in ideal fashion\".\nHall writes that Brahms proved \"a personal tower of strength to Clara during the difficult days ahead\": in early 1854 Schumann's health deteriorated drastically. On 27 February he attempted suicide by throwing himself into the River Rhine. He was rescued by fishermen, and at his own request he was admitted to a private sanatorium at Endenich, near Bonn, on 4 March. He remained there for more than two years, gradually deteriorating, with intermittent intervals of lucidity during which he wrote and received letters and sometimes essayed some composition. The director of the sanatorium held that direct contact between patients and relatives was likely to distress all concerned and reduce the chances of recovery. Friends, including Brahms and Joachim, were permitted to visit Schumann, but Clara did not see her husband until nearly two and a half years into his confinement, and only two days before his death. Schumann died at the sanatorium aged 46 on 29 July 1856, the cause of death being recorded as pneumonia.\nWorks.\n\"Baker's Biographical Dictionary of Musicians\" (2001) begins its entry on Schumann: \"[G]reat German composer of surpassing imaginative power whose music expressed the deepest spirit of the Romantic era\", and concludes: \"As both man and musician, Schumann is recognized as the quintessential artist of the Romantic period in German music. He was a master of lyric expression and dramatic power, perhaps best revealed in his outstanding piano music and songs\u00a0...\" Schumann believed the aesthetics of all the arts were identical. In his music he aimed at a conception of art in which the poetic was the main element. According to the musicologist Carl Dahlhaus, for Schumann, \"music was supposed to turn into a tone poem, to rise above the realm of the trivial, of tonal mechanics, by means of its spirituality and soulfulness\".\nIn the late nineteenth century and most of the twentieth it was widely held that the music of Schumann's later years was less inspired than his earlier works (up to about the mid-1840s), either because of his declining health, or because his increasingly orthodox approach to composition deprived his music of the Romantic spontaneity of the earlier works. The late-nineteenth century composer Felix Draeseke commented \"Schumann started as a genius and ended as a talent\". In the view of the composer and oboeist Heinz Holliger, \"certain works of his early and middle period are praised to the skies, while on the other hand a pious veil of silence obscures the more sober, austere and concentrated works of the late period\". More recently the later works have been viewed more favourably; Hall suggests that this is because they are now played more often in concert and in recording studios, and have \"the beneficial effects of period performance practice as it has come to be applied to mid-19th-century music\".\nSolo piano.\nSchumann's works in some other musical genres \u2013 particularly orchestral and operatic works \u2013 have had a mixed critical reception, both during his lifetime and since, but there is widespread agreement about the high quality of his solo piano music. In his youth the familiar Austro-German tradition of Bach, Mozart and Beethoven was temporarily eclipsed by a fashion for the flamboyant showpieces of composers such as Moscheles. Schumann's first published work, the \"Abegg\" Variations, is in the latter style. But he revered the earlier German masters, and in his three piano sonatas (composed between 1830 and 1836) and the Fantasie in C (1836) he showed his respect for the earlier Austro-German tradition. Absolute music such as those works is in the minority in his piano compositions, of which many are what Hall calls \"character pieces with fanciful names\".\nSchumann's most characteristic form in his piano music is the cycle of short, interrelated pieces, often programmatic, though seldom explicitly so. They include and (Wood Scenes). The critic J. A. Fuller Maitland wrote of the first of these, \"Of all the pianoforte works [\"Carnaval\"] is perhaps the most popular; its wonderful animation and never-ending variety ensure the production of its full effect, and its great and various difficulties make it the best possible test of a pianist's skill and versatility\". Schumann continually inserted into his piano works veiled allusions to himself and others \u2013 particularly Clara \u2013 in the form of ciphers and musical quotations. His self-references include both the impetuous \"Florestan\" and the poetic \"Eusebius\" elements he identified in himself.\nAlthough some of his music is technically challenging for the pianist Schumann also wrote simpler pieces for young players, the best-known of which are his (Album for the Young, 1848) and Three Sonatas for Young People (1853). He also wrote some undemanding music with an eye to commercial sales, including the (Flower Piece) and (both 1839), which he privately considered \"feeble and intended for the ladies\".\nSongs.\nThe authors of \"The Record Guide\" describe Schumann as \"one of the four supreme masters of the German \", alongside Schubert, Brahms and Hugo Wolf. The pianist Gerald Moore wrote that \"after the unparalleled Franz Schubert\", Schumann shares the second place in the hierarchy of the with Wolf. \"Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" classes Schumann as \"the true heir of Schubert\" in .\nSchumann wrote more than 300 songs for voice and piano. They are known for the quality of the texts he set: Hall comments that the composer's youthful appreciation of literature was constantly renewed in adult life. Although Schumann greatly admired Goethe and Schiller and set a few of their verses, his favoured poets for lyrics were the later Romantics such as Heine, Eichendorff and M\u00f6rike.\nAmong the best-known of the songs are those in four cycles composed in 1840 \u2013 a year Schumann called his (year of song). These are (Poet's Love) comprising sixteen songs with words by Heine; (Woman's Love and Life), eight songs setting poems by Adelbert von Chamisso; and two sets simply titled \u2013 German for \"Song Cycle\" \u2013 the Op. 24 set, consisting of nine Heine settings and the Op. 39 set of twelve settings of poems by Eichendorff. Also from 1840 is the set Schumann wrote as a wedding present to Clara, (Myrtles \u2013 traditionally part of a bride's wedding bouquet), which the composer called a song cycle, although comprising twenty-six songs with lyrics from ten different writers, this set is a less unified cycle than the others. In a study of Schumann's songs Eric Sams suggests that even here there is a unifying theme, namely the composer himself. \nAlthough during the twentieth century it became common practice to perform these cycles as a whole, in Schumann's time and beyond it was usual to extract individual songs for performance in recitals. The first documented public performance of a complete Schumann song cycle was not until 1861, five years after the composer's death; the baritone Julius Stockhausen sang with Brahms at the piano. Stockhausen also gave the first complete performances of and the Op. 24 .\nAfter his Schumann returned in earnest to writing songs after a break of several years. Hall describes the variety of the songs as immense, and comments that some of the later songs are entirely different in mood from the composer's earlier Romantic settings. Schumann's literary sensibilities led him to create in his songs an equal partnership between words and music unprecedented in the German . His affinity with the piano is heard in his accompaniments to his songs, notably in their preludes and postludes, the latter often summing up what has been heard in the song.\nOrchestral.\nSchumann acknowledged that he found orchestration a difficult art to master, and many analysts have criticised his orchestral writing. Conductors including Gustav Mahler, Max Reger, Arturo Toscanini, Otto Klemperer and George Szell have made changes to the instrumentation before conducting his orchestral music. The music scholar Julius Harrison considers such alterations fruitless: \"the essence of Schumann's warmly vibrant music resides in its forthright romantic appeal with all those personal traits, lovable characteristic and faults\" that make up Schumann's artistic character. Hall comments that Schumann's orchestration has subsequently been more highly regarded because of a trend towards playing the orchestral music with smaller forces in historically informed performance.\nAfter the successful premiere in 1841 of the first of his four symphonies the described it as \"well and fluently written\u00a0... also, for the most part, knowledgeably, tastefully, and often quite successfully and effectively orchestrated\", although a later critic called it \"inflated piano music with mainly routine orchestration\". Later in the year a second symphony was premiered and was less enthusiastically received. Schumann revised it ten years later and published it as his Fourth Symphony. Brahms preferred the original, more lightly scored version, which is occasionally performed and has been recorded, but the revised 1851 score is more usually played. The work now called the Second Symphony (1846) is structurally the most classical of the four and is influenced by Beethoven and Schubert. The Third Symphony (1851), known as the \"Rhenish\", is, unusually for a symphony of its day, in five movements, and is the composer's nearest approach to pictorial symphonic music, with movements depicting a solemn religious ceremony in Cologne Cathedral and outdoor merrymaking of Rhinelanders.\nSchumann experimented with unconventional symphonic forms in 1841 in his Overture, Scherzo and Finale, Op. 52, sometimes described as \"a symphony without a slow movement\". Its unorthodox structure may have made it less appealing and it is not often performed. Schumann composed six overtures, three of them for theatrical performance, preceding Byron's \"Manfred\" (1852), Goethe's \"Faust\" (1853) and his own \"Genoveva\". The other three were stand-alone concert works inspired by Schiller's \"The Bride of Messina\", Shakespeare's \"Julius Caesar\" and Goethe's \"Hermann and Dorothea\".\nThe Piano Concerto (1845) quickly became and has remained one of the most popular Romantic piano concertos. In the mid-twentieth century, when the symphonies were less well regarded than they later became, the concerto was described in \"The Record Guide\" as \"the one large-scale work of Schumann's which is by general consent an entire success\". The pianist Susan Tomes comments, \"In the era of recording it has often been paired with Grieg's Piano Concerto (also in A minor) which clearly shows the influence of Schumann's\". The first movement pitches against each other the forthright Florestan and dreamy Eusebius elements in Schumann's artistic nature \u2013 the vigorous opening bars succeeded by the wistful A minor theme that enters in the fourth bar. No other concerto or concertante work by Schumann has approached the popularity of the Piano Concerto, but the Concert Piece for Four Horns and Orchestra (1849) and the Cello Concerto (1850) remain in the concert repertoire and are well represented on record. The late Violin Concerto (1853) is less often heard but has received several recordings.\nChamber.\nSchumann composed a substantial quantity of chamber pieces, of which the best-known and most performed are the Piano Quintet in E\u266d major, Op. 44, the Piano Quartet in the same key (both 1842) and three piano trios, the first and second from 1847 and the third from 1851. The Quintet was written for and dedicated to Clara Schumann. It is described by the musicologist Linda Correll Roesner as \"a very 'public' and brilliant work that nonetheless manages to incorporate a private message\" by quoting a theme composed by Clara. Schumann's writing for piano and string quartet \u2013 two violins, one viola and one cello \u2013 was in contrast with earlier piano quintets with different combinations of instruments, such as Schubert's \"Trout Quintet\" (1819). Schumann's ensemble became the template for later composers including Brahms, Franck, Faur\u00e9, Dvo\u0159\u00e1k and Elgar. Roesner describes the Quartet as equally brilliant as the Quintet but also more intimate. Schumann composed a set of three string quartets (Op. 41, 1842). Dahlhaus comments that after this Schumann avoided writing for string quartet, finding Beethoven's achievements in that genre daunting.\nAmong the later chamber works are the Sonata in A minor for Piano and Violin, Op. 105 \u2013 the first of three chamber pieces written in a two-month period of intense creativity in 1851 \u2013 followed by the Third Piano Trio and the Sonata in D minor for Violin and Piano, Op. 121.\nIn addition to his chamber works for what were or were becoming standard combinations of instruments, Schumann wrote for some unusual groupings and was often flexible about which instruments a work called for: in his Adagio and Allegro, Op. 70 the pianist may, according to the composer, be joined by either a horn, a violin or a cello, and in the Fantasiest\u00fccke, Op. 73, the pianist may be duetting with a clarinet, violin or cello. His Andante and Variations (1843) for two pianos, two cellos and a horn later became a piece for just the pianos.\nOpera and choral.\n\"Genoveva\" was not a great success in Schumann's lifetime and has continued to be a rarity in the opera house. From its premiere onwards the work was criticised on the grounds that it is \"an evening of and nothing much else happens\". The conductor Nikolaus Harnoncourt, who championed the work, blamed music critics for the low esteem in which the work is held. He maintained that they all approached the work with a preconceived idea of what an opera must be like, and finding that \"Genoveva\" did not match their preconceptions they condemned it out of hand. In Harnoncourt's view it is a mistake to look for a dramatic plot in this opera:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;It is a look into the soul. Schumann didn't want anything naturalistic at all. To Schumann this seemed alien to opera. He wanted to find an opera in which the music had more to say.\nHarnoncourt's view of the lack of drama in the opera contrasts with that of Victoria Bond, who conducted the work's first professional stage production in the US in 1987. She finds the work \"full of high drama and supercharged emotion. In my opinion, it's very stageworthy, too. It's not at all static\".\nUnlike the opera, Schumann's secular oratorio was an enormous success in his lifetime, although it has since been neglected. Tchaikovsky described it as a \"divine work\" and said he \"knew nothing higher in all of music.\" The conductor Sir Simon Rattle called it \"The great masterpiece you've never heard, and there aren't many of those now.\u00a0... In Schumann's life it was the most popular piece he ever wrote, it was performed endlessly. Every composer loved it. Wagner wrote how jealous he was that Schumann had done it\". Based on an episode from Thomas Moore's epic poem \"Lalla Rookh\" it reflects the exotic, colourful tales from Persian mythology popular in the nineteenth century. In a letter to a friend in 1843 Schumann said, \"at the moment I'm involved in a large project, the largest I've yet undertaken \u2013 it's not an opera \u2013 I believe it's well-nigh a new genre for the concert hall\".\n (Scenes from Goethe's Faust), composed between 1844 and 1853, is another hybrid work, operatic in manner but written for concert performance and labelled an oratorio by the composer. The work was never given complete in Schumann's lifetime, although the third section was successfully performed in Dresden, Leipzig and Weimar in 1849 to mark the centenary of Goethe's birth. Jensen comments that its good reception is surprising as Schumann made no concessions to popular taste: \"The music is not particularly tuneful\u00a0... There are no arias for Faust or Gretchen in the grand manner\". The complete work was first given in 1862 in Cologne, six years after Schumann's death. Schumann's other works for voice and orchestra include a Requiem Mass, described by the critic Ivan March as \"long-neglected and under-prized\". Like Mozart before him, Schumann was haunted by the conviction that the Mass was his own requiem.\nRecordings.\nAll of Schumann's major works and most of the minor ones have been recorded. From the 1920s his music has had a prominent place in the catalogues. In the 1920s Hans Pfitzner recorded the symphonies, and other early recordings were conducted by Georges Enescu and Toscanini. Large-scale performances with modern symphony orchestras have been recorded under conductors including Herbert von Karajan, Wolfgang Sawallisch and Rafael Kubel\u00edk, and from the mid-1990s smaller ensembles such as the Orchestre des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es with Philippe Herreweghe and the Orchestre R\u00e9volutionnaire et Romantique with John Eliot Gardiner have recorded historically informed readings of Schumann's orchestral music.\nThe songs featured in the recorded repertoire from the early days of the gramophone, with performances by singers such as Elisabeth Schumann (no relation to the composer), Friedrich Schorr, Alexander Kipnis and Richard Tauber, followed in a later generation by Elisabeth Schwarzkopf and Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau. Although in 1955 the authors of \"The Record Guide\" expressed regret that so few of Schumann's songs were available on record, by the early twenty-first century every song was on disc. A complete set was published in 2010 with the songs in chronological order of composition; the pianist Graham Johnson partnered a range of singers including Ian Bostridge, Simon Keenlyside, Felicity Lott, Christopher Maltman, Ann Murray and Christine Sch\u00e4fer. Pianists for other recordings of Schumann have included Gerald Moore, Dalton Baldwin, Erik Werba, J\u00f6rg Demus, Geoffrey Parsons, and more recently Roger Vignoles, Irwin Gage and Ulrich Eisenlohr.\nSchumann's solo piano music has remained core repertoire for pianists; there have been numerous recordings of major works played by performers from Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alfred Cortot, Myra Hess and Walter Gieseking to Alfred Brendel, Vladimir Ashkenazy, Martha Argerich, Stephen Hough, Arcadi Volodos and Lang Lang. The chamber works are also well represented in the recording catalogues. In 2023 \"Gramophone\" magazine singled out among recent issues recordings of the Piano Quintet by Leif Ove Andsnes and the Artemis Quartet, String Quartets 1 and 3 by the Zehetmair Quartet and the Piano Trios by Andsnes, Christian Tetzlaff and Tanja Tetzlaff.\nSchumann's only opera, \"Genoveva\", has been recorded. A 1996 complete set conducted by Harnoncourt with Ruth Ziesak in the title role followed earlier recordings under Gerd Albrecht and Kurt Masur. Recordings of include sets conducted by Gardiner and Rattle. Among the recordings of is one conducted by Benjamin Britten in 1972, with Fischer-Dieskau as Faust and Elizabeth Harwood as Gretchen.\nLegacy.\nSchumann had considerable influence in the nineteenth century and beyond. Those he influenced included French composers such as Faur\u00e9 and Messager, who made a joint pilgrimage to his tomb at Bonn in 1879, Bizet, Widor, Debussy and Ravel, along with the developers of symbolism. Cortot maintained that Schumann's inspired Bizet's (Children's Games, 1871), Chabrier's (1881), Debussy's \"Children's Corner\" (1908) and Ravel's (Mother Goose, 1908).\nElsewhere in Europe, Elgar called Schumann \"my ideal\", and Grieg's Piano Concerto is heavily influenced by Schumann's. Grieg wrote that Schumann's songs deserved to be recognised as \"major contributions to world literature\", and Schumann was a major influence on the Russian school of composers, including Anton Rubinstein and Tchaikovsky. Tchaikovsky, though critical of Schumann's orchestration, described him as a \"composer of genius\" and \"the most striking exponent of the music of our time.\" \nAlthough Brahms said that all he had learned from Schumann was how to play chess, the development of his writing was influenced by Schumann. Other composers in German-speaking countries whose music shows Schumann's influence include Mahler, Richard Strauss and Schoenberg. More recently, Schumann has been an important influence on the music of Wolfgang Rihm, who has incorporated elements of Schumann's music into chamber works (, (Foreign Scenes, 1982\u20131984)) and his opera (1977\u20131978). Other twentieth and twenty-first century composers drawing on Schumann have included Mauricio Kagel, Wilhelm Killmayer, Henri Pousseur and Robin Holloway.\nDuring the second half of the nineteenth century there developed what became known as the \"War of the Romantics\". Schumann's successors including Clara and Brahms, together with their supporters such as Joachim and the music critic Eduard Hanslick, were seen as the proponents of music in the classic German tradition of Beethoven, Mendelssohn and Schumann. They were opposed by the adherents of Liszt and Wagner, including Draeseke, Hans von B\u00fclow (for a time) and in his capacity as a music critic Bernard Shaw, who were in favour of more extreme chromatic harmonies and explicit programmatic content. Wagner declared that the symphony was dead. By the turn of the century critics such as Fuller Maitland and Henry Krehbiel were treating the output of both factions with equal regard.\nIn 1991 the first volume of a complete edition of Schumann's works was published. A supposedly complete edition had been published between 1879 and 1887, edited by Clara and Brahms, but it was not complete: apart from inadvertent omissions the two editors deliberately suppressed some of Schumann's later music as they believed it had been affected by his declining mental health. In the 1980s the University of Cologne set up a research department with the aim of locating all the composer's manuscripts. This led to the \"New Schumann Complete Edition\" which comprises 49 volumes and was completed in 2023.\nSchumann's birthplace in Zwickau is preserved as a museum in his honour. It hosts chamber concerts and is the focus of an annual festival commemorating him. The International Robert Schumann Competition for Piano and Voice was launched in Berlin in 1956, and later moved to Zwickau. Among the winners have been the pianists Dezs\u0151 R\u00e1nki, Yves Henry and \u00c9ric Le Sage and the singers Siegfried Lorenz, Edith Wiens and Mauro Peter. In 2009 the Royal College of Music in London inaugurated the Joan Chissell Schumann Prize for singers and pianists.\nIn 2005 the German federal government launched the online Schumann Network in collaboration with cultural institutions in Zwickau, Leipzig, D\u00fcsseldorf and Bonn. The site aims to offer the public the most comprehensive coverage of the life and works of Robert and Clara Schumann.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44888", "revid": "10239913", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44888", "title": "Franz Schubert", "text": "Austrian composer (1797\u20131828)\nFranz Peter Schubert (; ; 31 January 1797\u00a0\u2013 19 November 1828) was an Austrian composer of the late Classical and early Romantic eras. Despite his short life, Schubert left behind a vast \"oeuvre\", including more than 600 \"Lieder\" (art songs in German) and other vocal works, seven complete symphonies, sacred music, operas, incidental music, and a large body of piano and chamber music. His major works include \"Erlk\u00f6nig\", \"Gretchen am Spinnrade\", and \"Ave Maria\"; the \"Trout\" Quintet; the Symphony No. 8 in B minor (\"Unfinished\"); the Symphony No. 9 in C major (\"The Great\"); the String Quartet No. 14 in D minor (\"Death and the Maiden\"); the String Quintet in C major; the Impromptus for solo piano; the last three piano sonatas; the Fantasia in F minor for piano four hands; the opera \"Fierrabras\"; the incidental music to the play \"Rosamunde\"; \"Schwanengesang\"; and the song cycles \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\" and \"Winterreise\".\nBorn in the Himmelpfortgrund suburb of Vienna, Schubert showed uncommon gifts for music from an early age. His father gave him his first violin lessons and his elder brother gave him piano lessons, but Schubert soon exceeded their abilities. In 1808, at the age of eleven, he became a pupil at the Stadtkonvikt school, where he became acquainted with the orchestral music of Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, and Ludwig van Beethoven. He left the Stadtkonvikt at the end of 1813 and returned home to live with his father, where he began studying to become a schoolteacher. Despite this, he continued his studies in composition with Antonio Salieri and still composed prolifically. In 1821, Schubert was admitted to the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde as a performing member, which helped establish his name among the Viennese citizenry. He gave a concert of his works to critical acclaim in March 1828, the only time he did so in his career. He died eight months later at the age of 31, the cause officially attributed to typhoid fever, but believed by some historians to be syphilis.\nAppreciation of Schubert's music while he was alive was limited to a relatively small circle of admirers in Vienna, but interest in his work increased greatly in the decades following his death. Felix Mendelssohn, Robert Schumann, Franz Liszt, Johannes Brahms and other 19th-century composers discovered and championed his works. Today, Schubert is considered one of the greatest composers in the history of Western classical music and his music continues to be widely performed.\nLife and career.\nEarly life and education.\nFranz Peter Schubert was born in Himmelpfortgrund (now a part of Alsergrund), Vienna, Archduchy of Austria, on 31 January 1797, and baptized in the Catholic Church the following day. He was the twelfth child of Franz Theodor Florian Schubert (1763\u20131830) and Maria Elisabeth Katharina Vietz (1756\u20131812). Schubert's immediate ancestors came originally from the province of Zuckmantel in Austrian Silesia. His father, the son of a Moravian peasant, was a well-known parish schoolmaster, and his school in Lichtental (in Vienna's ninth district) had numerous students in attendance. He came to Vienna from Zuckmantel in 1784 and was appointed schoolmaster two years later. His mother was the daughter of a Silesian master locksmith and had been a housemaid for a Viennese family before marriage. Of Franz Theodor and Elisabeth's fourteen children (one of them illegitimate, born in 1783), nine died in infancy.\nAt the age of five, Schubert began to receive regular lessons from his father, and a year later he was enrolled at his father's school. Although it is not known exactly when he received his first musical instruction, he was given piano lessons by his brother Ignaz, but they lasted for a very short time as Schubert excelled him within a few months. Ignaz later recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis father gave him his first violin lessons when he was eight years old, training him to the point where he could play easy duets proficiently. Soon after, Schubert was given his first lessons outside the family by Michael Holzer, organist and choirmaster of the local parish church in Lichtental. Holzer would often assure Schubert's father, with tears in his eyes, that he had never had such a pupil as Schubert, and the lessons may have largely consisted of conversations and expressions of admiration. Holzer gave the young Schubert instruction in piano and organ as well as in figured bass. According to Holzer, however, he did not give him any real instruction as Schubert would already know anything that he tried to teach him; rather, he looked upon Schubert with \"astonishment and silence\". The boy seemed to gain more from an acquaintance with a friendly apprentice joiner who took him to a neighbouring pianoforte warehouse where Schubert could practise on better instruments. He also played viola in the family string quartet, with his brothers Ferdinand and Ignaz on first and second violin and his father on the cello. Schubert wrote his earliest string quartets for this ensemble.\nYoung Schubert first came to the attention of Antonio Salieri, then Vienna's leading musical authority, in 1804, when his vocal talent was recognized. In November 1808, he became a pupil at the Stadtkonvikt (Imperial Seminary) through a choir scholarship. At the Stadtkonvikt, he was introduced to the overtures and symphonies of Mozart, the symphonies of Joseph Haydn and his younger brother Michael Haydn, and the early overtures and symphonies of Beethoven, a composer for whom he developed admiration. His exposure to these and other works, combined with occasional visits to the opera, laid the foundation for a broader musical education. One important musical influence came from the songs by Johann Rudolf Zumsteeg, an important composer of Lieder. The precocious young student \"wanted to modernize\" Zumsteeg's songs, as reported by Joseph von Spaun, Schubert's friend. Schubert's friendship with Spaun began at the Stadtkonvikt and lasted throughout his short life. In those early days, the financially well-off Spaun furnished the impoverished Schubert with much of his manuscript paper.\nIn the meantime, Schubert's talent began to show in his compositions; Salieri decided to start training him privately in music theory and composition. According to Ferdinand, the boy's first composition for piano was a Fantasy for four hands; his first song, \"Klagegesang der Hagar\", was written a year later. Schubert was occasionally permitted to lead the Stadtkonvikt's orchestra, the first orchestra he wrote for. He devoted much of the rest of his time at the Stadtkonvikt to composing chamber music, several songs, piano pieces and, more ambitiously, liturgical choral works in the form of a \"Salve Regina\" (D 27), a \"Kyrie\" (D 31), in addition to the unfinished \"Octet for Winds\" (D 72, said to commemorate the 1812 death of his mother), the cantata \"Wer ist gro\u00df?\" for male voices and orchestra (D 110, for his father's birthday in 1813), and his first symphony (D 82).\nTeacher at his father's school.\nAt the end of 1813, Schubert left the Stadtkonvikt and returned home for teacher training at the St Anna Normal-hauptschule. In 1814, he entered his father's school as the teacher of the youngest pupils. For over two years, young Schubert endured severe drudgery. However, he found compensatory interests during this time. For example, Schubert continued to take private lessons in composition from Salieri, who provided him with more technical training than any of his other teachers, until they parted ways in 1817.\nIn 1814, Schubert met a young soprano named Therese Grob, daughter of a local silk manufacturer, and wrote several of his liturgical works (including a \"Salve Regina\" and a \"Tantum Ergo\") for her; she was also a soloist in the premiere of his Mass No. 1 (D. 105) in September 1814. Schubert wanted to marry her, but was hindered by the harsh marriage-consent law of 1815 requiring an aspiring bridegroom to show he had the means to support a family. In November 1816, after failing to gain a musical post in Laibach (now Ljubljana, Slovenia), Schubert sent Ms. Grob's brother Heinrich a collection of songs, which was retained by the family into the twentieth century.\nOne of Schubert's most prolific years was 1815. He composed over 20,000 bars of music, more than half of which were for orchestra, including nine church works, a symphony, and about 140 Lieder. In that year, he was also introduced to Anselm H\u00fcttenbrenner and Franz von Schober, who would become his lifelong friends. Another friend, Johann Mayrhofer, was introduced to him by Spaun in 1815.\nThroughout 1815, Schubert lived at home with his father. He continued to teach at the school and give private musical instruction, earning enough money for his basic needs, including clothing, manuscript paper, pens, and ink, but with little to no money left over for luxuries. Spaun was well aware that Schubert was discontented with his life at the schoolhouse, and was concerned for Schubert's development intellectually and musically. In May 1816, Spaun moved from his apartment in Landskrongasse (in the inner city) to a new home in the Landstra\u00dfe suburb; one of the first things he did after he settled into the new home was to invite Schubert to spend a few days with him. This was probably Schubert's first visit away from home or school. Schubert's unhappiness during his years as a schoolteacher possibly showed early signs of depression, and it is virtually certain that Schubert suffered from cyclothymia throughout his life.\nIn 1989, the musicologist Maynard Solomon suggested that Schubert was erotically attracted to men, a thesis that has been heatedly debated. The musicologist and Schubert expert Rita Steblin has said that he was \"chasing women\". The theory of Schubert's sexuality or \"Schubert as Other\" has continued to influence current scholarship. The biographer Lorraine Byrne Bodley is sceptical \"...of Solomon\u2019s \"outing\" of Schubert, saying this misunderstands the passionate \"homosocial\" friendships of 19th-century Europe.\"\nSupport from friends.\nSignificant changes occurred in Schubert's life in 1816 when Schober, a student from an affluent family, invited him to lodge at his mother's house. The proposal was particularly opportune, for Schubert had just made the unsuccessful application for the post of Kapellmeister at Laibach, and he had also decided not to resume teaching duties at his father's school. By the end of the year, he became a guest in Schober's lodgings. For a time, he attempted to increase the household resources by giving music lessons, but they were soon abandoned, and he devoted himself to composition. \"I compose every morning, and when one piece is done, I begin another.\" During this year, he focused on orchestral and choral works, although he also continued to write Lieder. Much of this work was unpublished, but manuscripts and copies circulated among friends and admirers.\nIn early 1817, Schober introduced Schubert to Johann Michael Vogl, a prominent baritone twenty years Schubert's senior. Vogl, for whom Schubert went on to write a great many songs, became one of Schubert's main proponents in Viennese musical circles. Schubert also met Joseph H\u00fcttenbrenner (brother of Anselm), who also played a role in promoting his music. These, and an increasing circle of friends and musicians, became responsible for promoting, collecting, and, after his death, preserving his work. Heinrich Ansch\u00fctz wrote in his memoirs that Schubert was an active member of the 1817\u20131818 Unsinnsgesellschaft (Nonsenses Society), and various scholars agree with this.\nIn late 1817, Schubert's father gained a new position at a school in Rossau, not far from Lichtental. Schubert rejoined his father and reluctantly took up teaching duties there. In early 1818, he applied for membership in the prestigious Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde, intending to gain admission as an accompanist, but also so that his music, especially the songs, could be performed in the evening concerts. He was rejected on the basis that he was \"no amateur\", although he had been employed as a schoolteacher at the time and there were professional musicians already among the society's membership. However, he began to gain more notice in the press, and the first public performance of a secular work, an overture performed in February 1818, received praise from the press in Vienna and abroad.\nSchubert spent the summer of 1818 as a music teacher to the family of Count Johann Karl Esterh\u00e1zy at their ch\u00e2teau in Zsel\u00edz (now \u017deliezovce, Slovakia). The pay was relatively good, and his duties teaching piano and singing to the two daughters, Marie and Caroline, were relatively light, allowing him to compose happily. Schubert may have written his Marches Militaire in D major (D. 733 no. 1) for Marie and Caroline, in addition to other piano duets. On his return from Zsel\u00edz, he took up residence with his friend Mayrhofer.\nDuring the early 1820s, Schubert was part of a close-knit circle of artists and students who had social gatherings together that became known as \"Schubertiads.\" Many of them took place in Ignaz von Sonnleithner's large apartment in the Gundelhof (Brandst\u00e4tte 5, Vienna). The tight circle of friends with which Schubert surrounded himself was dealt a blow in early 1820. Schubert and four of his friends were arrested by the Austrian police who, in the aftermath of the French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars, were on their guard against revolutionary activities and suspicious of any gathering of youth or students. One of Schubert's friends, Johann Senn, was put on trial, imprisoned for over a year, and then permanently forbidden to enter Vienna. The other four, including Schubert, were \"severely reprimanded\", in part for \"inveighing against [officials] with insulting and opprobrious language\". While Schubert never saw Senn again, he did set some of his poems, \"Selige Welt\" (D. 743) and \"Schwanengesang\" (D 744), to music. The incident may have played a role in a falling-out with Mayrhofer, with whom he was living at the time.\nSchubert, who was only 1.52 m (5 feet) tall, was nicknamed \"Schwammerl\" by his friends, which Gibbs describes as translating to \"Tubby\" or \"Little Mushroom\". (\"Schwamm\" is \"mushroom\" in the Austrian and Bavarian dialects of German; the ending \"-erl\" makes it a diminutive.) Gibbs also claims he may have occasionally drunk to excess, noting that references to Schubert's heavy drinking \"... come not only in later accounts, but also in documents dating from his lifetime.\"\nMusical maturity.\nSchubert's compositions of 1819 and 1820 show a marked advance in development and maturity of style. He began the ultimately unfinished oratorio \"Lazarus\" (D. 689) in February 1820. This was later followed by the hymn \"Der 23. Psalm\" (D. 706), the octet \"Gesang der Geister \u00fcber den Wassern\" (D. 714), the Quartettsatz in C minor (D. 703), the \"Wanderer Fantasy\" in C major for piano (D. 760), and additional smaller works. In 1820, two of Schubert's operas were staged: \"Die Zwillingsbr\u00fcder\" (D. 647) appeared at the Theater am K\u00e4rntnertor on 14 June, and \"Die Zauberharfe\" (D. 644) appeared at the Theater an der Wien on 21 August. Hitherto, his larger compositions (apart from his masses) had been restricted to the amateur orchestra at the Gundelhof (Brandst\u00e4tte 5, Vienna), a society which grew out of the quartet-parties at his home. Now he began to assume a more prominent position, addressing a wider public. Publishers, however, remained distant, with Anton Diabelli hesitantly agreeing to print some of his works on commission. The first seven opus numbers, all songs, appeared on these terms; then the commission ceased, and he began to receive parsimonious royalties. The situation improved somewhat in March 1821 when Vogl performed the song \"Erlk\u00f6nig\" (D. 328) at a concert that was extremely well received. That month, Schubert composed a Variation on a Waltz by Diabelli (D 718), being one of the fifty composers who contributed to the \"Vaterl\u00e4ndischer K\u00fcnstlerverein\" publication.\nThe production of the two operas turned Schubert's attention more firmly than ever in the direction of the stage, where, for a variety of reasons, he was almost completely unsuccessful. All in all, he embarked on twenty stage projects, each of them failures that were quickly forgotten. In 1822, \"Alfonso und Estrella\" was rejected, partly owing to its libretto, written by Schubert's friend Franz von Schober. In 1823, \"Fierrabras\" (D 796) was rejected: Domenico Barbaia, impresario for the court theatres, largely lost interest in new German opera due to the popularity of Rossini and the Italian operatic style, and the failure of Carl Maria von Weber's \"Euryanthe\". \"Die Verschworenen\" (\"The Conspirators\", D 787) was prohibited by the censor, apparently because of its title, and the play \"Rosamunde, F\u00fcrstin von Zypern\", for which Schubert had written incidental music (D 797), was withdrawn after two nights, due to the play's poor quality.\nDespite his operatic failures, Schubert's reputation was growing steadily on other fronts. In 1821, the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde finally accepted him as a performing member, and the number of performances of his music grew remarkably. These performances helped Schubert's reputation grow rapidly among the members of the Gesellschaft and established his name. Some of the members of the Gesellschaft, most notably Ignaz von Sonnleithner and his son Leopold von Sonnleithner, had a sizeable influence on the affairs of the society, and as a result of that and of Schubert's growing reputation, his works were included in three major concerts of the Gesellschaft in 1821. In April, one of his male-voice quartets was performed, and in November, his Overture in E minor (D. 648) received its first public performance; at a different concert on the same day as the premiere of the Overture, his song \"Der Wanderer\" (D. 489) was performed.\nIn 1822, Schubert made the acquaintance of both Weber and Beethoven but little came of it in either case; however, Beethoven is said to have acknowledged the younger man's gifts on a few occasions. On his deathbed, Beethoven is said to have looked into some of the younger man's works and exclaimed: \"Truly, the spark of divine genius resides in this Schubert!\" Beethoven also reportedly predicted that Schubert \"would make a great sensation in the world,\" and regretted that he had not been more familiar with him earlier; he wished to see his operas and works for piano, but his severe illness prevented him from doing so.\nLast years and masterworks.\nDespite his preoccupation with the stage and subsequent official duties, Schubert wrote a significant amount of music during these years. He completed the Mass in A-flat major, (D. 678) in 1822, and later that year embarked suddenly on a work which, more decisively than almost any other in those years, showed his maturing personal vision, the Symphony in B minor, known as the \"Unfinished\" Symphony (D. 759). The reason he left it unfinished \u2013 after writing two movements and sketches some way into a third \u2013 continues to be discussed and written about, and it is also remarkable that he did not mention it to any of his friends, even though, as Brian Newbould notes, he must have felt thrilled by what he was achieving.\nIn 1823, Schubert wrote his first large-scale song cycle, \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\" (D. 795), setting poems by Wilhelm M\u00fcller. This series, together with the later cycle \"Winterreise\" (D. 911, also setting texts of M\u00fcller in 1827) is widely considered one of the pinnacles of Lieder. He also composed the song \"Du bist die Ruh\"' (\"You are rest and peace\", D. 776) during this year. Also in that year, symptoms of syphilis first appeared.\nIn 1824, he composed the Variations in E minor for flute and piano; \"Trockne Blumen\", a song from the cycle \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\"; and several string quartets. He also wrote the Sonata in A minor for arpeggione and piano (D. 821) at the time when there was a minor craze over that instrument. In the spring of that year, he wrote the Octet in F major (D. 803), a sketch for a \"Grand Symphony,\" and in the summer went back to \"Zseliz\". There he became attracted to Hungarian musical idiom and wrote the \"Divertissement \u00e0 la hongroise\" in G minor for piano duet (D. 818) and the String Quartet in A minor \"Rosamunde\" (D. 804). It has been said that he held a hopeless passion for his pupil, the Countess Caroline Esterh\u00e1zy, but the only work that bears a dedication to her is his Fantasia in F minor for piano duet (D. 940). This dedication, however, can only be found in the first edition and not in Schubert's autograph. His friend Eduard von Bauernfeld penned the following verse, which appears to reference Schubert's unrequited sentiments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe setbacks of previous years were compensated by the prosperity and happiness of 1825. Publication had been moving more rapidly, the stress of poverty was for a time lightened, and in the summer he had a pleasant holiday in Upper Austria where he was welcomed with enthusiasm. It was during this tour that he produced the seven-song cycle \"Fr\u00e4ulein am See\", based on Walter Scott's \"The Lady of the Lake\", and including \"Ellens Gesang III\" (\"Hymn to the Virgin\") (D. 839, Op. 52, No. 6); the lyrics of Adam Storck's German translation of the Scott poem are now frequently replaced by the full text of the traditional Roman Catholic prayer Hail Mary (\"Ave Maria\" in Latin), but for which the Schubert melody is not an original setting. The original only opens with the greeting \"Ave Maria\", which also recurs only in the refrain. In 1825, Schubert also wrote the Piano Sonata in A minor (D 845, first published as op. 42), and began the Symphony in C major (\"Great C major\", D. 944), which was completed the following year.\nFrom 1826 to 1828, Schubert resided continuously in Vienna, except for a brief visit to Graz, Austria, in 1827. In 1826, he dedicated a symphony (D. 944, that later came to be known as the \"Great C major\") to the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde and received an honorarium in return. The String Quartet No. 14 in D minor (D. 810), with the variations on \"Death and the Maiden\", was written during the winter of 1825\u20131826, and first played on 25 January 1826. Later in the year came the String Quartet No. 15 in G major, (D 887, first published as op. 161), the \"Rondo in B minor for violin and piano\" (D. 895), \"Rondeau brillant\", and the Piano Sonata in G major, (D 894, first published as \"Fantasie in G\", op. 78). He also produced in 1826 three Shakespearian songs, of which \"St\u00e4ndchen\" (D. 889) and \"\" (D. 891) were allegedly written on the same day, the former at a tavern where he broke his afternoon's walk, the latter on his return to his lodging in the evening.\nThe works of his last two years reveal a composer entering a new professional and compositional stage. Although parts of Schubert's personality were influenced by his friends, he nurtured an intensely personal dimension in solitude; it was out of this dimension that he wrote his greatest music. The death of Beethoven affected Schubert deeply, and may have motivated Schubert to reach new artistic peaks. In 1827, Schubert wrote the song cycle \"Winterreise\" (D. 911), the Fantasy in C major for violin and piano (D. 934, first published as op. post. 159), the Impromptus (D. 899 and D. 935, two sets of four pieces in which the latter was published posthumously) for piano, and the two piano trios (the first in B-flat major (D. 898), and the second in E-flat major, (D. 929); in 1828 the cantata \"Mirjams Siegesgesang\" (\"Victory Song of Miriam\", D 942) on a text by Franz Grillparzer, the Mass in E-flat major (D. 950), the \"Tantum Ergo\" (D. 962) in the same key, the String Quintet in C major (D. 956), the second \"Benedictus\" to the Mass in C major (D. 961), the three final piano sonatas (D. 958, D. 959, and D. 960), and the collection \"13 Lieder nach Gedichten von Rellstab und Heine\" for voice and piano, also known as \"Schwanengesang\" (\"Swan-song\", D. 957). (This collection \u2013 which includes settings of words by Heinrich Heine, Ludwig Rellstab, and Johann Gabriel Seidl \u2013 is not a true song cycle like \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\" or \"Winterreise\", as it was a posthumous collection of songs which may not have reflected Schubert's original intentions.) The \"Great C major\" symphony is dated 1828, but Schubert scholars believe that this symphony was largely written in 1825\u20131826 (being referred to while he was on holiday at Gastein in 1825\u2014that work, once considered lost, is now generally seen as an early stage of his C major symphony) and was revised for prospective performance in 1828. The orchestra of the Gesellschaft reportedly read through the symphony at a rehearsal, but never scheduled a public performance of it. The reasons continue to be unknown, although the difficulty of the symphony is a possible explanation. In the last weeks of his life, he began to sketch three movements for a new Symphony in D major (D 936A); In this work, he anticipates Gustav Mahler's use of folksong-like harmonics and bare soundscapes. Schubert expressed the wish, were he to survive his final illness, to further develop his knowledge of harmony and counterpoint, and had actually made appointments for lessons with the counterpoint master Simon Sechter.\nOn 26 March 1828, the anniversary of Beethoven's death, Schubert gave, for the only time in his career, a public concert of his own works. The concert was a success popularly and financially, although it was overshadowed by Niccol\u00f2 Paganini's first appearances in Vienna shortly after.\nFinal illness and death.\nIn the midst of this creative activity, his health deteriorated. By the late 1820s, Schubert's health was failing and he confided to some friends that he feared that he was near death. In the late summer of 1828, he saw the physician Ernst Rinna, who may have confirmed Schubert's suspicions that he was ill beyond cure and likely to die soon. Some of his symptoms matched those of mercury poisoning (mercury was then a common treatment for syphilis, again suggesting that Schubert suffered from it). At the beginning of November, he again fell ill, experiencing headaches, fever, swollen joints, and vomiting. He was generally unable to retain solid food and his condition worsened. Five days before Schubert's death, his friend the violinist Karl Holz and his string quartet visited to play for him. The last musical work he had wished to hear was Beethoven's String Quartet No. 14 in C-sharp minor, Op. 131; Holz commented: \"The King of Harmony has sent the King of Song a friendly bidding to the crossing\".\nSchubert died in Vienna, aged 31, on 19 November 1828, at the apartment of his brother Ferdinand. The cause of his death was officially diagnosed as typhoid fever, though other theories have been proposed, including the tertiary stage of syphilis. Although there are accounts by his friends that indirectly imply that he had contracted syphilis earlier, the symptoms of his final illness do not correspond with tertiary syphilis. Six weeks before his death, he walked 68 km (42 miles) in three days, ruling out musculoskeletal syphilis. In the months before his death, he composed his last work, \"Der Hirt auf dem Felsen\", making neurosyphilis unlikely. Meningovascular syphilis is also unlikely because it presents a progressive stroke-like picture, and Schubert had no neurological manifestation until his final delirium, which started only two days before his death. Lastly, his final illness was characterized by gastrointestinal symptoms (namely vomiting). These issues all led Robert L. Rold to argue that (although he believed Schubert had syphilis), the fatal final illness was a gastrointestinal one such as salmonella or indeed typhoid fever. Rold also pointed out that when Schubert was in his final illness, his close friend Schober avoided visiting him \"out of fear of contagion\". Yet Schober had known of his earlier possible syphilis and had never avoided Schubert in the past. Eva M. Cybulska goes further and says that Schubert's syphilis is a conjecture. His multi-system signs and symptoms, she says, could point at a number of different illness such as leukaemia, anaemia, or Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and that many tell-tale signs of syphilis\u2014chancre, mucous plaques, rash on the thorax, pupil abnormality, dysgraphia\u2014were absent. She argues that the syphilis diagnosis originated with Schubert's biographer Otto Deutsch in 1907, based on the aforementioned indirect references by his friends, and uncritically repeated ever since.\nSchubert was buried, at his own request, near the grave of Beethoven, whom he had admired all his life, in the village cemetery of W\u00e4hring on the edge of the Vienna Woods. A year earlier he had served as a torchbearer at Beethoven's funeral. In 1872, a memorial to Franz Schubert was erected in Vienna's Stadtpark. In 1888, both Schubert's and Beethoven's graves were moved to the Zentralfriedhof where they are next to the later graves of Johann Strauss II and Johannes Brahms. Anton Bruckner was present at both exhumations, and he reached into both coffins and held the revered skulls in his hands. The cemetery in W\u00e4hring was converted into a park in 1925, called the Schubert Park, and his former grave site was marked by a bust. His epitaph, written by his friend the poet Franz Grillparzer, reads: \"Die Tonkunst begrub hier einen reichen Besitz, aber noch viel sch\u00f6nere Hoffnungen\" (\"The art of music has here interred a precious treasure, but yet far fairer hopes\").\nMusic.\nSchubert was remarkably prolific, writing over 1,500 works in his short career. His compositional style progressed rapidly throughout his life. The largest number of his compositions are songs for solo voice and piano (roughly 630). Schubert also composed a considerable number of secular works for two or more voices, namely part songs, choruses and cantatas. He completed eight orchestral overtures and seven complete symphonies, in addition to fragments of six others. While he composed no concertos, he did write three concertante works for violin and orchestra. Schubert wrote a large body of music for solo piano, including eleven incontrovertibly completed sonatas and at least eleven more in varying states of completion, numerous miscellaneous works and many short dances, in addition to producing a large set of works for piano four hands. He also wrote over fifty chamber works, including some fragmentary works. Schubert's sacred output includes seven masses, one oratorio and one requiem, among other mass movements and numerous smaller compositions. He completed only eleven of his twenty stage works.\nStyle.\nIn July 1947 the Austrian composer Ernst Krenek discussed Schubert's style, abashedly admitting that he had at first \"shared the wide-spread opinion that Schubert was a lucky inventor of pleasing tunes ... lacking the dramatic power and searching intelligence which distinguished such 'real' masters as J. S. Bach or Beethoven\". Krenek wrote that he reached a completely different assessment after a close study of Schubert's pieces at the urging of his friend and fellow composer Eduard Erdmann. Krenek pointed to the piano sonatas as giving \"ample evidence that [Schubert] was much more than an easy-going tune-smith who did not know, and did not care, about the craft of composition.\" Each sonata then in print, according to Krenek, exhibited \"a great wealth of technical finesse\" and revealed Schubert as \"far from satisfied with pouring his charming ideas into conventional moulds; on the contrary he was a thinking artist with a keen appetite for experimentation.\"\nInstrumental music, stage works and church music.\nThat \"appetite for experimentation\" manifests itself repeatedly in Schubert's output in a wide variety of forms and genres, including opera, liturgical music, chamber and solo piano music, and symphonic works. Perhaps most familiarly, his adventurousness is reflected in his notably original sense of modulation; for example, the second movement of the String Quintet (D. 956), which is in E major, features a central section in the distant key of F minor. It also appears in unusual choices of instrumentation, as in the Sonata in A minor for arpeggione and piano (D. 821), or the unconventional scoring of the \"Trout Quintet\" (D. 667) for piano, violin, viola, cello, and double bass, whereas conventional piano quintets are scored for piano and string quartet.\nAlthough Schubert was clearly influenced by the Classical sonata forms of Beethoven, Haydn and Mozart, his formal structures and his developments tend to give the impression more of melodic development than of harmonic drama. This combination of Classical form and long-breathed Romantic melody sometimes lends them a discursive style: his \"Great C Major Symphony\" was described by Robert Schumann as running to \"heavenly lengths\".\nLieder and art songs.\nIt was in the genre of the lied that Schubert made his most indelible mark. Leon Plantinga remarks that \"in his more than six hundred Lieder he explored and expanded the potentialities of the genre, as no composer before him.\" Prior to Schubert's influence, Lieder tended toward a strophic, syllabic treatment of text, evoking the folksong qualities engendered by the stirrings of Romantic nationalism.\nAmong Schubert's treatments of the poetry of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, his settings of \"Gretchen am Spinnrade\" (D. 118) and \"Der Erlk\u00f6nig\" (D. 328) are particularly striking for their dramatic content, forward-looking uses of harmony, and use of eloquent pictorial keyboard figurations, such as the depiction of the spinning wheel and treadle in the piano in \"Gretchen\" and the furious and ceaseless gallop in \"\". He composed music using the poems of myriad poets, with Goethe, Mayrhofer, and Schiller the most frequent, and others, including Heinrich Heine, Friedrich R\u00fcckert, and Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff.\nOf particular note are his two song cycles on the poems of Wilhelm M\u00fcller, \"Die sch\u00f6ne M\u00fcllerin\" and \"Winterreise\", which helped to establish the genre and its potential for musical, poetic, and almost operatic dramatic narrative. His last collection of songs, published in 1828 after his death, \"Schwanengesang\", is also an innovative contribution to German Lieder literature, as it features poems by different poets, namely Ludwig Rellstab, Heine, and Johann Gabriel Seidl. The \"Wiener Theaterzeitung\", writing about \"Winterreise\" at the time, commented that it was a work that \"none can sing or hear without being deeply moved\".\nAnton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k wrote in 1894 that Schubert, whom he considered one of the truly great composers, was clearly influential on shorter works, especially Lieder and shorter piano works: \"The tendency of the romantic school has been toward short forms, and although Weber helped to show the way, to Schubert belongs the chief credit of originating the short models of piano forte pieces which the romantic school has preferably cultivated... Schubert created a new epoch with the Lied... All other songwriters have followed in his footsteps.\"\nPublication \u2013 catalogue.\nWhen Schubert died he had around 100 opus numbers published, mainly songs, chamber music and smaller piano compositions. Publication of smaller pieces continued (including opus numbers up to 173 in the 1860s, 50 instalments with songs published by Diabelli and dozens of first publications Peters), but the manuscripts of many of the longer works, whose existence was not widely known, remained hidden in cabinets and file boxes of Schubert's family, friends, and publishers. Even some of Schubert's friends were unaware of the full scope of what he wrote, and for many years he was primarily recognized as the \"prince of song\", although there was recognition of some of his larger-scale efforts. In 1838 Robert Schumann, on a visit to Vienna, found the dusty manuscript of the C major Symphony (D. 944) and took it back to Leipzig where it was performed by Felix Mendelssohn and celebrated in the \"Neue Zeitschrift.\" An important step towards the recovery of the neglected works was the journey to Vienna which the music historian George Grove and the composer Arthur Sullivan made in October 1867. The travellers unearthed the manuscripts of six of the symphonies, parts of the incidental music to \"Rosamunde\", the Mass No. 1 in F major (D. 105), and the operas \"Des Teufels Lustschloss\" (D. 84), \"Fernardo\" (D. 220), \"Der vierj\u00e4hrige Posten\" (D. 190), and \"Die Freunde von Salamanka\" (D. 326), and several other unnamed works. With these discoveries, Grove and Sullivan were able to inform the public of the existence of these works; in addition, they were able to copy the fourth and sixth symphonies, the \"Rosamunde\" incidental music, and the overture to \"Die Freunde von Salamanka\". This led to more widespread public interest in Schubert's work.\nComplete editions.\nFrom 1884 to 1897, Breitkopf &amp; H\u00e4rtel published Franz Schubert's Works, a critical edition including a contribution made \u2013 among others \u2013 by Johannes Brahms, editor of the first series containing eight symphonies. The publication of the Neue Schubert-Ausgabe by B\u00e4renreiter started in the second half of the 20th century.\nDeutsch catalogue.\nSince relatively few of Schubert's works were published in his lifetime, only a small number of them have opus numbers assigned, and even in those cases, the sequence of the numbers does not give a good indication of the order of composition. The Austrian musicologist Otto Erich Deutsch (1883\u20131967) is known for compiling the first comprehensive catalogue of Schubert's works. This was first published in English in 1951 (\"Schubert Thematic Catalogue\") and subsequently revised for a new edition in German in 1978 (\"\" \u2013 \"Franz Schubert: Thematic Catalogue of His Works in Chronological Order\").\nNumbering issues.\nConfusion arose quite early over the numbering of Schubert's late symphonies. Schubert's last completed symphony, the \"Great C major\" D\u00a0944, was assigned the numbers 7, 8, 9 and 10, depending on publication. Similarly the \"Unfinished\" D\u00a0759 has been indicated with the numbers 7, 8, and 9.\nThe order usually followed for these late symphonies by English-language sources is:\nAn even broader confusion arose over the numbering of the piano sonatas, with numbering systems ranging from 15 to 23 sonatas.\nInstruments.\nAmong pianos Schubert had access to were a Benignus Seidner piano (now displayed at the Schubert Geburtshaus in Vienna) and an Anton Walter &amp; Sohn piano (today in the collection of the Vienna Kunsthistorisches Museum). Schubert was also familiar with instruments by Viennese piano builder Conrad Graf. He appreciated the potential these early nineteenth-century instruments possessed for both intimate and extrovert, virtuosic playing.\nRecognition.\nA feeling of regret for the loss of potential masterpieces caused by Schubert's early death at age 31 was expressed in the epitaph on his large tombstone written by Grillparzer: \"Here music has buried a treasure, but even fairer hopes.\" Some prominent musicians share a similar view, including the pianist Radu Lupu, who said: \"[Schubert] is the composer for whom I am really most sorry that he died so young. ... Just before he died, when he wrote his beautiful two-cello String Quintet in C, he said very modestly that he was trying to learn a little more about counterpoint, and he was perfectly right. We'll never know in what direction he was going or would have gone.\" However, others have expressed disagreement with this early view. For instance, Robert Schumann said: \"It is pointless to guess at what more [Schubert] might have achieved. He did enough; and let them be honoured who have striven and accomplished as he did\", and the pianist Andr\u00e1s Schiff said that: \"Schubert lived a very short life, but it was a very concentrated life. In 31 years, he lived more than other people would live in 100 years, and it is needless to speculate what could he have written had he lived another 50 years. It's irrelevant, just like with Mozart: these are the two natural geniuses of music.\"\nThe Wiener Schubertbund, one of Vienna's leading choral societies, was founded in 1863, whilst the Gr\u00fcnderzeit was taking place. The Schubertbund quickly became a rallying point for schoolteachers and other members of the Viennese middle class who felt increasingly embattled during the Gr\u00fcnderzeit and the aftermath of the Panic of 1873. In 1872, the dedication of the Schubert Denkmal, a gift to the city from Vienna's leading male chorus, the Wiener M\u00e4nnergesang-Verein, took place; the chorus performed at the event. The Denkmal was designed by Austrian sculptor Carl Kundmann and is located in Vienna's Stadtpark.\nSchubert's chamber music continues to be popular. In a survey conducted by the ABC Classic FM radio station in 2008, Schubert's chamber works dominated the field, with the \"Trout Quintet\" ranked first, the String Quintet in C major ranked second, and the Notturno in E-flat major for piano trio ranked third. Furthermore, eight more of his chamber works were among the 100 ranked pieces: both piano trios, the String Quartet No. 14 (\"Death and the Maiden\"), the String Quartet No. 15, the Arpeggione Sonata, the Octet, the Fantasie in F minor for piano four-hands, and the \"Adagio and Rondo Concertante\" for piano quartet.\n\"The New York Times\"' chief music critic Anthony Tommasini ranked Schubert as the fourth greatest composer, writing:\nYou have to love the guy, who died at 31, ill, impoverished and neglected except by a circle of friends who were in awe of his genius. For his hundreds of songs alone\u2014including the haunting cycle \"Winterreise\", which will never release its tenacious hold on singers and audiences\u2014Schubert is central to our concert life. The baritone Sanford Sylvan once told me that hearing the superb pianist Stephen Drury give searching accounts of the three late Schubert sonatas on a single program was one of the most transcendent musical experiences of his life. Schubert\u2019s first few symphonies may be works in progress. But the \"Unfinished\" and especially the Ninth Symphony are astonishing. The Ninth paves the way for Bruckner and prefigures Mahler.\nTributes by other musicians.\nFrom the 1830s through the 1870s, Franz Liszt transcribed and arranged several of Schubert's works, particularly the songs. Liszt, who was a significant force in spreading Schubert's work after his death, said Schubert was \"the most poetic musician who ever lived.\" Schubert's symphonies were of particular interest to Anton\u00edn Dvo\u0159\u00e1k. Hector Berlioz and Anton Bruckner acknowledged the influence of the \"Great C Major\" Symphony. Robert Schumann, after seeing the manuscript of the symphony in Vienna in 1838, brought it to the attention of Mendelssohn. Mendelssohn then conducted the first performance of the symphony, albeit in a heavily abridged version, in Leipzig in 1839.\nIn the 20th century, composers including Richard Strauss, Anton Webern, Benjamin Britten, George Crumb, and Hans Zender championed or paid homage to Schubert in some of their works. Britten, an accomplished pianist, accompanied many of Schubert's Lieder and performed many piano solo and duet works. The German electronic music group Kraftwerk has a track titled \"Franz Schubert\" on their 1977 album \"Trans-Europe Express\".\nCommemorations.\nIn 1897, the 100th anniversary of Schubert's birth was marked in the musical world by festivals and performances dedicated to his music. In Vienna, there were ten days of concerts, and Emperor Franz Joseph gave a speech recognising Schubert as the creator of the art song, and one of Austria's favourite sons. Karlsruhe saw the first production of his opera \"Fierrabras\".\nIn 1928, Schubert Week was held in Europe and the United States to mark the centenary of the composer's death. Works by Schubert were performed in churches, in concert halls, and on radio stations. A competition, with top prize money of US$10,000 and sponsorship by the Columbia Phonograph Company, was held for \"original symphonic works presented as an apotheosis of the lyrical genius of Schubert, and dedicated to his memory\". The winning entry was Kurt Atterberg's sixth symphony.\nIn film and television.\nSchubert has featured as a character in several films including \"Schubert's Dream of Spring\" (1931), \"Gently My Songs Entreat\" (1933), \"Serenade\" (1940), \"The Great Awakening\" (1941)\u2014whose plot is based on a fictional episode of him fleeing Vienna to Hungary to avoid conscription\u2014\"It's Only Love\" (1947), \"Franz Schubert\" (1953), \"Das Dreim\u00e4derlhaus\" (1958), and \"Mit meinen hei\u00dfen Tr\u00e4nen\" (1986). \nSchubert's life was covered in the documentary \"Franz Peter Schubert: The Greatest Love and the Greatest Sorrow\" by Christopher Nupen (1994), and in the documentary \"Schubert \u2013 The Wanderer\" by Andr\u00e1s Schiff and Mischa Scorer (1997), both produced for the BBC. \"Great Performances,\" \"Now Hear This: The Schubert Generation Series,\" hosted by Scott Yoo, explored commentary and performances by contemporary musician admirers.\nSchubert's music has also been featured in numerous films:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nWorks by Otto Erich Deutsch.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n19th- and early 20th-century scholarship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nModern scholarship.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNumbering of symphonies.\nThe following sources illustrate the confusion around the numbering of Schubert's late symphonies. The B minor \"Unfinished\" Symphony is variously published as No. 7 and No. 8, in both German and English.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "44889", "revid": "173996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44889", "title": "Aeolian Islands", "text": "Volcanically active archipelago off the northern coast of Sicily, Italy\nThe Aeolian Islands ( ; ; ), sometimes referred to as the Lipari Islands or Lipari group ( , ) after their largest island, are a volcanic archipelago in the Tyrrhenian Sea north of Sicily, said to be named after Aeolus, the mythical ruler of the winds. The islands' inhabitants are known as Aeolians (). The islands had a permanent population of 14,224 at the 2011 census; the latest official estimate is 15,419 as of 1 January 2019. The Aeolian Islands are a popular tourist destination in the summer and attract up to 600,000 visitors annually.\nThere are seven significant islands: Lipari, Vulcano, Salina, Stromboli, Filicudi, Alicudi and Panarea, and a set of minor islands and rocks.\nGeography.\nThe Aeolian Islands are off the north coast of Sicily in the Tyrrhenian Sea. Vulcano is located closest to the Sicilian coast. Lipari and Salina follow to the north, Filicudi and Alicudi to the west, and Panarea and Stromboli to the northeast. In addition to these seven inhabited islands, there are a number of smaller, uninhabited islands and rocky cliffs, such as Basiluzzo, Strombolicchio, Dattilo and Lisca Bianca.\nThe largest island is Lipari (), followed by Salina (), Vulcano (), Stromboli (), Filicudi () and Alicudi (). The smallest island, at , is Panarea. The highest elevation of the Lipari Islands is Monte Fossa delle Felci on Salina, which reaches a height of .\nGeology.\nThe seven Aeolian Islands, covering an area of , originated in the Tyrrhenian Basin, a great plain at the bottom of the Tyrrhenian Sea. Emissions of lava from depths of up to resulted in the formation of the Aeolian Islands, together with Ustica and a series of submarine volcanoes named Magnani, Vavilov, Marsili and Palinuro, as well as two that are unnamed.\nThe present shape of the Aeolian Islands is the result of volcanic activity over a period of 260,000 years. There are two active volcanoes \u2013 Stromboli and Vulcano. Steaming fumaroles and thermal waters are on most of the islands. The volcanic activity has also left the islands with a very fertile soil that is beneficial in the growth of natural flora.\nGeologically the archipelago is defined as a volcanic arc. The origin of the Aeolian Islands is due to movement of the Earth's crust as a result of plate tectonics. The African continental shelf is in constant movement towards Europe. Its subduction underneath the Eurasian plate generates magma, which rises to the surface to form the volcanoes. The \"Aeolian Arc\" extends for more than . It is a section of a larger area of geological instability across the Mediterranean region, caused by the collision of Africa and Europe, which includes Sicily, Calabria, and Campania together with Greece and the Aegean islands.\nAdministration.\nThe islands form part of the Sicilian Metropolitan City of Messina. All the islands except Salina comprise the \"comune\" of Lipari within that province; Salina forms three separate \"comunes\": Malfa, Leni and Santa Marina Salina.\nArchitectural control.\nCurbing urban development has been a key in preserving the Aeolian islands in a natural state. New buildings are severely restricted. Existing residences can be bought and restored but they must be constructed to resemble its whitewashed houses. Traditional houses consist of modular cubes constructed from indigenous building materials like stone, lava, pumice, and tufo. Almost all houses have a huge outdoor terrace, usually shaded by grape and flowering vines.\nMythology.\nIn Homer's epic poem, the Odyssey, Aeolus, son of Hippotes, was the divine keeper of the winds and king of the mythical, floating island of Aeolia. He kept the violent winds locked safely away inside the interior of his isle, releasing them only at the command of greatest gods to wreak devastation upon the world.\nThe hero of the epic poem, Odysseus, on his travels to return home from Troy, visited Aiolos' isle and was entrusted with a bag containing all of the winds to ensure a safe voyage home. However, during the trip, the hero's companions opened the bag and the escaping winds carried their ship all the way back to Aiolos' shore.\nHistory.\n4000\u20132500\u00a0BC.\nThe first evidence of Sicilian migration was in Lipari (Castellaro Vecchio culture). The manufacture and commerce of obsidian objects was highly developed until the introduction of metals.\n1600\u20131250\u00a0BC.\nDuring the Bronze Age, the Aeolians prospered by means of maritime commerce in an area which extended from Mycenae to the British Isles, from where tin was imported. Villages on the Aeolian islands flourished on Capo Graziano (Filicudi), Castello (Lipari), Serro dei Cianfi (Salina), Capo Milazzese (Panarea), and Portella (Salina). All these settlements were destroyed by new Italic invasions in 1250\u00a0BC.\n1240\u2013850\u00a0BC.\nAccording to Diodorus Siculus, the Aeolian Islands were occupied by the Ausones led by Liparus. Liparus was succeeded by Aeolus whose house, according to the \"Odyssey\" by Homer, gave hospitality to Odysseus.\n600\u2013300\u00a0BC.\nIn 580\u00a0BC, Greeks exiled from Rhodes and Knidos landed at Lipari and began a period of Greek domination, which was known for acts of piracy against Etruscan and Phoenician shipping. There was production of vases and other ceramics.\n300\u00a0BC\u2013AD\u00a0250.\nThe islanders were allies of the Carthaginians against Rome during the Punic Wars. Although the Battle of the Lipari Islands in 260\u00a0BC led to a Carthaginian victory, the Romans later sacked Lipari and their domination led to a period of poverty.\nAD\u00a0250\u20131000.\nAt the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Aeolian Islands came under the sway of the Visigoths, the Vandals and the Ostrogoths, followed by the domination of the Byzantine Empire. According to a Christian legend, in 264 a coffin which contained the body of Bartholomew washed up on the beach of Lipari, with the result that Bartholomew was immediately elected the patron saint of the Aeolian Islands. In 836 the Aghlabids of Ziyadat Allah I of Ifriqiya sacked Lipari, massacred most of the population, enslaved the survivors and annexed the Liparian Islands into the Emirate of Sicily.\n1000\u20131600.\nThe Norman conquest of Sicily from the Emirate of Sicily in 1061 resulted in the annexation of the islands. Roger II of Sicily sent the Benedictine monks to Lipari, which gave rise to considerable development on the islands. A cathedral dedicated to Saint Bartholomew was built, as well as the Benedictine monastery in the castle. In 1208 Frederick II of Swabia acceded to the throne of the Kingdom of Sicily. The period of prosperity which followed, ended with the domination of the Angevins and the rebellion of the Sicilians which culminated in the revolt of the Sicilian Vespers. The Aeolians however, remained loyal to Charles of Anjou, and commercial links were established with Naples, the capital of the Angevin kingdom. In 1337 Lipari opened its gates to the French fleet without resistance, and in return obtained various commercial and fiscal benefits. In the mid-15th century, Naples and Palermo united into the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies under the crown of Alfonso V of Aragon.\nOn June 30, 1544, a fleet of 180 Ottoman vessels under the command of the corsair Hayreddin Barbarossa occupied Lipari and laid siege to the castle. The defenders surrendered. Historically, it is said around 9,000 of the 10,000 citizens of Lipari were captured and enslaved although a couple of more recent scholars have questioned this number arguing for a lower population at the time of Barbarossa. A number of citizens were ransomed in Messina and returned to the islands but most of those captured never returned. Only after the tragedy did the Spanish authorities turn their attention to Lipari and repopulate the city with Sicilian, Calabrian and Spanish families. The city walls and houses were rebuilt and an Aeolian fleet was constructed which was able to successfully defend the Tyrrhenian Sea from the Ottomans.\n1600\u2013present.\nIn 1693, an earthquake destroyed all the towns in eastern Sicily, causing around 60,000 deaths. After the population invoked the protection of Saint Bartholomew during prayers in the cathedral, there was not a single victim on the Aeolian Islands. The economic conditions of the islands improved greatly during the 17th century with agricultural progress (malvasia grapes), capers, and a variety of fruit, vegetables and fishing). With the Bourbons came the introduction of criminal and political prisoners to the islands. In 1916, the penal colony was closed, but the Fascist regime unsuccessfully tried to reopen it in 1926. The island population reacted by pulling down the remains of the ex-penitentiary in the castle. However, not long after, the castle was converted to accommodate anti-Fascist political prisoners in enforced exile. Liparians fraternised with these exiles until the Allies' liberation. After the war, the same room that had housed the opponents of Fascism became the Aeolian Archaeological Museum.\nTowards the end of the 19th century, the Aeolian Islands were visited by Archduke Ludwig Salvator of Austria\u2014a friend of the islands and also a man with a profound knowledge of the archipelago. Between the years 1893\u201396 he published a work of eight volumes on the Aeolian Islands.\nIn August 1888, the crater named Fossa on Vulcano erupted and caused many deaths in the sulphur mines. The eruptions continued for 19 months.\nOn New Year's Day in 1909, a rumour appeared in international newspapers that the Aeolian Islands had been \"swallowed up by the sea\" during a time of volcanic activity. While communication with the islands was interrupted for a time, they were not otherwise inconvenienced.\nDuring World War II, all of the Aeolian Islands were captured by the Allies in August 1943, during the invasion of Sicily. The islands were then extensively searched by archeologists Madeleine Cavalier and Luigi Bernab\u00f2 Brea after World War II.\nUNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nThe Aeolian Islands were listed by UNESCO in 2000 as a World Heritage Site for providing \"an outstanding record of volcanic island-building and destruction, and ongoing volcanic phenomena\". Status as a World Heritage Site was threatened by Italy's failure to close the pumice quarry as well as its failure to prevent the building of 4 new harbours. However, as of 2020[ [update]], it is still listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage site.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44890", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44890", "title": "Franz Joseph Haydn", "text": ""}
{"id": "44893", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44893", "title": "Moses Mendelssohn", "text": "German philosopher and theologian (1729\u20131786)\nMoses Mendelssohn (6 September 1729\u00a0\u2013 4 January 1786) was a German-Jewish philosopher and theologian. His writings and ideas on Jews and the Jewish religion and identity were a central element in the development of the \"Haskalah\", or 'Jewish Enlightenment' of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.\nBorn to a poor Jewish family in Dessau, Principality of Anhalt, and originally destined for a rabbinical career, Mendelssohn educated himself in German thought and literature. Through his writings on philosophy and religion he came to be regarded as a leading cultural figure of his time by both Christian and Jewish inhabitants of German-speaking Europe and beyond. His involvement in the Berlin textile industry formed the foundation of his family's wealth.\nHis descendants include the composers Fanny and Felix Mendelssohn; Felix's son, chemist Paul Mendelssohn Bartholdy; Fanny's grandsons, Paul and Kurt Hensel; and the founders of the Mendelssohn &amp; Co. banking house.\nLife.\nYouth.\nMoses Mendelssohn was born in Dessau to Mendel Heymann and Bela Rachel Wahl. His father's name was Mendel, but Moses and his brother Saul were the first to adopt the surname Mendelssohn (\"Mendel's son\"). Moses's son Abraham Mendelssohn wrote in 1829 (to Felix), \"My father felt that the name Moses Ben Mendel Dessau would handicap him in gaining the needed access to those who had the better education at their disposal. Without any fear that his own father would take offense, my father assumed the name Mendelssohn. The change, though a small one, was decisive.\"\nMendel was an impoverished scribe\u2014a writer of Torah scrolls\u2014and his son Moses in his boyhood developed curvature of the spine. Moses' early education was provided by his father and by the local rabbi, David Fr\u00e4nkel, who, besides teaching him the Bible and Talmud, introduced to him the philosophy of Maimonides. In 1743 Fr\u00e4nkel received a call to Berlin, and a few months later Moses followed him. Moses, age 14, \"entered Berlin at the Rosenthaler Tor, the only gate in the city wall through which Jews (and cattle) were allowed to pass.\" \"Mendelssohn enrolled in Frankel's exacting seminary, where the program consisted of unending rote repetitions of early medieval texts, interpretations thereof, elaborations of Talmudic law, and copious commentary accumulated over the centuries.\"\nA refugee Polish Jew, Israel Zamosz, taught him mathematics, and a young Jewish physician taught him Latin. He was, however, mainly self-taught. He learned to spell and to philosophize at the same time (according to the historian Graetz). With his scanty earnings he bought a Latin copy of John Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", and mastered it with the aid of a Latin dictionary. He then made the acquaintance of Aaron Solomon Gumperz, who taught him basic French and English. In 1750, a wealthy Jewish silk-merchant, Isaac Bernhard, appointed him to teach his children. Mendelssohn soon won the confidence of Bernhard, who made the young student successively his bookkeeper and his partner.\nIt was possibly Gumperz who introduced Mendelssohn to Gotthold Ephraim Lessing in 1754, who became one of his greatest friends. It is said that the first time Mendelssohn met Lessing, they played chess. In Lessing's play \"Nathan the Wise\" Nathan and the character Saladin first meet during a game of chess. Lessing had recently produced the drama \"Die Juden\", whose moral was that a Jew can possess nobility of character. This notion was, in the contemporary Berlin of Frederick the Great, generally ridiculed as untrue. Lessing found in Mendelssohn the realization of his dream. Within a few months, the two became closely intellectually allied. Lessing also brought Mendelssohn to public attention for the first time: Mendelssohn had written an essay attacking Germans' neglect of their native philosophers (principally Gottfried Leibniz), and lent the manuscript to Lessing. Without consulting the author, Lessing published Mendelssohn's \"Philosophical Conversations\" (\"Philosophische Gespr\u00e4che\") anonymously in 1755. In the same year there appeared in Danzig (now Gda\u0144sk, Poland) an anonymous satire, \"Pope a Metaphysician\" (\"Pope ein Metaphysiker\"), which turned out to be the joint work of Lessing and Mendelssohn.\nEarly prominence as philosopher and critic.\nMendelssohn became the leading spirit of Friedrich Nicolai's important literary undertakings, the \"Bibliothek\" and the \"Literaturbriefe\", and ran some risk by criticizing the poems of Frederick II, King of Prussia; Frederick\u2019s good nature kept him out of trouble. In 1762 he married Fromet Guggenheim, who survived him by twenty-six years. In the year following his marriage Mendelssohn won the prize offered by the Berlin Academy for an essay on the application of mathematical proofs to metaphysics, \"On Evidence in the Metaphysical Sciences\"; among the competitors were Thomas Abbt and Immanuel Kant, who came second. In October 1763 the king granted Mendelssohn, but not his wife or children, the privilege of Protected Jew (\"Schutzjude\"), which assured his right to undisturbed residence in Berlin.\nAs a result of his correspondence with Abbt, Mendelssohn resolved to write on the immortality of the soul. Materialistic views were at the time rampant and fashionable, and faith in immortality was at a low ebb. At this favourable juncture appeared \"Ph\u00e4don oder \u00fcber die Unsterblichkeit der Seele\" (\"Phaedo or On the Immortality of Souls\"; 1767). Modelled on Plato's dialogue of the same name, Mendelssohn's work possessed some of the charm of its Greek exemplar and impressed the German world with its beauty and lucidity of style. \"Phaedo\" was an immediate success, and besides being one of the most widely read books of its time in German was speedily translated into several European languages, including English. The author was hailed as the \"German Plato\", or the \"German Socrates\"; royal and other aristocratic friends showered attentions on him, and it was said that \"no stranger who came to Berlin failed to pay his personal respects to the German Socrates.\"\nLavater.\nSo far, Mendelssohn had devoted his talents to philosophy and criticism; now, however, an incident turned the current of his life in the direction of the cause of Judaism. In April 1763, Johann Kaspar Lavater, then a young theology-student from Zurich, made a trip to Berlin, where he visited the already famous Jewish philosopher with some companions. They insisted on Mendelssohn telling them his views on Jesus and managed to get from him the statement, that, provided the historical Jesus had kept himself and his theology strictly within limits of orthodox Judaism, Mendelssohn \"respected the morality of Jesus' character.\" Six years later, in October 1769, Lavater sent Mendelssohn his German translation of Charles Bonnet's essay on Christian Evidences, with a preface where he publicly challenged Mendelssohn to refute Bonnet or if he could not then to \"do what wisdom, the love of truth and honesty must bid him, what a Socrates would have done if he had read the book and found it unanswerable.\" Mendelssohn answered in an open letter in December 1769: \"Suppose there were living among my contemporaries a Confucius or a Solon, I could, according to the principles of my faith, love and admire the great man without falling into the ridiculous idea that I must convert a Solon or a Confucius.\" The ongoing public controversy cost Mendelssohn much time, energy and strength.\nLavater later described Mendelssohn in his book on physiognomy, \"Physiognomische Fragmente zur Bef\u00f6rderung der Menschenkenntnis und Menschenliebe\" (1775\u20131778), as \"a companionable, brilliant soul, with piercing eyes, the body of an Aesop [who was traditionally considered ugly]\u2014a man of keen insight, exquisite taste and wide erudition [...] frank and open-hearted\"\u2014ending his public praise with the wish of Mendelssohn recognizing, \"together with Plato and Moses... the crucified glory of Christ.\" When, in 1775 the Swiss-German Jews, faced with the threat of expulsion, turned to Mendelssohn and asked him to intervene on their behalf with \"his friend\" Lavater, Lavater, after receiving Mendelssohn's letter, promptly and effectively secured their stay.\nIllness.\nIn March 1771 Mendelssohn's health deteriorated so badly that Marcus Elieser Bloch, his doctor, decided his patient had to give up philosophy, at least temporarily. After a short and restless sleep one evening, Mendelssohn found himself incapable of moving and had the feeling of something lashing his neck with fiery rods, his heart was palpitating and he was in an extreme anxiety, yet fully conscious. This spell was then broken suddenly by some external stimulation. Attacks of this kind recurred. The cause of his disease was ascribed to the mental stress due to his theological controversy with Lavater. However, this sort of attack, in milder form, had presumably occurred many years earlier. Bloch diagnosed the disease as due to 'congestion of blood in the brain' (a meaningless diagnosis in modern medical practice as such congestion is anatomically impossible), and after some controversy this diagnosis was also accepted by the famous Hanoverian court physician, Johann Georg Ritter von Zimmermann, an admirer of Mendelssohn. In retrospect, his illness might be diagnosed as a heart-rhythm-problem (such as atrial fibrillation) and/or a mild form of familial dysautonomia, a hereditary disease of Ashkenazi Jews, which often brings with it a curvature of the spine and epilepsy-like symptoms in times of stress.\nMendelssohn was treated with China bark, blood lettings on the foot, leeches applied to the ears, enemas, foot baths, lemonade and mainly vegetarian food. \u201cNo mental stress whatsoever\u201d was ordered. However, although he remained subject to periods of setback, he eventually recovered sufficiently to write the major works of his later career.\nDeath.\nMendelssohn died on 4 January 1786 as the result (it was thought at the time) of a cold contracted while carrying a manuscript (his reply to Jacobi, titled \"To Lessing's Friends (An die Freunde Lessings)\") to his publishers on New Year's Eve; Jacobi was held by some to have been responsible for his death. He was buried in the Jewish Cemetery of Berlin. The translation of the Hebrew inscription on his gravestone (see picture to the right) reads: \"H[ere] r[ests] / the wise R[eb] Moses of Dessau / born on the 12th of Elul 5489 [6 September 1729] / died on Wednesday the 5th of Shevat [4 January] / and buried the next morning on Thursday 6th/ 5546 [5 January 1786] / M[ay] H[is] S[oul be] B[ound up in the] B[ond of eternal] L[ife]\". Although the cemetery was largely destroyed during the Nazi era, after German reunification, in 2007-2008, it was reestablished with monuments to its past, including a recreation of Mendelssohn's gravestone.\nPhilosophical work.\nWorks on religion and civil society.\nIt was after the breakdown of his health that Mendelssohn decided to \"dedicate the remains of my strength for the benefit of my children or a goodly portion of my nation\"\u2014which he did by trying to bring the Jews closer to \"culture, from which my nation, alas! is kept in such a distance, that one might well despair of ever overcoming it\". One of the means of doing this was by \"giving them a better translation of the holy books than they previously had\". To this end Mendelssohn undertook his German translation of the Pentateuch and other parts of the Bible. This work was called the \"Bi'ur\" (\"the explanation\") (1783) and also contained a commentary, only that on Exodus having been written by Mendelssohn himself. The translation was in an elegant High German, designed to allow Jews to learn the language faster. Most of the German Jews in that period spoke Yiddish and many were literate in Hebrew (the language of Jewish scripture, liturgy, and scholarship). The commentary was also thoroughly rabbinic, quoting mainly from medieval exegetes but also from Talmud-era \"midrashim\". Mendelssohn is also believed to be behind the foundation of the first modern public school for Jewish boys, \"Freyschule f\u00fcr Knaben\", in Berlin in 1778 by one of his most ardent pupils, David Friedl\u00e4nder, where both religious and worldly subjects were taught.\nMendelssohn also tried to better the Jews' situation in general by furthering their rights and acceptance. He induced Christian Wilhelm von Dohm to publish in 1781 his work, \"On the Civil Amelioration of the Condition of the Jews\", which played a significant part in the rise of tolerance. Mendelssohn himself published a German translation of the \"Vindiciae Judaeorum\" by Menasseh Ben Israel.\nThe interest caused by these actions led Mendelssohn to publish his most important contribution to the problems connected with the position of Judaism in a Gentile world. This was \"Jerusalem\" (1783; Eng. trans. 1838 and 1852). It is a forcible plea for freedom of conscience, described by Kant as \"an irrefutable book\". Mendelssohn wrote:\nBrothers, if you care for true piety, let us not feign agreement, where diversity is evidently the plan and purpose of Providence. None of us thinks and feels exactly like his fellow man: why do we wish to deceive each other with delusive words?\nIts basic thrust is that the state has no right to interfere with the religion of its citizens, Jews included. While it proclaims the mandatory character of Jewish law for all Jews (including, based on Mendelssohn's understanding of the New Testament, those converted to Christianity), it does not grant the rabbinate the right to punish Jews for deviating from it. He maintained that Judaism was less a \"divine need, than a revealed life\". \"Jerusalem\" concludes with the cry \"Love truth, love peace!\"\u2014in a quote from Zacharias 8:19.\nKant called this \"the proclamation of a great reform, which, however, will be slow in manifestation and in progress, and which will affect not only your people but others as well.\" Mendelssohn asserted the pragmatic principle of the possible plurality of truths: that just as various nations need different constitutions\u2014to one a monarchy, to another a republic, may be the most congenial to the national genius\u2014so individuals may need different religions. The test of religion is its effect on conduct. This is the moral of Lessing's \"Nathan the Wise\" (\"Nathan der Weise\"), the hero of which is undoubtedly Mendelssohn, and in which the parable of the three rings is the epitome of the pragmatic position.\nTo Mendelssohn his theory represented a strengthening bond to Judaism. But in the first part of the 19th century, the criticism of Jewish dogmas and traditions was associated with a firm adhesion to the older Jewish mode of living. Reason was applied to beliefs, the historic consciousness to life. Modern reform in Judaism has parted to some extent from this conception. In the view of the German writer Heinrich Heine, \"as Luther had overthrown the Papacy, so Mendelssohn overthrew the Talmud; and he did so after the same fashion, namely, by rejecting tradition, by declaring the Bible to be the source of religion, and by translating the most important part of it. By these means he shattered Judaic, as Luther had shattered Christian, catholicism; for the Talmud is, in fact, the catholicism of the Jews.\"\nLater years and legacy.\nMendelssohn grew ever more famous, and counted among his friends many of the great figures of his time. But his final years were overshadowed and saddened by the so-called pantheism controversy. Ever since his friend Lessing had died, he had wanted to write an essay or a book about his character. When Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi, an acquaintance of both men, heard of Mendelssohn's project, he stated that he had confidential information about Lessing being a \"Spinozist\", which, in these years, was regarded as being more or less synonymous with \"atheist\"\u2014something which Lessing was accused of being anyway by religious circles.\nThis led to an exchange of letters between Jacobi and Mendelssohn which showed they had hardly any common ground. Mendelssohn then published his \"Morgenstunden oder Vorlesungen \u00fcber das Dasein Gottes\" (\"Morning hours or lectures about God's existence\"), seemingly a series of lectures to his oldest son, his son-in-law and a young friend, usually held \"in the morning hours\", in which he explained his personal philosophical world-view, his own understanding of Spinoza and Lessing's \"purified\" (\"gel\u00e4utert\") pantheism. But almost simultaneously with the publication of this book in 1785, Jacobi published extracts of his and Mendelssohn's letters as \"Briefe \u00fcber die Lehre Spinozas\", stating publicly that Lessing was a self-confessed \"pantheist\" in the sense of \"atheist\". Mendelssohn was thus drawn into a poisonous literary controversy, and found himself attacked from all sides, including former friends or acquaintances such as Johann Gottfried von Herder and Johann Georg Hamann. Mendelssohn's contribution to this debate, \"To Lessing's Friends (An die Freunde Lessings)\" (1786), was his last work, completed a few days before his death.\nMendelssohn's complete works have been published in 19 volumes (in the original languages) (Stuttgart, 1971 ff., ed. A. Altmann and others)\nFamily.\nMendelssohn had six children, of whom only his second-oldest daughter, Recha, and his eldest son, Joseph, retained the Jewish faith. His sons were: Joseph (founder of the Mendelssohn banking house and a friend and benefactor of Alexander von Humboldt), Abraham (who married and was the father of Fanny and Felix Mendelssohn), and (a mechanical engineer of considerable repute). His daughters were Brendel (later Dorothea; the wife of Simon Veit and mother of Philipp Veit, subsequently the mistress, and then wife, of Friedrich von Schlegel), , and , all gifted women. Recha's only grandson (son of Heinrich Beer, brother of the composer Giacomo Meyerbeer), was born and educated as a Jew, but died very young, together with his parents, apparently from an epidemic. Joseph Mendelssohn's son (1798-1871) was the last male descendant of Moses Mendelssohn to practice Judaism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44894", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44894", "title": "Ablative heat shield", "text": ""}
{"id": "44895", "revid": "50884935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44895", "title": "United Arab Republic", "text": "Sovereign state in the Middle East (1958\u20131971)\nThe United Arab Republic (UAR; ) was a sovereign state in the Middle East from 1958 to 1971. It was initially a short-lived political union between Egypt (including Egyptian-governed Gaza) and Syria from 1958 until Syria seceded from the union following the 1961 Syrian coup d'\u00e9tat. Egypt continued to be known officially as the United Arab Republic until it was formally dissolved by Anwar Sadat in September 1971.\nThe republic was led by Gamal Abdel Nasser as the Egyptian president. The UAR was a member of the United Arab States, a loose confederation with the Mutawakkilite Kingdom of Yemen, which was dissolved in 1961. It was a brief pan-Arab union.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe United Arab Republic was established on 1 February 1958 as the first step towards a larger pan-Arab state, originally being proposed to Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser by a group of political and military leaders in Syria.\nPan-Arab sentiment traditionally was very strong in Syria, and Nasser was a popular heroic figure throughout the Arab world following the 1956 Tripartite Aggression. There was thus considerable popular support in Syria for union with Nasser's Egypt. The Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party was the leading advocate of such a union.\nIn mid-1957, Western powers began to worry that Syria was close to a Communist takeover; it had a highly organized Communist Party and the newly appointed army's chief of staff, Afif al-Bizri, was a Communist sympathizer. This caused the Syrian Crisis of 1957 after which Syrians intensified their efforts to unite with Egypt. Nasser told a Syrian delegation, including President Shukri al-Quwatli and Prime Minister Khalid al-Azm, that they needed to rid their government of Communists, but the delegation countered and warned him that only total union with Egypt would end the \"Communist threat\". According to Abdel Latif Boghdadi, Nasser initially resisted a total union with Syria, favoring instead a federal union. However, Nasser was \"more afraid of a Communist takeover\" and agreed on a total merger. The increasing strength of the Syrian Communist Party, under the leadership of Khalid Bakdash, worried the Syrian Ba'ath Party, which was suffering from an internal crisis from which prominent members were anxious to find an escape. Syria had a democratic government since the overthrow of Adib Shishakli's military government in 1954, and popular pressure for Arab unity was reflected in the composition of parliament.\nOn 11 January 1958, the Syrian Chief of Staff Afif al-Bizri headed a Syrian delegation composed of military officers which came uninvited and unannounced to Cairo. The delegation was received by Egyptian Chief of Staff Abdel Hakim Amer and petitioned for a Syrian-Egyptian union. Only Syrian advocates of unity, including Salah al-Din al-Bitar and Akram al-Hourani had prior knowledge of this delegation; Quwatli and Azm were notified a day later and considered it tantamount to a \"military coup\".\nNasser's final terms for the union were decisive and non-negotiable: \"a plebiscite, the dissolution of parties, and the withdrawal of the army from politics\". While the plebiscite seemed reasonable to most Syrian elites, the latter two conditions were extremely worrisome. They believed it would destroy political life in Syria. Despite these concerns, the Syrian officials knew it was too late to turn back. Caught between Western and Soviet pressures, the members of the elite in Syria viewed the merger with Egypt as the least bad option to insulate from either side. They believed that Nasser's terms were unfair, but given the intense pressure that their government was undergoing, they believed that they had no other choice.\nA plebiscite was held on 21 February 1958, with Egyptians and Syrians voting in favor of the merger. The result was announced on 22 February and Nasser was declared the new president of the United Arab Republic.\nEgyptian and Syrian leaders signed the protocols, although Azm did so reluctantly. Nasser became the republic's president and very soon carried out a crackdown against the Syrian Communists and opponents of the union. This included dismissing Bizri and Azm from their posts.\nEarly history.\nAdvocates of the union believed that Nasser would use the Ba'ath Party for ruling Syria. Unfortunately for the Ba'athists, it was never Nasser's intention to share an equal measure of power. Nasser established a new provisional constitution proclaiming a 600-member National Assembly with 400 members from Egypt and 200 members from Syria, and the disbanding of all political parties, including the Ba'ath. Nasser gave each of the provinces two vice-presidents, assigning Boghdadi and Abdel Hakim Amer to Egypt and Sabri al-Asali and Akram al-Hourani \u2013 a leader of the Ba'ath \u2013 to Syria. The new provisional constitution of 1958 was adopted.\nThough Nasser allowed former Ba'ath Party members to hold prominent political positions, they never reached positions as high in the government as did the Egyptian officials. During the winter and the spring of 1959\u201360, Nasser slowly squeezed prominent Syrians out of positions of influence. In the Syrian Ministry of Industry, for example, seven of the top thirteen positions were filled by Egyptians. In the General Petroleum Authority, four of the top six officials were Egyptian. In the fall of 1958, Nasser formed a tripartite committee, consisting of Zakaria Mohieddin, al-Hawrani, and Bitar to oversee the affairs in Syria. By moving the latter two, both Ba'athists, to Cairo, he neutralized important political figures who had their own ideas about how Syria should be run within the UAR.\nIn Syria, opposition to union with Egypt mounted. Syrian Army officers resented being subordinate to Egyptian officers, and Syrian Bedouin tribes received money from Saudi Arabia to prevent them from becoming loyal to Nasser. Also, Egyptian-style land reform was resented for damaging Syrian agriculture, the Communists began to gain influence, and the intellectuals of the Ba'ath Party who supported the union rejected the one-party system. Mustafa al-Barudi, the Syrian Minister of Propaganda, stated that 'the smallest member of the (Egyptian) retinue thought that he had inherited our country. [Egyptians] spread \"like octopuses\" everywhere.' Nasser was not able to address problems in Syria completely, because they were new to him, and instead of appointing Syrians to run Syria, he assigned this position to Amer and Abdul Hamid al-Sarraj (a Syrian army official and Nasser sympathizer).\nIn Egypt, the situation was more positive, with a GNP growth of 4.5 per cent and a rapid growth of industry. In 1960, Nasser nationalized the Egyptian press, reducing it to his personal mouthpiece.\nForeign relations.\nThe union was interpreted by the other nations of the world as a major threat to Jordan. Syria was seen as a source of instigation and shelter for Jordanian plotters against King Hussein. Egypt's own status as a state unfriendly to Western influence in the region (and thus to the close relationship between the British, in particular, and the Jordanian and Iraqi monarchies) added to the pressure. Hussein responded by proposing to Faisal II of Iraq a Jordanian-Iraqi union to counter the UAR; such a union formed on 14 February 1958, as the Arab Federation. Jordan and Iraq agreed to establish a unified military command with a unified military budget, 80 per cent of which was to be provided by Iraq and the remaining 20 per cent by Jordan. Troops from both countries were exchanged in the arrangement.\nIn nearby Lebanon, President Camille Chamoun, an opponent of Nasser, viewed the creation of the UAR with worry. Pro-Nasser factions in the country were mostly Muslims and Druze, while the Christian Maronite population generally supported Chamoun. These two sides began clashing, culminating in a civil war by May 1958. The former favoured merging with the UAR, while the latter feared the new country as a satellite of Communism. Although Nasser did not covet Lebanon, seeing it as a special case, he felt obliged to back his supporters through giving Abdul Hamid al-Sarraj the task of sending them money and light arms, and training officers.\nOn 14 July 1958, Iraqi army officers staged a military coup and overthrew the Kingdom of Iraq \u2013 which had just previously united with Jordan to form the rival Arab Federation. Nasser declared his recognition of the new government and stated that \"any attack on Iraq was tantamount to an attack on the UAR\". The next day British special forces and US marines landed in Lebanon and in Jordan, respectively, to prevent the two countries from opening up to pro-Nasser forces. To Nasser, the revolution in Iraq opened the road for Arab nationalism. Although most members of the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) favoured joining Iraq with the UAR, the new prime minister Abdul Karim Qasim disagreed. Said Aburish states reasons for this could have included Nasser's refusal to cooperate with and encourage the Iraqi Free Officers a year before the coup \u2013 or Qasim viewed Nasser as a threat to his supremacy as leader of Iraq.\nLater in July, the American government convinced Chamoun not to seek a second term. This allowed the election of Fouad Chehab as Lebanon's new president. Nasser and Chehab met at the Lebanese\u2013Syrian border and Nasser explained to Chehab that he never wanted unity with Lebanon, but only that the country not be used as a base against the UAR. This meeting resulted in the end of the crisis in Lebanon, with Nasser ceasing to supply his partisans and America setting a deadline for retreating from the area.\nAfter the overthrow of its Hashemite monarchy in 1958, Iraq became the Arab state most supportive of the UAR. Iraq sought to join the union; however, in 1959 Qasim cancelled the unity talks. After Qasim's overthrow in 1963 the union idea resurrected with the proposal of Egypt, Iraq, and Syria reforming the UAR. A new flag was proposed, with three stars symbolizing the three states constituting the proposed union. However, the plan for a tri-partite union never materialised. Iraq continued to use the three-star flag and later adopted it as the national flag. This three-star flag remained Iraq's national flag (with some modifications) until 2007.\nNationalization.\nIn June 1960, Nasser tried to establish economic reforms that would bring the Syrian economy more in line with the strong Egyptian public sector. However, these changes did little to help either economy. Rather than shift growth toward the private sector, Nasser embarked on an unprecedented wave of nationalizations in both Syria and Egypt. These began in July 1961, without consulting top Syrian economic officials. The entire cotton trade was taken over by the government, as well as all import-export firms. Nasser announced the nationalization of banks, insurance companies, and all heavy industry, 23 July 1961. Nasser also extended his social justice principles. The land limit was reduced from 200 to 100 feddans. Interest rates for farmers were dramatically reduced to the point of elimination in some cases. A ninety percent tax was instituted on all income above \u00a3E10,000. Workers and employees were allowed representatives on management boards. They were also given the right to a twenty-five percent share in the profit of their firm. The average workday was also cut from eight hours to seven without a reduction in pay.\nCulture.\nUpon accepting the 1960 Best Supporting Actor award given to Hugh Griffith for his \"wonderfully humorous, human, and sympathetic characterization of an Arab sheik\" in \"Ben-Hur\" (1959), director William Wyler expressed regret that the people of the United Arab Republic would not be permitted to see Griffith's performance.\nDissolution.\nInstead of a federation of two Arab peoples, as many Syrians had imagined, the UAR turned into a state completely dominated by Egyptians. Syrian political life was also diminished, as Nasser demanded all political parties in Syria to be dismantled. In the process, the strongly centralized Egyptian state imposed Nasser's socialistic political and economic system on weaker Syria, creating a backlash from the Syrian business and army circles, which resulted in the Syrian coup of 28 September 1961, and the end of the UAR. According to Elie Podeh, \"...this unity scheme was successful in consolidating the shaky Syrian identity. In fact, once the Syrians lost their independence they suddenly realized that they did indeed possess a different identity than the Egyptians.\"\nDespite the economic difficulties, what truly produced the demise of the UAR was Nasser's inability to find a suitable political system for the new regime. Given his socialist agenda in Egypt, the Ba'ath should have been his natural ally, but Nasser was hesitant to share power. Though Amer allowed some liberalization of the economy to appease Syrian businessmen, his decision to rig the elections of the National Union (the single party which replaced the Ba'ath), with the help of Colonel Abdul Hamid Sarraj (a Syrian army official and Nasser sympathizer), antagonized Ba'athist leaders. The Ba'ath Party won only five percent of the seats on the higher committees, while the more traditional conservative parties won a significant majority. Sarraj was appointed the head of the National Union in Syria, and by the spring of 1960 had replaced Amer as the chair of the Syrian Executive Council. Under Sarraj Syria was ruled by a repressive security force designed to suppress all opposition to the regime.\nThe immense increases in public sector control were accompanied by a push for centralisation. In August 1961 Nasser abolished regional governments in favour of one central authority, which operated from Damascus February through May and from Cairo for the rest of the year. As a part of this centralisation, Sarraj was relocated to Cairo, where he found himself with little real power. 15 September 1961, Sarraj returned to Syria, and after meeting with Nasser and Amer resigned from all his posts on 26 September.\nWithout any close allies to watch over Syria, Nasser was unaware of the growing unrest of the military. On 28 September a group of officers staged a coup and declared Syria's independence from the UAR. Though the coup leaders were willing to renegotiate a union under terms they felt would put Syria on an equal footing with Egypt, Nasser refused such a compromise. He initially considered sending troops to overthrow the new regime, but chose not to once he was informed that the last of his allies in Syria had been defeated. In speeches that followed the coup, Nasser declared he would never give up his goal of an ultimate Arab union. However, he would never again achieve such a tangible victory toward this goal.\nAfter Syria's withdrawal.\nAfter Syria's withdrawal from the union in 1961, Egypt retained its \"United Arab Republic\" name until 1971.\nIn the early 1960s, Nasser sent an expeditionary army to Yemen to support the anti-monarchist forces in the North Yemen Civil War.\nFrom 5 to 10 June in 1967, Israel invaded Gaza, the West Bank, the Golan Heights, and the Sinai Peninsula during the Six-Day War. Egypt recovered partial sovereignty over the Sinai Peninsula in 1978, but only after agreeing to recognize Israel. Anwar Sadat, who reversed many of the socialist reforms enacted under Nasser, extended diplomatic recognition to Israel despite their ongoing occupation of lands seized in 1967. Israel maintained an occupation of these territories and created illegal settlements. After 1994, the Palestinian Authority, created by the Oslo Accords, established a degree of Palestinian civil administration in Gaza. Israel retreated from Gaza in 2005 was not followed by resumption of control by Egypt. Since 2007, Gaza has been administered by the Palestinian party Hamas.\nEgypt was officially renamed from the UAR to the Arab Republic Of Egypt on the 2nd of September, 1971. \nArmed forces.\nFollowing the formation of the United Arab Republic, the Syrian Army was designated as the First Army, and the Egyptian Army was designated as the Second Army.\nFlag.\nThe UAR adopted a flag based on the Arab Liberation Flag of the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, but with two stars to represent the two parts of the UAR. From 1980 to 2024 this was the official flag of Syria. In 1963, Iraq adopted a flag that was similar but with three stars, representing the hope that Iraq would join the UAR. The current flags of Egypt, Sudan and Yemen are also based on the 1952 Arab Liberation Flag of horizontal red, white and black bands.\nGeography.\nIf it existed today, the United Arab Republic would be the 25th largest nation on the planet (Egypt is 30th and Syria is 88th). It was comparable in size to South Africa, and twice the size of France. Following the dissolution of the government of Palestine in 1959, the United Arab Republic further exerted administration over Gaza, until 1967.\nSport.\nA team representing the United Arab Republic competed at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome. The UAR won one silver and one bronze medal.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44898", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44898", "title": "Mafioso", "text": "Mafioso may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44899", "revid": "51058652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44899", "title": "Espoo", "text": "Second-most populous city in Finland\nEspoo (, ; ) is a city in Finland. It is located to the west of the capital, Helsinki, in southern Uusimaa. The population is approximately . It is the most populous municipality in Finland. Espoo is part of the Helsinki Metropolitan Area, which has approximately \u00a0million inhabitants. Espoo is on the northern shore of the Gulf of Finland and borders Helsinki, Vantaa, Kirkkonummi, Vihti and Nurmij\u00e4rvi. The city includes the enclave of Kauniainen. Espoo covers an area of . Espoo is a bilingual municipality with Finnish and Swedish as its official languages. The population consists of Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages, well above the national average.\nEspoo was settled in the Prehistoric Era, with evidence of human settlements dating back 8,000 years. However, the population disappeared during the early Iron Age. During the Early Middle Ages, the region was populated by Tavastians and Southwestern Finns. Following the Northern Crusades, Swedish settlers began to emigrate to the coastal regions of modern-day Finland. Espoo was founded as an autonomous Catholic parish in the 15th century. Following the conclusion of the Finnish War, the decision to make Helsinki the new capital of the Russian-controlled Grand Duchy of Finland in 1812 had a significant positive impact on the municipality's growth and development. Nevertheless, the territory continued to be mainly agrarian until the 20th century. After World War II, Espoo underwent swift urbanization and significant demographic shifts, with Finnish becoming the majority language around 1950, replacing Swedish. The municipality attained market town status in 1963 and was granted city status in 1972.\nThe city is characterized by a suburban landscape dominated by detached housing. It is recognized for its expansive natural surroundings such as a shoreline, an archipelago, forests, lakes, and a national park. Espoo is divided into seven major districts, with each being further divided into smaller districts and neighbourhoods. Unlike traditional cities, Espoo does not have a central city area. Instead, it has five distinct city centres: Lepp\u00e4vaara, Tapiola, Matinkyl\u00e4, Espoon keskus and Espoonlahti. Espoo has numerous local centres formed around historical manors. Because of its structure, Espoo is generally considered even \"the most American suburban city of Finland\".\nAalto University is situated in Otaniemi, Espoo, alongside a thriving scientific community that comprises startups and associations such as VTT \u2013 the Technical Research Centre of Finland. Espoo is home to leading enterprises like Nokia, HMD Global, Tieto, KONE, Neste, Fortum, Orion Corporation, Metso, and Foreca, in addition to game developers Rovio and Remedy Entertainment. In 2015, Espoo became a member of the UNESCO Global Network of Learning Cities.\nHistory.\nEtymology.\nBefore the time of the Swedish colonisation, Espoo was inhabited by Tavastians, a Finnish tribe, and the area in which the city lies on did most likely have a different name. The name of Espoo is believed to have derived from the Medieval Swedish village of \"Espaby\" (or \"Espoby\"), which was located in the western part of the present-day city. It may refer to aspens that grew on a nearby riverbank, as the archaic Swedish word for the tree is \"\u00e4spe\", and the word for a river is \"\u00e5\", with the suffix \"-by\" meaning village.\nThe coat of arms of Espoo features a gold horseshoe topped by a gold crown on a blue shield. The crown refers to the old \"kungsg\u00e5rd\" of Espoo and the horseshoe refers to the obligation to transport officials, military or prisoners that parishes along the King's Road fell under. Many roads in Espoo still follow the old medieval King's Road. The King's Road in Finland, stretching from Turku in the west to Vyborg in the east, was formed in the 1340s or 1350s and was the most important road in Finland at the time.\nPrehistory.\nPresent-day Espoo was first settled by hunter-gatherers around 8,000 years ago, a few thousand years after the end of the Last Glacial Period. Stone Age settlements have been found from Nuuksio and Perinki. Settlements from the Early Metal Age have been found from Mikkel\u00e4 and from Morby dating from the Pre-Roman Iron Age, of which the latter is an important subject relating to research of cattle husbandry. Traces of early settlement in the area remain in the place names. For example, the original name for Soukka was \"Soukko\".\nThe first settlers lived in the northern parts of the current city, around the lakes Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, Bodomj\u00e4rvi, and Looj\u00e4rvi, as the southern parts were still largely covered by the sea. In the Stone Age, people in Espoo lived on south-facing shores and slopes, which provided shelter from cold continental winds. Living close to water bodies also made hunting and fishing easier. The way of life was dictated by seasonal changes, and people rarely stayed in one place throughout the year.\nDuring the Bronze Age (c. 1500\u2013500 BCE), human settlement shifted southward. Known settlements from the era are few, but more than 70 cairn-like burial sites from the period have been discovered, mostly from southern Espoo, which formed an archipelago at the time. When ironwork was introduced to Finland around 500 BCE, it gave people access to materials that were far more versatile than materials used before. However, the climate grew colder at the beginning of the Iron Age, and it seems that human settlement in Espoo disappeared during the era. Only two discoveries from the time have been made in Espoo.\nSwedish rule.\nMedieval Espoo.\nMost of the original villages of present-day Espoo were founded by Tavastian Finns according to place names. By the 12th century, there were Tavastian houses on the shore of Kaukj\u00e4rvi (now known as Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi), in Kauklahti, Karvasm\u00e4ki, Bemb\u00f6le, Haapalahti and Finnevik.\nThe first Swedish settlements in Uusimaa were established during the 12th or 13th century. Swedish settlers moved to the area through the current site of Kirkkonummi, and then to the Esboby area. From there, they continued northeast to Kauklahti, Bemb\u00f6le and Vanhakartano. In later stages, settlers might also have arrived in Espoo directly from Sweden, most likely from Svealand. The Swedish name for Espoo, \"Esbo\", dates from this period. The settlers changed the Finnish names used by the Tavastians to Swedish ones: for example Kauklahti became K\u00f6klax and Karvasm\u00e4ki became Karvasbacka. The current Finnish names might also have changed from the original ones in this process. For example, the place name \"V\u00e4lli\" might have been changed into \"V\u00e4llskog\", which has since led to the current Finnish name Velskola. The Swedish settlements were so extensive that the entire area became Swedish-speaking, except for its northernmost part and possibly the Haapalahti-M\u00e4kkyl\u00e4 area.\nPalynological analyses indicate that agriculture was already practised in Espoo around the 11th century, but no historical records from the era survive. Until the late 13th century, Espoo was part of a borderland region between the Southwestern Finns and Tavastian Finns. Some artefacts found in Espoo have also been traced to ancient Savo-Karelian Finnish costumes, and the Late Iron Age and Early Medieval women in the area have had similar jewellery as in the region around present-day Mikkeli.\nIn the Middle Ages, there were about 70 village lots in Espoo. Ancient fields and many passageways have been discovered near the remains of ancient villages. Espaby (at which site the Espoo manor was later founded) was probably the oldest Swedish-speaking village in the area. The name Espoo likely refers to the name of the river Espoonjoki (Swedish: Esbo\u00e5n, originally Esp\u00e5 / Esp\u00e5\u00e5), which in turn is thought to have come from the aspen trees on the shores of the river (the Swedish word for \"aspen\" is \"\u00e4spe\"). The name was first mentioned in 1431. Originally, the current river Gumb\u00f6lenjoki was renamed Espoonjoki after the village located along the river. When a church was founded near the village of S\u00f6drik, the name Espoonjoki was given to a river running from lake Kirkkoj\u00e4rvi to Kauklahti.\nEspoo became an independent parish in the 15th century. Previously Espoo had been a chapel parish under Kirkkonummi. The stone Espoo Cathedral was built in the 1480s by initiative from the peasants. Up to the 1670s the eastern parts of Espoo belonged to the Helsinki parish, after which they were officially annexed to the Espoo parish and the \"slottsl\u00e4n\" of Raseborg.\nAfter the Second Crusade to Finland, settlers from Sweden established permanent agricultural settlements in Uusimaa. Espoo was a subdivision of the Kirkkonummi congregation until 1486\u20131487. The oldest known document referring to Kirkkonummi is from 1330; Espoo as a subchapter has been dated to the 1380s, although the first document directly referring to Espoo is from as late as 1431. The construction of the Espoo Cathedral, the oldest preserved building in Espoo, marks the independence of Espoo. Administratively, Espoo was a part of Uusimaa. When the province was split to Eastern and Western provinces governed from the Porvoo and Raseborg castles, respectively, the eastern border of the Raseborg province was in Espoo. The 13th-century road connecting the most important cities in Finland at that time, the King's Road, passes through Espoo on its way from Stockholm via Turku and Porvoo to Viipuri.\nGr\u00e4sa manor.\nThe oldest \"fr\u00e4lse\" stead in Espoo, the Gr\u00e4sa manor, apparently received \"fr\u00e4lse\" rights in the late 15th century. Gr\u00e4sa is one of the oldest settlements in Espoo and the oldest in southern Espoo, as it was probably founded already in the early 14th century as Swedish settlement moved inland. From the beginning, the settlement was located at the site of the current Olari Church on both sides of the Gr\u00e4sanoja river. The absence of Finnish names in the area reveals that the population was Swedish-speaking from the beginning.\nEarly modern period.\nIn 1556, King Gustav Vasa decided to stabilize and develop the region by founding a royal mansion in Espoo. The government bought the villages of Esp\u00e5by and Mankby (Finnish: \"Mankki\") and transferred the population elsewhere, and built the royal mansion in Esp\u00e5by. (Mankby was eventually abandoned and was never repopulated.) The royal mansion housed the king's local plenipotentiary (vogt), and collected royal tax in kind paid by labour on the mansion's farm. The administrative centre Espoon keskus has grown around the church and the Espoo railway station, but the municipality has retained a network-like structure to the modern day.\nIn the 16th century Espoo changed into a parish of many large farmsteads. The war between Sweden and Russia in the late 16th century attracted farmstead owners to found horse steads in hopes of reduced taxation. Horse stead owners were required to uphold a rider in the wars fought by the realm. In the late 17th century the crown had donated lands to noblemen with success in wars, and during a few decades, the lands in Espoo had been dealt to seven noble families.\nIn the early 18th century the Great Northern War and the Great Wrath caused poverty among the people. During this time, many members of the estates in Espoo moved to Sweden. The foundation of Sveaborg in front of Helsinki increased the traffic in Espoo and many officers bought villas in Espoo. Construction of the fortress required transport of bricks from factories in Espoo. In the same century, agricultural novelties such as the potato and various fruits spread from the manor houses to the peasants.\nGrand Duchy of Finland and early industrialisation.\nSwedish rule in Finland came to an end in 1809, when the Kingdom of Sweden ceded all of its remaining territory in Finland under control of the Russian Empire after the Finnish War. When the city of Helsinki became the capital of the newly established Grand Duchy of Finland in 1812, it brought novel developments to the neighbouring parish of Espoo. Many government officials as well as members of the growing merchant class bought summer houses from Espoo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThere was a great sawmill in Bastvik back in 1883, where great ships from faraway seas came to lade lumber. There were many great bridges so that vessels could be laden simultaneously. After bringing colonial and other necessary goods to Helsinki, they came empty to Bastvik. [...] The superintendent was a German-born Hoffeldt.\nKatri Bergholm, reminiscing life in Bastvik, present-day Saunalahti, at the end of the 19th century.\nThroughout the 19th century, most of Espoo's inhabitants worked in agriculture. The population was around 4,000, while most of the people lived in over 60 small villages. Halfway through the century, almost 90% of the population spoke Swedish as their first language. The wealthy estates and mansions of the parish required maids, farmhands and tenant farmers as their workforce to raise cattle, farm crops and raise vegetables in the kitchen gardens. Fishing was also common in the coastal areas. The Glims farmstead in Karvasm\u00e4ki has been preserved as a museum to present rural life in Espoo during this period when industrial development was still minute in Finland.\nThe rural community in Espoo began to change in the latter half of the 19th century. Some brickyards had already been built in the 18th century on the grounds of Espoonkartano manor, located in the western part of the present-day city, but it was not until the economic reforms of Emperor Alexander II that the Industrial Revolution started to gain momentum in Finland. As the Russo-Finnish trade legislation liberalized, new brickyards were established in Espoonlahti and Kauklahti, as the shores of Espoo Bay provided high-quality clay for their use. The bricks were mostly carried with steamboats to the neighbouring Helsinki, the growing capital city of the grand duchy.\nThe most prominent industrial facility in 19th century Espoo was the steam-powered Bastvik Sawmill, founded in 1876. In addition to the growing lumber and brick industries, a joiners' workshop was established on the island of Staffan in 1886. Staffan Island became a home for a highly skilled and renowned community of joiners, colloquially known as the \"University of Espoo\" or the \"University of Soukka\".\nWorld War I.\nWorld War I had an effect on the Russian Empire and the Grand Duchy of Finland when the German Empire declared war on Russia on 1 August 1914. Russia immediately started preparing for war against Germany. At the start of the war, the main forces of the Russian Baltic Fleet had been concentrated at Sveaborg in front of Helsinki. The Russian military feared that Germany would use southern Finland to attack Petrograd, so Russia started building a fortification chain of over surrounding Helsinki to protect it. Construction of the fortification started in 1915 and took almost three years.\nConstruction of the fortification chain required a huge amount of workforce. The construction was led by the engineering administration of Saint Petersburg, but in practice, the actual work was led by the engineering military staff in Sveaborg. The local engineering office was located in Lepp\u00e4vaara in Espoo. Although the Russian military tried to keep the construction of the fortification chain secret from the enemy, there are German intelligence reports with descriptions of the Russian fortification chain.\nBecause of the lack of available workforce, the Russians turned to expropriation allowed by Russian military law. The manor houses in Espoo were ordered to send one man and one horse each to work on the construction. The total number of workforce at the fortification is not known, but the expropriation resulted in 4,000 men, of which 1,300 were situated in Lepp\u00e4vaara and 1,500 in Tapiola in June 1916.\n16-year-old Annukka Koskinen, who lived at the Bergans farm in Suur-Lepp\u00e4vaara, wrote about the expropriation in June 1916:\nIt was really shameless. Last year [the Russians] took control of three large buildings, and they would have taken the last one too, had we not complained to the office of the governor. For all of summer, they built fortifications all over the hill. Trees were cut down and new ones planted in their place. You know that only very few of these newly planted trees will survive. \u2013 This spring, [the soldiers] have shot at our fields during practice. Two days ago we received an order that the house, the large woodshed and the sauna have to be empty by noon on the next day.\nThe Russian Revolution in 1917 stopped work at the fortification. Finland declared its full independence in December 1917, and the fortifications were never actually needed to protect Saint Petersburg from a German attack. The fortifications only ever saw action in one battle during the Finnish Civil War, when the red forces in Lepp\u00e4vaara fought the German forces who had come to the aid of the whites on 14 April 1918. The fortifications were later used as ammunition storage and civil protection during World War II.\nFinnish Civil War.\nPower vacuum.\nAfter the February Revolution in 1917, Finland went through a power vacuum. The imperial rule had fallen, general order had broken and the police had been dispensed. Upholding the general order moved to a local level, and local militias, citizens' guards, fire brigades and security forces were founded. These forces were not originally founded for military purposes but to uphold the general order. The activity was voluntary-based, and the forces were organised for example during strikes.\nIn autumn 1917 the nature of the organisation became more military and the number of local workers' guards increased rapidly. The armed organisation was influenced by an acute lack of food, disappointment with the loss of the majority position of the Social Democratic Party of Finland at the 1917 Finnish parliamentary election, the Senate's desire for renovation, the fight for municipal power and fear of an armed uprising of the bourgeoisie.\nRed and White Guards in Espoo.\nIn Espoo, particularly Lepp\u00e4vaara was a restless area. The workers' association of Alberga founded an unarmed militia of ten people to uphold the general order. During summer and early autumn in 1917 there were local conflicts between the bourgeois guards and the workers' militia. In middle November the guards in Espoo on both sides had already started arming themselves.\nIn July 1917 the first bourgeois order guard was founded in Kauklahti, under the guise of a voluntary fire brigade. A little later a similar organisation was founded in Kilo, and these organisations joined forces in August to September. The guards had about 160 members in total at this point.\nAfter the Finnish Civil War had broken out, many young men left Espoo to join the White Guards all over the countryside in Uusimaa. The most important of these was the Sigurds Guard in Kirkkonummi, of whose members 40 came from Espoo.\nRed Espoo.\nAt the start of the Civil War in January 1918, the Red Guards took control of Espoo. There were no actual battles between the Reds and the Whites during the revolution, as Espoo was in practice already under Red control. Municipal power was transferred from the municipal council and the municipal board to a social democratic municipal organisation. The Reds took control without bloodshed and strengthened their position by sending patrols all around Espoo to confiscate any weapons found in the houses they visited.\nBy order from the Finnish People's Delegation, a revolutionary court was founded in Espoo, with the Kauklahti-based worker Aleksi Aronen serving as its judge. The court sessions were held in Villa Odenwald in Kauniainen. Most of the sentences given by the court were prison sentences or fines. In addition, the Red Guard in Lepp\u00e4vaara had its own comrade court. The general staff of the Red Guard in Uusimaa had installed a curfew forbidding going outside after nine o'clock in the evening. Meetings were held in workers' houses assembling lists to provide support for the Red Guards. Patrols consisting of young men looking for food and weapons could take justice in their own hands in the typical form of red terror. In the spring, the Reds killed nine people in Espoo, of which six were civilians. Rumours of these acts of violence spread out, spreading fear among the people. Many people saw the municipal rule of the Reds as a reign of terror.\nDuring the Civil War, many bourgeois people in Espoo, whom the Reds in power saw as a threat, fled to neighbouring municipalities, hidden cabins in the archipelago or forests in northern Espoo. For example, Hans Heimb\u00fcrger, the speaker of the Espoo municipal council, fled to Deger\u00f6 in Ing\u00e5 in January together with his family. Two people from Espoo are said to have fled into caves to flee from the Red power.\nAfter the war.\nThe damages of the Civil War in Espoo were minimal, except for one primary school which had been hit by German bombing. However, many houses in Espoo suffered from famine after the Civil War. The war had cut off a large part of the foreign trade in Finland, which worsened the famine. Particularly the price of grain and other necessary foodstuffs had risen significantly, which caused price limits for the most important products. The situation eased out in 1919, but food regulation was only finally discontinued in 1921.\nAfter the end of the war, the White Guards went out to look for Reds fled into the forests in Espoo for a long time. In June 1918 the White Guards appealed to the municipal council of Espoo to ask for funds to travel to prison camps in order to provide expert help in judging reds from Espoo. 12 members of the Red Guard in Espoo had been sent to prison camps.\nUnder the 1918 peasant law, peasants were freed from the power of their private masters, which led to a widespread settlement of steadless population in Finland. From 1919 to 1925 about 150 peasants and crofters in Espoo bought land for themselves with the grant given by the Finnish state. The new farms thus acquired still remained small, which caused the need to acquire further income through forestry and handyman work.\n20th century.\nIn 1920, Espoo was only a rural municipality of about 9,000 inhabitants, of whom 70% were Swedish speaking. Agriculture was the primary source of income, with 75% of the population making their living from farming.\nKauniainen was separated from Espoo in 1920, and it gained city rights the same year as Espoo, in 1972. However, the border between Espoo and Kauniainen was only defined in the late 1940s.\nEspoo started to grow rapidly in the 1940s and 1950s. Shortly after the end of the Continuation War, the population of Espoo grew by four thousand as frontline soldiers and evacuees from ceded territories (including the Porkkalanniemi peninsula, leased to the Soviet Union between 1944 and 1956) were settled in the city.\nEspoo's location right next to the capital city of Helsinki attracted people working in the capital city to move into the rapidly growing neighbour city, and already before World War II there were many suburbs along the Rantarata railway, such as Lepp\u00e4vaara, Kilo and Kauklahti which had formed into an industrial area. After the new Jorvaksentie road (predecessor to the L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4 highway) was completed, new detached houses were built along it, particularly in Westend. After the war, many detached houses for soldiers having fought at the frontline were built in Espoo. The highest increase in population only started in the early 1950s when the Asuntos\u00e4\u00e4ti\u00f6 foundation started construction of the garden city of Tapiola, and construction of a new campus area of the Helsinki University of Technology started in the neighbouring district of Otaniemi.\nIn the 1940s and 1950s Espoo grew more rapidly than it could afford. The infrastructure of Espoo was not prepared to handle such rapid growth. There was no time for proper zoning, instead new houses were built as people bought lots in the city.\nA major change happened in the late 1940s as the Helsinki University of Technology moved from Hietalahti in Helsinki to larger premises in Otaniemi, and the planning of the Tapiola garden city district was started. As the city did not have enough money to fund the construction of the student village in Otaniemi, the technical university students took to the matter to their own hands, both by gathering money through various activities and taking part in the actual construction. About 800 thousand bricks from the Embassy of the Soviet Union in Helsinki, which had been destroyed in the bombing of Helsinki, were used to build student apartments in Otaniemi.\nFrom 1944 to 1956 the Espoonlahti bay between Espoo and Kirkkonummi served as the border of the Porkkala Naval Base under the control of the Soviet Union. A large part of Kirkkonummi, as well as a narrow strip of the sea and a couple of islands in Espoo were included in the area of the naval base. In Espoo, the Kauklahti railway station near the border to the naval base became a tightly controlled border station between Finland and the Soviet Union. The land connection to Porkkala went via the Kivenlahti bridge. During the time of the naval base, part of the western coast had been evacuated, and the windows of the houses in the border villages on the Soviet side had to be covered during night time. The windows of the trains travelling through the area rented to the Soviet Union had to be covered with wooden hatches from the outside for the duration of passage through Soviet territory, and could only be reopened upon reentry to Finland.\nUnlike the neighbouring city of Helsinki, Espoo failed to develop a proper city centre, forming instead into an area of multiple centres. This was partly because a 1968 zoning plan where Espoo was divided into four separate areas, with the administrative centre situated in Muurala (later known as Espoon keskus), partly because most of the land in Espoo was not actually owned by the city but was instead in private ownership, directing new construction to wherever it was possible instead of using a proper zoning plan.\nThe rather tightly populated districts of Tapiola and Lepp\u00e4vaara in eastern Espoo underwent attempts to separate from the city of Espoo, from two directions: on the one hand, the inhabitants of the districts wanted them to become independent municipalities, while on the other hand, the neighbouring city of Helsinki wanted to annex the districts into Helsinki. These attempts all failed and the districts remained as part of Espoo, which changed from a rural municipality first to a market town in 1963 and then to a city in 1972. The new administrative centre of the city, Espoon keskus, was built in the 1970s around the Espoo railway station and the old grey stone church in Espoo.\nThe non-centralised nature of Espoo led to significant differences between its districts. Different parts of Espoo included the wealthy garden city district of Tapiola, large areas that still remained as countryside, and new suburbs such as Haukilahti, Karakallio and Soukka. Disagreements between different districts were common and gave Espoo a nationwide reputation of a quarrelsome municipality.\nThe city quickly developed from a rural municipality into a fully-fledged industrial city, gaining city rights in 1972. On 1 January 1972, when Espoo gained city rights, it had a population of over 100,000, making it into the fourth-largest city in Finland at the time, after Helsinki, Turku and Tampere.\nDue to its proximity to Helsinki, Espoo soon became popular amongst people working in the capital. In the fifty years from 1950 to 2000, the population of Espoo grew from 22,000 to 210,000, mainly due to large-scale migration from other parts of Finland. Since 1945, the majority of people in Espoo have been Finnish-speaking. In 2006, the Swedish-speaking inhabitants represented barely 9% of the total population. The population growth is still continuing, but at a slower rate. In the summer of 2022, the population of Espoo grew to over 300,000 inhabitants.\nMarket town and city.\nEspoo became a market town in 1963. The population of Espoo at the time was 65,000. About a decade later, Espoo became a city in 1972. The districts of Suvela, Olari, Matinkyl\u00e4 and Kivenlahti were built in the 1970s. The first of the high-rise buildings in Keilaniemi, the Neste head office was built in 1976.\nMany of the important roads in Finland go through Espoo. Finland's first highway, the Finnish national road 1, was built in 1962. The Ring I beltway was also built in the 1960s. The next outer beltway, Ring II, was taken into use in 2000.\nIn the original plan for the centre of the Tapiola garden city, architect Aarne Ervi had reserved a space for a theatre building at the end of the fountain pool, but the theatre building was never built. The decision to build a new cultural centre was made in a celebratory session of the Espoo city council on 1 January 1972, when Espoo became a city. Two years later the first room program of the new building was completed, defining its needs and surface area. An architecture contest was held for its design in 1979. About 60 different proposals were submitted for the contest, with architect Arto Sipinen's design \"Kuunsilta\" (\"Moonlight bridge\") being chosen as the winner. Construction of the Espoo Cultural Centre started in 1986. The foundation stone was laid on Jean Sibelius Day on 8 December. The building was constructed of quartz sand bricks, travertine tiles, glass and mosaic concrete, and its cost rose to about 130 million Finnish markka. The building was completed in January 1989.\n21st century.\nBy the start of the 21st century, Espoo had become the second largest city in the entire country in Finland with a population of slightly over 200 thousand, second only to the capital city Helsinki.\nThe L\u00e4nsimetro transport line started construction in 2010 and its first stage was taken into use on 18 November 2017.\nGeography.\nGeneral.\nEspoo has an area of \u2014 (59%) of land and (41%) of water. Sea water makes up 37% of the total area of Espoo and inland water makes up a bit over 3%. To the north of the lush river areas and the fields in central Espoo, the archipelagal and coastal zone in southern Espoo changes into lake-filled and rocky terrain. At some places the lake areas in northern Espoo resemble the Finnish Lakeland. The largest part of the lake ridge in Nuuksio is located in Espoo, but a part of it is located in neighbouring Vihti. The largest lakes in Uusimaa, Lohjanj\u00e4rvi and Hiidenvesi, are located west of the ridge.\nThe highest point in Espoo is Velskola at 114.2 m above sea level, and the lowest point is at sea level. Espoo is a part of the Helsinki capital region and is contiguously bordered by the cities, towns and municipalities of Kirkkonummi, Vihti, Nurmij\u00e4rvi, Vantaa, Kauniainen and Helsinki.\nFor a city of its size, Espoo is home to exceptionally large natural areas. The southern part of the city is characterized by maritime environment, including a varied coastline and an archipelago consisting of 165 islands.\nBedrock.\nThe minerals and structures of the rocky and hilly topography of Espoo were formed about 1880 to 1650 million years ago. Particularly the Weichselian glaciation has had an effect on the current environment \u2013 the continental ice sheet withdrew from what is now Espoo about 13 thousand years ago. The first areas to surface from underneath the sea were the high hills in northern Espoo, such as Mustankorvenkallio. The numerous smooth cliffs on the seashore and in the archipelago were caused by wear by the continental ice sheet; there are grooves on their surfaces, indicating the direction of the flow of the ice sheet. Icebergs split off from the ice sheet have transported glacial erratics, including those in Kunnarla, Soukka and Suomenoja.\nMain rock types in the Espoo bedrock include gneiss, migmatite, granite, gabbro, amphibolite and mica schist. Rare orbicular granite can be found in Nuuksio, the deposit is internationally valuable. At many places there are thick layers of clay on top of the bedrock, and fields were plowed onto clay-covered valleys. The thickness of the clay layers was mainly formed in the Baltic Ice Lake and the Yoldia Sea. The effect of the bedrock on the traditional Espoo natural landscape was significant; high and steep cliffs stand up from shallowly waving fields. The oblong lakes in northern Espoo are located in valleys in the bedrock. The formation of the bedrock has determined the shapes of the coastline, such as Espoonlahti and Laajalahti. Because of upthrust, paludification of forests and overgrowth of lakes, bogs and layers of peat have formed on top of the clay at some places.\nSea area.\nThe sea area of Espoo is a considerably narrow strip between the sea areas of Helsinki and Kirkkonummi. The depth of the southern part of the sea area, in the outer archipelago, is a few dozen metres at the most. The ship route between Helsinki and Stockholm, Sweden goes through the outermost parts of the sea area which contains small treeless, sea-washed islets. One of them is the former fortification island of Kyt\u00f6. The smallest islands are shallow islets, such as Stensk\u00e4r. They are significant nesting grounds for birds and many of them are nature-protected areas. In summertime there might be flowering meadow patches on the islands. The islands closest to the Espoo shoreline include Stora Herr\u00f6, Pentala, Kopplorna and Lehtisaaret. The islands host many vacation buildings, and they are often referred to as an intermediary archipelago.\nThe islands in the inner archipelago are larger and lusher and contain boat harbours and buildings, as well as permanent settlements on the islands closest to the shore. There is a land connection from the mainland to the inhabited islands in Suvisaaristo and it forms a district of its own, with a more rural image than most of Espoo.\nThe sea area extends inland at many places as bays, of which the largest are Espoonlahti in the west and Laajalahti in the east. Bays on the shoreline between them include Nuottalahti, Haukilahti and Otsolahti. The bays are shallow and contain many islands, particularly in Espoonlahti. Most of the islands in Laajalahti are located across the municipal border in Helsinki. The largest peninsula in Espoo is Soukka, fracturing into an archipelago in the south. Thus the peninsula hardly offers any views to the open sea. The nearest ship harbours are located in Helsinki, while the Espoo shoreline contains many small boat harbours, the largest being the boat harbour in Suomenoja. The maritime traffic in front of Espoo mainly consists of motor boats of various sizes, water scooters and ferries handling traffic in the archipelago.\nIn terms of natural geography, the coastal waters of Espoo are divided into four different sea areas, consisting counting from the west of Espoonlahti, Suvisaaristo-Lauttasaari and Seurasaari. The fourth sea area is Helsinki-Porkkala to the south of the other three. The surface area of the Espoonlahti sea area is 19.2 square kilometres. The Espoonlahti nature preserve area is located in its northern part. The western part of the sea area is located in the neighbouring municipality of Kirkkonummi. The surface area of the Suvisaaristo-Lauttasaari sea area is 48.5 square kilometres. It reaches from the shores of the islands of Stora Herr\u00f6 and Pentala up to the West Harbour in Helsinki. The surface area of the Seurasaari sea area is 13.1 square kilometres. The Laajalahti nature preserve area is located in its northwestern part. Most of the sea area is located in neighbouring Helsinki. The surface area of the Helsinki-Porkkala sea area is 400.5 square kilometres. It reaches from the eastern shore of the Porkkalanniemi peninsula up to Suomenlinna and Santahamina. Islands in the sea area include Kyt\u00f6, Stensk\u00e4r, Knappersk\u00e4r and G\u00e5sgrund.\nShoreline.\nThe shoreline of Espoo is about 58 kilometres long and there are 165 islands in front of it. The shoreline is diverse and contains decomposing bays, reed beds, sandy beaches, coastal cliffs and boat harbours. The district of Westend contains private house lots reaching to the sea shore, while the sea shore in the rest of Espoo is mainly in public use. The Rantaraitti hiking route spans almost the entire sea shore of Espoo. The district of Kivenlahti contains coastal cliffs, man-made shoreline and sandy beaches.\nThe land in Espoo is rising by about a quarter of a metre per century and the moist land rise shores are slowly becoming bogs.\nContinental area.\nThere are six Natura 2000 areas in Espoo: the B\u00e5nberget forest area, Espoonlahti-Saunalahti (partly located in Kirkkonummi), the Laajalahti bird waters, Matalaj\u00e4rvi, Nuuksio (partly located in Kirkkonummi and Vihti) and the bogs, groves and old forests in Vestra (partly located in Vantaa). The forests in Espoo are mainly pine barrens consisting mostly of spruces and pines, with some deciduous trees. There are lush and diverse groves in some places, containing many hardwood trees such as oak. The ecological core area of southern Espoo is the Espoo Central Park, consisting mainly of two forest massives: Harmaakallo and Bosmalm.\nThe most famous and most popular nature area in Espoo is the Nuuksio National Park located on the lake highland of northern Espoo, reaching over to Kirkkonummi and Vihti. As well as the contiguous forest and pools of sweet water, Nuuksio contains small bogs and meadows. There are also lush grove-like brook valleys in the area.\nThe highest spot in Espoo, Mustankorvenkallio, is located in Velskola to the southwest of Saarij\u00e4rvi 114 metres above sea level and over 40 metres above the water level of Saarij\u00e4rvi. There are also considerably high spots very near the coast, such as the Kasavuori hill in Soukka, rising to 44 metres above sea level.\nInland waters.\nThere are over a hundred lakes and ponds in Espoo, of which 73 have an area of over a hectare. The lakes in Espoo were formed when the land slowly started rising after the continental ice sheet had thawed, and water started flowing into the crevices in the bedrock. The oldest lakes in Espoo are Kalatoin, Iso Majaslampi, Oraj\u00e4rvi and Pieni Majaslampi, all located over 80 metres above sea level. At that time, what is now the Baltic Sea was in a so-called Yoldia Sea phase, which had formed when the surface of the Baltic Ice Lake had lowered tens of metres in a short time. Nuuksio slowly expanded into part of the mainland and new lakes were formed when the sea level sank. Development stopped for about a millennium and a half when the ancient Baltic Sea changed into the Ancylus Lake. Its surface was originally about 60 metres above the current sea level. The Ancylus Lake formed into the salty Littorina Sea when the current Danish straits started opening up. The surface of the Littorina Sea was about 34 metres above the current sea level. At that time, almost all lakes in northern Espoo had been separated from the sea. Only the lake Nuuksion Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi remained as a narrow, fjord-like bay. The shore of the Littorina Sea remained at its place for a long time as upthrust slowed down. Rocky rims remain of the ancient sea shore on hills and cliffs. Nuuksion Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi only separated from the sea and became an inland lake about five millennia ago. About four millennia ago the land had risen so far that also Lake Bodom, Lippaj\u00e4rvi and other pools in central Espoo changed from shallow bays into lakes.\nMost of the lakes in Espoo are located to the north of the Finnish national road 1, particularly in the lake highlands in Nuuksio. There are three pools named Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi (\"long lake\"): Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, Nuuksion Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi and Velskolan Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi. The largest lake in Espoo is Lake Bodom with a surface area of 4.1 square kilometres and an average depth of 4.3 metres. The largest depth of Nuuksion Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi is 18 metres and the average depth is 6.5 metres, and there are tens of lakes and ponds in its drainage basin of 60 square kilometres. There are few lakes in southern Espoo. The shallow lake Hannusj\u00e4rvi with a surface area of six hectares is located in Kaitaa and the small lake Pentalanj\u00e4rvi is located in the island of Pentala.\nBecause the sweet water pools to the south of the Salpausselk\u00e4 ridges formed when the ancient bays separated from the sea into lakes because of upthrust, only very few islands developed in them. One of the few inland islands in Espoo is an island of fifteen hectares in the lake Saarij\u00e4rvi located near the border to Vihti. There was a suggestion to name the rocky island covered in pine forests as Partiosaari, but nothing became of this.\nThe differences in the surface heights of the lakes in Espoo are considerable. Lake Pieni Majaslampi is located the highest up, 97 metres above sea level. Lake Saarij\u00e4rvi near it is located 25 metres lower. Because of the height differences, small rapids sometimes form in spring time in the creeks between adjacent water pools.\nFeatures.\nAlthough Espoo is relatively highly populated, it has large amounts of the countryside and natural wilderness, particularly in the city's western and northern portions. The city has a total of 71 lakes, the largest of which are Lake Bodom, Nuuksion Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, Vanhankyl\u00e4n Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, Looj\u00e4rvi, Velskolan Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi, Saarij\u00e4rvi, Matalaj\u00e4rvi, Siikaj\u00e4rvi, and Lippaj\u00e4rvi. The city has a large coastline on the Gulf of Finland.\nEspoo has six Natura 2000 protected areas: B\u00e5nberget forests, Espoonlahti\u2013Saunalahti bay area (partially in Kirkkonummi), Laajalahti bay, Matalaj\u00e4rvi lake, Nuuksio National Park (partially in Kirkkonummi and Vihti), as well as forests in Vestra (partially in Vantaa).\nThe official animal of Espoo is the Siberian flying squirrel, the official bird is the common blackbird, and the official plant is \"Anemone nemorosa\".\nFlora and fauna.\nThe city's Central Park's fauna represents a typical range of Finnish forest species. The most common flora in the Central Park includes Equisetum, ferns, Anemone, Lythrum and Orchidaceae. Common mammal species present in Espoo include the European hare and the mountain hare, the raccoon dog, the red squirrel, the elk, the red fox, various bat species, the European badger, as well as the roe deer and the white-tailed deer, which was introduced to Finland in the 1930s as a gift from Finnish American migrants.\nThe Suomenoja Bird Reserve in Finnoo, southern Espoo, is considered to be nationally significant for its bird diversity. Among others, there are endangered moorhens, as well as horned grebes and gadwalls. The most common and audible maritime bird species is the black-headed gull, but the whooper swan is also a common sight in the city's archipelago, where white-tailed eagles can be found as well.\nThe city is home to 73 vulnerable or endangered species, including the Siberian flying squirrel, whose Finnish populations have experienced a steep decline for many decades due to logging. The flying squirrel is considered to be the official animal of Espoo, and the squirrel populations are especially plentiful in the northernmost parts of the city. However, the flying squirrel is also present in some southern areas, including the Central Park, Soukka, Espoon keskus, Tapiola, Laajalahti, Hannusmets\u00e4 and Matinkyl\u00e4.\nClimate.\nTemperature and rainfall.\nEspoo's location in the northern latitudes between the large continent of Eurasia and the even larger Atlantic Ocean causes rapid changes in the weather in Espoo. The height of the terrain from sea level also has an effect on the climate: most of the people in Espoo live south of Lake Bodom, where the terrain only rises higher than above sea level in a few spots. There are no proper plateaus in northern Espoo either: the terrain rises a bit over above sea level at the most.\nEspoo is located in a hemiboreal zone, also known as the oak zone. The most important factor affecting the environment is the Gulf of Finland, cooling the weather down in summer and warming it up in autumn. The coastal convergence increases rainfall going inward into the mainland. The local climate in Nuuksio is different from the rest of Espoo: the terrain in Nuuksio rises up from almost all directions, which causes a forced rise upwards in air currents, which in turn has an effect on the clouds. The ridge in Nuuksio has the highest rainfall in all of Finland. The climate in Nuuksio is also affected by the fractionate terrain, causing friction increasing rainfall. In 1981, the rainfall in Nupuri was measured as , an all-time record in Finland. In southern Espoo the area of Suurpelto is slightly cooler than its surroundings.\nAlthough Espoo is the second-largest city in Finland, its meteorological averages have not been measured. At the weather stations in the neighbouring municipalities the average temperature from 1981 to 2010 was about . The coldest time of the year was from January to February and the warmest time was from July to August. The temperature differences between the seasons grow smaller when moving out towards the sea. On the coast and in the archipelago, the temperature rarely rises above or falls below . The average rainfall is from per year. The driest season is in springtime and the rainiest season is in August and from October to December. Most of the rainy days occur in autumn.\nThe Finnish Meteorological Institute has eight outposts in Espoo: Friisil\u00e4, Kivenlahti, Kyt\u00f6, Lepp\u00e4vaara, Luukki, Nuuksio, Otaniemi and Tapiola. Of these, Nuuksio and Tapiola are weather outposts, brought online in the 2010s. The Nuuksio outpost is located in a sparsely populated and fractionate lake ridge above sea level. The Tapiola outpost is located in a suburb on the coast of the Gulf of Finland above sea level.\nSnow conditions.\nOn average, snow first falls on Espoo after Christmas and melts away from late March to early April. The snow conditions vary more on the coast than inland. In some years, the snow may last up to five months, while in other years, there might be hardly any snow during the entire winter. Lows coming from the southwest carry temperate air which can keep the snow layers thin or even melt the snow away.\nWinds.\nThe dominant wind direction sector in Espoo is south-west, as with Finland in general. The sea wind has a large effect on the local winds on the coast, and can even create its own wind field. It can change the direction and speed of the basic wind on the coast for many times during the same day. Particularly in springtime and early summertime the sea wind keeps the archipelago and coastline free of clouds, while there is a white cloud wall further inland, which can cause rain showers.\nAir quality.\nThe air quality in Espoo is considerably good despite the negative effect of the traffic. Particularly on pedestrian roads, sand is used to combat slipperiness, which causes a major dust problem in springtime. Studded tires also contribute to the number of harmful particles. The air quality in Espoo is measured in Lepp\u00e4vaara and Luukki. There are also mobile measurement stations. Alder and birch pollen has a harmful effect on the air quality in springtime, hay and mugwort in summertime.\nLighting conditions.\nEspoo is located at a latitude of 60 degrees north, which causes the duration of daylight to vary considerably. At summer solstice daylight lasts for nineteen hours, while at winter solstice it only lasts for six hours. The angle of the sun is at its highest at 53.4 degrees in summertime and only at 6.6 degrees in wintertime. Espoo is among the northernmost places to have nautical dusk even at summer solstice, meaning the sun is at least six degrees below the horizon at the darkest hour of the night. At that time, the entire night passes without total darkness. In contrast, daylight at winter solstice is short, especially when there are only few sunny hours from November to January.\nShadows cast by buildings are long even at summertime. They are at their shortest at summer solstice, about 75 percent of the height of the buildings. For example, the shadow of Niittyhuippu is 63 metres long at the time. At noon at winter solstice the shadows can be up to 8.8 times the height of the entire building. For example, the shadow of the Tapiola Central Tower is 430 metres long at the time.\nThe official time in Espoo is measured by the 30th eastern meridian. The city is located over five degrees west of it, so the solar noon occurs over 20 minutes later than on the 30th meridian.\nGrowth season.\nEspoo is located at the plant success zone 1b. The thermal growth season lasts for a bit over half a year on average. In general, the growth season starts in April and ends in October. Sometimes it continues to early November. The sum of the effective temperature during the thermal growth season is over 1,400 degrees Celsius times day, and annual variations are large.\nAdministration.\nEspoo belongs to the region of Uusimaa. Supreme decision-making power in the city is held by the City Council of Espoo. The council has 75 members, elected for a period of four years.\nSubdivisions.\nEspoo is divided into seven major areas (, ): Vanha-Espoo (with administrative center), Suur-Espoonlahti, Pohjois-Espoo, Suur-Kauklahti, Suur-Lepp\u00e4vaara, Suur-Matinkyl\u00e4, and Suur-Tapiola of which Suur-Lepp\u00e4vaara has the highest population. These major areas are then divided into a total of 56 districts. The healthcare, social, cultural and school services of the city have been concentrated to the regional centres in the major areas.\nStatistics about Espoo also include the division \"other\", which included 4,582 people on New Year 2022. From 2011 to 2022 the population growth was the highest in Suur-Kauklahti, about 70%. The growth in Suur-Matinkyl\u00e4 was about 27%, while Suur-Tapiola and Suur-Lepp\u00e4vaara grew by about 20%. The population in Suur-Espoonlahti and Vanha-Espoo grew by about 12% to 13% and that in Pohjois-Espoo by about 10%.\nThe postal codes in Espoo start with the digits \"02\", like in Kauniainen, Kirkkonummi and Siuntio as well. Espoo includes the postal codes 02100 to 02380, 02600 to 02860 (excluding 02700 Kauniainen) and 02920 to 02980. The lowest postal codes are located in the south and the highest ones in the north.\nMunicipal annexations.\nIn connection to the municipal renewal plan in Finland there have been suggestions to annex Espoo into the rest of the Finnish capital region, together with some of the surrounding municipalities. So far the City Council of Espoo has strongly opposed these suggestions.\nOrganisation.\nThe city of Espoo has three industries and one result area.\nCity and municipal managers.\nThe office of a municipal manager was introduced to the rural municipalities in Finland through the 1948 municipal law, but in Espoo this office was only first fulfilled in 1962, one year before Espoo became a market town. Before this, the duties of the municipal manager were handled by the speaker of the municipal council.\nMunicipal managers of Espoo include:\nCity Council.\nPolitically, Espoo is a clearly bourgeois city, with the largest party being the National Coalition Party. Support of the Green League and the Swedish People's Party of Finland is also larger in Espoo than the average of Finland. The parties with the largest increase in support in the 2010s were the Green League and Movement Now.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Espoo has inhabitants, making it the second most populous municipality in Finland. The city of Espoo is part of the Helsinki metropolitan area, which is the largest urban area in Finland with inhabitants. The city is home to 5% of Finland's population. In Espoo, 22% of the population has a foreign background, almost three times the national average.\nThe city is the 7th most densely populated in Finland. In 2022, the average age of people in Espoo was 39.0 years, lower than the average age in Finland (43.7 years). In 2021, the population of Espoo had the second highest average income in Finland after Kauniainen.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLanguage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city of Espoo is officially bilingual, with both Finnish and Swedish as official languages. As of 2024[ [update]], the majority of the population, persons (), spoke Finnish as their first language. The number of Swedish speakers was persons () of the population. Foreign languages were spoken by of the population. As English and Swedish are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon.\nThe proportion of Swedish speakers decreased the most in the 1950s: in the 1950s, Swedish speakers accounted for 43.1% of the population (about 10,800 people), while in 1960 they accounted for 23.5% (about 13,300 people), due to rapid urbanisation, which led to strong positive immigration of Finnish speakers from other parts of the country.\nThe number of Swedish speakers increased slowly until the 2010s, when they numbered about 20,300, while the proportion decreased year by year. In 1996 the proportion fell below 10 per cent. As of 2024[ [update]], the proportion of Swedish speakers in Espoo was 6.3% of the population. In absolute terms, Espoo was the second most Swedish-speaking municipality in Finland after Helsinki, ahead of Raseborg, Vaasa, Porvoo and Korsholm.\nIn 2018, the largest proportions of Swedish speakers in Espoo were in Suvisaaristo (33.6%), Espoonkartano (29.9%), Sep\u00e4nkyl\u00e4 (24.1%) and Bodom (21.3%). In absolute terms, the most Swedish speakers lived in Haukilahti (993 people) and Matinkyl\u00e4 (813 people).\nThe proportion of Finnish speakers has declined significantly over the past three decades. In 1999 the proportion of Finnish speakers was 88%, and in 2024 it was 68.7%. At the same time, the proportion of foreign language speakers has increased dramatically: in 1999 it was only about 4%, and in 2024 it was 25,0%. The foreign language speakers in Espoo are a heterogeneous group divided into tens of different languages, of which the Russian speakers form the largest part.\nImmigration.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there were 80,691 people with an immigrant background living in Espoo, or 25% of the population. There were 70,918 residents who were born abroad, or 22% of the population. The number of foreign citizens in Espoo was 49,245.\nThe relative share of immigrants in Espoo's population is almost three times higher than the national average. Moreover, the city's new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years.\nThe largest groups are from the former Soviet Union, Estonia, India, China, Iraq and Russia. The number of people from India has increased sharply in recent years, especially in the areas of Olari and Suurpelto.\nReligion.\nIn 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 50.3% of the population of Espoo. Other religious groups accounted for 3.8% of the population. 45.9% of the population had no religious affiliation.\nAccording to the 2018 division Espoo is home to the following Evangelical Lutheran congregations:\nTogether these congregations form the Espoo Congregation Union (Finnish: \"Espoon seurakuntayhtym\u00e4\", Swedish: \"Esbo kyrkliga samf\u00e4llighet\").\nIn 2003, of the population of Espoo, 1.2 percent belonged to the Orthodox Church of Finland, 0.4 percent were Catholic and 0.2 percent were Jehovah's Witnesses. Members of the Evangelical Free Church of Finland, Mormons, Jews, Muslims, other Orthodox and Methodists amounted to 0.1 percent each.\nThere are five Lutheran churches in Espoo (each Finnish-speaking congregation has one), including the Espoo Cathedral, the Espoonlahti Church, the Olari Church, the Tapiola Church and the Lepp\u00e4vaara Church. There are also 27 chapels of the Lutheran Church in Espoo.\nOf the Orthodox congregations in Finland, the Helsinki Orthodox Congregation is active in Espoo. It has the Church of the Sanctifier Herman of Alaska in Tapiola.\nOf the congregations of the Pentecostal Church of Finland, the Pentecostal Congregation of Espoo is active in Espoo. Individual Pentecostal congregations in Espoo include the Espoonlahti Pentecostal congregation, the Keski-Espoo near congregation, the Lepp\u00e4vaara Missionary chapel and Mankby bibliska f\u00f6rsamling. Of the congregations of the Evangelical Free Church of Finland, the Espoo free congregation is active in Espoo.\nEconomy.\nEconomical history.\nStill in the middle 19th century, Espoo was a rural community living in subsistence economy. There was hardly any industry, the villages were small and situated evenly across different parts of the parish. There was some population concentration at the location of the current district of Espoon keskus and along the Suuri Rantatie road, and some dense population on the shore of the Gulf of Finland. In 1865 farming was the primary source of income for about 90% of the men in Espoo. There were about seventy craftsmen and about twenty people working in the industry. Of the women in Espoo, over one fifth worked as maids.\nThe economical history of 19th-century Espoo also includes some small-scale mining activity. There was ore mining at the lands of the Kilo mansion around 1840, and this activity continued to the 1850s. The ore was of good quality but poor, and the ore streaks were fragmentary. In the end, the amount of ore mined from Kilo was very small. A new discovery of ore was made at the lands of the Alberga manor in the early 1840s. At most seven people worked at the site, but the amount of ore mined in Alberga ended up very small as well. The mining activity slowly waned and stopped completely in 1851.\nThe Espoo parish was not a neighbour of the city of Helsinki in the 19th century \u2013 there were lands of the Helsinki parish in between. The rapid growth of Helsinki attracted people from Espoo: despite the short distance, travel between Espoo and Helsinki was so slow, that moving into Helsinki was almost unavoidable if one happened to get a job there.\nThe rapid growth of Helsinki started also showing outside the administrative borders of the city. The first industrial area in Espoo was born near the shore of the Espoonlahti bay. In the late 19th century there were three brick factories and a steam-powered sawmill in the area. Clay from the Espoonlahti bay was well suited for making bricks, and the bricks were easy to transport to Helsinki over sea. For example, the Uspenski Cathedral in Katajanokka has been built from bricks from the Stensvik brick factory. The village of Mulby (Muulo in Finnish) became the industrial centre of Espoo, and its population grew manifold. Other villages in southwestern Espoo also grew through the industry. When the Rantarata railway was completed in the early 20th century part of the industry moved to the railway track, and the railway also enabled people to commute for work from Espoo to Helsinki.\nThere was also glass industry in Espoo. Pehr Appelgr\u00e9n founded a bottle glass factory near the Espoo railway station in 1912. The factory closed down in 1922. The Kauklahti glass factory started in 1923, and by the 1930s it was the largest illumination glass factory in Finland. The factory closed down in 1951. Glass industry in Espoo altogether waned in the 1950s.\nBy the late 1930s, there were about thirty businesses in Espoo. In addition to glass and brick industry, the parish included machinery workshops, sawmills and metallurgy workshops. There was industrial clothing manufacturing in Kauklahti and a clock factory in Viherlaakso. The steam-powered sawmill in Bastvik, founded in 1876, was economically quite stable; its saw equipment was moved to the Hanko Peninsula in the 20th century. The merchant F. F. Sj\u00f6blom founded the first shop in Espoo in Stensvik soon after founding of shops had been liberated in 1868. At the time when Finland became independent, there were about 40 shops in Espoo, most of them general stores.\nDespite the increase in industry and service jobs, Espoo was still a predominantly rural parish in 1920. About two thirds of the population got their primary income from farming. Rye and barley had been the primary crops in Espoo for centuries. By the 20th century the significance of cattle herding increased, and the farming of oats became more popular.\nConstruction and services became the basis of the economy in Espoo in the 1950s, when the rapid growth in population in Espoo started. In the 2010s, the primary industries counting by number of jobs are trade, accommodation and food and beverage industry as well as specialist services. The proportion of information and communications technology is about one tenth. About one sixth of the jobs are in industry and construction. The public sector is large: about one quarter of jobs were in the public sector in the middle 2010s.\nThe transition from a medieval rural parish into an integral part of the Helsinki metropolitan area has dropped the proportion of farming and forestry jobs to about a fifth of a percent.In 2024, Espoo placed second in the European Commission's Capital of Innovation Awards (iCapital), recognised for its collaborative innovation ecosystem and youth-focused initiatives.\nCompanies.\nEspoo is home to the head offices of several global companies and many high technology companies. The Aalto University campus in southeastern Espoo is at the heart of research and development. The head offices of Nokia, Valmet, Remedy Entertainment, Fortum, Neste, Huhtam\u00e4ki, Mets\u00e4 Group, Orion Corporation, Oriola, Outotec and L\u00e4hiTapiola are located in Espoo. Among government enterprises, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Gasum, Neste and Fortum are headquartered in Espoo. Due to the presence of these companies, particularly Nokia, Espoo alone accounts for 60% of patents filed in Finland and ranks #6 among European cities in number of patents filed.\nThe largest shopping centres in Espoo are Iso Omena, Sello, Lippulaiva, Entresse and Ainoa. Along the continuous traffic route formed by Merituulentie to the north of L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4, Kuitinm\u00e4entie and Martinsillantie are located the shopping centre Niitty, L\u00e4nsikeskus, the retail park Merituuli, the shopping centre Liila as well as several leisure, indoor decoration and automobile businesses. The small shopping centre Suuris, opened in 2017, is located in Suurpelto along Ring II.\nIndustrial areas in Espoo include Juvanmalmi, Karamalmi and Kivenlahti.\nCity of Espoo.\nThe city of Espoo funds its services mainly by taxation. In 2021 the tax income of the city, consisting of the municipal tax, the communal tax and the property tax, amounted to 1,711 million euro, with the municipal tax rate being 18.00 percent. By number of employees, the city of Espoo is the biggest employer in Espoo: in 2016 it employed about 14 thousand people.\nThe economy in Espoo leaves a surplus, but this is not enough to finance the investments of the growing city.\nEspoo has signed the principles of responsible investment of the United Nations. The city of Espoo has five investment funds: the basic services and land acquisition fund, the development fund of basic services, the development fund of entrepreneurship and employment, the investment fund and the accident fund.\nA characteristic feature of Espoo is that the city manages its investments through its daughter companies.\nIncome level.\nThe average income level in Espoo is higher than that in the rest of the capital region and particularly higher than that in the rest of Finland. In 2015, the taxable income in Espoo was 40% higher than in the rest of Finland. The unemployment rate in Espoo is high, but still lower than the average in Finland. The highest-income areas in Espoo, such as Westend and Haukilahti, are mainly located on the coast. These districts are part of the Tapiola major district, whose income level is significantly higher than the average in Espoo. The income level in the Matinkyl\u00e4 and Espoonlahti major districts is near the average in Espoo. The income level in the Lepp\u00e4vaara major district and particularly in the Vanha-Espoo major district is lower than the average in Espoo.\nThe city of Espoo is not particularly segregated by major districts, instead the differences in income are significantly higher within the major districts as between them. In low-income major districts the average income level is near the average in Helsinki. In some areas, such as in Kivenlahti and Suvela, it even falls below the average in Vantaa. Areas consisting of detached houses generally have higher income levels than areas consisting of apartment buildings.\nCulture.\nEspoo hosts a Museum of Modern Art called EMMA (Espoo Museum of Modern Art), built in a renovated old print house, the WeeGee house, named after an old book print company Weilin &amp; G\u00f6\u00f6s. The same building hosts also Finland's only Museum of Horology (, ) and a Toy Museum. Glims Farmstead Museum is also located in the city. The Espoo cultural centre, home of the world-renowned Tapiola Sinfonietta, where numerous concerts and theater performances are held, is located in Tapiola (). The Akseli Gallen-Kallela Museum is located in Tarvasp\u00e4\u00e4 and the Haltia Nature Centre is located in Nuuksio.\nEspoo has several old manors of which two are open to the general public. The most important is Espoon kartano (, Espoo Manor), first mentioned in maps in 1495, and belonging to the noble Ramsay family since 1756. The current main building dates back to 1914, but a mill dates from the 1750s and Finland oldest walled stone bridge from 1777 is on the King's Road (, ) which passes by the manor. The main building can be rented for weddings and similar occasions. Guided tours are available on request for groups. The other manor open to public is Pakankyl\u00e4n kartano, located on the northern shore of Lake Bodom. The manor hosts a restaurant and club rooms, partly with original furniture open to the public, but meant originally to Kaisankoti sanatory and old people's home located on ground of the manor.\nThe Metal band Children of Bodom comes from Espoo, Finland. They are named after the unsolved murder known as the Lake Bodom murders which took place at the shore of Lake Bodom, a lake in northern Espoo, in 1960. The bands Norther and Kiuas also come from Espoo.\nThe educational department took part in Lifelong Learning Programme 2007\u20132013 in Finland.\nAuthors in Espoo include Antti Hyry and Mauri Kunnas. Arto Paasilinna, known for his comical narrative, was nominally Espoo's prosaist. Of his novels, \"El\u00e4m\u00e4 lyhyt, Rytk\u00f6nen pitk\u00e4\" (\"Life is short, Rytk\u00f6nen is tall\") features the districts of Tapiola and Haukilahti, \"Aatami ja Eeva\" (\"Adam and Eve\") features Otaniemi and \"Herranen aika\" (\"Oh my God\") features Jorvi.\nEvents.\nThe district of Tapiola hosts the annual film festival Espoo Cin\u00e9 and the annual music festival April Jazz. Lepp\u00e4vaara hosts the annual music festival Kivenlahti Rock. At wintertime, the Serena Waterpark hosts the Pacifique spa party. In summertime, the Espoo Cathedral hosts the concert event Urkuy\u00f6 ja aaria, belonging to the Finland Festivals event chain. Ropecon, the largest independent role-playing game convention in Europe, was held at the Dipoli conference centre from 1998 to 2015.\nThe annual celebration of the Awakening movement was held in Espoo in 2008.\nFood culture.\nIn the 1980s, the parish dishes of Espoo were listed as cod potatoes, fisherman's herring pan and cake \u00e0 la Anna. A noteworthy menu was the dinner at the Espoo manor, including bouillon and cheese sticks, roasted veal with cream sauce, canned peas, pickled cucumbers, ice cream and canned strawberries.\nCultural history.\nThe cultural landscape in Espoo started developing in river valleys and on plantations cleared on bays revealed by upthrust of land. The largest plantations were already in the map drawn in the middle 18th century mainly in the same form as in the late 20th century. Tightly built, small groups of buildings started developing on the edges of the plantations, at some places also on hills in between them. The large landscape of Snettans and R\u00f6yl\u00e4 stretches to the north of Lake Bodom, with the Pakankyl\u00e4 manor located in its southern part. There is a significant landscape to the west of the Espoo manor, There is a large plantation landscape stretching over the Velskola manor in northern Espoo.\nThe large cultural landscape of Bemb\u00f6le-Karvasm\u00e4ki is located to the northeast of Espoon keskus and the clearly defined landscape of S\u00f6derskog is located to the south of it. The well preserved village landscape of Gammelg\u00e5rd is located on the shore of lake Pitk\u00e4j\u00e4rvi in eastern Espoo.\nThe most historically valuable landscape is located at Espoonjokilaakso near the Espoo Cathedral. The valley, surrounded by steep cliffs, was probably cleared for plantation use already in ancient times. As well as the cathedral, the landscape includes many other culturally significant buildings.\nThe typical rural village in Espoo was small: two or three houses in an asymmetric group on a hill. A notable exception was the village of Gammelg\u00e5rd: the village had thirteen houses in 1540. Because of the small number houses, the Great Partition in the late 18th century had little effect on the traditional cultural landscape in Espoo. The building tradition in Espoo remained old-fashioned for a long time: low paired houses were common up to the late 19th century. The storm in August 1890 brought upon a change, when new buildings according to the style at the time were built from thousands of logs felled by the storm.\nManor houses started appearing when one of the houses of the village grew larger than the others and developed into a riding farm, which ended up as property of the gentry. Thus almost all of the manor houses in Espoo are located at the site of an old peasant village. The Espoo manor was founded at the start of the new era, but most of the manor houses in Espoo had formed without an official founding in the late 18th century. The officers in Suomenlinna bought farms near Helsinki, resulting in so-called officer manor houses such as Bodom, Hovg\u00e5rd and Tr\u00e4sk\u00e4nda. The late Carolinian appearance of the main buildings of the manor houses has been preserved the best in Bodom and Backby. The manor houses in Alberga and Kilo represent the style ideals of the late 19th century, while Tr\u00e4sk\u00e4nda represents the start of the 20th century.\nThe owners of the manor houses started selling their lands to the municipality and to construction enterprises in the 20th century. The manor houses in southern Espoo were mostly torn down to make way for new buildings and roads. The medieval Gr\u00e4sa manor, the only so-called old \"fr\u00e4lse\" in Espoo, was located in the Olari area. Gr\u00e4sa is seen as a textbook example of the rapid and fundamental change in the cultural landscape in Espoo. The main buildings of the Hagalund and Matinkyl\u00e4 manor remain, while hardly anything remains of the Frisans and Finno manors. The Soukanpohja manor is the only manor house in Espoo to remain as a contiguous group of buildings. It also forms a small rural landscape in the middle of new development in the late 20th century.\nThe effect of the roads on the cultural landscape of Espoo is indisputable. Villages were founded along the King's Road and the road brought cultural influences along with it. The rural landscapes in Espoo started gradually changing in the late 19th century as new villas were founded on the coast because of regular steamship traffic. There is a well preserved summer villa milieu on the island of Iso Vasikkasaari. Many of the villas are known by their famous architects or commissioners, such as Villa Carlstedt designed by Lars Sonck.\nMany villas were also founded in Kilo and Lepp\u00e4vaara. The Karhusaari villa was built in southeastern Espoo in the 1890s, as well as Villa Rulludd in Kaitaa. The first villas in Suvisaaristo were built on the island of Tallholm in the 1860s, before that the area had mostly consisted of fishing villages. The most architecturally valuable villa in Espoo is Villa Miniato in Soukka.\nThe Pasila-Karjaa railway, completed in 1903, had a significant impact on the cultural landscape of Espoo. Industrial buildings were built near the railway stations, attracting working class settlements. The first suburban areas also appeared along the railway: tuberculosis was a common cause of death among the Finns in the early 20th century, and the dry and bright hills in Espoo along with the pines growing on them were seen as suitable to prevent and treat the disease. Espoo was seen as a healthy alternative to Helsinki, but new settlement coming from the east was diverse and new residential areas were very different from each other. The city of Kauniainen developed into a showy area, while the district of Lepp\u00e4vaara developed into a more modest one.\nSports.\nAt the 1952 Summer Olympics, the city's Westend Tennis Hall hosted the fencing events.\nMany world famous sportspeople are from Espoo, such as ice hockey players Teemu Sel\u00e4nne and Jere Lehtinen, swimmer Antti Kasvio, figure skater Laura Lepist\u00f6, javelin thrower Tiina Lillak, cross-country skier Marjo Matikainen and Formula 1 world champion Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen.\nEspoo is home to the Vermo race track, the Espoo Metro Areena, the sports parks of Tapiolan urheilupuisto, Lepp\u00e4vaaran urheilupuisto, Espoonlahden urheilupuisto as well as the Serena Waterpark. The largest swimming pools in Espoo are the Lepp\u00e4vaara swimming pool, the Keski-Espoo swimming pool, the Espoonlahti swimming pool and the Tapiola swimming pool. Other exercise sites include the Espoo Central Park, the Espoo outdoor islands and the outdoor exercise areas of Luukki and Pirttim\u00e4ki of the city of Helsinki.\nSportsperson of the year in Espoo.\nEvery year a sportsperson of the year is chosen in Espoo. Titleholders include the following people:\nBasketball.\nIn 2027 the Espoo Metro Areena will be used as Finland's host city for the FIBA Women's EuroBasket.\nIce hockey.\nEspoo Blues was a successful hockey club; between 1998 and 2016 it iced a men's hockey team which played at the men's premier SM-liiga and a women's hockey team which played at the women's premier Naisten SM-sarja. The women's team, Espoo Blues Naiset, won 13 Finnish women's championships in the 18-year span (1998\u20132016), seven of them won consecutively. The men's and women's ice hockey teams were known as Kiekko-Espoo from 1984 to 1998 and 1990 to 1998 respectively.\nIn spring 2016 \"J\u00e4\u00e4kiekko Espoo Oy\", the organization which owned the clubs, declared bankruptcy. A new club called Espoo United was established to replace Espoo Blues. Espoo United's men's ice hockey team played at the second highest level Mestis. The Espoo United women's hockey team played at the highest level, , and won silver in the 2017 league championships. Espoo United was also active in basketball and the men's basketball team played at the second highest level; the women's basketball team played at the highest level, Naisten Korisliiga.\nIn August 2017, in what was described as an effort to stabilize the club's tenuous financial situation, Espoo United abandoned its women's teams in both ice hockey and basketball. Espoo United's former women's basketball team quickly acquired transfer to Tapiolan Honka but the women's ice hockey team was left in an unsustainable situation.\nThe Finnish Ice Hockey Association chose to intervene in September 2017 and created an organization that would allow the team to play under the name Espoo Blues until a better structure could be identified. In April 2018, despite the dumping of its women's teams, Espoo United declared bankruptcy and its men's teams folded.\nIn April 2019, the women's ice hockey team Espoo Blues merged with \"Kiekko Espoo Oy\", a significant junior hockey club with the largest girls hockey program in the country, to become Kiekko-Espoo Naiset. At the time of the merger, the team was the winningest team in Naisten Liiga history with 14 Naisten Liiga championships and a combined 24 Naisten Liiga championship medals over 29 seasons.\nFootball.\nFC Honka is the most successful local professional football club. The men's team was promoted into the Finnish premier division (\"Veikkausliiga\") for the first time in its history at the end of the 2005 season. They play their home matches at Tapiolan urheilupuisto. Espoo is also home to SexyP\u00f6xyt of the fourth-tier Kolmonen league. They play their home matches at Laaksolahden urheilupuisto in the Laaksolahti district.\nFloorball.\nEspoo also has two floorball teams playing at highest level Salibandyliiga. The two teams are Esport Oilers and Westend Indians.\nRunning.\nEspoo is home to the L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4juoksu, an annual running event that starts and finishes in Otaniemi.\nAthletes from Espoo.\nEspoo is the birthplace of 2007 Formula One World Champion Kimi R\u00e4ikk\u00f6nen, former Dallas Stars forward Jere Lehtinen (three time NHL Selke Trophy winner), former Formula One driver JJ Lehto, professional downhill mountain biker Matti Lehikoinen, professional ten-pin bowling star Osku Palermaa and 2009 European Figure Skating Champion Laura Lepist\u00f6.\nParks and recreation.\nThe city's 880-hectare (2,200-acre) Central Park is located directly in the middle of the city, and it consists of natural forests, meadows, cliffs, wetlands as well as recreational routes. Central Park is the second-largest natural area in Espoo, after Nuuksio National Park, located in the northern part of the city. The park consists of two separate areas, Central Park I and II, approved by the City Council in 1996 and 2004, respectively.\nGovernment and politics.\nEspoo's city council has 75 members. Nationally, Espoo is a part of the constituency of Uusimaa. Support for the centre-right politics, especially the National Coalition Party, is traditionally high in Espoo. Following the Finnish municipal elections of 2025 the council seats are allocated in the following way: National Coalition Party 28 seats, Green League 15 seats, Social Democratic Party of Finland 14 seats, Swedish People's Party of Finland 6 seats, Finns Party 4 seats, Left Alliance 3 seats, Christian Democrats 2 seats, Centre Party 2 seats and, Liberal Party 1 seat.\nEspoo is the home for the former Finns Party chairman Timo Soini.\nServices.\nEducation.\nThe Otaniemi campus of the Aalto University is located in Espoo, containing all six colleges of the university starting from February 2019. Espoo is also home to the Metropolia University of Applied Sciences (formerly known as the Technical University of Applied Sciences in Espoo-Vantaa) and local colleges of the Laurea University of Applied Sciences. The musical institute Juvenalia is located near the Sello shopping centre. The Espoo Musical Institute is located in the Espoo Cultural Centre.\nHealthcare.\nThe Jorvi Hospital is located in Karvasm\u00e4ki in Espoo, cooperating with the Helsinki University Central Hospital and belonging to the Hospital District of Helsinki and Uusimaa. There are a total of ten healthcare stations handling municipal healthcare in Espoo.\nInfrastructure.\nThere are two controlled-access highways going through Espoo to the west: L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4, which is part of the Finnish national road 51 between Helsinki and Karjaa, and the Finnish national road 1 going further west to Turku. These roads and other main roads leading from Helsinki to various directions are connected by the beltways Ring I and Ring III, partly located in Espoo, as well as Ring II leading from L\u00e4nsiv\u00e4yl\u00e4 to the Finnish regional road 110, located entirely in Espoo. The Finnish regional road 120 goes through northern Espoo, forming part of the old route of the Finnish national road 2.\nPublic transport.\nEspoo is well-served by public transport, through the Helsinki commuter rail network, the Helsinki Metro's L\u00e4nsimetro extension opened in November 2017, and buses provided by Helsingin seudun liikenne. In 2024 the orbital Jokeri light rail line will connect Espoo to eastern Helsinki.\nData communications in Espoo have been handled by sixteen broadcast frequencies.\nMetro transport.\nThe L\u00e4nsimetro extension to the Helsinki Metro was started in 2008 and the first phase was opened for traffic on 18 November 2017. The first phase consists of six stations: Keilaniemi, Aalto University, Tapiola, Urheilupuisto, Niittykumpu and Matinkyl\u00e4. The second phase consists of an additional five stations: Finnoo, Kaitaa, Soukka, Espoonlahti and Kivenlahti, and was originally expected to be completed in 2023 at the earliest. The extension was completed on 3 December 2022.\nRailway transport.\nThere are nine railway stations in Espoo, of which only the Lepp\u00e4vaara railway station serves long-distance traffic. The Lepp\u00e4vaara railway station is the busiest railway station in Espoo, with the Espoo railway station being the second busiest.\nThe local traffic on the Rantarata railway is frequent, and the train lines are marked with letters. L trains stop at every station from Helsinki Central Station to Kirkkonummi railway station. E, U, L and X trains stop at every station in Espoo and Kauniainen except M\u00e4kkyl\u00e4 railway station. Only A and L trains stop at M\u00e4kkyl\u00e4. Y trains between Helsinki Central Station and Siuntio railway station stop at Lepp\u00e4vaara railway station, Espoo railway station and Kauklahti railway station. A trains travel along the Lepp\u00e4vaara city railway with a terminus at Lepp\u00e4vaara. All local trains travelling through Espoo stop at Pasila railway station, with connections to Tampere, and also at Huopalahti railway station, with a P train connection to the Helsinki Airport in northern Vantaa.\nLong-distance trains between Helsinki and Turku previously stopped at Espoo railway station. Starting from autumn 2015 the stop was moved to Lepp\u00e4vaara railway station.\nBus transport.\nNumerous bus lines serve public transport in Espoo. The Helsinki Regional Transport Authority is responsible for bus transport in Espoo, planning the routes, timetables and ticket systems. Bus line 200 is the only trunk line in Espoo, travelling between Espoon keskus and the Eliel Square in central Helsinki. The line has 32 stops, which is 12 stops fewer in Espoo than on the previous trunk line 235.\nThere are a hundred accessible bus stops in Espoo. The first accessible stop was built in 2006 on Puolarintie, next to the Puolarmets\u00e4 Hospital.\nBus lines in southern Espoo travel to the Matinkyl\u00e4 metro station and at times of heavy traffic, directly to the Kamppi Center in Helsinki. There are also internal bus lines to Tapiola. In contrast, the bus lines in central and northern Espoo travel via T\u00f6\u00f6l\u00f6 to the Eliel Square. All line numbers of Espoo bus lines were changed to three digits in the 2010s. Line numbers beginning with 1 mainly travel in southern Espoo and line numbers beginning with 2 in central and northern Espoo. Bus lines travelling between southern and central Espoo have numbers beginning with 5. The Joker line 550 travels between Westend and It\u00e4keskus bypassing the Helsinki city centre by going to the north of it.\nInternational relations.\nThe City of Espoo has ten official sister cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "44900", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44900", "title": "Kauniainen", "text": "Town in Uusimaa, Finland\nKauniainen (; ) is a town in Finland, located in the southern interior of the country. Kauniainen is situated in the southern part of the Uusimaa region, and it is enclaved by the City of Espoo. The population of Kauniainen is approximately . It is the most populous municipality in Finland. Kauniainen is part of the Helsinki Metropolitan Area, which has approximately \u00a0million inhabitants.\nKauniainen was founded by a corporation in 1906, AB Grankulla, that parcelled land and created a suburb for villas; Kauniainen received the status of a market town in 1920, the Finnish name in 1949 and the title of \"kaupunki\" (\"city, town\") in 1972.\nThe municipal taxation rate in Kauniainen is the lowest in Finland (%), which has made the city attractive to high-income families. This in turn makes the average income generally high, making it possible to keep the taxation rate low without compromising the service to the inhabitants.\nKauniainen is a bilingual municipality with Finnish and Swedish as its official languages. The population consists of Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages. The dominant party in the city council has traditionally been the Swedish People's Party.\nEtymology.\nThe Swedish name Grankulla is composed by the Swedish words \"gran\" (spruce) and \"kulle\" (hill) and has been in use in this form since the beginning of the 1900s. Earlier the place was known under its dialectal form \"Gr\u00e4nkull\". The name Gr\u00e4nkull is found on modern maps as the name of the hill where the water tower in Kauniainen is located. The Finnish name of the town, Kauniainen, is derived from the name of a homestead that was located in Kauniainen called \"Kauniais\". It was named after an estate near Tampere. The Finnish name was taken into use in the 1930s and was made the official name of the town alongside the Swedish name in 1949.\nHeraldry.\nThe explanation for the coat of arms is \"a golden, red squirrel sitting on a blue plate, holding a black spruce cone in its forefeet, with three golden roses side by side above it.\" The squirrel holding the spruce cone of the coat of arms indirectly refers to the Swedish name of Kauniainen (\"Grankulla\"). The roses on the subject depict the villa settlements in the locality. The coat of arms was designed by Ahto Numminen and approved by the Kauniainen Chamber of Commerce at its meetings on June 5, 1951, and January 10, 1952. The Ministry of the Interior confirmed the use of the coat of arms on March 11 of the same year.\nHistory.\nAround 10,000 years ago, after the Ice Age, only a few islets were visible in the Yoldia Sea, heights that today form the highest peaks of the area that is today known as Kauniainen. As the land slowly rose Kauniainen became a part of the inner archipelago around 4,000 years ago and there is evidence of human activity in the area in form of pieces of ceramics from this time period. However, the first permanent settlements in the area were established in the 19th century. Today Kauniainen is situated several kilometres from the sea.\nIn the beginning of the 20th century Kauniainen only consisted of a few crofters' holdings at the outskirts of larger farms in Espoo. The name of the place, Grankulla, was known as the more dialectal \"Gr\u00e4nkull\". The main road between Helsinki and Turku had passed through the northern parts of Kauniainen for centuries, but the new railway between the same cities that opened in 1903 was crucial for the development of the area.\nThe history of modern Kauniainen began in 1906 when a company, AB Grankulla, bought the land and sold it to people who wanted to have a villa outside the unhealthy city life in Helsinki. Several other similar communities were established at the same time around Helsinki: Kulosaari, Haaga, Lepp\u00e4vaara and Puistola. The share holders, among them the \"father\" of the municipality Janne Thurman, could be satisfied with their investment; they got the invested money back in one year. The era of the villas had, however, begun a few years earlier, when Elia Heikel and Emil Lindstedt bought the area around lake Galltr\u00e4sk and built the first villas. No properties sold were smaller than 3,000 square metres.\nBecause the municipality of Espoo, to which the area of Kauniainen belonged, did not show much interest in the new community, the company was responsible for developing it; roads were built, a school founded, electricity arranged and the company lobbied for a railway station (opened in 1908) and a police office. In 1915 Kauniainen received a limited autonomy from Espoo and the role of the company declined.\nThe first exact population figure is from 1917 when the community had 1,647 inhabitants. In 1920 Kauniainen became a market town and gained complete municipal sovereignty. Kauniainen also differed from its rural surroundings in Espoo with a town plan, road network, villas and electricity. It was decided to keep Kauniainen a green, idyllic, rural community and industrial buildings were banned. Most of the villas were built in neoclassical style or in the late 1920s functionalism. The work with a new town plan was started in the late 1920s, but the proposal was disputed; the inhabitants (and property owners) thought the roads were too wide. The architect also died in the middle of the process, which led to that a compromise could be reached as late as in 1937. The population grew only by 10% from 1917 to 1939, while the population right outside the market town's borders grew significantly.\nKauniainen has been officially bilingual since 1936 and the Finnish name \"Kauniainen\" was made official beside the Swedish name Grankulla in 1949 by the market town's council. Already in the 1930s the name Kauniainen was used by the railways and the post service. The era of the villas ended with the Second World War and was replaced by reconstruction and economically challenging times.\nThe independence of Kauniainen as a municipality was threatened by the municipal obligations and the small number of inhabitants. In the 1950s the market town tried to incorporate a few surrounding areas from Espoo, but the application was rejected in 1953. Instead the area of Kasavuori, which the market town had bought, was incorporated in 1957. Otto-Iivari Meurman was given the task of making a new town plan. He suggested that the villa milieu would be kept, but that the number of inhabitants would be significantly raised, from 2,500 to 10,000, and that the unmodern villas would be replaced by new ones. Also apartment buildings should be built. A new commercial centre was planned next to the railway station with V\u00e4llingby in Stockholm as a model. The plans for Kasavuori were approved in 1959 and for the rest of the market town in 1961 and 1963. The commercial centre was inaugurated in 1966. The town plan has later been criticised because the unique villa environment was disrupted and many of the beautiful villas were demolished. A skiing centre was planned in Kasavuori of the same type as Holmenkollen in Oslo, but the plans were never realised. Today this area is protected.\nThe number of inhabitants grew rapidly; in 1967 by as much as 25%. In 1972 Kauniainen gained the status of a city (fi. \"kaupunki\") and the year after Finnish became the majority language of the inhabitants and Swedish the minority. The town had at the time 6,400 inhabitants. The commercial centre has been considered ugly and outdated for more than 20 years and a new development plan for the town centre was approved in May 2006. The project begun in December 2006 when the first building was demolished.\nThe population surpassed 10,000 inhabitants in 2020. At the end of 2020 there were 10,177 people living in the town.\nTransport.\nRoads.\nKauniainen has good road connections in most directions. The east-to-west Helsinki\u2013Turku motorway (national road 1) passes Kauniainen to the south and the old Helsinki\u2013Turku main road (regional road 110) passes the northern parts of the town. The construction of the motorway in the 1960s played a big role when new inhabitants moved to Kauniainen, when they could drive quickly along the motorway into Helsinki's city centre. The north-to-south Keh\u00e4 II (Ring Road 2) passes the eastern corner of Kauniainen.\nPublic transportation.\nKauniainen is served by two commuter rail stations, Kauniainen and Koivuhovi, on the Rantarata line, which was opened in 1903. The railway has been important for the development of Kauniainen as a suburb of Helsinki. Trains leave appromaximately every 15 minutes and the ride to Helsinki Central railway station takes about 20 minutes.\nThere are two regional bus lines which connect to Helsinki. There are also local bus lines which connect to various districts of Espoo.\nServices.\nKauniainen offers a very large range of services to its inhabitants, considering the size of the town. There are six schools in Kauniainen, spread out on three levels and two languages \u2013 Finnish and Swedish. Kauniainen has:\nDistricts.\nThere are three districts in Kauniainen called I, II and III. No districts are named because of the small size of the town. The only area that is viewed as a named district is Kasavuori () in the western part of the town.\nPolitics.\nThe following parties have seats in the city council of Kauniainen following the 2021 municipal election:\nParliamentary elections.\nResults of the 2011 Finnish parliamentary election in Kauniainen:\nSports.\nKauniainen has a large range of sports facilities and the town council has been active in sponsoring sports. There are activities in most sports with Grankulla IFK (GrIFK) as the biggest association. GrIFK was founded in 1925 and is today active in ice hockey, football, team handball, floorball and alpine skiing.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44901", "revid": "1304327825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44901", "title": "Tango (disambiguation)", "text": "Tango is a social dance form including Argentine, Uruguayan, and international ballroom tango.\nTango may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "44902", "revid": "47033785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44902", "title": "Vowel harmony", "text": "Sound change in vowels\nIn phonology, vowel harmony is a phonological process in which vowels assimilate (\"harmonize\") to share certain distinctive features. Vowel harmony is often confined to the domain of a phonological word, but may extend across word boundaries in certain languages. \nGenerally, one vowel will trigger a shift in other vowels within the domain, such that the affected vowels match the relevant feature of the trigger vowel. Intervening segments are common between affected vowels, meaning that the vowels do not need to be next to each other for this change to apply, classifying this as a \"long-distance\" type of assimilation. Common phonological features that define the natural classes of vowels involved in vowel harmony include vowel backness, vowel height, nasalization, roundedness, and advanced and retracted tongue root.\nCertain authors and articles use the term \"vowel harmony\" to refer to \"progressive\" (beginning-to-end) vowel assimilation, and use \"umlaut\" to refer to \"regressive\" assimilation. The term \"umlaut\" is also used in a different sense to refer to a type of vowel gradation, as well as the diacritic that often marks such changes. \"Metaphony\" is often used synonymously with vowel harmony, but is typically used to describe historical sound changes. This article uses the term \"vowel harmony\" to refer to both \"progressive\" and \"regressive\" assimilatory processes.\nVowel harmony is found in many agglutinative languages. The given domain of vowel harmony taking effect often spans across morpheme boundaries, and suffixes and prefixes will usually follow vowel harmony rules. Vowel harmony is also considered an areal feature in some parts of the world, especially Northern and Central Asia among the Turkic, Mongolic and Tungusic language families, as well as other languages in contact with languages from the aforementioned families.\n\"Long-distance\".\nVowel harmony processes are \"long-distance\" in the sense that the assimilation involves sounds that are separated by intervening segments (usually consonant segments). In other words, \"harmony\" refers to the assimilation of sounds that are \"not\" adjacent to each other. For example, a vowel at the beginning of a word can trigger assimilation in a vowel at the end of a word. The assimilation occurs across the entire word in many languages. This is represented schematically in the following diagram:\nIn the diagram above, the Va (type-a vowel) causes the following Vb (type-b vowel) to assimilate and become the same type of vowel (and thus they become, metaphorically, \"in harmony\").\nThe vowel that causes the vowel assimilation is frequently termed the \"trigger\" while the vowels that assimilate (or \"harmonize\") are termed \"targets\". When the vowel triggers lie within the root or stem of a word and the affixes contain the targets, this is called \"stem-controlled\" vowel harmony (the opposite situation is called \"dominant\"). This is fairly common among languages with vowel harmony and may be seen in the Hungarian dative suffix:\nThe dative suffix has two different forms . The form appears after the root with back vowels ( and are back vowels). The form appears after the root with front vowels ( and are front vowels).\nFeatures of vowel harmony.\nVowel harmony often involves dimensions such as:\nIn many languages, vowels can be said to belong to particular sets or classes, such as back vowels or rounded vowels. Some languages have more than one system of harmony. For instance, Altaic languages are proposed to have a rounding harmony superimposed over a backness harmony.\nEven among languages with vowel harmony, not all vowels need to participate in the vowel conversions; these vowels are termed \"neutral\". Neutral vowels may be \"opaque\" and block harmonic processes or they may be \"transparent\" and not affect them. Intervening consonants are also often transparent.\nFinally, languages that do have vowel harmony often allow for lexical \"disharmony\", or words with mixed sets of vowels even when an opaque neutral vowel is not involved. Van der Hulst &amp; van de Weijer (1995) point to two such situations: polysyllabic trigger morphemes may contain non-neutral vowels from opposite harmonic sets and certain target morphemes simply fail to harmonize. Many loanwords exhibit disharmony. For example, Turkish , ('time' [from Arabic ]); * would have been expected. Other examples from Finnish include \"olympialaiset\" ('Olympic games') and \"sekund\u00e4\u00e4rinen\" ('secondary') which have both front and back vowels. In standard Finnish, these words are pronounced as they are spelled, but many speakers intuitively apply vowel harmony \u2013 \"olumpialaiset\", and \"sekundaarinen\" or \"sekynd\u00e4\u00e4rinen\".\nLanguages with vowel harmony.\nTurkic languages.\nTurkic languages inherit their systems of vowel harmony from Proto-Turkic, which already had a fully developed system. The one exception is Uzbek, which has lost its vowel harmony due to extensive Persian influence; however, its closest relative, Uyghur, has retained Turkic vowel harmony.\nAzerbaijani.\nAzerbaijani's system of vowel harmony has both front/back and rounded/unrounded vowels.\nTatar.\nTatar has no neutral vowels. The vowel \u00e9 is found only in loanwords. Other vowels also could be found in loanwords, but they are seen as Back vowels. Tatar language also has a rounding harmony, but it is not represented in writing. O and \u00f6 could be written only in the first syllable, but vowels they mark could be pronounced in the place where \u0131 and e are written.\nKazakh.\nKazakh's system of vowel harmony is primarily a front/back system, but there is also a system of rounding harmony that is not represented by the orthography.\nKyrgyz.\nKyrgyz's system of vowel harmony is primarily a front/back system, but there is also a system of rounding harmony, which strongly resembles that of Kazakh.\nTurkish.\nTurkish has a 2-dimensional vowel harmony system, where vowels are characterised by two features: [\u00b1front] and [\u00b1rounded]. There are two sets of vocal harmony systems: a simple one and a complex one. The simple one is concerned with the low vowels e, a and has only the [\u00b1front] feature (\"e\" front vs \"a\" back). The complex one is concerned with the high vowels i, \u00fc, \u0131, u and has both [\u00b1front] and [\u00b1rounded] features (\"i\" front unrounded vs \"\u00fc\" front rounded and \"\u0131\" back unrounded vs \"u\" back rounded). The close-mid vowels \"\u00f6, o\" are not involved in vowel harmony processes.\nFront/back harmony.\nTurkish has two classes of vowels\u00a0\u2013 \"front\" and \"back\". Vowel harmony states that words may not contain both front and back vowels. Therefore, most grammatical suffixes come in front and back forms, e.g. \"T\u00fcrkiye'de \"in Turkey\" but \"Almanya'da \"in Germany\".\nRounding harmony.\nIn addition, there is a secondary rule that and in suffixes tend to become and respectively after rounded vowels, so certain suffixes have additional forms. This gives constructions such as \"T\u00fcrkiye'dir\" \"it is Turkey\", \"it is the door\", but \"it is the day\", \"it is the watermelon\".\nExceptions.\nNot all suffixes obey vowel harmony perfectly.\nIn the suffix , the is invariant, while the changes according to the preceding vowel; for example \u2013 \"he/she/it fades\". Likewise, in the suffix , the is invariant: \u2013 \"When in Rome\"; and so is the in the suffix : \u2013 \"credible\". The suffix exhibits partial harmony, never taking a back vowel but allowing only the front-voweled variant : \u2013 \"belonging to yesterday\"; \u2013 \"belonging to tomorrow\".\nMost Turkish words do not only have vowel harmony for suffixes, but also internally. However, there are many exceptions.\nCompound words are considered separate words with respect to vowel harmony: vowels do not have to harmonize between members of the compound (thus forms like \"this|day\" = \"today\" are permissible). Vowel harmony does not apply for loanwords, as in \u2013 from French \"autobus\". There are also a few native modern Turkish words that do not follow the rule (such as \"mother\" or \"sibling\" which used to obey vowel harmony in their older forms, and , respectively). However, in such words, suffixes nevertheless harmonize with the final vowel; thus \u2013 \"his/her mother\", and \u2013 \"volleyballer\".\nIn some loanwords the final vowel is an , or and thus looks like a back vowel, but is phonetically actually a front vowel, and governs vowel harmony accordingly. An example is the word , meaning \"hour\" or \"clock\", a loanword from Arabic. Its plural is . This is not truly an exception to vowel harmony itself; rather, it is an exception to the rule that denotes a front vowel.\nDisharmony tends to disappear through analogy, especially within loanwords; e.g. (a man's name) &lt; earlier , from Arabic \"husn\u00ee\"; \"Moslem, Muslim (adj. and n.)\" &lt; Ottoman Turkish , from Persian \"mosalm\u00e2n\".\nTuvan.\nTuvan has one of the most complete systems of vowel harmony among the Turkic languages.\nMongolic languages.\nMongolic languages display various vowel harmony systems. While there is some debate, Proto-Mongolic appears to have had a system of backness harmony, from which the modern languages' systems descend.\nMongolian.\nMongolian innovates on Proto-Mongolic's system, exhibiting both tongue root harmony and rounding harmony. The tongue root harmony involves the vowels: (+RTR) and (-RTR). The vowel is phonetically similar to the -RTR vowels, but is largely transparent to vowel harmony. Rounding harmony only affects the open vowels, . Some sources refer to the primary harmonization dimension as pharyngealization or palatalness (among others), but neither of these is technically correct. Likewise, referring to \u00b1RTR as the sole defining feature of vowel categories in Mongolian is not fully accurate either. In any case, the two vowel categories differ primarily with regards to tongue root position, and \u00b1RTR is a convenient and fairly accurate descriptor for the articulatory parameters involved.\nKalmyk-Oirat.\nKalmyk Oirat, a western Mongolic language, displays very clear backness harmony. Words may only contain back or front vowels, but may be rounded or unrounded. /y/ alternates with /u/, /\u00f8/ alternates with /o/, /\u00e6/ alternates with /a/, and /i/ has the allophonic alternation [\u0268] in suffixes. /e/ is mostly transparent to vowel harmony.\nKorean.\nKorean is an example of a language with a vowel harmony system that is gradually becoming less productive. While Middle Korean had strong vowel harmony, modern Korean only retains it in certain cases such as onomatopoeia, adjectives, adverbs, conjugation, and interjections. Many native Korean words demonstrate the formerly productive vowel harmony, such as (, 'person') and (, 'kitchen').\nThe current system of Korean vowel harmony is based on the orthographic system where vowels are classified as either positive/light, negative/dark, or neutral. Many scholars treat the positive vowels as +RTR and the negative and neutral vowels as \u2212RTR. The basic conjugations for Korean's tenses demonstrate this vowel harmony, using the +RTR vowel /a/ or \u2212RTR vowel /\u028c/ depending on the last vowel of the verb/adjective stem.\nNote that the vowel harmony does not spread to subsequent morphemes, such as the polite ending \uc694 [jo], which uses a +RTR vowel, but occurs the same on words that take the +RTR tense marker.\nPersian.\nPersian is a language which includes various types of regressive and progressive vowel harmony in different words and expressions.\nIn Persian, progressive vowel harmony only applies to prepositions/post-positions when attached to pronouns.\nIn Persian, regressive vowel harmony, some features spread from the triggering non-initial vowel to the target vowel in the previous syllable. The application and non-application of this backness harmony which can also be considered rounding harmony.\nUralic languages.\nMany, though not all, Uralic languages show vowel harmony between front and back vowels. Vowel harmony is often hypothesized to have existed in Proto-Uralic, though its original scope remains a matter of discussion.\nSamoyedic.\nVowel harmony is found in Nganasan and is reconstructed also for Proto-Samoyedic.\nHungarian.\nVowel types.\nHungarian has a system of \"front\", \"back\", and \"intermediate\" (neutral) vowels and some vowel harmony processes. The basic rule is that words including at least one back vowel get back vowel suffixes ( \u2013 in(to) the arm), while words excluding back vowels get front vowel suffixes ( \u2013 in(to) the hand). Single-vowel words which have only the neutral vowels (, or ) are unpredictable, but takes a front-vowel suffix.\nVowel length.\nIn Hungarian language there are long, and short vowels\nLong vowels compared to short ones are quite simply voiced for a longer period of time. Hungarian long vowels are two units long compared to other Uralic language Finnish's three units long vowels. In order for two vowels to be long-short pairs, the long vowel pronounced short must be identical to its short pair, and vice-versa. In the case of the four exceptions, this is not applicable because - contrary to their written form - the four exceptions are not two pairs of long, and short vowels, but vowels with pronunciation difference that is not only the length\nIn writing the long of such vowel pairs are marked with stick-like accents most of the time compared to its dot-accented, or non-accented versions\nIn the four exceptions case the stick-like accent ( [], []) refer to long length most if not all the time\nIn practice these long and short vowels sometimes lengthen, or shorten due to agglutinations. Most if not all the time this change is with written difference (meaning that the accent becomes different according)\nIt can happen that an exceptional vowel is gaining, or losing an accent regardless of it not being the long, or the short pair of the other\nVowel cleft lipness.\nThere are cleft lip, and non-cleft lip vowel pairs. Cleft lip vowels approach [] sound when pronounced compared to its non-cleft lip vowel pairs. All these letters (or sounds if you will) other than [], and [] are marked with double accents (both double dot, and double sticks)\nWords with such sounds are often agglutinated using cleft lip vowels also\nNaturally since [], and [] are also cleft lip (by definition, not by accent on letter) with these as the last vowel of a word the following examples are also valid\nBehaviour of neutral vowels.\n\"Unrounded front vowels\" (or \"Intermediate\" or \"neutral\" vowels) can occur together with either \"back vowels\" (e.g. carrot, car) or \"rounded front vowels\" (e.g. , ), but \"rounded front vowels\" and \"back vowels\" can occur together only in words of foreign origins (e.g. = chauffeur, French word for driver). The basic rule is that words including at least one back vowel take back vowel suffixes (e.g. in a carrot, in a car), while words excluding back vowels usually take front vowel suffixes (except for words including only the vowels , , and , for which there is no general rule, e.g. against , or against ).\nSome other rules and guidelines to consider:\nSuffixes with multiple forms.\nGrammatical suffixes in Hungarian can have one, two, three, or four forms:\nAn example on basic numerals:\nAgglutination vowel constraints.\nHungarian language is a consonant oriented language that makes vowel harmony possible, but the vowels in agglutinations can not be changed according to free will. Some of such vowels even change the meaning of the word\nFor example it was mentioned that the last cleft lip vowel in the root of the word induces an agglutination with also at least one cleft lip vowel in it, however this is not always the case due to certain agglutinations are constrained. One good example is the agglutination that can not take any other vowel, but o\nThere are further examples of vowel constraints in agglutinations not only for cleft lip-ness with some agglutination possessing\nThe vowel in these forms are only short, or only long\nIn the following examples the used vowels in the agglutinations change the meaning\nAs you can see in the last example's agglutination of is with long vowel. This resulted in a noun, not a verb. The long vowel renders meaning completely detached of the other two examples' context. The other two are in a context with only short vowels, with the rest of their context is the following:\nLikewise using the same agglutination used to , the word is also with long vowel, that is also a noun against with a short vowel that is likewise a verb\nMansi.\nVowel harmony occurred in Southern Mansi.\nKhanty.\nIn the Khanty language, vowel harmony occurs in the Eastern dialects, and affects both inflectional and derivational suffixes. The Vakh-Vasyugan dialect has a particularly extensive system of vowel harmony:\nTrigger vowels occur in the first syllable of a word, and control the backness of the entire word. Target vowels are affected by vowel harmony and are arranged in seven front-back pairs of similar height and roundedness, which are assigned the archiphonemes A, O, U, I, \ua7ae, \u01b1.\nThe vowels , and appear only in the first syllable of a word, and are thus strictly trigger vowels. All other vowel qualities may act in both roles.\nVowel harmony is lost in the Northern and Southern dialects, as well as in the Surgut dialect of Eastern Khanty.\nMari.\nMost varieties of the Mari language have vowel harmony.\nErzya.\nThe Erzya language has a limited system of vowel harmony, involving only two vowel phonemes: (front) versus (back).\nMoksha, the closest relative of Erzya, has no phonemic vowel harmony, though has front and back allophones in a distribution similar to the vowel harmony in Erzya.\nFinnic languages.\nVowel harmony is found in most of the Finnic languages. It has been lost in Livonian and in Standard Estonian, where the front vowels \"\u00fc\" \"\u00e4\" \"\u00f6\" occur only in the first (stressed) syllable. South Estonian V\u00f5ro (and Seto) language as well as some [North] Estonian dialects, however, retain vowel harmony.\nFinnish.\nIn the Finnish language, there are three classes of vowels\u00a0\u2013 \"front\", \"back\", and \"neutral\", where each front vowel has a back vowel pairing. Grammatical endings such as case and derivational endings\u00a0\u2013 but not enclitics\u00a0\u2013 have only archiphonemic vowels U, O, A, which are realized as either back or front inside a single word. From vowel harmony it follows that the initial syllable of each single (non-compound) word controls the frontness or backness of the entire word. Non-initially, the neutral vowels are transparent to and unaffected by vowel harmony. In the initial syllable:\nFor example:\nSome dialects that have a sound change opening diphthong codas also permit archiphonemic vowels in the initial syllable. For example, standard 'ie' is reflected as 'ia' or 'i\u00e4', controlled by noninitial syllables, in the Tampere dialect, e.g. \u2190 but \u2190 \n... as evidenced by (not ). Even if phonologically front vowels precede the suffix , grammatically it is preceded by a word controlled by a back vowel. As shown in the examples, neutral vowels make the system unsymmetrical, as they are front vowels phonologically, but leave the front/back control to any grammatical front or back vowels. There is little or no change in the actual vowel quality of the neutral vowels.\nAs a consequence, Finnish speakers often have problems with pronouncing foreign words which do not obey vowel harmony. For example, is often pronounced . The position of some loans is unstandardized (e.g. ) or ill-standardized (e.g. , sometimes pronounced , and , which violate vowel harmony). Where a foreign word violates vowel harmony by not using front vowels because it begins with a neutral vowel, then last syllable generally counts, although this rule is irregularly followed. Experiments indicate that e.g. always becomes (front) , but becomes equally frequently both (back) and (front), even by the same speaker.\nWith respect to vowel harmony, compound words can be considered separate words. For example, (\"autumn month\" i.e. September) has both \"u\" and \"y\", but it consists of two words and , and declines (not ). The same goes for enclitics, e.g. \"backwards\" consists of the word \"to back\" and \"-wards\", which gives e.g. (not or ). If fusion takes place, the vowel is harmonized by some speakers, e.g. pro \u2190 .\nSome Finnish words whose stems contain only neutral vowels exhibit an alternating pattern in terms of vowel harmony when inflected or forming new words through derivation. Examples include \"sea\", \"in the sea\" (inessive), but (partitive), not ; \"blood\", \"from the blood\" (elative), but (partitive), not ; \"to be afraid\", but \"fear\", not ; \"pain\", but \"sore\", not .\nHelsinki slang has slang words that have roots violating vowel harmony, e.g. . This can be interpreted as Swedish influence.\nVeps.\nThe Veps language has partially lost vowel harmony.\nYokuts.\nVowel harmony is present in all Yokutsan languages and dialects. For instance, Yawelmani has 4 vowels (which additionally may be either long or short). These can be grouped as in the table below.\nVowels in suffixes must harmonize with either or its non- counterparts or with or non- counterparts. For example, the vowel in the aorist suffix appears as when it follows a in the root, but when it follows all other vowels it appears as . Similarly, the vowel in the nondirective gerundial suffix appears as when it follows an in the root; otherwise it appears as .\nIn addition to the harmony found in suffixes, there is a harmony restriction on word stems where in stems with more than one syllable all vowels are required to be of the same lip rounding and tongue height dimensions. For example, a stem must contain all high rounded vowels or all low rounded vowels, etc. This restriction is further complicated by (i) long high vowels being lowered and (ii) an epenthetic vowel which does not harmonize with stem vowels.\nSumerian.\nThere is some evidence for vowel harmony according to vowel height or ATR in the prefix i3/e- in inscriptions from pre-Sargonic Lagash (the specifics of the pattern have led a handful of scholars to postulate not only an phoneme, but even an and, most recently, an ) Many cases of partial or complete assimilation of the vowel of certain prefixes and suffixes to one in the adjacent syllable are reflected in writing in some of the later periods, and there is a noticeable though not absolute tendency for disyllabic stems to have the same vowel in both syllables. What appears to be vowel contraction in hiatus (*/aa/, */ia/, */ua/ &gt; a, */ae/ &gt; a, */ue/ &gt; u, etc.) is also very common.\nOther languages.\nVowel harmony occurs to some degree in many other languages, such as\nOther types of harmony.\nAlthough vowel harmony is the most well-known harmony, not all types of harmony that occur in the world's languages involve only vowels. Other types of harmony involve consonants (and is known as consonant harmony). Rarer types of harmony are those that involve tone or both vowels and consonants (e.g. \"postvelar harmony\").\nVowel\u2013consonant harmony.\nSome languages have harmony processes that involve an interaction between vowels and consonants. For example, Chilcotin has a phonological process known as \"vowel flattening\" (i.e. post-velar harmony) where vowels must harmonize with uvular and pharyngealized consonants.\nChilcotin has two classes of vowels:\nAdditionally, Chilcotin has a class of pharyngealized \"flat\" consonants . Whenever a consonant of this class occurs in a word, all preceding vowels must be flat vowels.\nIf flat consonants do not occur in a word, then all vowels will be of the non-flat class:\nOther languages of this region of North America (the Plateau culture area), such as St'\u00e1t'imcets, have similar vowel\u2013consonant harmonic processes.\nSyllabic synharmony.\nSyllabic synharmony was a process in the Proto-Slavic language ancestral to all modern Slavic languages. It refers to the tendency of frontness (palatality) to be generalised across an entire syllable. It was therefore a form of consonant\u2013vowel harmony in which the property 'palatal' or 'non-palatal' applied to an entire syllable at once rather than to each sound individually.\nThe result was that back vowels were fronted after \"j\" or a palatal consonant, and consonants were palatalised before \"j\" or a front vowel. Diphthongs were harmonized as well, although they were soon monophthongized because of a tendency to end syllables with a vowel (syllables were or became open). This rule remained in place for a long time, and ensured that a syllable containing a front vowel always began with a palatal consonant, and a syllable containing \"j\" was always preceded by a palatal consonant and followed by a front vowel.\nA similar process occurs in Skolt Sami, where palatalization of consonants and fronting of vowels is a suprasegmental process applying to a whole syllable. Suprasegmental palatalization is marked with the letter \"\u02b9\", which is a Modifier letter prime, for example in the word \"v\u00e4\u00e4\u02b9rr\" 'mountain, hill'.\nRhotic harmony.\nThe Mawo dialect of Northern Qiang displays rhotic harmony, where vowels must align with the previous vowel's rhoticity.\nUnconventional systems.\nLanguages such as Nez Perce and Chukchi have vowel harmony systems which can not be easily explained in terms of height, backness, tongue root, or rounding. In Nez Perce, Katherine Nelson (2013) proposes that the two sets of vowels (\"dominant\" /i a o/ and \"recessive\" /i \u00e6 u/) be considered as distinct \"triangles\" of vowel space, each by themselves maximally dispersed, where one set is somewhat retracted (further back) in comparison to the dominant. Note here that /i/ can behave as a dominant or recessive vowel depending on the root it is in; it is not transparent to vowel harmony.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44903", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44903", "title": "Astor Piazzolla", "text": "Argentine composer, bandoneon player and arranger (1921\u20131992)\nAstor Pantale\u00f3n Piazzolla (, ; March 11, 1921 \u2013 July 4, 1992) was an Argentine tango composer, bandoneon player, and arranger. His works revolutionized the traditional tango into a new style termed \"nuevo tango\", incorporating elements from jazz and classical music. A virtuoso bandoneonist, he regularly performed his own compositions with a variety of ensembles.\nIn 1992, American music critic Stephen Holden described Piazzolla as \"the world's foremost composer of Tango music\".\nLife and career.\nChildhood.\nPiazzolla was born in Mar del Plata, Argentina, in 1921, the only child of Vicente \"Nonino\" Piazzolla and Asunta Manetti. His paternal grandfather, a sailor and fisherman named Pantaleo (later Pantale\u00f3n) Piazzolla, had immigrated to Mar del Plata from Trani, a seaport in the southeastern Italian region of Apulia, at the end of the 19th century. His mother was the daughter of two Italian immigrants from Lucca in the central region of Tuscany.\nIn 1925 Astor Piazzolla moved with his family to Greenwich Village in New York City, which in those days was a violent neighbourhood inhabited by a volatile mixture of gangsters and hard-working immigrants. His parents worked long hours, and Piazzolla, despite having a limp, soon learned to take care of himself on the streets. At home he would listen to his father's records of the tango orchestras of Carlos Gardel and Julio de Caro, and was exposed to jazz and classical music, including Bach, from an early age. He began to play the bandoneon after his father spotted one in a New York pawn shop in 1929.\nAfter their return to New York City from a brief visit to Mar del Plata in 1930, the family moved to Little Italy in lower Manhattan. In 1932 Piazzolla composed his first tango, \"La Catinga\". The following year he took music lessons with the Hungarian classical pianist B\u00e9la Wilda, a student of Rachmaninoff, who taught him to play Bach on his bandoneon. In 1934 he met Carlos Gardel, one of the most important figures in the history of tango, and played a cameo role as a paper boy in his movie \"El d\u00eda que me quieras\". Gardel invited the young bandoneon player to join him on his tour. Much to Piazzolla's dismay, his father decided that he was not old enough to go along. The disappointment of being forbidden to join the tour proved to be fortunate, as it was on this tour in 1935 that Gardel and his entire orchestra perished in a plane crash. In later years Piazzolla jokingly made light of this fateful event: had his father let him join the tour, Piazzolla would have played the harp instead of the bandoneon.\nEarly career.\nIn 1936, Piazzolla returned with his family to Mar del Plata, where he began to play in a variety of tango orchestras and around this time he discovered the music of Elvino Vardaro\u2019s sextet on the radio. Vardaro's novel interpretation of tango made a great impression on Piazzolla and years later he would become Piazzolla's violinist in his Orquesta de Cuerdas (String Orchestra) and his First Quintet.\nInspired by Vardaro's style of tango, and still only 17 years old, Piazzolla moved to Buenos Aires in 1938 where, the following year, he realized a dream when he joined the orchestra of the bandoneonist An\u00edbal Troilo, which would become one of the greatest tango orchestras of that time. Piazzolla was employed as a temporary replacement for Toto Rodr\u00edguez who was ill, but when Rodr\u00edguez returned to work Troilo decided to retain Piazzolla as a fourth bandoneonist. Apart from playing the bandoneon, Piazzolla also became Troilo's arranger and would occasionally play the piano for him. By 1941 he was earning a good wage, enough to pay for music lessons with Alberto Ginastera, an eminent Argentine composer of classical music. The pianist Arthur Rubinstein, then living in Buenos Aires, had advised him to study with Ginastera; delving into scores by Stravinsky, Bart\u00f3k, Ravel and others, Piazzolla rose early each morning to hear the Teatro Col\u00f3n orchestra rehearse while continuing a gruelling performing schedule in the tango clubs at night. During his five years of study with Ginastera he mastered orchestration, which he later considered to be one of his strong points. In 1943 he started piano lessons with the Argentine classical pianist Ra\u00fal Spivak, which would continue for the next five years, and wrote his first classical works \"Preludio No. 1 for Violin and Piano\" and \"Suite for Strings and Harps\". In the same year he married his first wife, Ded\u00e9 Wolff, an artist, with whom he had two children, Diana and Daniel.\nAs time passed, Troilo began to fear that the advanced musical ideas of the young bandoneonist might undermine the style of his orchestra and make it less appealing to dancers of tango. Tensions mounted between the two bandoneonists until, in 1944, Piazzolla announced his intention to leave Troilo and join the orchestra of the tango singer and bandoneonist Francisco Fiorentino. Piazzolla would lead Fiorentino's orchestra until 1946 and make many recordings with him, including his first two instrumental tangos, \"La chiflada\" and \"Color de rosa\".\nIn 1946 Piazzolla formed his Orquesta T\u00edpica, which, although having a similar formation to other tango orchestras of the day, gave him his first opportunity to experiment with his own approach to the orchestration and musical content of tango. That same year he composed \"El Desbande\", which he considered to be his first formal tango, and then began to compose musical scores for films, starting with \"Con los mismos colores\" in 1949 and \"B\u00f3lidos de acero\" in 1950, both films directed by Carlos Torres R\u00edos.\nHaving disbanded his first orchestra in 1950, he almost abandoned tango altogether, continuing to study Bartok and Stravinsky and orchestra direction with Hermann Scherchen. He spent a lot of time listening to jazz and searching for a musical style of his own beyond the realms of tango. He decided to drop the bandoneon and to dedicate himself to writing and to studying music. Between 1950 and 1954 he composed a series of works that began to develop his unique style: \"Para lucirse\", \"Tanguango\", \"Prep\u00e1rense\", \"Contrabajeando\", \"Triunfal\" and \"Lo que vendr\u00e1\".\nStudies in Paris.\nAt Ginastera's urging, on August 16, 1953, Piazzolla entered his classical composition \"Buenos Aires Symphony in Three Movements\" for the Fabian Sevitzky Award. The performance took place at the law school in Buenos Aires with the symphony orchestra of Radio del Estado under the direction of Sevitzky himself. At the end of the concert, a fight broke out among members of the audience who were offended by the inclusion of two bandoneons in a traditional symphony orchestra. In spite of this Piazzolla's composition won him a grant from the French government to study in Paris with the legendary French composition teacher Nadia Boulanger at the Fontainebleau conservatory.\nIn 1954, he and his wife left their two children (Diana aged 11 and Daniel aged 10) with Piazzolla's parents and travelled to Paris. Piazzolla was tired of tango and tried to hide his tango and bandoneon compositions from Boulanger, thinking that his destiny lay in classical music. Introducing his work, Piazzolla played her a number of his classically inspired compositions, but it was not until he played his tango \"Triunfal\" that she congratulated him and encouraged him to pursue his career in tango, recognising that this was where his talent lay. This was to prove a historic encounter and a crossroads in Piazzolla's career.\nWith Boulanger he studied classical composition, including counterpoint, which was to play an important role in his later tango compositions. Before leaving Paris, he heard the octet of the American jazz saxophonist Gerry Mulligan, which was to give him the idea of forming his own octet on his return to Buenos Aires. He composed and recorded a series of tangos with the String Orchestra of the Paris Opera and began to play the bandoneon while standing up, putting his right foot on a chair and the bellows of the instrument across his right thigh. Until that time bandoneonists played sitting down.\nIn the vanguard of \"nuevo tango\".\nBack in Argentina, Piazzolla formed his Orquesta de Cuerdas (String Orchestra), which performed with the singer Jorge Sobral, and his Octeto Buenos Aires in 1955. With two bandoneons (Piazzolla and Leopoldo Federico), two violins (Enrique Mario Francini and Hugo Baralis), double bass (Juan Vasallo), cello (Jos\u00e9 Bragato), piano (Atilio Stampone), and an electric guitar (Horacio Malvicino), his Octeto effectively broke the mould of the traditional orquesta t\u00edpica and created a new sound akin to chamber music, without a singer and with jazz-like improvisations. This was to be a turning point in his career and a watershed in the history of tango. Piazzolla's new approach to the tango, \"nuevo tango\", made him a controversial figure in his native land both musically and politically. However, his music gained acceptance in Europe and North America, and his reworking of the tango was embraced by some liberal segments of Argentine society, who were pushing for political changes in parallel to his musical revolution.\nIn 1958 he disbanded both the Octeto and the String Orchestra and returned to New York City with his family where he struggled to make a living as a musician and arranger. Briefly forming his own group, the Jazz Tango Quintet with whom he made just two recordings, his attempts to blend jazz and tango were not successful. He received the news of the death of his father in October 1959 while performing with Juan Carlos Copes and Mar\u00eda Nieves in Puerto Rico; on his return to New York City a few days later, he asked to be left alone in his apartment and in less than an hour wrote his famous tango \"Adi\u00f3s Nonino\", in homage to his father.\nCopes and Nieves packed out Club Flamboyan in San Juan, Puerto Rico, with \"Compa\u00f1ia Argentina Tangolandia\". Piazzolla was serving as the musical director. The tour continued in New York, Chicago and then Washington. The last show that the three of them did together was an appearance on CBS, the only colour TV channel in the US, on the Arthur Murray Show in April 1960.\nBack in Buenos Aires later that year he put together the first, and perhaps most famous, of his quintets, the first Quinteto, initially comprising bandoneon (Piazzolla), piano (Jaime Gosis), violin (Sim\u00f3n Bajour), electric guitar (Horacio Malvicino) and double bass (Kicho D\u00edaz). Of the many ensembles that Piazzolla set up during his career, it was the quintet formation which best expressed his approach to tango.\nIn 1963 he set up his \"Nuevo Octeto\", and the same year premiered his \"Tres Tangos Sinf\u00f3nicos\", under the direction of Paul Klecky, for which he was awarded the Hirsch Prize.\nIn 1965 he released \"El Tango\", an album for which he collaborated with the Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges. The recording featured his Quinteto together with an orchestra, the singer Edmundo Rivero and Luis Medina Castro reciting texts.\nIn 1966 he left Ded\u00e9 Wolff and the following year signed a five-year contract with the poet Horacio Ferrer with whom he composed the 'operita' (little opera) \"Mar\u00eda de Buenos Aires\", with lyrics by Ferrer. The work was premiered in May 1968 with the singer Amelita Baltar in the title role and introduced a new style of tango, Tango Canci\u00f3n (in English: Song Tango). Soon after this he began a relationship with Amelita Baltar. The following year he wrote \"Balada para un loco\" with lyrics by Ferrer, which was premiered at the First Iberoamerican Music Festival with Amelita Baltar, and Piazzolla himself conducting the orchestra. Piazzolla was awarded second prize and the composition would prove to be his first popular success.\nIn 1970 Piazzolla returned to Paris where with Ferrer he wrote the oratorio \"El pueblo joven\", later premiered in Saarbr\u00fccken, Germany in 1971. On May 19, 1970, he gave a concert with his Quinteto at the Teatro Regina in Buenos Aires in which he premiered his composition \"Cuatro Estaciones Porte\u00f1as\".\nBack in Buenos Aires he founded his Conjunto 9 (also known as \"Nonet\"), a chamber music formation, which was a realisation of a dream for Piazzolla and for which he composed some of his most sophisticated music. He now put aside his first Quinteto and made several recordings with his new ensemble in Italy. Within a year the Conjunto 9 had run into financial problems and was dissolved and in 1972 he participated in his first concert at the Teatro Col\u00f3n in Buenos Aires, sharing the bill with other Tango orchestras.\nAfter a period of great productivity as a composer, he suffered a heart attack in 1973. That same year he moved to Italy where he began a series of recordings which would span a period of five years. The music publisher Aldo Pagani, a partner in Curci-Pagani Music, had offered Piazzolla a 15-year contract in Rome to record anything he could write. His famous album \"Libertango\" was recorded in Milan in May 1974. Later that year he separated from Amelita Baltar and in September recorded the album \"Summit (Reuni\u00f3n Cumbre)\" with the saxophonist Gerry Mulligan and an Italian orchestra, including jazz musicians such as bassist /arranger Pino Presti and drummer Tullio De Piscopo, in Milan. The album includes the composition \"Aire de Buenos Aires\" by Mulligan.\nIn 1975 he set up his \"Electronic Octet\", an octet made up of bandoneon, electric piano and/or acoustic piano, organ, guitar, electric bass, drums, synthesizer and violin, which was later replaced by a flute or saxophone. Later that year An\u00edbal Troilo died and Piazzolla composed the \"Suite Troileana\u200a\" in his memory, a work in four parts, which he recorded with the Conjunto Electronico. At this time Piazzolla started a collaboration with the singer Jos\u00e9 \u00c1ngel Trelles, with whom he made a number of recordings.\nIn December 1976 he played at a concert at the Teatro Gran Rex in Buenos Aires, where he presented his work, \u201c500 motivaciones\u201d, written especially for the Conjunto Electronico, and in 1977 he played another memorable concert at the Olympia in Paris, with a new formation of the Conjunto Electronico.\nIn 1978 he formed his second Quintet, with which he would tour the world for 11 years, and which would make him world-renowned. He also returned to writing chamber music and symphonic works.\nDuring the period of Argentine military dictatorship from 1976 to 1983, Piazzolla lived in Italy, but returned many times to Argentina, recorded there, and on at least one occasion had lunch with the dictator Jorge Rafael Videla. However, his relationship with the dictator might have been less than friendly, as recounted in \"Astor Piazzolla, A manera de memorias\" (a comprehensive collection of interviews, constituting a memoir):\nOne year before the \"Los Largartos\" issue you went to Videla's house and had lunch with him. Why did you accept that invitation?\nWhat invitation? They sent a couple of guys in black suits and a letter with my name on it that said that Videla expected me a particular day in a particular place. I have a book around someplace, with pictures of all the guests: Eladia Bl\u00e1zquez, Daniel Tinayre, Olga Ferri, the composer Juan Carlos Tauriello, there were painters, actors [\u2026] \u2013 Astor Piazzolla, \"A manera de memorias\"\nIn 1985 he received the Platinum Konex Award, and in 1995 his family received the Honour Konex Award as the most important deceased musician of the decade in Argentina.\nTraveling the world.\nIn 1982 he recorded the album \"Oblivion\" with an orchestra in Italy for the film \"Enrico IV\", directed by Marco Bellocchio, and in May 1982, in the middle of the Falklands War, he played in a concert at the Teatro Regina, Buenos Aires with the second Quinteto and the singer Roberto Goyeneche. That same year he wrote \"Le Grand Tango\" for cello and piano, dedicated to Russian cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, which would be premiered by him in 1990 in New Orleans.\nOn 11 June 1983 he put on one of the best concerts of his life when he played a program of his music at the Teatro Col\u00f3n in Buenos Aires. For the occasion he regrouped the Conjunto 9 and played solo with the Buenos Aires Philharmonic, directed by Pedro Ignacio Calder\u00f3n. The programme included his three-movement \"Concierto para bandone\u00f3n y orquesta\" and his three-movement \"Concierto de Nacar\".\nOn 4 July 1984, Piazzolla appeared with his Quinteto at the Montreal International Jazz Festival, the world's largest jazz festival, and on 29 September that same year they appeared with the Italian singer Milva at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Bouffes du Nord, Paris. His concert on 15 October 1984 at the Teatro Nazionale in Milan was recorded and released as the album \"Suite Punta del Este\". At the end of that same year he performed in West-Berlin, and in theater Vredenburg in Utrecht, in the Netherlands, where VPRO-TV-director Theo Uittenbogaard recorded his Quinteto Tango Nuevo, playing, among other pieces, a very moving \"Adios Nonino\", with as a backdrop \u2013 to Piazzolla's great pleasure \u2013 the extremely zoomed-in \"live\"' projection of his bandoneon playing.\nIn 1985 he was named Illustrious Citizen of Buenos Aires and premiered his \"Concerto for Bandoneon and Guitar\" (also known as \"Tribute to Li\u00e8ge\"), at the Fifth International Li\u00e8ge Guitar Festival on March 15, with the Li\u00e8ge Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Leo Brouwer and Cacho Tirao on guitar. Piazzolla made his London debut with his second Quinteto at the Almeida Theatre in London at the end of June.\nWith the film score for El exilio de Gardel he won the French critics Cesar Award in Paris for best film music in 1986.\nHe appeared at the Montreux Jazz Festival, Montreux, Switzerland, with vibraphonist Gary Burton in July 1986 and, on 6 September 1987, gave a concert in New York's Central Park, in the city where he spent his childhood.\nIn September 1987 he recorded his \"Concierto para bandone\u00f3n y orquesta\" and \"Tres tangos para bandone\u00f3n y orquesta\" with Lalo Schifrin conducting the St. Luke's Orchestra, in the Richardson Auditorium at Princeton University.\nIn 1988, he wrote music for the film \"Sur\" and married the singer and television personality Laura Escalada on April 11. In May that year he recorded his album \"La Camorra\" in New York, a suite of three pieces, the last time he would record with the second Quinteto. During a tour of Japan with Milva he played at a concert at the Nakano Sun Plaza Hall in Tokyo on June 26, 1988, and that same year underwent a quadruple by-pass operation.\nEarly in 1989 he formed his \"Sexteto Nuevo Tango\", his last ensemble, with two bandoneons, piano, electric guitar, bass and cello. Together they gave a concert at the Club Italiano in Buenos Aires in April, a recording of which was issued under the title of \"Tres minutos con la realidad\". Later he appeared with them at the Teatro Opera in Buenos Aires in the presence of the newly elected Argentine President Carlos Menem on Friday, June 9. This would be Piazzolla's last concert in Argentina.\nThere followed a concert at the Royal Carre Theatre in Amsterdam with his Sexteto and Osvaldo Pugliese\u2019s Orquesta on June 26, 1989, a live recording at the BBC Bristol Studios in June 1989, between concerts in Berlin and Rome, and a concert at the Wembley Conference Centre on June 30, 1989. On November 4, 1989, he gave a concert in Lausanne, Switzerland, at the Moulin \u00e0 Danses and later that month he recorded his composition \"Five Tango Sensations\", with the Kronos Quartet in the US on an album of the same name. This would be his last studio recording and was his second composition for the Kronos Quartet. His first \"Four, For Tango\" had been included in their 1988 album \"Winter Was Hard\". Towards the end of the year he dissolved his sexteto and continued playing solo with classical string quartets and symphonic orchestras. He joined Anahi Carfi's Mantova String Quartet and toured Italy and Finland with them.\nHis 1982 composition \"Le grand tango\", for cello and piano, was premiered in New Orleans by the Russian cellist Mstislav Rostropovich and the pianist Igor Uriash in 1990 and on July 3 he gave his last concert in Athens, Greece, with the Orchestra of Colours, conducted by founder-director Manos Hatzidakis.\nHe suffered a cerebral hemorrhage in Paris on August 4, 1990, which left him in a coma, and died in Buenos Aires, just under two years later on July 4, 1992, without regaining consciousness.\nAmong his followers, the composer and pianist Fernando Otero and Piazzolla's prot\u00e9g\u00e9, bandoneonist Marcelo Nisinman, are the best known innovators of the tango music of the new millennium, while Pablo Ziegler, pianist with Piazzolla's second quintet, has assumed the role of principal custodian of \"nuevo tango\", extending the jazz influence in the style. The Brazilian guitarist Sergio Assad has also experimented with folk-derived, complex virtuoso compositions that show Piazzolla's structural influence while steering clear of tango sounds; and Osvaldo Golijov has acknowledged Piazzolla as perhaps the greatest influence on his globally oriented, eclectic compositions for classical and klezmer performers.\nMusical style.\nPiazzolla's \"nuevo tango\" was distinct from the traditional tango in its incorporation of elements of jazz, its use of extended harmonies and dissonance, its use of counterpoint, and its ventures into extended compositional forms. As Argentine psychoanalyst Carlos Kuri has pointed out, Piazzolla's fusion of tango with this wide range of other recognizable Western musical elements was so successful that it produced a new individual style transcending these influences. It is precisely this success, and individuality, that makes it hard to pin down where particular influences reside in his compositions, but some aspects are clear. The use of the passacaglia technique of a circulating bass line and harmonic sequence, invented and much used in 17th- and 18th-century baroque music but also central to the idea of jazz changes, predominates in most of Piazzolla's mature compositions. Another clear reference to the baroque is the often complex and virtuosic counterpoint that sometimes follows strict fugal behavior but more often simply allows each performer in the group to assert his voice. A further technique that emphasises this sense of democracy and freedom among the musicians is improvisation, that is borrowed from jazz in concept, but in practice involves a different vocabulary of scales and rhythms that stay within the parameters of the established tango sound-world. Pablo Ziegler has been particularly responsible for developing this aspect of the style both within Piazzolla's groups and since the composer's death.\nWith the composition of \"Adi\u00f3s Nonino\" in 1959, Piazzolla established a standard structural pattern for his compositions, involving a formal pattern of fast-slow-fast-slow-coda, with the fast sections emphasizing gritty tango rhythms and harsh, angular melodic figures and the slower sections usually making use of the string instrument in the group and/or Piazzolla's own bandoneon as lyrical soloists. The piano tends to be used throughout as a percussive rhythmic backbone, while the electric guitar either joins in this role or spins filigree improvisations; the double bass parts are usually of little interest, but provide an indispensable rugged thickness to the sound of the ensemble. The quintet of bandoneon, violin, piano, electric guitar and double bass was Piazzolla's preferred setup on two extended occasions during his career, and most critics consider it to be the most successful instrumentation for his works. This is due partly to its great efficiency in terms of sound \u2013 it covers or imitates most sections of a symphony orchestra, including the percussion, which is improvised by all players on the bodies of their instruments \u2013 and the strong expressive identity it permits each individual musician. With a style that is both rugged and intricate, such a setup augments the compositions' inherent characteristics.\nDespite the prevalence of the quintet formation and the ABABC compositional structure, Piazzolla consistently experimented with other musical forms and instrumental combinations. In 1965 an album was released containing collaborations between Piazzolla and Jorge Luis Borges where Borges's poetry was narrated over very avant-garde music by Piazzolla including the use of dodecaphonic (twelve-tone) rows, free non-melodic improvisation on all instruments, and modal harmonies and scales. In 1968 Piazzolla wrote and produced an \"operita\", \"Mar\u00eda de Buenos Aires\", that employed a larger ensemble including flute, percussion, multiple strings and three vocalists, and juxtaposed movements in Piazzolla's own style with several pastiche numbers ranging from waltz and hurdy-gurdy to a piano/narrator bar-room \"scena\" straight out of \"Casablanca\".\nBy the 1970s Piazzolla was living in Rome, managed by the Italian agent Aldo Pagani, and exploring a leaner, more fluid musical style drawing on more jazz influence, and with simpler, more continuous forms. Pieces that exemplify this new direction include \"Libertango\" and most of the \"Suite Troileana\u200a\", written in memory of An\u00edbal Troilo. In the 1980s Piazzolla was wealthy enough, for the first time, to become relatively autonomous artistically, and wrote some of his most ambitious multi-movement works. These included \"Tango Suite\" for the virtuoso guitar duo Sergio and Odair Assad; \"Histoire du Tango\", where a flutist and guitarist tell the history of tango in four chunks of music styled at thirty-year intervals; and \"La Camorra\", a suite in three ten-minute movements, inspired by the Neapolitan crime family and exploring symphonic concepts of large-scale form, thematic development, contrasts of texture and massive accumulations of ensemble sound. After making three albums in New York with the second quintet and producer Kip Hanrahan, two of which he described on separate occasions as \"the greatest thing I've done\", he disbanded the quintet, formed a sextet with an extra bandoneon, cello, bass, electric guitar, and piano, and wrote music for this ensemble that was even more adventurous harmonically and structurally than any of his previous works (\"Preludio y Fuga; Sex-tet\"). Had he not suffered an incapacitating stroke on the way to Notre Dame mass in 1990, it is likely that he would have continued to use his popularity as a performer of his own works to experiment in relative safety with even more audacious musical techniques, while possibly responding to the surging popularity of non-Western musics by finding ways to incorporate new styles into his own. In his musical professionalism and open-minded attitude to existing styles he held the mindset of an 18th-century composing performer such as Handel or Mozart, who were anxious to assimilate all national \"flavors\" of their day into their own compositions, and who always wrote with both first-hand performing experience and a sense of direct social relationship with their audiences. This may have resulted in a backlash amongst conservative tango aficionados in Argentina, but in the rest of the West it was the key to his extremely sympathetic reception among classical and jazz musicians, both seeing some of the best aspects of their musical practices reflected in his work.\nMusical career.\nAfter leaving Troilo's orchestra in the 1940s, Piazzolla led numerous ensembles beginning with the 1946 Orchestra, the 1955 Octeto Buenos Aires, the 1960 \"First Quintet\", the 1971 Conjunto 9 (\"Noneto\"), the 1978 \"Second Quintet\" and the 1989 New Tango Sextet. As well as providing original compositions and arrangements, he was the director and bandoneon player in all of them. He also recorded the album \"Summit (Reuni\u00f3n Cumbre)\" with jazz baritone saxophonist Gerry Mulligan. His numerous compositions include orchestral work such as the \"Concierto para bandone\u00f3n, orquesta, cuerdas y percusi\u00f3n\", \"Doble concierto para bandone\u00f3n y guitarra\", \"Tres tangos sinf\u00f3nicos\" and \"Concierto de N\u00e1car para 9 tanguistas y orquesta\", pieces for the solo classical guitar \u2013 the \"Cinco Piezas\" (1980), as well as song-form compositions that still today are well known by the general public in his country, including \"Balada para un loco\" (Ballad for a madman) and \"Adi\u00f3s Nonino\" (dedicated to his father), which he recorded many times with different musicians and ensembles. Biographers estimate that Piazzolla wrote around 3,000 pieces and recorded around 500.\nIn 1981, singer/model/actress Grace Jones famously incorporated his \"Libertango\" into her hit song \"I've Seen That Face Before\" on her platinum selling \"Nightclubbing\" album. A Grammy nominated video was also filmed for her performance of the song. In 1984, he appeared with his Quinteto Tango Nuevo in West-Berlin, Germany and for television in Utrecht, Netherlands. In the summer of 1985 he performed at the Almeida Theatre in London for a week-long engagement. On September 6, 1987, his quintet gave a concert in New York's Central Park, which was recorded and, in 1994, released in compact disc format as \"The Central Park Concert.\"\nWork.\nEnsembles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilm music.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44904", "revid": "24198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44904", "title": "Red\u2013green alliance", "text": "Political alliance between socialists or social democrats and greens or agrarians\nIn politics, a red\u2013green alliance or red\u2013green coalition is an alliance of \"red\" (often social-democratic or democratic socialist) parties with \"green\" (often green and/or occasionally agrarian) parties. The alliance is often based on common left political views, especially a shared distrust of corporate or capitalist institutions. While the \"red\" social-democratic parties tend to focus on the effects of capitalism on the working class, the \"green\" environmentalist parties tend to focus on the environmental effects of capitalism.\nRed\u2013green coalition governments.\nThere have been a number of red\u2013green governments in Europe since the 1990s.\nRed\u2013red\u2013green coalition.\nA red\u2013red\u2013green coalition or red\u2013green\u2013red coalition is a left-wing alliance of two \"red\" social democratic, democratic socialist, or socialist parties with one \"green\" environmentalist party. In France, Jean-Luc M\u00e9lenchon's New Ecologic and Social People's Union is an example of a left\u2013green alliance.\nRadical red\u2013green alliances.\nPolitical parties or joint electoral lists have been formed over the years, most often between socialists and left-oriented greens. Example include:\nRed\u2013green alliances with centre-left parties.\nThere are also red/green political alliances and/or electoral agreements between social-democratic or liberal parties cooperate with green parties\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44905", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44905", "title": "Asthma", "text": "Long-term inflammatory disease of the airways of the lungs\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nAsthma is a common long-term inflammatory disease of the bronchioles of the lungs. It is characterized by variable and recurring symptoms, reversible airflow obstruction, and easily triggered bronchospasms. Symptoms include episodes of wheezing, coughing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath. A sudden worsening of asthma symptoms sometimes called an 'asthma attack' or an 'asthma exacerbation' can occur when allergens, pollen, dust, or other particles, are inhaled into the lungs, causing the bronchioles to constrict and produce mucus, which then restricts oxygen flow to the alveoli. These may occur a few times a day or a few times per week. Depending on the person, asthma symptoms may become worse at night or with exercise.\nAsthma is thought to be caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Environmental factors include exposure to air pollution and allergens. Other potential triggers include medications such as aspirin and beta blockers. Diagnosis is usually based on the pattern of symptoms, response to therapy over time, and spirometry lung function testing. Asthma is classified according to the frequency of symptoms of forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow rate. It may also be classified as atopic or non-atopic, where atopy refers to a predisposition toward developing a type 1 hypersensitivity reaction.\nThere is no known cure for asthma, but it can be controlled. Symptoms can be prevented by avoiding triggers, such as allergens and respiratory irritants, and suppressed with the use of inhaled corticosteroids. Long-acting beta agonists (LABA) or antileukotriene agents may be used in addition to inhaled corticosteroids if asthma symptoms remain uncontrolled. Treatment of rapidly worsening symptoms is usually with an inhaled short-acting beta2 agonist such as salbutamol and corticosteroids taken by mouth. In very severe cases, intravenous corticosteroids, magnesium sulfate, and hospitalization may be required.\nIn 2019, asthma affected approximately 262million people and caused approximately 461,000 deaths. Most of the deaths occurred in the developing world. Asthma often begins in childhood, and the rates have increased significantly since the 1960s. Asthma was recognized as early as Ancient Egypt. The word \"asthma\" is from the Greek (), which means 'panting'.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nAsthma is characterized by recurrent episodes symptoms of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and coughing. Sputum may be produced from the lung by coughing but is often hard to bring up. During recovery from an asthma attack (exacerbation), the sputum may appear pus-like due to high levels of white blood cells called eosinophils. Symptoms are usually worse at night and in the early morning or in response to exercise or cold air. Some people with asthma rarely experience symptoms, usually in response to triggers, whereas others may react frequently and readily and experience persistent symptoms.\nAssociated conditions.\nA number of other health conditions occur more frequently in people with asthma, including gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), rhinosinusitis, and obstructive sleep apnea. Psychological disorders are also more common, with anxiety disorders occurring in between 16 and 52% and mood disorders in 14\u201341%. It is not known whether asthma causes psychological problems or psychological problems lead to asthma. Current asthma, but not former asthma, is associated with increased all-cause mortality, heart disease mortality, and chronic lower respiratory tract disease mortality. Asthma, particularly severe asthma, is strongly associated with development of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Those with asthma, especially if it is poorly controlled, are at increased risk for radiocontrast reactions.\nCavities occur more often in people with asthma. This may be related to the effect of beta2-adrenergic agonists decreasing saliva. These medications may also decrease the risk of dental erosions.\nCauses.\nAsthma is caused by a combination of complex and incompletely understood environmental and genetic interactions. These influence both its severity and its responsiveness to treatment. It is believed that the recent increased rates of asthma are due to changing epigenetics (heritable factors other than those related to the DNA sequence) and a changing living environment. Asthma that starts before the age of 12 years old is more likely due to genetic influence, while onset after age 12 is more likely due to environmental influence.\nEnvironmental.\nMany environmental factors have been associated with the development and exacerbation of asthma, including allergens, air pollution, and other environmental chemicals. There are some substances that are known to cause asthma in exposed people and they are called asthmagens. Some common asthmagens include ammonia, latex, pesticides, solder and welding fumes, metal or wood dusts, spraying of isocyanate paint in vehicle repair, formaldehyde, glutaraldehyde, anhydrides, glues, dyes, metal working fluids, oil mists, and moulds. Smoking during pregnancy and after delivery is associated with a greater risk of asthma-like symptoms. Low air quality from environmental factors such as traffic pollution or high ozone levels has been associated with both asthma development and increased asthma severity. Over half of cases in children in the United States occur in areas when air quality is below the EPA standards. Low air quality is more common in low-income and minority communities.\nExposure to indoor volatile organic compounds may be a trigger for asthma; formaldehyde exposure, for example, has a positive association. Phthalates in certain types of PVC are associated with asthma in both children and adults. While exposure to pesticides is linked to the development of asthma, a cause and effect relationship has yet to be established. A meta-analysis concluded gas stoves are a major risk factor for asthma, finding around one in eight cases in the U.S. could be attributed to these.\nPregnancy.\nMaternal psychological stress during pregnancy is a risk factor for the child to develop asthma.\nAllergens.\nAsthma is associated with exposure to indoor allergens. Common indoor allergens include dust mites, cockroaches, animal dander (fragments of fur or feathers), and mould. Efforts to decrease dust mites have been found to be ineffective on symptoms in sensitized subjects. Weak evidence suggests that efforts to decrease mould by repairing buildings may help improve asthma symptoms in adults. Certain viral respiratory infections, such as respiratory syncytial virus and rhinovirus, may increase the risk of developing asthma when acquired as young children. Certain other infections, however, may decrease the risk.\nHygiene hypothesis.\nThe hygiene hypothesis attempts to explain the increased rates of asthma worldwide as a direct and unintended result of reduced exposure, during childhood, to non-pathogenic bacteria and viruses. It has been proposed that the reduced exposure to bacteria and viruses is due, in part, to increased cleanliness and decreased family size in modern societies. Exposure to bacterial endotoxin in early childhood may prevent the development of asthma, but exposure at an older age may provoke bronchoconstriction. Evidence supporting the hygiene hypothesis includes lower rates of asthma on farms and in households with pets.\nUse of antibiotics in early life had been linked to the development of asthma. A later review found that previous studies came to inconsistent conclusions on the relationship between antibiotic use and asthma development, and that many failed to rule out respiratory infections as a confounding factor.\nDelivery via caesarean section is associated with an increased risk (estimated at 20\u201380%) of asthma\u00a0\u2013 this increased risk is attributed to the lack of healthy bacterial colonization that the newborn would have acquired from passage through the birth canal. There is a link between asthma and the degree of affluence, which may be related to the hygiene hypothesis, as less affluent individuals often have more exposure to bacteria and viruses.\nGenetic.\nFamily history is a risk factor for asthma, with many different genes being implicated. If one identical twin is affected, the probability of the other having the disease is approximately 25%. By the end of 2005, 25 genes had been associated with asthma in six or more separate populations, including GSTM1, IL10, CTLA-4, SPINK5, LTC4S, IL4R and ADAM33, among others. Many of these genes are related to the immune system or modulating inflammation. Even among this list of genes supported by highly replicated studies, results have not been consistent among all populations tested. In 2006 over 100 genes were associated with asthma in one genetic association study alone; more continue to be found.\nSome genetic variants may only cause asthma when they are combined with specific environmental exposures. An example is a specific single nucleotide polymorphism in the CD14 region and exposure to endotoxin (a bacterial product). Endotoxin exposure can come from several environmental sources, including tobacco smoke, dogs, and farms. Risk for asthma, then, is determined by both a person's genetics and the level of endotoxin exposure.\nMedical conditions.\nA triad of atopic eczema, allergic rhinitis and asthma is called atopy. The strongest risk factor for developing asthma is a history of atopic disease; with asthma occurring at a much greater rate in those who have either eczema or hay fever. Asthma has been associated with eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known as Churg\u2013Strauss syndrome), an autoimmune disease, and vasculitis. Individuals with certain types of urticaria may also experience symptoms of asthma.\nThere is a correlation between obesity and the risk of asthma, with both having increased in recent years. Several factors may be at play, including decreased respiratory function due to a buildup of fat and the fact that adipose tissue leads to a pro-inflammatory state.\nBeta blocker medications such as propranolol can trigger asthma in those who are susceptible. Cardioselective beta-blockers, however, appear safe in those with mild or moderate disease. Other medications that can cause problems in asthmatics are angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, aspirin, and NSAIDs. Use of acid-suppressing medication (proton pump inhibitors and H2 blockers) during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of asthma in the child.\nExacerbation.\nSome individuals will have stable asthma for weeks or months and then suddenly develop an episode of acute asthma. Different individuals react to various factors in different ways. Most individuals can develop severe exacerbation from a number of triggering agents.\nHome factors that can lead to exacerbation of asthma include dust, animal dander (especially cat and dog hair), cockroach allergens and mold. Perfumes are a common cause of acute attacks in women and children. Both viral and bacterial infections of the upper respiratory tract can worsen the disease. Psychological stress may worsen symptoms\u00a0\u2013 it is thought that stress alters the immune system and thus increases the airway inflammatory response to allergens and irritants.\nAsthma exacerbations in school-aged children peak in autumn for 8 weeks, shortly after children return to school. This might reflect a combination of factors, including poor treatment adherence, increased allergen and viral exposure, and altered immune tolerance. There is limited evidence to guide possible approaches to reducing autumn exacerbations, but while costly, seasonal omalizumab treatment from four to six weeks before school return may reduce autumn asthma exacerbations.\nPathophysiology.\nAsthma is the result of chronic inflammation of the conducting zone of the airways (most especially the bronchi and bronchioles), which subsequently results in increased contractability of the surrounding smooth muscles. This among other factors leads to bouts of narrowing of the airway and the classic symptoms of wheezing. The narrowing is typically reversible with or without treatment. Occasionally, the airways themselves change. Typical changes in the airways include an increase in eosinophils and thickening of the lamina reticularis. Chronically, the airways' smooth muscle may increase in size along with an increase in the number of mucous glands. Other cell types involved include T lymphocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils. There may also be involvement of other components of the immune system, including cytokines, chemokines, histamine, and leukotrienes among others.\nDiagnosis.\nWhile asthma is a well-recognized condition, there is no one universal, agreed-upon definition. It is defined by the Global Initiative for Asthma as:\nA chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways in which many cells and cellular elements play a role. The chronic inflammation is associated with airway hyper-responsiveness that leads to recurrent episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness, and coughing, particularly at night or in the early morning. These episodes are usually associated with widespread but variable airflow obstruction within the lung that is often reversible either spontaneously or with treatment.There is currently no precise test for the diagnosis, which is typically based on the pattern of symptoms and response to therapy over time. Asthma may be suspected if there is a history of recurrent wheezing, coughing, or difficulty breathing, and these symptoms occur or worsen due to exercise, viral infections, allergens, or air pollution. Spirometry is then used to confirm the diagnosis. In children under the age of six, the diagnosis is more difficult as they are too young for spirometry.\nSpirometry.\nSpirometry is recommended to aid in diagnosis and management. It is the single best test for asthma. If the FEV1 measured by this technique improves more than 12% and increases by at least 200 millilitres following administration of a bronchodilator such as salbutamol, this is supportive of the diagnosis. It however may be normal in those with a history of mild asthma, not currently acting up. As caffeine is a bronchodilator in people with asthma, the use of caffeine before a lung function test may interfere with the results. Single-breath diffusing capacity can help differentiate asthma from COPD. It is reasonable to perform spirometry every one or two years to follow how well a person's asthma is controlled.\nOthers.\nThe methacholine challenge involves the inhalation of increasing concentrations of a substance that causes airway narrowing in those predisposed. If negative, it means that a person does not have asthma; if positive, however, it is not specific for the disease.\nOther supportive evidence includes: \nTesting peak expiratory flow is more variable than spirometry, however, and thus not recommended for routine diagnosis. It may be useful for daily self-monitoring in those with moderate to severe disease and for checking the effectiveness of new medications. It may also be helpful in guiding treatment in those with acute exacerbations.\nClassification.\nAsthma is clinically classified according to the frequency of symptoms, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow rate. Asthma may also be classified as atopic (extrinsic) or non-atopic (intrinsic), based on whether symptoms are precipitated by allergens (atopic) or not (non-atopic). While asthma is classified based on severity, at the moment there is no clear method for classifying different subgroups of asthma beyond this system. Finding ways to identify subgroups that respond well to different types of treatments is a current critical goal of asthma research. Recently, asthma has been classified based on whether it is associated with type 2 or non\u2013type 2 inflammation. This approach to immunologic classification is driven by a developing understanding of the underlying immune processes and by the development of therapeutic approaches that target type 2 inflammation.\nAlthough asthma is a chronic obstructive condition, it is not considered as a part of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, as this term refers specifically to combinations of disease that are irreversible such as bronchiectasis and emphysema. Unlike these diseases, the airway obstruction in asthma is usually reversible; however, if left untreated, the chronic inflammation from asthma can lead the lungs to become irreversibly obstructed due to airway remodelling. In contrast to emphysema, asthma affects the bronchi, not the alveoli. The combination of asthma with a component of irreversible airway obstruction has been termed the asthma-chronic obstructive disease (COPD) overlap syndrome (ACOS). Compared to other people with \"pure\" asthma or COPD, people with ACOS exhibit increased morbidity, mortality, and possibly more comorbidities.\nAsthma exacerbation.\nAn acute asthma exacerbation is commonly referred to as an asthma attack. The classic symptoms are shortness of breath, wheezing, and chest tightness. The wheezing is most often when breathing out. While these are the primary symptoms of asthma, some people present primarily with coughing, and in severe cases, air motion may be significantly impaired such that no wheezing is heard. In children, chest pain is often present.\nSigns occurring during an asthma attack include the use of accessory muscles of respiration (sternocleidomastoid and scalene muscles of the neck), there may be a paradoxical pulse (a pulse that is weaker during inhalation and stronger during exhalation), and over-inflation of the chest. A blue colour of the skin and nails may occur from lack of oxygen.\nIn a mild exacerbation the peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) is \u2265200\u00a0L/min, or \u226550% of the predicted best. Moderate is defined as between 80 and 200\u00a0L/min, or 25% and 50% of the predicted best, while severe is defined as \u2264\u00a080 L/min, or \u226425% of the predicted best.\nAcute severe asthma, previously known as status asthmaticus, is an acute exacerbation of asthma that does not respond to standard treatments of bronchodilators and corticosteroids. Half of cases are due to infections with others caused by allergen, air pollution, or insufficient or inappropriate medication use.\nBrittle asthma is a kind of asthma distinguishable by recurrent, severe attacks. Type 1 brittle asthma is a disease with wide peak flow variability, despite intense medication. Type 2 brittle asthma is background well-controlled asthma with sudden, severe exacerbations.\nExercise-induced.\nExercise can trigger bronchoconstriction both in people with and without asthma. It occurs in most people with asthma and up to 20% of people without asthma. Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction is common in professional athletes. The highest rates are among cyclists (up to 45%), swimmers, and cross-country skiers. While it may occur with any weather conditions, it is more common when it is dry and cold. Inhaled beta2 agonists do not appear to improve athletic performance among those without asthma; however, oral doses may improve endurance and strength.\nOccupational.\nAsthma as a result of (or worsened by) workplace exposures is a commonly reported occupational disease. Many cases, however, are not reported or recognized as such. It is estimated that 5\u201325% of asthma cases in adults are work-related. A few hundred different agents have been implicated, with the most common being isocyanates, grain and wood dust, colophony, soldering flux, latex, animals, and aldehydes. The employment associated with the highest risk of problems include those who spray paint, bakers and those who process food, nurses, chemical workers, those who work with animals, welders, hairdressers, and timber workers.\nAspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease.\nAspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD), also known as aspirin-induced asthma, affects up to 9% of asthmatics. AERD consists of asthma, nasal polyps, sinus disease, and respiratory reactions to aspirin and other NSAID medications (such as ibuprofen and naproxen). People often also develop loss of smell and most experience respiratory reactions to alcohol.\nAlcohol-induced asthma.\nAlcohol may worsen asthmatic symptoms in up to a third of people. This may be even more common in some ethnic groups, such as the Japanese and those with aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease. Other studies have found improvement in asthmatic symptoms from alcohol.\nNon-atopic asthma.\nNon-atopic asthma, also known as intrinsic or non-allergic, makes up between 10 and 33% of cases. There is negative skin test to common inhalant allergens. Often it starts later in life, and women are more commonly affected than men. Usual treatments may not work as well. The concept that \"non-atopic\" is synonymous with \"non-allergic\" is called into question by epidemiological data that the prevalence of asthma is closely related to the serum IgE level standardized for age and sex (P&lt;0.0001), indicating that asthma is almost always associated with some sort of IgE-related reaction and therefore has an allergic basis, although not all the allergic stimuli that cause asthma appear to have been included in the battery of aeroallergens studied (the \"missing antigen(s)\" hypothesis). For example, an updated systematic review and meta-analysis of population-attributable risk (PAR) of \"Chlamydia pneumoniae\" biomarkers in chronic asthma found that the PAR for \"C. pneumoniae\"-specific IgE was 47%.\nInfectious asthma.\nInfectious asthma is an easily identified clinical presentation. When queried, asthma patients may report that their first asthma symptoms began after an acute lower respiratory tract illness. This type of history has been labelled the \"infectious asthma\" (IA) syndrome, or as \"asthma associated with infection\" (AAWI) to distinguish infection-associated asthma initiation from the well known association of respiratory infections with asthma exacerbations. Reported clinical prevalences of IA for adults range from around 40% in a primary care practice to 70% in a speciality practice treating mainly severe asthma patients. Additional information on the clinical prevalence of IA in adult-onset asthma is unavailable because clinicians are not trained to elicit this type of history routinely, and recollection in child-onset asthma is challenging. A population-based incident case-control study in a geographically defined area of Finland reported that 35.8% of new-onset asthma cases had experienced acute bronchitis or pneumonia in the year preceding asthma onset, representing a significantly higher risk compared to randomly selected controls (odds ratio 7.2, 95% confidence interval 5.2\u201310).\nPhenotyping and endotyping.\nAsthma phenotyping and endotyping have emerged as a novel approach to asthma classification inspired by precision medicine, which separates the clinical presentations of asthma, or asthma phenotypes, from their underlying causes, or asthma endotypes. The best-supported endotypic distinction is the type 2-high/type 2-low distinction. Classification based on type 2 inflammation is useful in predicting which patients will benefit from targeted biologic therapy.\nDifferential diagnosis.\nMany other conditions can cause symptoms similar to those of asthma. In children, symptoms may be due to other upper airway diseases such as allergic rhinitis and sinusitis, as well as other causes of airway obstruction including foreign body aspiration, tracheal stenosis, laryngotracheomalacia, vascular rings, enlarged lymph nodes or neck masses. Bronchiolitis and other viral infections may also produce wheezing. According to European Respiratory Society, it may not be suitable to label wheezing preschool children with the term \"asthma\" because there is lack of clinical data on inflammation in airways. In adults, COPD, congestive heart failure, airway masses, as well as drug-induced coughing due to ACE inhibitors may cause similar symptoms. In both populations vocal cord dysfunction may present similarly.\nChronic obstructive pulmonary disease can coexist with asthma and can occur as a complication of chronic asthma. After the age of 65, most people with obstructive airway disease will have asthma and COPD. In this setting, COPD can be differentiated by increased airway neutrophils, abnormally increased wall thickness, and increased smooth muscle in the bronchi. However, this level of investigation is not performed due to COPD and asthma sharing similar principles of management: corticosteroids, long-acting beta-agonists, and smoking cessation. It closely resembles asthma in symptoms, is correlated with more exposure to cigarette smoke, an older age, less symptom reversibility after bronchodilator administration, and decreased likelihood of family history of atopy.\nPrevention.\nThe evidence for the effectiveness of measures to prevent the development of asthma is weak. The World Health Organization recommends decreasing risk factors such as tobacco smoke, air pollution, chemical irritants including perfume, and the number of lower respiratory infections. Other efforts that show promise include: limiting smoke exposure in utero, breastfeeding, and increased exposure to daycare or large families, but none are well supported enough to be recommended for this indication.\nEarly pet exposure may be useful. Results from exposure to pets at other times are inconclusive and it is only recommended that pets be removed from the home if a person has allergic symptoms to said pet.\nDietary restrictions during pregnancy or when breastfeeding are not effective at preventing asthma in children and are not recommended. Omega-3 consumption, Mediterranean diet and antioxidants have been suggested by some studies to potentially help prevent crises, but the evidence is still inconclusive.\nReducing or eliminating compounds known to provoke sensitive people from the workplace may be effective. It is not clear if annual influenza vaccinations affect the risk of exacerbations. Immunization, however, is recommended by the World Health Organization. Smoking bans are effective in decreasing exacerbations of asthma.\nManagement.\nWhile there is no cure for asthma, symptoms can typically be improved. The most effective treatment for asthma is identifying triggers, such as cigarette smoke, use of electronic cigarettes, pets or other allergens, and eliminating exposure to them. If trigger avoidance is insufficient, the use of medication is recommended. Pharmaceutical drugs are selected based on, among other things, the severity of illness and the frequency of symptoms. Specific medications for asthma are broadly classified into fast-acting and long-acting categories. The medications listed below have demonstrated efficacy in improving asthma symptoms; however, real world use-effectiveness is limited as around half of people with asthma worldwide remain sub-optimally controlled, even when treated. People with asthma may remain sub-optimally controlled either because optimum doses of asthma medications do not work (called \"refractory\" asthma) or because individuals are either unable (e.g. inability to afford treatment, poor inhaler technique) or unwilling (e.g., wish to avoid side effects of corticosteroids) to take optimum doses of prescribed asthma medications (called \"difficult to treat\" asthma). In practice, it is not possible to distinguish \"refractory\" from \"difficult to treat\" categories for patients who have never taken optimum doses of asthma medications. A related issue is that the asthma efficacy trials upon which the pharmacological treatment guidelines are based have systematically excluded the majority of people with asthma. For example, asthma efficacy treatment trials always exclude otherwise eligible people who smoke, and smoking diminishes the efficacy of inhaled corticosteroids, the mainstay of asthma control management.\nBronchodilators are recommended for short-term relief of symptoms. In those with occasional attacks, no other medication is needed. If mild persistent disease is present (more than two attacks a week), low-dose inhaled corticosteroids or alternatively, a leukotriene antagonist or a mast cell stabilizer by mouth is recommended. For those who have daily attacks, a higher dose of inhaled corticosteroids is used. In a moderate or severe exacerbation, corticosteroids by mouth are added to these treatments.\nPeople with asthma have higher rates of anxiety, psychological stress, and depression. This is associated with poorer asthma control. Cognitive behavioural therapy may improve quality of life, asthma control, and anxiety levels in people with asthma.\nImproving people's knowledge about asthma and using a written action plan has been identified as an important component of managing asthma. Providing educational sessions that include information specific to a person's culture is likely effective. More research is necessary to determine if increasing preparedness and knowledge of asthma among school staff and families using home-based and school interventions results in long-term improvements in safety for children with asthma. School-based asthma self-management interventions, which attempt to improve knowledge of asthma, its triggers, and the importance of regular practitioner review, may reduce hospital admissions and emergency department visits. These interventions may also reduce the number of days children experience asthma symptoms and may lead to small improvements in asthma-related quality of life. More research is necessary to determine if shared decision-making helps manage adults with asthma or if a personalized asthma action plan is effective and necessary. Some people with asthma use pulse oximeters to monitor their own blood oxygen levels during an asthma attack. However, there is no evidence regarding the use in these instances.\nLifestyle modification.\nAvoidance of triggers is a key component of improving control and preventing attacks. The most common triggers include allergens, smoke (from tobacco or other sources), air pollution, nonselective beta-blockers, and sulfite-containing foods. Cigarette smoking and second-hand smoke (passive smoke) may reduce the effectiveness of medications such as corticosteroids. Laws that limit smoking decrease the number of people hospitalized for asthma. Dust mite control measures, including air filtration, chemicals to kill mites, vacuuming, mattress covers, and other methods, did not affect asthma symptoms. There is insufficient evidence to suggest that dehumidifiers help control asthma.\nOverall, exercise is beneficial in people with stable asthma. Yoga could provide small improvements in quality of life and symptoms in people with asthma. More research is necessary to determine how effective weight loss is in improving quality of life, the usage of health care services, and adverse effects for people of all ages with asthma.\nFindings suggest that the Wim Hof Method may reduce inflammation in healthy and non-healthy participants as it increases epinephrine levels, causing an increase in interleukin-10 and a decrease in pro-inflammatory cytokines.\nMedications.\nMedications used to treat asthma are divided into two general classes: quick-relief medications used to treat acute symptoms, and long-term control medications used to prevent further exacerbation. Antibiotics are generally not needed for sudden worsening of symptoms or for treating asthma at any time.\nLong\u2013term control.\nFor children with asthma that is well-controlled on combination therapy of inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and long-acting beta2-agonists (LABA), the benefits and harms of stopping LABA and stepping down to ICS-only therapy are uncertain. In adults who have stable asthma while they are taking a combination of LABA and inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), stopping LABA may increase the risk of asthma exacerbations that require treatment with corticosteroids by mouth. Stopping LABA probably makes little or no important difference to asthma control or asthma-related quality of life. Whether or not stopping LABA increases the risk of serious adverse events or exacerbations requiring an emergency department visit or hospitalization is uncertain.\nDelivery methods.\nMedications are typically provided as metered-dose inhalers (MDIs) in combination with an inhaler spacer or as a dry powder inhaler. The spacer is a plastic cylinder that mixes the medication with air, making it easier to receive a full dose of the drug. A nebulizer may also be used. Nebulizers and spacers are equally effective in those with mild to moderate symptoms. However, insufficient evidence is available to determine whether a difference exists in those with severe disease. For delivering short-acting beta-agonists in acute asthma in children, spacers may have advantages compared to nebulisers, but children with life-threatening asthma have not been studied. There is no strong evidence for the use of intravenous LABA for adults or children who have acute asthma. There is insufficient evidence to directly compare the effectiveness of a metered-dose inhaler attached to a homemade spacer compared to a commercially available spacer for treating children with asthma.\nAdverse effects.\nLong-term use of inhaled corticosteroids at conventional doses carries a minor risk of adverse effects. Risks include thrush, the development of cataracts, and a slightly slowed rate of growth. Rinsing the mouth after the use of inhaled steroids can decrease the risk of thrush. Higher doses of inhaled steroids may result in lower bone mineral density.\nOthers.\nInflammation in the lungs can be estimated by the level of exhaled nitric oxide. The use of exhaled nitric oxide levels (FeNO) to guide asthma medication dosing may have small benefits for preventing asthma attacks but the potential benefits are not strong enough for this approach to be universally recommended as a method to guide asthma therapy in adults or children.\nWhen asthma is unresponsive to usual medications, other options are available for both emergency management and prevention of flare-ups. Additional options include:\nAdherence to asthma treatments.\nStaying with a treatment approach for preventing asthma exacerbations can be challenging, especially if the person is required to take medicine or treatments daily. Reasons for low adherence range from a conscious decision to not follow the suggested medical treatment regime for various reasons including avoiding potential side effects, misinformation, or other beliefs about the medication. Problems accessing the treatment and problems administering the treatment effectively can also result in lower adherence. Various approaches have been undertaken to try and improve adherence to treatments to help people prevent serious asthma exacerbations, including digital interventions.\nAlternative medicine.\nMany people with asthma, like those with other chronic disorders, use alternative treatments; surveys show that roughly 50% use some form of unconventional therapy. There is little data to support the effectiveness of most of these therapies.\nEvidence is insufficient to support the usage of vitamin C or vitamin E for controlling asthma. There is tentative support for use of vitamin C in exercise induced bronchospasm. Fish oil dietary supplements (marine n-3 fatty acids) and reducing dietary sodium do not appear to help improve asthma control. In people with mild to moderate asthma, treatment with vitamin D supplementation or its hydroxylated metabolites does not reduce acute exacerbations or improve control. There is no strong evidence to suggest that vitamin D supplements improve day-to-day asthma symptoms or a person's lung function. There is no strong evidence to suggest that adults with asthma should avoid foods that contain monosodium glutamate (MSG). There have not been enough high-quality studies performed to determine if children with asthma should avoid eating food that contains MSG.\nAcupuncture is not recommended for the treatment as there is insufficient evidence to support its use. Air ionizers show no evidence that they improve asthma symptoms or benefit lung function; this applied equally to positive and negative ion generators. Manual therapies, including osteopathic, chiropractic, physiotherapeutic and respiratory therapeutic manoeuvres, have insufficient evidence to support their use in treating asthma. Pulmonary rehabilitation, however, may improve quality of life and functional exercise capacity when compared to usual care for adults with asthma. The Buteyko breathing technique for controlling hyperventilation may result in a reduction in medication use; however, the technique does not have any effect on lung function. Thus an expert panel felt that evidence was insufficient to support its use. There is no clear evidence that breathing exercises are effective for treating children with asthma.\nPrognosis.\nThe prognosis for asthma is generally good, especially for children with mild disease. Mortality has decreased over the last few decades due to better recognition and improvement in care. In 2010 the death rate was 170 per million for males and 90 per million for females. Rates vary between countries by 100-fold.\nGlobally, it causes moderate or severe disability in 19.4\u00a0million people as of 2004[ [update]] (16\u00a0million of which are in low and middle-income countries). Of asthma diagnosed during childhood, half of the cases will no longer carry the diagnosis after a decade. Airway remodelling is observed, but it is unknown whether these represent harmful or beneficial changes. More recent data find that severe asthma can result in airway remodelling and the \"asthma with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease syndrome (ACOS)\" that has a poor prognosis. Early treatment with corticosteroids seems to prevent or ameliorate a decline in lung function. Asthma in children also has negative effects on the quality of life of their parents.\nEpidemiology.\nIn 2019, approximately 262 million people worldwide were affected by asthma, and approximately 461,000 people died from the disease. Rates vary between countries, with prevalences between 1 and 18%. It is more common in developed than developing countries. One thus sees lower rates in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Africa. Within developed countries, it is more common in those who are economically disadvantaged, while in contrast, in developing countries, it is more common in the affluent. The reasons for these differences are unclear. Low- and middle-income countries make up more than 80% of the mortality.\nWhile asthma is twice as common in boys as girls, severe asthma occurs at equal rates. In contrast adult women have a higher rate of asthma than men and it is more common in the young than the old. In 2010, children with asthma experienced over 900,000 emergency department visits, making it the most common reason for admission to the hospital following an emergency department visit in the US in 2011.\nGlobal rates of asthma have increased significantly between the 1960s and 2008 with it being recognized as a major public health problem since the 1970s. Rates of asthma have plateaued in the developed world since the mid-1990s, with recent increases primarily in the developing world. Asthma affects approximately 7% of the population of the United States and 5% of people in the United Kingdom. Canada, Australia, and New Zealand have rates of about 14\u201315%.\nThe average death rate from 2011 to 2015 from asthma in the UK was about 50% higher than the average for the European Union and had increased by about 5% in that time. Children are more likely see a physician due to asthma symptoms after school starts in September.\nPopulation-based epidemiological studies describe temporal associations between acute respiratory illnesses, asthma, and development of severe asthma with irreversible airflow limitation (known as the asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease \"overlap\" syndrome, or ACOS). Additional prospective population-based data indicate that ACOS seems to represent a form of severe asthma, characterized by more frequent hospitalizations, and to be the result of early-onset asthma that has progressed to fixed airflow obstruction.\nHealth disparities.\nAs of 2005, more \"westernized,\" urbanized countries had much higher rates of asthma than \"less developed\" countries. However, exposure to urbanization alone has not been able to explain these disparities.\nIn the United States, the burden of asthma falls disproportionately on racial and ethnic minorities and economically underprivileged populations. As of 2016, the prevalence of asthma was highest in non-Hispanic black and Puerto Rican children. The prevalence of asthma was also over 1.5 times higher in Americans 100% below the poverty level than those 450% of the poverty level or higher. As of 2021, the mortality rate for black Americans with asthma was two times higher than for white Americans.\nNeighborhoods in the United States with predominantly racial and ethnic minority populations are affected to a greater extent than predominantly white neighborhoods by air pollutants, which are a significant factor in the occurrence of asthma. Additionally, residents of areas that were more likely to be redlined have asthma emergency department visit rates 2.4 times higher than residents of areas that were less likely to be redlined.\nEconomics.\nFrom 2000 to 2010, the average cost per asthma-related hospital stay in the United States for children remained relatively stable at about $3,600, whereas the average cost per asthma-related hospital stay for adults increased from $5,200 to $6,600. In 2010, Medicaid was the most frequent primary payer among children and adults aged 18\u201344 years in the United States; private insurance was the second most frequent payer. Among both children and adults in the lowest-income communities in the United States, there was a higher rate of hospital stays for asthma in 2010 than in the highest-income communities.\nHistory.\nAsthma was recognized in ancient Egypt and was treated by drinking an incense mixture known as kyphi. It was officially named as a specific respiratory problem by Hippocrates circa 450 BC, with the Greek word for \"panting\" forming the basis of our modern name. In 200 BC, it was believed to be at least partly related to the emotions. In the 12th century, the Jewish physician and philosopher Maimonides wrote \"Maq\u0101la f\u012b al-Rabw\" (\"Treatise on Asthma\") in Arabic. In the work, he described the symptoms of asthma, proposed dietary and therapeutic treatments, and emphasized the importance of clean air and climate in managing the condition. Traditional Chinese medicine also offered medication for asthma, as indicated by a surviving 14th-century manuscript curated by the Wellcome Foundation.\n19th century.\nA well-documented case in the 19th century was that of young Theodore Roosevelt (1858\u20131919). At that time there was no effective treatment. Roosevelt's youth was in large part shaped by his poor health, partly related to his asthma. He experienced recurring nighttime asthma attacks that felt as if he was being smothered to death, terrifying the boy and his parents.\nIn 1873, one of the first papers in modern medicine on the subject tried to explain the pathophysiology of the disease while one in 1872, concluded that asthma can be cured by rubbing the chest with chloroform liniment. Medical treatment in 1880 included the use of intravenous doses of a drug called pilocarpine.\nIn 1886, F. H. Bosworth theorized a connection between asthma and hay fever.\n20th century.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, the focus was on the avoidance of allergens as well as the use of selective beta2-adrenergic agonists as treatment strategies.\nEarly 1900s.\nEpinephrine (adrenaline) was first referred to in the treatment of asthma in 1905. The asthma was relived with this treatment by what was described as \"vasomotor ataxia of the relaxing variety\". The successful results of using epinephrine provided encouraging medical data on the vasodilator hypothesis, that asthma was due to vasodilation and the subsequent inflammation of the swelling of the bronchial mucosa.\n1930s\u20131950s.\nIn the 1930s, U.S. physician Alvin Barach created, by means of spirometry, the quantification of expiratory flow rates to nebulized epinephrine for those with asthma, which was the first published medical report on the effectiveness of bronchodilation.\nDuring the 1930s to 1950s, asthma was known as one of the \"holy seven\" psychosomatic illnesses. Its cause was considered to be psychological, with treatment often based on psychoanalysis and other talking cures. As these psychoanalysts interpreted the asthmatic wheeze as the suppressed cry of the child for its mother, they considered the treatment of depression to be especially important for individuals with asthma.\n1940s\u20131960s.\nIn the 1940s, the first pure \u03b2-agonist to be synthesized was isoprenaline. Both isoprenaline and adrenaline are catecholamines. However, isoprenaline was an effective bronchodilator that was more selective than epinephrine.\nThe efficacy of anecdotal applications of oral corticosteroids (OCS) for the asthma was published in 1952. In 1958, the association between a treatment strategy of OCS and a reduction in eosinophils in the sputum was published. The eosinophils are essentially the key cells that are commonly involved in asthma. \nThe use of a pressurized metered dose inhaler was developed in the mid-1950s for the administration of adrenaline as well as isoproterenol, and was later used as a beta2-adrenergic agonist. Inhaled corticosteroids and selective short-acting beta agonists came into wide use in the 1960s. In 1967, adrenergic receptors were classified into the two subtypes of the \u03b21 and the \u03b22 adrenergic receptors. The \u03b22 adrenergic receptors were found to be dominant in the lungs as well as present in the alveolar airspace. The discovery of the \u03b22 adrenergic receptors allowed for the discovery and development of beta2 agonists. Specifically, it allowed for the development of selective \u03b22-agonists starting in the 1960s.\nGlobal mortality rates.\nBetween 1970 and 1985, the following countries saw a general rise in reported asthma mortality in people aged 5 to 34: Singapore, Australia, Japan, England/Wales, West Germany, Israel, United States, Netherlands, Canada, and France. Additionally, New Zealand experienced a major epidemic of asthma in this period, which may have been due to inadequate maintenance therapy and long-term management of the disease amongst those affected, as well as delays in receiving care in emergencies.\n21st century.\nIn January 2021, an appeal court in France overturned a deportation order against a 40-year-old Bangladeshi man, who was a patient with asthma. His lawyers had argued that the dangerous levels of pollution in Bangladesh could possibly lead to worsening of his health condition, or even premature death.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44910", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44910", "title": "Anglo-American playing card", "text": ""}
{"id": "44911", "revid": "48764542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44911", "title": "Syllable", "text": "Unit of organization for a sequence of speech sounds\nA syllable is a basic unit of organization within a sequence of speech sounds, such as within a word, typically defined by linguists as a \"nucleus\" (most often a vowel) with optional sounds before or after that nucleus (\"margins\", which are most often consonants). In phonology and studies of languages, syllables are often considered the \"building blocks\" of words. They can influence the rhythm of a language: its prosody or poetic metre. Properties such as stress, tone, and reduplication operate on syllables and their parts. Speech can usually be divided up into a whole number of syllables: for example, the word \"ignite\" is made of two syllables: \"ig\" and \"nite\". Most languages of the world use relatively simple syllable structures that often alternate between vowels and consonants.\nDespite being present in virtually all human languages, syllables still have no precise definition that is valid for all known languages. A common criterion for finding syllable boundaries is native-speaker intuition, but individuals sometimes disagree on them.\nSyllabic writing began several hundred years before the first instances of alphabetic writing. The earliest recorded syllables are on tablets written around 2800 BC in the Sumerian city of Ur. This shift from pictograms to syllables has been called \"the most important advance in the history of writing\".\nA word that consists of a single syllable (like English \"dog\") is called a monosyllable (and is said to be \"monosyllabic\"). Similar terms include disyllable (and \"disyllabic\"; also \"bisyllable\" and \"bisyllabic\") for a word of two syllables; trisyllable (and \"trisyllabic\") for a word of three syllables; and polysyllable (and \"polysyllabic\"), which may refer either to a word of more than three syllables or to any word of more than one syllable.\nEtymology.\n\"Syllable\" is an Anglo-Norman variation of Old French , from Latin , from Koine Greek (). means \"the taken together\", referring to letters that are taken together to make a single sound.\n is a verbal noun from the verb , a compound of the preposition \"with\" and the verb \"take\". The noun uses the root , which appears in the aorist tense; the present tense stem is formed by adding a nasal infix \u27e8\u27e9 \"\u27e8m\u27e9\" before the and a suffix at the end.\nTranscription.\nIn the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), the fullstop \u27e8\u27e9 marks syllable breaks, as in the word \"astronomical\" \u27e8\u27e9.\nIn practice, however, IPA transcription is typically divided into words by spaces, and often these spaces are also understood to be syllable breaks. In addition, the stress mark \u27e8\u27e9 is placed immediately before a stressed syllable, and when the stressed syllable is in the middle of a word, in practice, the stress mark also marks a syllable break, for example in the word \"understood\" \u27e8\u27e9 (though the syllable boundary may still be explicitly marked with a full stop, e.g. \u27e8\u27e9).\nWhen a word space comes in the middle of a syllable (that is, when a syllable spans words), a tie bar \u27e8\u27e9 can be used for liaison, as in the French combination \u27e8\u27e9. The liaison tie is also used to join lexical words into phonological words, for example \"hot dog\" \u27e8\u27e9.\nA Greek sigma, \u27e8\u03c3\u27e9, is used as a wild card for 'syllable', and a dollar/peso sign, \u27e8$\u27e9, marks a syllable boundary where the usual fullstop might be misunderstood. For example, \u27e8\u03c3\u03c3\u27e9 is a pair of syllables, and \u27e8V$\u27e9 is a syllable-final vowel.\nComponents.\nOnset\u2013nucleus\u2013rime segmentation.\nIn this framework, the general structure of a syllable (\u03c3) consists of three segments grouped into two components:\nThe syllable is usually considered right-branching, i.e. nucleus and coda are grouped together as a \"rime\" and are only distinguished at the second level.\nThe sounds occupying these positions may also be denoted with the following notation:\npossibly with the following notation to indicate occurrence count:\nThe \"nucleus\" is usually the vowel in the middle of a syllable. The \"onset\" is the sound or sounds occurring before the nucleus, and the \"coda\" (literally 'tail') is the sound or sounds that follow the nucleus. They are sometimes collectively known as the \"shell\". The term \"rime\" covers the nucleus plus coda. In the one-syllable English word \"cat\", the nucleus is \"a\" (the sound that can be shouted or sung on its own), the onset \"c\", the coda \"t\", and the rime \"at\". This syllable can be abstracted as a \"consonant-vowel-consonant\" syllable, abbreviated \"CVC\". Languages vary greatly in the restrictions on the sounds making up the onset, nucleus and coda of a syllable, according to what is termed a language's phonotactics.\nAlthough every syllable has supra-segmental features, these are usually ignored if not semantically relevant, e.g. in tonal languages.\nChinese segmentation.\nIn the syllable structure of Sinitic languages, the onset is replaced with an initial, and a semivowel or liquid forms another segment, called the medial. These four segments are grouped into two slightly different components:\nIn many languages of the Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area, such as Chinese, the syllable structure is expanded to include an additional, optional medial segment located between the onset (often termed the \"initial\" in this context) and the rime. The medial is normally a semivowel, but reconstructions of Old Chinese generally include liquid medials ( in modern reconstructions, in older versions), and many reconstructions of Middle Chinese include a medial contrast between and , where the functions phonologically as a glide rather than as part of the nucleus. In addition, many reconstructions of both Old and Middle Chinese include complex medials such as , , and . The medial groups phonologically with the rime rather than the onset, and the combination of medial and rime is collectively known as the final.\nSome linguists, especially when discussing the modern Chinese varieties, use the terms \"final\" and \"rime\" interchangeably. In historical Chinese phonology, however, the distinction between \"final\" (including the medial) and \"rime\" (not including the medial) is important in understanding the rime dictionaries and rime tables that form the primary sources for Middle Chinese, and as a result most authors distinguish the two according to the above definition.\nGrouping of components.\nIn some theories of phonology, syllable structures are displayed as tree diagrams (similar to the trees found in some types of syntax). Not all phonologists agree that syllables have internal structure; in fact, some phonologists doubt the existence of the syllable as a theoretical entity.\nThere are many arguments for a hierarchical relationship, rather than a linear one, between the syllable constituents. One hierarchical model groups the syllable nucleus and coda into an intermediate level, the \"rime\". The hierarchical model accounts for the role that the \"nucleus\"+\"coda\" constituent plays in verse (i.e., rhyming words such as \"cat\" and \"bat\" are formed by matching both the nucleus and coda, or the entire rime), and for the distinction between heavy and light syllables, which plays a role in phonological processes such as, for example, sound change in Old English and , where in a process called high vowel deletion (HVD), the nominative/accusative plural of single light-syllable roots (like \"*scip-\") got a \"u\" ending in OE, whereas heavy syllable roots (like \"*word-\") would not, giving \"scip-u\" but \"word-\u2205\".\nBody.\nIn some traditional descriptions of certain languages such as Cree and Ojibwe, the syllable is considered left-branching, i.e. onset and nucleus group below a higher-level unit, called a \"body\" or \"core\". This contrasts with the coda.\nRime.\nThe rime or rhyme of a syllable consists of a nucleus and an optional coda. It is the part of the syllable used in most poetic rhymes, and the part that is lengthened or stressed when a person elongates or stresses a word in speech.\nThe rime is usually the portion of a syllable from the first vowel to the end. For example, is the rime of all of the words \"at\", \"sat\", and \"flat\". However, the nucleus does not necessarily need to be a vowel in some languages, such as English. For instance, the rime of the second syllables of the words \"bottle\" and \"fiddle\" is just , a liquid consonant.\nJust as the rime branches into the nucleus and coda, the nucleus and coda may each branch into multiple phonemes. The limit for the number of phonemes which may be contained in each varies by language. For example, Japanese and most Sino-Tibetan languages do not have consonant clusters at the beginning or end of syllables, whereas many Eastern European languages can have more than two consonants at the beginning or end of the syllable. In English, the onset may have up to three consonants, and the coda four.\n\"Rime\" and \"rhyme\" are variants of the same word, but the rarer form \"rime\" is sometimes used to mean specifically \"syllable rime\" to differentiate it from the concept of poetic rhyme. This distinction is not made by some linguists and does not appear in most dictionaries.\nWeight.\nA heavy syllable is generally one with a \"branching rime\", i.e. it is either a \"closed syllable\" that ends in a consonant, or a syllable with a \"branching nucleus\", i.e. a long vowel or diphthong. The name is a metaphor, based on the nucleus or coda having lines that branch in a tree diagram.\nIn some languages, heavy syllables include both VV (branching nucleus) and VC (branching rime) syllables, contrasted with V, which is a light syllable.\nIn other languages, only VV syllables are considered heavy, while both VC and V syllables are light.\nSome languages distinguish a third type of superheavy syllable, which consists of VVC syllables (with both a branching nucleus and rime) or VCC syllables (with a coda consisting of two or more consonants) or both.\nIn moraic theory, heavy syllables are said to have two moras, while light syllables are said to have one and superheavy syllables are said to have three. Japanese phonology is generally described this way.\nMany languages forbid superheavy syllables, while a significant number forbid any heavy syllable. Some languages strive for constant syllable weight; for example, in stressed, non-final syllables in Italian, short vowels co-occur with closed syllables while long vowels co-occur with open syllables, so that all such syllables are heavy (not light or superheavy).\nThe difference between heavy and light frequently determines which syllables receive stress \u2013 this is the case in Latin and Arabic, for example. The system of poetic meter in many classical languages, such as Classical Greek, Classical Latin, Old Tamil and Sanskrit, is based on syllable weight rather than stress (so-called \"quantitative rhythm\" or \"quantitative meter\").\nSyllabification.\nSyllabification is the separation of a word into syllables, whether spoken or written. In most languages, the actually spoken syllables are the basis of syllabification in writing too. Due to the very weak correspondence between sounds and letters in the spelling of modern English, for example, written syllabification in English has to be based mostly on etymological i.e. morphological instead of phonetic principles. English written syllables therefore do not correspond to the actually spoken syllables of the living language.\nPhonotactic rules determine which sounds are allowed or disallowed in each part of the syllable. English allows very complicated syllables; syllables may begin with up to three consonants (as in \"strength\"), and occasionally end with as many as four (as in \"angsts\", pronounced [\u00e6\u014bsts]). Many other languages are much more restricted; Japanese, for example, only allows and a chroneme in a coda, and theoretically has no consonant clusters at all, as the onset is composed of at most one consonant.\nThe linking of a word-final consonant to a vowel beginning the word immediately following it forms a regular part of the phonetics of some languages, including Spanish, Hungarian, and Turkish. Thus, in Spanish, the phrase ('the men') is pronounced , Hungarian ('the human') as , and Turkish ('I hated it') as . In Italian, a final sound can be moved to the next syllable in enchainement, sometimes with a gemination: e.g., ('I've never had any of them') is broken into syllables as and ('I go there and she does as well') is realized as . A related phenomenon, called consonant mutation, is found in the Celtic languages like Irish and Welsh, whereby unwritten (but historical) final consonants affect the initial consonant of the following word.\nAmbisyllabicity.\nThere can be disagreement about the location of some divisions between syllables in spoken language. The problems of dealing with such cases have been most commonly discussed with relation to English. In the case of a word such as \"hurry\", the division may be or , neither of which seems a satisfactory analysis for a non-rhotic accent such as RP (British English): results in a syllable-final , which is not normally found, while gives a syllable-final short stressed vowel, which is also non-occurring. Arguments can be made in favour of one solution or the other: A general rule has been proposed that states that \"Subject to certain conditions ..., consonants are syllabified with the more strongly stressed of two flanking syllables\", while many other phonologists prefer to divide syllables with the consonant or consonants attached to the following syllable wherever possible. However, an alternative that has received some support is to treat an intervocalic consonant as \"ambisyllabic\", i.e. belonging both to the preceding and to the following syllable: . This is discussed in more detail in .\nOnset.\nThe onset (also known as anlaut) is the consonant sound or sounds at the beginning of a syllable, occurring before the nucleus. Most syllables have an onset. Syllables without an onset may be said to have an \"empty\", \"zero\" or \"null onset\" \u2013 that is, nothing where the onset would be.\nOnset cluster.\nSome languages restrict onsets to be only a single consonant, while others allow multiconsonant onsets according to various rules. For example, in English, onsets such as \"pr-\", \"pl-\" and \"tr-\" are possible but \"tl-\" is not, and \"sk-\" is possible but \"ks-\" is not. In Greek, however, both \"ks-\" and \"tl-\" are possible onsets, while contrarily in Classical Arabic no multiconsonant onsets are allowed at all.\nOnset clusters often follow the sonority principle, that is, onsets with increasing sonority (/kl/) are usually preferred to ones with a plateau (/ll/) and even stronger preferred to decreasing sonority (/lk/); however, many languages have counterexamples to this tendency.\nNull onset.\nSome languages forbid null onsets. In these languages, words beginning in a vowel, like the English word \"at\", are impossible.\nThis is less strange than it may appear at first, as most such languages allow syllables to begin with a phonemic glottal stop (the sound in the middle of English \"uh-oh\" or, in some dialects, the double T in \"button\", represented in the IPA as ). In English, a word that begins with a vowel may be pronounced with an epenthetic glottal stop when following a pause, though the glottal stop may not be a phoneme in the language.\nFew languages make a phonemic distinction between a word beginning with a vowel and a word beginning with a glottal stop followed by a vowel, since the distinction will generally only be audible following another word. However, Maltese and some Polynesian languages do make such a distinction, as in Hawaiian ('fire') and / \u2190 ('tuna') and Maltese \u2190 Arabic and Maltese \u2190 Arabic .\nAshkenazi and Sephardi Hebrew may commonly ignore , and , and Arabic forbids empty onsets. The names \"Israel\", \"Abel\", \"Abraham\", \"Omar\", \"Abdullah\", and \"Iraq\" appear not to have onsets in the first syllable, but in the original Hebrew and Arabic forms they actually begin with various consonants: the semivowel in , the glottal fricative in , the glottal stop in , or the pharyngeal fricative in , , and . Conversely, the Arrernte language of central Australia may prohibit onsets altogether; if so, all syllables have the underlying shape VC(C).\nThe difference between a syllable with a null onset and one beginning with a glottal stop is often purely a difference of phonological analysis, rather than the actual pronunciation of the syllable. In some cases, the pronunciation of a (putatively) vowel-initial word when following another word \u2013 particularly, whether or not a glottal stop is inserted \u2013 indicates whether the word should be considered to have a null onset. For example, many Romance languages such as Spanish never insert such a glottal stop, while English does so only some of the times, depending on factors such as conversation speed; in both cases, this suggests that the words in question are truly vowel-initial.\nBut there are exceptions here, too. For example, standard German (excluding many southern accents) and Arabic both require that a glottal stop be inserted between a word and a following, putatively vowel-initial word. Yet such words are perceived to begin with a vowel in German but a glottal stop in Arabic. The reason for this has to do with other properties of the two languages. For example, a glottal stop does not occur in other situations in German, e.g. before a consonant or at the end of word. On the other hand, in Arabic, not only does a glottal stop occur in such situations (e.g. Classical \"he asked\", \"opinion\", \"light\"), but it occurs in alternations that are clearly indicative of its phonemic status (cf. Classical \"writer\" vs. /mak \"written\", \"eater\" vs. \"eaten\"). In other words, while the glottal stop is predictable in German (inserted only if a stressed syllable would otherwise begin with a vowel), the same sound is a regular consonantal phoneme in Arabic. The status of this consonant in the respective writing systems corresponds to this difference: there is no reflex of the glottal stop in German orthography, but there is a letter for it in the Arabic alphabet (Hamza (&lt;bdi&gt;\u0621&lt;/bdi&gt;)).\nThe writing system of a language may not correspond with the phonological analysis of the language in terms of its handling of (potentially) null onsets. For example, in some languages written in the Latin alphabet, an initial glottal stop is left unwritten (see the German example); on the other hand, some languages written using non-Latin alphabets such as abjads and abugidas have a special zero consonant to represent a null onset. As an example, in Hangul, the alphabet of the Korean language, a null onset is represented with \u3147 at the left or top section of a grapheme, as in \"station\", pronounced \"yeok\", where the diphthong \"yeo\" is the nucleus and \"k\" is the coda.\nNucleus.\nThe \"nucleus\" is usually the vowel in the middle of a syllable. Generally, every syllable requires a nucleus (sometimes called the \"peak\"), and the minimal syllable consists only of a nucleus, as in the English words \"eye\" or \"owe\". The syllable nucleus is usually a vowel, in the form of a monophthong, diphthong, or triphthong, but sometimes is a syllabic consonant.\nIt has been suggested that if a language allows a type of consonants to occur in syllable nucleus, it will also allow all the consonant types that are higher in sonority, that is, a language with syllabic fricatives would necessarily also have syllabic nasals, and that syllabic obstruents will be much more rare than liquids; both statements have been shown to be false.\nIn most Germanic languages, lax vowels can occur only in closed syllables. Therefore, these vowels are also called checked vowels, as opposed to the tense vowels that are called \"free vowels\" because they can occur even in open syllables.\nConsonant nucleus.\nSome languages allow obstruents to occur in the syllable nucleus without any intervening vowel or sonorant. The most common syllabic consonants are sonorants like , , , or , as in English \"bottle\" or in Slovak krv [krv]. However, English allows syllabic obstruents in a few para-verbal onomatopoeic utterances such as \"shh\" (used to command silence) and \"psst\" (used to attract attention). All of these have been analyzed as phonemically syllabic. Obstruent-only syllables also occur phonetically in some prosodic situations when unstressed vowels elide between obstruents, as in \"potato\" and \"today\" , which do not change in their number of syllables despite losing a syllabic nucleus.\nA few languages have so-called \"syllabic fricatives\", also known as \"fricative vowels\", at the phonemic level. (In the context of Chinese phonology, the related but non-synonymous term \"apical vowel\" is commonly used.) Mandarin Chinese allows such sounds in at least some of its dialects, for example the pinyin syllables \"s\u012b sh\u012b r\u012b\", usually pronounced , respectively. Though, like the nucleus of rhotic English \"church\", there is debate over whether these nuclei are consonants or vowels.\nLanguages of the northwest coast of North America, including Salishan, Wakashan and Chinookan languages, allow stop consonants and voiceless fricatives as syllables at the phonemic level, in even the most careful enunciation. An example is Chinook 'those two women are coming this way out of the water'. Syllabic obstruents used to be considered very rare, but surveys have shown that they are relatively common and might even be more common than syllabic liquids.\nOther examples:\n 'you spat on me'\n 'he arrived'\n 'he had in his possession a bunchberry plant'\n 'seal blubber'\nIn Bagemihl's survey of previous analyses, he finds that the Bella Coola word 'he arrived' would have been parsed into 0, 2, 3, 5, or 6 syllables depending on which analysis is used. One analysis would consider all vowel and consonant segments as syllable nuclei, another would consider only a small subset (fricatives or sibilants) as nuclei candidates, and another would simply deny the existence of syllables completely. However, when working with recordings rather than transcriptions, the syllables can be obvious in such languages, and native speakers have strong intuitions as to what the syllables are.\nThis type of phenomenon has also been reported in Berber languages (such as Indlawn Tashlhiyt Berber), Mon\u2013Khmer languages (such as Semai, Temiar, Khmu) and the \u014cgami dialect of Miyako, a Ryukyuan language.\n 'you sprained it and then gave it'\n 'rot' (imperf.)\n 'short, fat arms'\nLanguages with long sequences of obstruents pose a problem to several models of the syllable.\nCoda.\nThe coda (also known as auslaut) comprises the consonant sounds of a syllable that follow the nucleus. The sequence of nucleus and coda is called a rime. Some syllables consist of only a nucleus, only an onset and a nucleus with no coda, or only a nucleus and coda with no onset.\nThe phonotactics of many languages forbid syllable codas. Examples are Swahili and Hawaiian. In others, codas are restricted to a small subset of the consonants that appear in onset position. At a phonemic level in Japanese, for example, a coda may only be a nasal (homorganic with any following consonant) or, in the middle of a word, gemination of the following consonant. (On a phonetic level, other codas occur due to elision of /i/ and /u/.) In other languages, nearly any consonant allowed as an onset is also allowed in the coda, even clusters of consonants. In English, for example, all onset consonants except are allowed as syllable codas.\nIf the coda consists of a consonant cluster, the sonority typically decreases from first to last, as in the English word \"help\". This is called the sonority hierarchy (or sonority scale). English onset and coda clusters are therefore different. The onset in \"strengths\" does not appear as a coda in any English word. However, some clusters do occur as both onsets and codas, such as in \"stardust\". The sonority hierarchy is more strict in some languages and less strict in others.\nOpen and closed.\nA coda-less syllable of the form V, CV, CCV, etc. (V = vowel, C = consonant) is called an open syllable or free syllable, while a syllable that has a coda (VC, CVC, CVCC, etc.) is called a closed syllable or checked syllable. They have nothing to do with open and close vowels, but are defined according to the phoneme that ends the syllable: a vowel (open syllable) or a consonant (closed syllable). Almost all languages allow open syllables, but some, such as Hawaiian, do not have closed syllables.\nWhen a syllable is not the last syllable in a word, the nucleus normally must be followed by two consonants in order for the syllable to be closed. This is because a single following consonant is typically considered the onset of the following syllable. For example, Spanish (\"to marry\") is composed of an open syllable followed by a closed syllable (\"ca-sar\"), whereas \"to get tired\" is composed of two closed syllables (\"can-sar\"). When a geminate (double) consonant occurs, the syllable boundary occurs in the middle, e.g. Italian \"cream\" (\"pan-na\"); cf. Italian \"bread\" (\"pa-ne\").\nEnglish words may consist of a single closed syllable, with nucleus denoted by \u03bd, and coda denoted by \u03ba:\nEnglish words may also consist of a single open syllable, ending in a nucleus, without a coda:\nA list of examples of syllable codas in English is found at English phonology#Coda.\nNull coda.\nSome languages forbid codas, so that all syllables are open. Examples are Hawaiian from the Austronesian family, and Swahili from the Atlantic\u2013Congo family.\nSuprasegmental features.\nThe domain of suprasegmental features is a syllable (or some larger unit), but not a specific sound. That is to say, these features may affect more than a single segment, and possibly all segments of a syllable:\nSometimes syllable length is also counted as a suprasegmental feature; for example, in some Germanic languages, long vowels may only exist with short consonants and vice versa. However, syllables can be analyzed as compositions of long and short phonemes, as in Finnish and Japanese, where consonant gemination and vowel length are independent.\nTone.\nIn most languages, the pitch or pitch contour in which a syllable is pronounced conveys shades of meaning such as emphasis or surprise, or distinguishes a statement from a question. In tonal languages, however, the pitch affects the basic lexical meaning (e.g. \"cat\" vs. \"dog\") or grammatical meaning (e.g. past vs. present). In some languages, only the pitch itself (e.g. high vs. low) has this effect, while in others, especially East Asian languages such as Chinese, Thai or Vietnamese, the shape or contour (e.g. level vs. rising vs. falling) also needs to be distinguished.\nAccent.\nSyllable structure often interacts with stress or pitch accent. In Latin, for example, stress is regularly determined by syllable weight, a syllable counting as heavy if it has at least one of the following:\nIn each case, the syllable is considered to have two morae.\nThe first syllable of a word is the initial syllable and the last syllable is the final syllable.\nIn languages accented on one of the last three syllables, the last syllable is called the ultima, the next-to-last is called the penult, and the third syllable from the end is called the antepenult. These terms come from Latin ' \"last\", ' \"almost last\", and \"\" \"before almost last\".\nIn Ancient Greek, there are three accent marks (acute, circumflex, and grave), and terms were used to describe words based on the position and type of accent. Some of these terms are used in the description of other languages.\nHistory.\nGuilhem Molinier, a member of the , which was the first literary academy in the world and held the Floral Games to award the best troubadour with the \"violeta d'aur\" top prize, gave a definition of the syllable in his \"Leys d'amor\" (1328\u20131337), a book aimed at regulating then-flourishing Occitan poetry:\nCrosslinguistic patterns.\n\"CV\" is purported to be the universal syllable type that is found in all languages of the world, although two Australian languages, Arrernte and the Oykangand dialect of Kunjen, are possible exceptions. CV is the first syllable type to be acquired by children, and if a language has only one type of a syllable, it is always \"CV\" (e. g. Hawaiian and Hua).\nSeveral asymmetries in onset and coda have been identified. All languages have syllables with onsets, but about 12.6% of languages in WALS do not allow codas. The list of consonants allowed in the coda is usually smaller than the ones allowed in the onset (e. g. in Northern Germany, coda cannot have voiced consonants). All combinations of onset and nucleus are usually allowed, but the coda consonant is sometimes restricted by the nucleus.\nConsonant clusters are more typical in onsets than in codas.\nMorphology.\nComplex syllables often occur as a result of morphological processes (e. g. the English word \"texts\" has an uncommon coda /kst-s/ after pluralisation). Some models of the syllable even exclude morphologically complex syllables from their analysis. At the same time, these clusters are acquired earlier by L1 speakers than the ones arising within a single morpheme, and are less reduced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources and recommended reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44912", "revid": "1169106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44912", "title": "List of national parks of Tanzania", "text": ""}
{"id": "44913", "revid": "37864053", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44913", "title": "Dublin, Ireland", "text": ""}
{"id": "44914", "revid": "50964003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44914", "title": "List of national parks of India", "text": "&lt;mapframe width=\"400\" height=\"400\" text=\"National Parks in India\"&gt;\n \"type\": \"ExternalData\",\n \"service\": \"geoshape\",\n \"properties\": {\n \"stroke\": \"#00ff00\",\n \"stroke-width\": 2\n&lt;/mapframe&gt;\nNational parks in India are International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) category II protected areas. India's first national park was established in 1936, now known as Jim Corbett National Park, in Uttarakhand. In 1970, India had only five national parks. In 1972, India enacted the Wildlife Protection Act and Project Tiger in 1973 to safeguard the habitats of conservation reliant species. Further legislation strengthening protection for wildlife was introduced in the 1980s.\nThere are 106 existing national parks in India covering an area of 44,402.95\u00a0km2 which is 1.35% of the geographical area of the country. In addition to the above, 75 other national parks covering an area of are proposed in the Protected Area Network Report. The network of parks will go up 176 after full implementation of the above report.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Horizontal TOC/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nState-wise List of National Parks.\nSource:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44920", "revid": "32491363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44920", "title": "Pliny the Elder", "text": "1st-century Roman military commander and writer\nGaius Plinius Secundus (23 or 24 CE - 25 August 79 CE), known in English as Pliny the Elder ( ), was a Roman author, naturalist, scientist, naval and army commander of the early Roman Empire, and friend of the emperor Vespasian. Pliny wrote the encyclopedic (\"Natural History\"), a comprehensive thirty-seven-volume work covering a vast array of topics on human knowledge and the natural world, which became an editorial model for encyclopedias. He spent most of his spare time studying, writing, and investigating natural and geographic phenomena in the field.\nAmong Pliny's greatest works was the twenty-volume \"Bella Germaniae\" (\"Wars of Germania\"), which is no longer extant. \"Bella Germaniae\", which began where Aufidius Bassus' writings on Germani wars left off, was used as a source by other prominent Roman historians, including Plutarch, Tacitus, and Suetonius. Tacitus may have used \"Bella Germaniae\" as the primary source for his work, \"De origine et situ Germanorum\" (\"On the Origin and Situation of the Germani\").\nPliny the Elder died in AD 79 in Stabiae while attempting to rescue people from the eruption of Mount Vesuvius.\nLife and times.\nBackground.\nPliny's dates are pinned to the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE and a statement by his nephew that he died in his 56th year, which would put his birth in 23 or 24 CE.\nPliny was the son of an equestrian Gaius Plinius Celer and his wife, Marcella. Neither the Elder nor the Younger Pliny mention these names. Their ultimate source is a fragmentary inscription (CIL V 1 3442) found in a field in Verona and recorded by the 16th-century Augustinian friar Onofrio Panvinio. The form is an elegy. The most commonly accepted reconstruction is\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;PLINIVS SECVNDVS AVGV. LERI. PATRI. MATRI. MARCELLAE. TESTAMENTO FIERI IVSSO\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Plinius Secundus augur ordered this to be made as a testament to his father [Ce]ler and his mother [Grania] Marcella\nThe actual words are fragmentary. The reading of the inscription depends on the reconstruction, but in all cases the names come through. Whether he was an augur and whether she was named Grania Marcella are less certain. Jean Hardouin presents a statement from an unknown source that he claims was ancient, that Pliny was from Verona and that his parents were Celer and Marcella. Hardouin also cites the contrary (see below) of Catullus.\nHow the inscription got to Verona is unknown, but it could have arrived by dispersal of property from Pliny the Younger's estate at Colle Plinio, north of Citt\u00e0 di Castello, identified with certainty by his initials in the roof tiles. He kept statues of his ancestors there. Pliny the Elder was born at Como, not at Verona: it is only as a native of old \"Gallia Transpadana\" that he calls Catullus of Verona his \"conterraneus\", or fellow-countryman, not his \"municeps\", or fellow-townsman. A statue of Pliny on the fa\u00e7ade of the Como Cathedral celebrates him as a native son. He had a sister, Plinia, who married into the Caecilii and was the mother of his nephew, Pliny the Younger, whose letters describe his work and study regimen in detail.\nIn one of his letters to Tacitus (\"avunculus meus\"), Pliny the Younger details how his uncle's breakfasts would be light and simple (\"levis et facilis\") following the customs of our forefathers (\"veterum more interdiu\"). Pliny the Younger wanted to convey that Pliny the Elder was a \"good Roman\", which means that he maintained the customs of the great Roman forefathers. This statement would have pleased Tacitus.\nTwo inscriptions identifying the hometown of Pliny the Younger as Como take precedence over the Verona theory. One (CIL V 5262) commemorates the younger's career as the imperial magistrate and details his considerable charitable and municipal expenses on behalf of the people of Como. Another (CIL V 5667) identifies his father Lucius' village as present-day Fecchio (tribe Oufentina), a hamlet of Cant\u00f9, near Como. Therefore, Plinia likely was a local girl and Pliny the Elder, her brother, was from Como.\nGaius was a member of the Plinia \"gens:\" the Insubric root \"Plina\" still persists, with rhotacism, in the local surname \"Prina\". He did not take his father's cognomen, Celer, but assumed his own, Secundus. As his adopted son took the same cognomen, Pliny founded a branch, the Plinii Secundi. The family was prosperous; Pliny the Younger's combined inherited estates made him so wealthy that he could found a school and a library, endow a fund to feed the women and children of Como, and own numerous estates around Rome and Lake Como, as well as enrich some of his friends as a personal favor. No earlier instances of the Plinii are known.\nIn 59 BC, only about 82 years before Pliny's birth, Julius Caesar founded Novum Comum (reverting to Comum) as a to secure the region against the Alpine tribes, whom he had been unable to defeat. He imported a population of 4,500 from other provinces to be placed in Comasco and 500 aristocratic Greeks to found Novum Comum itself. The community was thus multi-ethnic and the Plinies could have come from anywhere. Whether any conclusions can be drawn from Pliny's preference for Greek words, or Julius Pokorny's derivation of the name from north Italic as \"bald\" is a matter of speculative opinion. No record of any ethnic distinctions in Pliny's time is apparent\u2014the population considered themselves to be Roman citizens.\nPliny the Elder did not marry and had no children. In his will, he adopted his nephew, which entitled the latter to inherit the entire estate. The adoption is called a \"testamental adoption\" by writers on the topic, who assert that it applied to the name change only, but Roman jurisprudence recognizes no such category. Pliny the Younger thus became the adopted son of Pliny the Elder after the latter's death. For at least some of the time, however, Pliny the Elder resided in the same house in Misenum with his sister and nephew (whose husband and father, respectively, had died young); they were living there when Pliny the Elder decided to investigate the eruption of Mount Vesuvius, and was sidetracked by the need for rescue operations and a messenger from his friend asking for assistance.\nStudent and lawyer.\nPliny's father took him to Rome to be educated in lawmaking. Pliny relates that he saw Marcus Servilius Nonianus.\nJunior officer.\nIn AD 46, at about age 23, Pliny entered the army as a junior officer, as was the custom for young men of equestrian rank. Ronald Syme, Plinian scholar, reconstructs three periods at three ranks.\nPliny's interest in Roman literature attracted the attention and friendship of other men of letters in the higher ranks, with whom he formed lasting friendships. Later, these friendships assisted his entry into the upper echelons of the state; however, he was trusted for his knowledge and ability, as well. According to Syme, he began as a \"praefectus cohortis\", a \"commander of a cohort\" (an infantry cohort, as junior officers began in the infantry), under Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo, himself a writer (whose works did not survive) in Germania Inferior. In AD 47, he took part in the Roman conquest of the Chauci and the construction of the canal between the rivers Maas and Rhine. His description of the Roman ships anchored in the stream overnight having to ward off floating trees has the stamp of an eyewitness account.\nAt some uncertain date, Pliny was transferred to the command of Germania Superior under Publius Pomponius Secundus with a promotion to military tribune, which was a staff position, with duties assigned by the district commander. Pomponius was a half-brother of Corbulo. They had the same mother, Vistilia, a powerful matron of the Roman upper classes, who had seven children by six husbands, some of whom had imperial connections, including a future empress. Pliny's assignments are not clear, but he must have participated in the campaign against the Chatti of AD 50, at age 27, in his fourth year of service. Associated with the commander in the \"praetorium\", he became a familiar and close friend of Pomponius, who also was a man of letters.\nAt another uncertain date, Pliny was transferred back to Germania Inferior. Corbulo had moved on, assuming command in the east. This time, Pliny was promoted to \"praefectus alae\", \"commander of a wing\", responsible for a cavalry battalion of about 480 men. He spent the rest of his military service there. A decorative \"phalera\", or piece of harness, with his name on it has been found at \"Castra Vetera\", modern Xanten, then a large Roman army and naval base on the lower Rhine. Pliny's last commander there, apparently neither a man of letters nor a close friend of his, was Pompeius Paullinus, governor of Germania Inferior AD 55\u201358. Pliny relates that he personally knew Paulinus to have carried around 12,000 pounds of silver service on which to dine in a campaign against the Germani (a practice which would not have endeared him to the disciplined Pliny).\nAccording to his nephew, during this period, he wrote his first book (perhaps in winter quarters when more spare time was available), a work on the use of missiles on horseback, \"De Jaculatione Equestri\" (\"On the Use of the Dart by Cavalry\"). It has not survived, but in \"Natural History\", he seems to reveal at least part of its content, using the movements of the horse to assist the javelin-man in throwing missiles while astride its back. During this period, he also dreamed that the spirit of Drusus Nero begged him to save his memory from oblivion. The dream prompted Pliny to begin forthwith a history of all the wars between the Romans and the Germani, which he did not complete for some years.\nLiterary interlude.\nAt the earliest time that Pliny could have left the service, Nero, the last of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, had been emperor for two years. He did not leave office until AD 68, when Pliny was 45 years old. During that time, Pliny did not hold any high office or work in the service of the state. In the subsequent Flavian dynasty, his services were in such demand that he had to give up his law practice, which suggests that he had been trying not to attract the attention of Nero, who was a dangerous acquaintance.\nUnder Nero, Pliny lived mainly in Rome. He mentions the map of Armenia and the neighbourhood of the Caspian Sea, which was sent to Rome by the staff of Corbulo in 58. He also witnessed the construction of Nero's Domus Aurea or \"Golden House\" after the Great Fire of Rome in 64.\nBesides pleading law cases, Pliny wrote, researched, and studied. His second published work was \"The Life of Pomponius Secundus\", a two-volume biography of his old commander, Pomponius Secundus.\nMeanwhile, he was completing his monumental work, \"Bella Germaniae\", the only authority expressly quoted in the first six books of the \"Annales\" of Tacitus, and probably one of the principal authorities for the same author's \"Germania\". It disappeared in favor of the writings of Tacitus (which are far shorter), and, early in the fifth century, Symmachus had little hope of finding a copy.\nLike Caligula, Nero seemed to grow gradually more insane as his reign progressed. Pliny devoted much of his time to writing on the comparatively safe subjects of grammar and rhetoric. He published a three-book, six-volume educational manual on rhetoric, entitled \"Studiosus\", \"The Student\". Pliny the Younger says of it: \"The orator is trained from his very cradle and perfected.\" It was followed by eight books entitled \"Dubii sermonis\" (\"Of Doubtful Phraseology\"). These are both now lost works. His nephew relates: \"He wrote this under Nero, in the last years of his reign, when every kind of literary pursuit which was in the least independent or elevated had been rendered dangerous by servitude.\"\nIn 68, Nero no longer had any friends and supporters. He committed suicide, and the reign of terror was at an end, as was the interlude in Pliny's obligation to the state.\nSenior officer.\nAt the end of AD 69, after a year of civil war consequent on the death of Nero, Vespasian, a successful general, became emperor. Like Pliny, he had come from the equestrian class, rising through the ranks of the army and public offices and defeating the other contenders for the highest office. His main tasks were to re-establish peace under imperial control and to place the economy on a sound footing. He needed in his administration all the loyalty and assistance he could find. Pliny, apparently trusted without question, perhaps (reading between the lines) recommended by Vespasian's son Titus, was put to work immediately and was kept in a continuous succession of the most distinguished procuratorships, according to Suetonius. A procurator was generally a governor of an imperial province. The empire was perpetually short of, and was always seeking, officeholders for its numerous offices.\nThroughout the latter stages of Pliny's life, he maintained good relations with Emperor Vespasian. As is written in the first line of Pliny the Younger's \"Avunculus Meus\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Before dawn he was going to Emperor Vespasian (for he also made use of the night), then he did the other duties assigned to him.\nIn this passage, Pliny the Younger conveys to Tacitus that his uncle was ever the academic, always working. The word \"ibat\" (imperfect, \"he used to go\") gives a sense of repeated or customary action. In the subsequent text, he mentions again how most of his uncle's day was spent working, reading, and writing. He notes that Pliny \"was indeed a very ready sleeper, sometimes dropping off in the middle of his studies and then waking up again.\"\nA definitive study of the procuratorships of Pliny was compiled by the classical scholar Friedrich M\u00fcnzer, which was reasserted by Ronald Syme and became a standard reference point. M\u00fcnzer hypothesized four procuratorships, of which two are certainly attested and two are probable but not certain. However, two does not satisfy Suetonius' description of a continuous succession. Consequently, Plinian scholars present two to four procuratorships, the four comprising (i) Gallia Narbonensis in 70, (ii) Africa in 70\u201372, (iii) Hispania Tarraconensis in 72\u201374, and (iv) Gallia Belgica in 74\u201376.\nAccording to Syme, Pliny may have been \"successor to Valerius Paulinus\", procurator of Gallia Narbonensis (southeastern France), early in AD 70. He seems to have a \"familiarity with the \"provincia\"\", which, however, might otherwise be explained. For example, he says In the cultivation of the soil, the manners and civilization of the inhabitants, and the extent of its wealth, it is surpassed by none of the provinces, and, in short, might be more truthfully described as a part of Italy than as a province.\ndenoting a general popular familiarity with the region.\nPliny certainly spent some time in the province of Africa, most likely as a procurator. Among other events or features that he saw are the provoking of \"rubetae\", poisonous toads (Bufonidae), by the Psylli; the buildings made with molded earthen walls, \"superior in solidity to any cement;\" and the unusual, fertile seaside oasis of Gab\u00e8s (then Tacape), Tunisia, currently a World Heritage Site. Syme assigns the African procuratorship to AD\u00a070\u201372.\nThe procuratorship of Hispania Tarraconensis was next. A statement by Pliny the Younger that his uncle was offered 400,000 \"sesterces\" for his manuscripts by Larcius Licinius while he (Pliny the Elder) was procurator of Hispania makes it the most certain of the three. Pliny lists the peoples of \"Hither Hispania\", including population statistics and civic rights (modern Asturias and Gallaecia). He stops short of mentioning them all for fear of \"wearying the reader\". As this is the only geographic region for which he gives this information, Syme hypothesizes that Pliny contributed to the census of Hither Hispania conducted in 73/74 by Vibius Crispus, legate from the Emperor, thus dating Pliny's procuratorship there.\nDuring his stay in Hispania, he became familiar with the agriculture and especially the gold mines of the north and west of the country. His descriptions of the various methods of mining appear to be eyewitness judging by the discussion of gold mining methods in his \"Natural History\". He might have visited the mine excavated at Las M\u00e9dulas.\nThe last position of procurator, an uncertain one, was of Gallia Belgica, based on Pliny's familiarity with it. The capital of the province was Augusta Treverorum (Trier), named for the Treveri surrounding it. Pliny says that in \"the year but one before this\" a severe winter killed the first crops planted by the Treviri; they sowed again in March and had \"a most abundant harvest.\" The problem is to identify \"this\", the year in which the passage was written. Using 77 as the date of composition Syme arrives at AD 74\u201375 as the date of the procuratorship, when Pliny is presumed to have witnessed these events. The argument is based entirely on presumptions; nevertheless, this date is required to achieve Suetonius' continuity of procuratorships, if the one in Gallia Belgica occurred.\nPliny was allowed home (Rome) at some time in AD 75\u201376. He was presumably at home for the first official release of \"Natural History\" in 77. Whether he was in Rome for the dedication of Vespasian's Temple of Peace in the Forum in 75, which was in essence a museum for display of art works plundered by Nero and formerly adorning the Domus Aurea, is uncertain, as is his possible command of the \"vigiles\" (night watchmen), a lesser post. No actual post is discernible for this period. On the bare circumstances, he was an official agent of the emperor in a quasiprivate capacity. Perhaps he was between posts. In any case, his appointment as commander of the imperial fleet at Misenum took him there, where he resided with his sister and nephew. Vespasian died of disease on 23 June 79. Pliny outlived him by four months.\nNoted author.\nDuring Nero's reign of terror, Pliny avoided working on any writing that would attract attention to himself. His works on oratory in the last years of Nero's reign (67\u201368) focused on form rather than on content. He began working on content again probably after Vespasian's rule began in AD 69, when the terror clearly was over and would not be resumed. It was to some degree reinstituted (and later cancelled by his son Titus) when Vespasian suppressed the philosophers at Rome, but not Pliny, who was not among them, representing, as he says, something new in Rome, an encyclopedist (certainly, a venerable tradition outside Italy).\nIn his next work, \"Bella Germaniae\", Pliny completed the history which Aufidius Bassus left unfinished. Pliny's continuation of Bassus's \"History\" was one of the authorities followed by Suetonius and Plutarch. Tacitus also cites Pliny as a source. He is mentioned concerning the loyalty of Burrus, commander of the Praetorian Guard, whom Nero removed for disloyalty. Tacitus portrays parts of Pliny's view of the Pisonian conspiracy to kill Nero and make Piso emperor as \"absurd\" and mentions that he could not decide whether Pliny's account or that of Messalla was more accurate concerning some of the details of the Year of the Four Emperors. Evidently Pliny's extension of Bassus extended at least from the reign of Nero to that of Vespasian. Pliny seems to have known it was going to be controversial, as he deliberately reserved it for publication after his death:\nIt has been long completed and its accuracy confirmed; but I have determined to commit the charge of it to my heirs, lest I should have been suspected, during my lifetime, of having been unduly influenced by ambition. By this means I confer an obligation on those who occupy the same ground with myself; and also on posterity, who, I am aware, will contend with me, as I have done with my predecessors.\n\"Natural History\".\nPliny's last work, according to his nephew, was the (\"Natural History\"), an encyclopedia into which he collected much of the knowledge of his time. Some historians consider this to be the first encyclopedia written. It comprised 37 books. His sources were personal experience, his own prior works (such as the work on Germania), and extracts from other works. These extracts were collected in the following manner: One servant would read aloud, and another would write the extract as dictated by Pliny. He is said to have dictated extracts while taking a bath. In winter, he furnished the copier with gloves and long sleeves so his writing hand would not stiffen with cold (Pliny the Younger in \"avunculus meus\"). His extract collection finally reached about 160 volumes, which Larcius Licinius, the Praetorian legate of Hispania Tarraconensis, unsuccessfully offered to purchase for 400,000 \"sesterces.\" That would have been in 73/74 (see above). Pliny bequeathed the extracts to his nephew.\nWhen composition of \"Natural History\" began is unknown. Since he was preoccupied with his other works under Nero and then had to finish the history of his times, he is unlikely to have begun before 70. The procuratorships offered the ideal opportunity for an encyclopedic frame of mind. The date of an overall composition cannot be assigned to any one year. The dates of different parts must be determined, if they can, by philological analysis (the \"post mortem\" of the scholars).\nThe closest known event to a single publication date, that is, when the manuscript was probably released to the public for borrowing and copying, and was probably sent to the Flavians, is the date of the Dedication in the first of the 37 books. It is to the \"imperator\" Titus. As Titus and Vespasian had the same name, Titus Flavius Vespasianus, earlier writers hypothesized a dedication to Vespasian. Pliny's mention of a brother (Domitian) and joint offices with a father, calling that father \"great\", points certainly to Titus.\nPliny also says that Titus had been consul six times. The first six consulships of Titus were in 70, 72, 74, 75, 76, and 77, all conjointly with Vespasian, and the seventh was in 79. This brings the date of the Dedication probably to 77. In that year, Vespasian was 68. He had been ruling conjointly with Titus for some years. The title \"imperator\" does not indicate that Titus was sole emperor, but was awarded for a military victory, in this case that in Jerusalem in 70.\nAside from minor finishing touches, the work in 37 books was completed in AD 77. That it was written entirely in 77 or that Pliny was finished with it then cannot be proved. Moreover, the dedication could have been written before publication, and it could have been published either privately or publicly earlier without the dedication. The only certain fact is that Pliny died in AD 79.\n\"Natural History\" is one of the largest single works to have survived from the Roman Empire and was intended to cover the entire field of ancient knowledge, based on the best authorities available to Pliny. He claims to be the only Roman ever to have undertaken such a work. It encompasses the fields of botany, zoology, astronomy, geology, and mineralogy, as well as the exploitation of those resources. It remains a standard work for the Roman period and the advances in technology and understanding of natural phenomena at the time. His discussions of some technical advances are the only sources for those inventions, such as hushing in mining technology or the use of water mills for crushing or grinding grain. Much of what he wrote about has been confirmed by archaeology. It is virtually the only work that describes the work of artists of the time, and is a reference work for the history of art. As such, Pliny's approach to describing the work of artists informed Lorenzo Ghiberti in writing his commentaries in the 15th century, and Giorgio Vasari, who wrote the celebrated \"Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects\" in 1550.\n\"Natural History\" as the First Encyclopedia.\nSome historians consider \"Natural History\" to be the first encyclopedia ever written. It was the earliest encyclopedia to survive. There were many ancient histories written before Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History,\" but scholars still recognize \"Natural History\" as an encyclopedia, setting it apart from the other ancient histories. Regardless of if it was first, it is certainly the most significant. Through \"Natural History,\" Pliny the Elder gives modern experts a view into meanings of various things from first century Rome in a way that no other surviving text does. Each book of the \"Natural History\" covers a different topic, and the work is meant to cover every topic. Given the organization of the work, it is clear that it was meant to be a reference resource. Even modern scholars will sometimes compare an unknown object mentioned in a different ancient text with the objects described by Pliny and make comparisons. Modern scholars are also able to use \"Natural History\" to understand the traditions, fantasies, and prejudices in Ancient Rome.\nThe work became a model for all later encyclopedias in terms of the breadth of subject matter examined, the need to reference original authors, and a comprehensive index list of the contents. It is the only work by Pliny to have survived, and the last that he published, lacking a final revision at his sudden and unexpected death in the AD 79 eruption of Mount Vesuvius.\nDeath.\nPliny, who had been appointed \"praefectus classis\" (admiral) in the Roman navy by Vespasian, was stationed with the fleet at Misenum at the time of the eruption of Mount Vesuvius. He organized and led a rescue mission upon receiving a message from his friend Rectina, who had been left stranded in Stabiae during the eruption. Pliny boarded one of several galleys that he dispatched across the Gulf of Naples to Stabiae.\nAs Pliny's vessel approached the shore near Herculaneum, cinders and pumice began to fall on it. The helmsman advised turning back, to which Pliny replied, \"Fortune favours the bold; steer to where Pomponianus is.\" Upon reaching Stabiae, they found Senator Pomponianus, but the same winds that brought them there prevented them from leaving. The group waited for the wind to abate, but they decided to leave later that evening for fear that their houses would collapse. The group fled when a plume of hot toxic gases engulfed them. Pliny, a corpulent man who suffered from a chronic respiratory condition, possibly asthma, died and was left behind. Upon the group's return three days later after the plume had dispersed, Pliny's body was found, with no apparent external injuries.\nTwenty-seven years later, upon a request from Tacitus, Pliny the Younger provided an account (obtained from the survivors from Stabiae) of his uncle's death.\nThe younger Pliny believed that he had been killed by toxic gases. Suetonius wrote that Pliny approached the shore only from scientific interest and then asked a slave to kill him to avoid heat from the volcano. In 1859, Jacob Bigelow, after summarizing the information about Pliny's death contained in Pliny the Younger's letter to Tacitus, concluded that Pliny had died from apoplexy (stroke) or heart disease.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44922", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44922", "title": "Selinunte", "text": "Ancient human settlement\nSelinunte ( , ; ; ; ) was a rich and extensive ancient Greek city of Magna Graecia on the south-western coast of Sicily in Italy. It was situated between the valleys of the Cottone and Modione rivers. It now lies in the of Castelvetrano, between the of Triscina di Selinunte in the west and Marinella di Selinunte in the east.\nThe archaeological site contains many great temples, the earliest dating from 550 BC, with five centred on an acropolis.\nAt its peak before 409\u00a0BC the city may have had 30,000 inhabitants, excluding slaves. It was destroyed and abandoned in 250 BC and never reoccupied.\nHistory.\nSelinunte was one of the most important of the Greek colonies in Sicily, situated on the southwest coast of that island, at the mouth of the small river of the same name, and 6.5\u00a0km west of the Hypsas river (the modern Belice). It was founded, according to the historian Thucydides, by a colony from the Sicilian city of Megara Hyblaea, under the leadership of a man called Pammilus, about 100 years after the foundation of Megara Hyblaea, with the help of colonists from Megara in Greece, which was Megara Hyblaea's mother city. The date of its foundation cannot be precisely fixed, as Thucydides indicates it only by reference to the foundation of Megara Hyblaea, which is itself not accurately known, but it may be placed about 628\u00a0BC. Diodorus places it 22 years earlier, or 650\u00a0BC, and Hieronymus still further back in 654\u00a0BC. The date from Thucydides, which is probably the most likely, is incompatible with this earlier date. The name is supposed to have been derived from quantities of wild celery () that grew on the spot. For the same reason, they adopted the celery leaf as the symbol on their coins.\nSelinunte was the most westerly of the Greek colonies in Sicily, and for this reason they soon came into contact with the Phoenicians of western Sicily and the native Sicilians in the west and northwest of the island. The Phoenicians do not at first seem to have conflicted with them; but as early as 580\u00a0BC the Selinuntines were engaged in hostilities with the non-Greek Elymian people of Segesta, whose territory bordered their own. A body of emigrants from Rhodes and Cnidus who subsequently founded Lipara, supported the Segestans on this occasion, leading to their victory; but disputes and hostilities between the Segestans and Selinuntines seem to have occurred frequently, and it is possible that when Diodorus speaks of the Segestans being at war with the Lilybaeans (modern Marsala) in 454\u00a0BC, that the Selinuntines are the people really meant.\nThe river Mazarus, which at that time appears to have formed the boundary with Segesta, was only about 25\u00a0km west of Selinunte; and it is certain that at a somewhat later period the territory of Selinunte extended to its banks, and that that city had a fort and emporium at its mouth. On the other side Selinunte's territory certainly extended as far as the Halycus (modern Platani), at the mouth of which it founded the colony of Minoa, or Heracleia, as it was afterward called. It is clear, therefore, that Selinunte had already achieved great power and prosperity; but very little information survives about its history. Like most of the Sicilian cities, it passed from an oligarchy to a tyranny, and about 510\u00a0BC was subject to a despot named Peithagoras, who was overthrown with the assistance of the Spartan Euryleon, one of the companions of Dorieus. Euryleon himself ruled the city, for a little while, but was speedily overthrown and put to death by the Selinuntines. The Selinuntines supported the Carthaginians during the great expedition of Hamilcar (480\u00a0BC); they even promised to send a contingent to the Carthaginian army, but this did not arrive until after Hamilcar's defeat at the Battle of Himera.\nThe Selinuntines are next mentioned in 466\u00a0BC, co-operating with the other cities of Sicily to help the Syracusans to expel Thrasybulus. Thucydides speaks of Selinunte just before the Athenian expedition in 416 BC as a powerful and wealthy city, possessing great resources for war both by land and sea, and having large stores of wealth accumulated in its temples. Diodorus also represents it at the time of the Carthaginian invasion, as having enjoyed a long period of tranquility, and possessing a numerous population. The walls of Selinunte enclosed an area of approximately . The population of the city has been estimated at 14,000 to 19,000 people during the fifth century BC.\nThe Sicilian Expedition.\nIn 416\u00a0BC, a renewal of the earlier disputes between Selinunte and Segesta led to the great Athenian expedition to Sicily. The Selinuntines called on Syracuse for assistance, and were able to blockade the Segestans; but the Segestans appealed to Athens for help. The Athenians do not appear to have taken any immediate action to save Segesta, but no further conflict around Segesta is recorded. When the Athenian expedition first arrived in Sicily (415\u00a0BC), Thucydides presents the general Nicias as proposing that the Athenians should proceed to Selinunte at once and compel the Selinuntines to surrender on moderate terms; but this advice was overruled and the expedition sailed against Syracuse instead. As a result, the Selinuntines played only a minor part in the subsequent operations. They are, however, mentioned on several occasions providing troops to the Syracusans; and it was at Selinunte that the large Peloponnesian force sent to support Gylippus landed in the spring of 413\u00a0BC, having been driven over to the coast of Africa by a tempest.\nCaptured by Carthage.\nThe defeat of the Athenian armament apparently left the Segestans at the mercy of their rivals. They surrendered the frontier district that was the original subject of dispute to Selinunte. The Selinuntines, however, were not satisfied with this concession, and continued their hostility against them, leading the Segestans to seek assistance from Carthage. After some hesitation, Carthage sent a small force, with the assistance of which the Segestans defeated the Selinuntines in a battle. The Carthaginians in the following spring (409\u00a0BC) sent over a vast army containing 100,000 men, according to the lowest ancient estimate, led by Hannibal Mago (the grandson of Hamilcar that was killed at Himera). The army landed at Lilybaeum, and directly marched from there to Selinunte. The city's inhabitants had not expected such a force and were wholly unprepared to resist it. The city fortifications were, in many places, in disrepair, and the armed forces promised by Syracuse, Acragas (modern Agrigento) and Gela, were not ready and did not arrive in time. The Selinuntines fought the Carthaginians on their own and continued to defend their individual houses even after the walls were breached. However, the enemy's overwhelming numbers made resistance hopeless, and after a ten-day siege the city was taken and most of the defenders put to death. According to sources, 16,000 of the citizens of Selinunte were killed, 5,000 were taken prisoner, and 2,600 under the command of Empedion escaped to Acragas. Subsequently, a considerable number of the survivors and fugitives were gathered together by Hermocrates of Syracuse, and established within the walls of the city. Shortly after, Hannibal destroyed the city walls, but gave permission to the surviving inhabitants to return and occupy it as tributaries of Carthage. A considerable part of the citizens of Selinunte took up this offer, which was confirmed by the treaty subsequently concluded between Dionysius, tyrant of Syracuse, and the Carthaginians, in 405\u00a0BC.\nDestruction.\nThe Selinuntines are again mentioned in 397\u00a0BC when they supported Dionysius during his war with Carthage; but both the city and territory were again given up to the Carthaginians by the peace of 383\u00a0BC. Although Dionysius reconquered it shortly before his death, it soon returned to Carthaginian control. The Halycus River, which was established as the eastern boundary of the Carthaginian dominion in Sicily by the treaty of 383\u00a0BC, seems to have generally continued to have been the border, despite temporary interruptions; and was again fixed as the border by the treaty with Agathocles in 314\u00a0BC. This last treaty expressly stipulated that Selinunte, as well as Heracleia and Himera, were subjects of Carthage, as before. In 276\u00a0BC, however, during the expedition of Pyrrhus to Sicily, the Selinuntines voluntarily joined Pyrrhus, after the capture of Heracleia. By the First Punic War, Selinunte was again under Carthaginian control, and its territory was repeatedly the theater of military operations between the Romans and the Carthaginians. But before the close of the war (about 250\u00a0BC), when the Carthaginians were beginning to pull back, and confine themselves to the defense of as few places as possible, they removed all the inhabitants of Selinunte to Lilybaeum and destroyed the city.\nIt seems that it was never rebuilt. Pliny the Elder mentions its name (\"Selinus oppidum\"), as if it still existed as a town in his time, but Strabo distinctly classes it with extinct cities. Ptolemy, though he mentions the river Selinus, does not mention a town of the name. The Thermae Selinuntiae (at modern Sciacca), which derived their name from the ancient city, and seem to have been much frequented in the time of the Romans, were situated at a considerable distance, 30\u00a0km, from Selinunte: they are sulfurous springs, still much valued for their medical properties, and dedicated, like most thermal waters in Sicily, to San Calogero. At a later period they were called the Aquae Labodes or Larodes, under which name they appear in the Itineraries.\nArchaeological remains.\nThe ancient city is beside the sea, between the Modione River in the west and the Cottone River in the east, on two high areas connected by a narrow isthmus. The part of the city to the south, next to the sea, contains the acropolis which is based around two intersecting streets and contains many temples (A, B, C, D, O). The part of the city on the Mannuzza Hill to the north, further inland, contained housing on the Hippodamian plan contemporary with the acropolis and two necropoleis (Galera-Bagliazzo and Manuzza).\nOther important remains are found on the high places across the rivers to the east and west of the city. In the east there are three temples (E, F, G) and a necropolis (Buffa) north of the modern village of Marinella. In the west are the most ancient remains of Selinus: the Sanctuary of the Malophoros and the archaic necropolis (Pipio, Manicalunga, Timpone Nero). The two ports of the city were in the mouths of the city's two rivers.\nThe modern Archaeological park, which covers about 270 hectares can therefore be divided into the following areas:\nThe Acropolis.\nThe acropolis is on a limestone massif with a cliff face falling into the sea in the south, while the north end narrows to 140 m wide. The settlement was in the form of a massive trapezoid, extended to the north with a large retaining wall in terraces (about eleven metres high) and surrounded by a wall (repeatedly restored and modified) with an exterior of squared stone blocks and an interior of rough stone (\"emplecton\"). It had five towers and four gates. To the north, the acropolis was fortified by a counter wall and towers from the beginning of the fourth century BC.\nAt the entrance to the acropolis is the so-called Tower of Pollux, constructed in the sixteenth century to deter the Barbary pirates, atop the remains of an ancient tower or lighthouse.\nThe Hippodamian urban plan dates to the fourth century BC (i.e. to the period of Punic rule) and is divided in quarters by two main streets (9 metres wide), which cross at right angles (the north\u2013south road is 425 metres long, the east\u2013west is 338 metres long). Every 32 metres they are intersected by other minor roads (5 metres wide).\nOn the crest of the acropolis are the remains of numerous Doric temples.\nMultiple altars and little sanctuaries may be attributed to the first years of the colony, which were replaced around fifty years later by large, more permanent temples. The first of these is the so-called \"Megaron\" near Temples B &amp; C. In front of Temple O there is a Punic sacrificial area from after the conquest of 409\u00a0BC, consisting of rooms built of dry masonry within which vases containing ashes were deposited along with amphorae of the Carthaginian \u201ctorpedo\u201d type.\nTemple O and Temple A of which little remains except for the rocky basement and the altar which was constructed between 490 and 460\u00a0BC. They had nearly identical structures, similar to that of Temple E on the East Hill. The peristyle was 16.2 x 40.2 m with 6 x 14 columns (6.23 metres high). Inside there was a pronaos in antis, a naos with an adyton and an opisthodomos in antis, separate from the naos. The naos was a step higher than the pronaos and the adyton was a step higher again. In the wall between the pronaos and the naos in Temple A two spiral staircases led to the gallery (or floor) above. The pronaos of Temple A has a mosaic pavement showing symbolic figures of the Phoenician goddess Tanit, a caduceus, the Sun, a crown, and a bull's head, which testifies to the reuse of the space as a religious or domestic area in the Punic period. Temple O was dedicated to Poseidon or perhaps Athena; Temple A to the Dioscuri or perhaps to Apollo.\n34 metres east of Temple A are the remains of the monumental entrance to the area, which took the form of a propylaea with a floorplan in the shape of a T, made up of a 13 x 5.6 metre rectangle with a peristyle of 5 x 12 columns and another rectangle of 6.78 x 7.25 metres.\nAcross the east\u2013west street there is a second sacred area, north of the preceding. There, to the south of Temple C is a Shrine 17.65 metres long and 5.5 metres wide which dates from 580 to 570\u00a0BC and has the archaic form of the \"Megaron\", perhaps intended to hold votive offerings. Lacking a pronaos, the entrance at the eastern end passed directly into the naos (at the centre of which there are two bases for the wooden columns which held up the roof). At the back there was a square adyton, to which a third space was added in a later period. The Shrine was perhaps dedicated to Demeter Thesmophoros.\nTo the right of the shrine is Temple B from the Hellenistic period, which is small (8.4 x 4.6 metres) and in bad condition. It is made up of a prostyle portico of four columns which is reached by a stairway with nine steps, followed by a pronaos and naos. In 1824 clear traces of polychrome stucco were still visible. Probably constructed around 250\u00a0BC, a short time before Selinus was abandoned for good, it represents the only religious building that attests to the modest revival of the city after its destruction in 409. Its purpose remains obscure; in the past it was believed to be the Heroon of Empedocles, benefactor of the Selinuntine marshes, but this theory is no longer sustainable, given the building's date. Today it is thought more likely to be a strongly Hellenised Punic cult, perhaps to Demeter or Asclepius-Eshmun.\nTemple C is the oldest in this area, dating from 550\u00a0BC. In 1925-7 the fourteen of the north side's seventeen columns were re-erected, along with part of the entablature. It had a peristyle (24 x 63.7 metres) of 6 x 17 columns (8.62 metres high). The entrance is reached by eight steps and consists of a portico with a second row of columns and then the pronaos. Behind it is the naos and adyton in a single long narrow structure (an archaic characteristic). It has basically the same floor plan as Temple F on the East Hill. Multiple elements show a certain experimentation and divergence from the pattern of the Doric temple which later became the standard: the columns are squat and massive (some are even made from a single stone), lack \"entasis\", show variation in the number of flutes, the width of the intercolumniation varies, the corner columns have a larger diameter than the others, etc. Finds in the temple include: some fragments of red, brown, and purple polychrome terracotta from the cornice decoration, a gigantic clay gorgon head from the pediment, three metopes representing Perseus slaying the Gorgon, Heracles with the Cercopes, and a frontal view of the quadriga of Apollo, all of which are in the Museo Archeologico di Palermo. Temple C probably functioned as an archive, since hundreds of seals have been found here and was dedicated to Apollo, according to epigraphic evidence, or perhaps Heracles. British architects Samuel Angell and William Harris excavated at Selinus in the course of their tour of Sicily, and came upon the sculptured metopes from the Archaic temple of \u201cTemple C.\u201d Although local Bourbon officials tried to stop them, they continued their work, and attempted to export their finds to England, destined for the British Museum. Now in the echoes of the activities of Lord Elgin in Athens, Angell and Harris's shipments were diverted to Palermo by force of the Bourbon authorities and are now kept in the Palermo archeological museum.\nEast of Temple C is its rectangular grand altar (20.4 metres long x 8 metres wide) of which the foundations and some steps remain. After that there is the area of the Hellenistic agora. A little further there are the remains of houses and the terrace is bordered by a Doric portico (57 metres long and 2.8 metres deep) which overlooks part of the wall supporting the acropolis.\nNext is Temple D which is dated to 540\u00a0BC. The west face fronts directly onto the north\u2013south street. The peristyle is 24 metres \u00d7 56 metres on a 6 \u00d7 13 column pattern (each 7.51 metres high). There is a pronaos in antis, an elongated naos, ending in an adyton. It is more standardized than Temple C (The columns are slightly inclined, more slender, and have \"entasis\", the portico is supported by a distyle pronaos in antis), but it retains some archaic features, such as variation in the length of the intercolumniation and the diameter of the columns, as well as in the number of flutes per column. As with Temple C, there are many circular and square cavities in the pavement of the peristyle and of the naos, whose function is unknown. Temple D was dedicated to Athena according to epigraphic evidence or perhaps to Aphrodite. The large external altar is not oriented to the temple's axis, but placed obliquely near the southwest corner, which suggested that an earlier temple occupied the same site on a different axis.\nEast of Temple D is a small altar in front of the basement of an archaic shrine: Temple Y, also known as the Temple of the Small Metopes. The recovered metopes have a height of 84 centimetres and can be dated to 570\u00a0BC. They depict a crouching Sphinx in profile, the Delphic triad (Leto, Apollo, Artemis) in rigid frontal view, and the Rape of Europa. Another two metopes can be dated to around 560\u00a0BC and were recycled in the construction of Hermocrates\u2019 wall. They show the quadriga of Demeter and Kore (or Helios and Selene? Apollo?) and an Eleusinian ceremony with three women holding ears of grain (Demeter, Kore, and Hecate? The Moirai?). They are kept at the Antonino Salinas Regional Archeological Museum.\nBetween Temples C and D are the ruins of a Byzantine village of the fifth century AD, built with recycled stone. The fact that some of the houses were crushed by the collapse of the columns of Temple C shows that the earthquake which caused the collapse of the Selinuntine temples occurred in the Medieval period.\nTo the north, the acropolis holds two quarters of the city (one west and the other east of the main north-south street), rebuilt by Hermocrates after 409\u00a0BC. The houses are modest, built with recycled material. Some of them contain incised crosses, a sign that they were later adapted as Christian buildings or inhabited by Christians.\nFurther north, before the main area of habitation, there are the grandiose fortifications for the defense of the acropolis. They are paralleled by a long gallery (originally covered) with numerous vaulted passages, followed by a deep defensive ditch crossed by a bridge, with three semicircular towers at west, north, and east. Around the outside of the north tower (which had a weapons\u2019 store at its base) are the entrances to the east\u2013west trench, with passages in both the walls. Only a small part of the fortifications belong to the old city \u2013 they are mostly from Hermocrates\u2019 reconstruction and successive repairs in the fourth and third centuries. The fact that architectural elements were recycled into it demonstrates that some of the temples were already abandoned in 409\u00a0BC.\nManuzza Hill.\nThe main residential part of the city is on the Manuzza Hill, the modern road traces the border of an area in the form of a massive trapezoid. The whole area was designed on a Hippodamian plan (reconstructed by means of aerial photography), on a slightly different orientation from the acropolis, with elongated insulae of 190 x 32 metres oriented north\u2013south, which were originally surrounded by a defensive wall. There have not been systematic excavations in the area, but there have been some sondages, which have confirmed that the area was inhabited from the foundation of Selinus (seventh century BC) and therefore was not a later expansion of the city.\nAfter the destruction of Selinus in 409, this area of the city was not reinhabited. The refugees returned by Hermocrates were settled only on the acropolis, which was more defensible.\nIn 1985 a tufa structure was discovered on the hill, probably a public building of the fifth century BC.\nFurther north, beyond the housing, are two necropoleis: Manuzza and the older (seventh and sixth century) one in Galera-Bagliazzo.\nAgora.\nStarting in 2020, the outline of the largest agora of the ancient world with an area of 33000 m2, more than twice that of Rome's Piazza del Popolo, was unearthed. The Agora, dating from the 6th century BC, was at the centre of the city, surrounded by public buildings and residential quarters. Previous excavations had revealed only one archaeological feature on the agora: an empty tomb in the middle, perhaps that of the founder.\nThe East Hill.\nThere are three temples on the East Hill, which although all in the same area on the same north\u2013south axis seem not to have belonged to a single sacred compound (\"Temenos\"), since there is a wall separating Temple E from Temple F. This sacred complex has strong parallels with the western slopes of the acropolis of Megara, Selinus\u2019 mothercity, which are useful (perhaps indispensable) for the correct attribution of the cults of the three temples.\nTemple E the most recent of the three, dates to 460\u2013450\u00a0BC and has a very similar plan to that of Temples A and O on the acropolis. Its current appearance is the result of anastylosis (reconstruction using the original material) carried out \u2013 controversially \u2013 between 1956 and 1959. The peristyle is 25.33 x 67.82 metres with a 6 x 15 column pattern (each 10.19 metres high) with numerous traces of the stucco which originally covered it remaining. It is a temple characterised by multiple staircases creating a system of successive levels: ten steps lead to the entrance on the eastern side, after the pronaos in antis another six steps lead into the naos and finally another six steps lead into the adyton at the rear of the naos. Behind the adyton, separated from it by a wall, was the opisthodomos in antis. A Doric frieze at the top of the walls of the naos consisted of metopes depicting people, with the heads and naked parts of the women made of Parian marble and the rest from local stone.\nFour metopes are preserved: Heracles killing the Amazon Antiope, the marriage of Hera and Zeus, Actaeon being torn apart by Artemis\u2019 hunting dogs, Athena killing the giant Enceladus, and another more fragmentary one perhaps depicting Apollo and Daphne. All of them are kept in the Museo Archeologico di Palermo. Recent sondages performed inside the temple and under Temple E have revealed that it was preceded by two other sacred buildings, one of which was destroyed in 510\u00a0BC. Temple E was dedicated to Hera as shown by the inscription on a votive stela but some scholars deduce that it must have been dedicated to Aphrodite on the basis of structural parallels.\nTemple F, the oldest and smallest of the three, was built between 550 and 540\u00a0BC on the model of Temple C. Of the temples it has been the most severely spoliated. Its peristyle was 24.43 x 61.83 metres on a 6 x 14 column pattern (each 9.11 metres high), with stone screens (4.7 metres high) in the space between the columns, with false doors painted in with pilasters and architraves \u2013 the actual entrance was at the east end. It is not clear what the purpose of these screens, which are unique among Greek temples, was. Some think they were intended to protect votive gifts or to prevent particular rites (Dionysian Mysteries?) being seen by the uninitiated. Inside, there is a portico containing a second row of columns, a pronaos, a naos, and an adyton in single long, narrow structure (an archaic characteristic).\nOn the east side, two late archaic metopes (dated to 500\u00a0BC) were found in excavations in 1823, which depict Athena and Dionysus in the process of killing two giants. Today they are kept in the Regional Archeological Museum Antonio Salinas. Scholars have suggested that Temple F was dedicated to either Athena or Dionysus.\nTemple G was the largest in Selinus (113.34 metres long, 54.05 metres wide and about 30 metres high) and was among the largest in the Greek world. This building, although under construction from 530 to 409\u00a0BC (the long period of construction is demonstrated by the variation of style: the east side is archaic, while the west side is classical), remained incomplete, as shown by the absence of fluting on some of the columns and by the existence of column drums of the same dimensions ten kilometres away at Cave di Cusa, still in the process of extraction (see below).\nIn the massive pile of ruins it is possible to make out a peristyle of 8 x 17 columns (16.27 metres high and 3.41 metres in diameter), only one of which remains standing since it was re-erected in 1832, known in Sicilian as \u201clu fusu di la vecchia\u201d (the old woman's spindle). The interior consisted of a prostyle pronaos with four columns, with two deep antae walls ending in pilasters and three doors leading to the large naos. The naos was very large and divided into three aisles \u2013 the middle one was probably open to the air (\"hypaethros\"). There were two rows of ten slender columns which supported a second row of columns (the gallery) and two lateral staircases which led to the roofspace. At the back of the central aisle was an adyton, separated from the walls of the naos and entirely contained within it. Inside the adyton, the torso of a wounded or dying giant was found as well as the very important inscription known as the \u201cGreat Table of Selinus\u201d (see below). At the rear there was an opisthodomos in antis, which could not be accessed from the naos. Of particular interest among the ruins are some finished columns showing traces of coloured stucco and blocks of the entablature which have horseshoe-shaped grooves on the sides. Ropes were run through these grooves and used to lift them into place. Temple G probably functioned as the treasury of the city and epigraphic evidence suggests that it was dedicated to Apollo, though recent studies have suggested that it be attributed to Zeus.\nAt the foot of the hill by the mouth of the River Cottone was the East Port, which was more than 600 metres wide on the inside and was probably equipped with a mole or breakwater to protect the acropolis. It underwent changes in the fourth and third centuries: it was enlarged and flanked by piers (oriented north\u2013south) and by storage areas. Of the two ports of Selinus, which are both now silted up, the West Port on the River Selinus-Modione was the main one.\nThe extramural quarters, dedicated to trade, commerce and port activities was arranged on massive terraces on the hillslopes\nNorth of the modern village of Marinella, is the Buffa necropolis\nGaggera Hill with the sanctuary of the Malophoros.\nA path runs from the acropolis, over the river Modione to the west hill.\nOn Gaggera Hill there are the remains of the very ancient Selinuntine sanctuary to the goddess of fertility, Demeter Malophoros, excavated continuously between 1874 and 1915. The complex, in varying states of preservation, was built in the sixth century BC on the slope of the hill and probably served as a station for funerary processions, before they proceeded to the Manicalunga necropolis.\nInitially, the place was definitely free of buildings and provided an open area for cult practices at the altar. Later, with the erection of the temple and of the high enclosure wall (\"temenos\") it was transformed into a sanctuary.\nThis sanctuary consisted of a rectangular enclosure (60 x 50 metres), which was entered on the east side through a rectangular propylaea in antis (built in the fifth century BC) fronted by a short staircase and a circular structure. Outside of the enclosure, the propylaea is flanked by the remains of a long portico (\"stoa\") with seats for the pilgrims, who left evidence of themselves in the form of various altars and votives. Inside the enclosure, there was the large altar (16.3 metres long x 3.15 metres wide) in the centre, on top of a pile of ashes from the bones and other parts of the sacrifices. It had an extension to the southwest, while the remains of an earlier archaic altar are visible near the northwest extremity and there is a square pit on the temple side of the altar. Between the altar and the temple there is a canal carved in the rock which, comes from the north, through the whole area, carrying water to the sanctuary from a nearby spring. Just past the canal is the Temple of Demeter itself in the form of a \"megaron\" (20.4 x 9.52 metres), lacking a crepidoma or columns, but equipped with a pronaos, naos and adyton with a niche in the back. A rectangular service room is attached to the north side of the pronaos. The megaron had an earlier phase recognisable only at the foundation level. South of the temple there is a square structure and a rectangular structure of unclear function. North of the temple, another structure from a later period with two rooms opening onto the inside and outside of the temenos forms a secondary entrance to the enclosure. The south wall of the enclosure was periodically reinforced to fight the subsidence of the hillside.\nSouth of the propylaea, attached to the wall of the enclosure, was another enclosure dedicated to Hecate. This took the form of a square, with the shrine in the east corner, near an entrance, while in the south corner there was a small square paved space of uncertain purpose.\nFifteen metres north there was another square enclosure (17 x 17 metres) dedicated to Zeus Meilichios (Honey-sweet Zeus) and Pasikrateia (Persephone), much of which remains, but it is not easy to understand the various structures, which were built at the end of the fourth century BC. It consists of an enclosure wall surrounded by various types of column on two sides (part of a Hellenistic portico), a small prostyle temple in antis (5.22 x 3.02\u00a0m) at the back of the enclosure with monolithic Doric columns, but an ionic entablature, and two others in the centre of the enclosure. Outside, to the west, the pious dedicated many small steles topped by images of the divine pair (two faces, one male and one female) made with shallow incisions. Along with them were found ashes and remains of offerings, evidence of convergence between the Greek cult of the Chthonic gods and Punic religion.\nA very large number of finds came from the Sanctuary of the Malophoros (all kept at the Museum in Palermo): carved reliefs of mythological scenes, around 12,000 votive figurines in terracotta from the seventh to fifth centuries BC; large bust-shaped censers depicting Demeter and perhaps Tanit, a great quantity of Corinthian pottery (late proto-Corinthian and early Corinthian), a bass-relief depicting the Rape of Persephone by Hades found at the entrance to the enclosure. Christian remains, especially lamps with the monogram XP, prove the presence of a Christian religious community in the area of the sanctuary between the third and fifth centuries AD.\nA little further up the slopes of Gaggera Hill is the spring from which the Sanctuary of the Malophoros gets its water. Fifty metres downstream of it is a building once believed to be a temple (the so-called \u201cTemple M\u201d), which is actually a monumental fountain. It is rectangular in shape (26.8 metres long x 10.85 metres wide x 8 metres high), constructed of squared blocks and contained a cistern, a closed basin protected by a portico with columns and an access staircase of four steps with a large paved area in front of it. The building is in the doric style and is dated to the middle of the sixth century mainly by the architectural terracotta discovered there. The fragments of metopes with the Amazonomachy, although found nearby, do not belong to the building, which had small, smooth metopes.\nAnother megaron, a few hundred metres to the northeast of the Sanctuary of the Malophoros, has been excavated recently.\nThe Necropoleis.\nAround Selinus some areas used as necropoleis can be identified.\nCave di Cusa.\nCave di Cusa (The Quarries of Cusa) are made up of banks of limestone near Campobello di Mazara, thirteen kilometres from Selinus. They were the stone quarries from which the material for the buildings of Selinus came. The most notable element of the quarries is the sudden interruption of operations caused by the attack on the city in 409\u00a0BC. The sudden departure of the quarrymen, stonemasons and other workers means that today it is possible not just to reconstruct, but to see all the various stages of the quarrying process from the first deep circular cuts to the finished drums waiting to be transported. Along with the column drums, there are also some capitals and also square incisions for quarrying square blocks, all intended for the temples of Selinus. Of the drums that had already been extracted, some were found ready for transport and others, already on the way to Selinus were abandoned on the road. Some gigantic columns, definitely intended for Temple G, are found in the area west of Cave di Cusa, also in the state in which they were originally abandoned.\nCoinage.\nThe coins of Selinus are numerous and various. The earliest, as already mentioned, bear merely the figure of a parsley-leaf on the obverse. Those of somewhat later date represent a figure sacrificing on an altar, which is consecrated to Aesculapius, as indicated by a cock that stands below it. The subject of this type evidently refers to a story related by Diogenes La\u00ebrtius that the Selinuntines were afflicted with a pestilence from the marshy character of the lands adjoining the neighboring river, but that this was cured by works of drainage, suggested by Empedocles. A figure standing on some coins is the river-god Selinus, who was thus made conducive to the salubrity of the city.\nThe Seal of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine is based on a coin of Selinus struck in 466 BC which was designed by the sculptor and medallist Allan Gairdner Wyon FRBS RMS (1882\u20131962). It shows two Greek gods associated with health \u2013 Apollo, the god of prophecy, music and medicine, and his sister Artemis, goddess of hunting and chastity, and comforter of women in childbirth \u2013 in a horse-drawn chariot. Artemis is driving while her brother the great archer is shooting arrows. The fruitful date palm was added to indicate the tropical activities of the School but also has a close connection with Apollo and Artemis: when their mother Leto gave birth to them on the island of Delos, miraculously a palm sprang up to give her shade in childbirth. Asclepius, Apollo's son, was the god of ancient Greek medicine, and was frequently shown holding a staff entwined with a snake. Snakes were used in this healing cult to lick the affected part of the patient. Significantly Asclepius' daughters were Hygeia (the goddess of health) and Panacea (the healer of all ailments). Asclepius' staff with a snake coiled round it (known as a symbol of the medical professions) was placed at the base of the seal to emphasise the medical interests of the School. The Seal was redesigned in 1990 by Russell Sewell Design Associates, and is retained today within the current School logo.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44923", "revid": "25859633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44923", "title": "Democrasy", "text": ""}
{"id": "44925", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44925", "title": "Piemonte", "text": ""}
{"id": "44928", "revid": "42245696", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44928", "title": "Mahogany", "text": "Timber of tropical hardwood species in the genus Swietenia\nMahogany is a straight-grained, reddish-brown timber of three tropical hardwood species of the genus \"Swietenia\", indigenous to the Americas and part of the pantropical chinaberry family, Meliaceae. Mahogany is used commercially for a wide variety of goods, due to its coloring and durable nature. It is naturally found within the Americas, but has also been imported to plantations across Asia and Oceania. The mahogany trade is believed to have started as early as the 16th century and flourished throughout the 17th and 18th centuries. In some countries, mahogany is classified as an invasive species.\nMahogany is wood from any of three tree species: Honduran or big-leaf mahogany (\"Swietenia macrophylla\"), West Indian or Cuban mahogany (\"Swietenia mahagoni\"), and \"Swietenia humilis\". Honduran mahogany is the most widespread and the only genuine mahogany species commercially grown today. Mahogany is a valuable lumber used for paneling, furniture, boats, musical instruments, and other items. The United States is the leading importer of mahogany, while Peru is the largest exporter. Mahogany is the national tree of the Dominican Republic and Belize.\n\"Swietenia\" species have been introduced in various countries outside the Americas since the 1800s, with many plantings becoming naturalized forests. All species of \"Swietenia\" are now listed by CITES and protected due to concerns over illegal logging and mismanagement. Mahogany species can crossbreed when they grow in proximity, and the hybrid between \"S. mahagoni\" and \"S. macrophylla\" is widely planted for timber.\nThe history of the American mahogany trade dates back to the 17th century when the wood was first noticed by Europeans during the Spanish colonization of the Americas. Mahogany became more popular in the 18th century when the British Parliament removed import duties on timber from British possessions, leading to increased exports to Europe and North America. Throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, mahogany from various regions was imported into Europe and North America, with Britain being the largest consumer.\nBy the late 19th century, African mahogany began to dominate the market, and by the early 20th century, the supply of American mahogany became scarcer. In response to concerns about the sustainability of mahogany, several species have been placed on CITES Appendices to regulate the trade.\nMahogany is known for its straight, fine grain and durability, making it a popular choice for fine furniture, boat construction, and musical instruments. However, the over-harvesting of mahogany and environmental concerns have led to a decrease in its use.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of \"mahogany\" is uncertain and a subject of debate. The term first appeared in John Ogilby's \"America\" (1671), referring to a \"curious and rich wood\" from Jamaica. Initial mentions of the mahogany tree (as opposed to wood) date to 1731, with its first detailed description in 1743, attributed to \"Swietenia mahagoni\" by Kemp Malone in 1940. Malone suggested that \"mahogany\" originated as a generic term for 'wood' in a native Bahamian language. F. Bruce Lamb disagreed, pointing out that the Arawak language's word for wood is \"caoba\". Lamb identified a West African origin for the word in the Yoruba \"oganwo\", collectively \"m'oganwo\" (meaning \"one which is the tallest or most high\") used for the \"Khaya\" genus of trees, whose timber is today called African mahogany. Lamb proposes that Yoruba and Igbo people brought to Jamaica as slaves identified the local trees of the \"Swietenia\" genus as \"m'oganwo\", which developed into the Portuguese term \"mogano\", which first appeared in print as the name of a river in 1661, before finally developing into the English \"mahogany\" in Jamaica between 1655 and 1670.\nMalone criticized this etymology, arguing that the proposed metamorphosis from the Yoruba \"m'oganwo\" to the Portuguese \"mogano\" to the English \"mahogany\" was a logical and linguistic stretch relying on the conversion of the singular \"oganwo\" to the collective \"m'oganwo\", which Malone finds unlikely considering the tree's generally solitary nature. He also argues that Lamb's earliest identified use of the Portuguese \"mog(a)no\", which is for a river that Lamb asserts must have been so named for the mahogany \"oganwo\" trees on its banks, could just as well have been named for any tall tree, since \"oganwo\" only means \"tall\". Lamb, in turn, criticized Malone's methodology and perceived bias, and maintained that there is no evidence for \"mahogany\" as a generic word.\nDescription.\nMahogany is a commercially important lumber prized for its beauty, durability, and color, and used for paneling and to make furniture, boats, musical instruments and other items. The leading importer of mahogany is the United States, followed by Britain; while the largest exporter today is Peru, which surpassed Brazil after that country banned mahogany exports in 2001. It is estimated that some 80 or 90 percent of Peruvian mahogany exported to the United States is illegally harvested, with the economic cost of illegal logging in Peru placed conservatively at $40\u201370 million USD annually. It was estimated that in 2000, some 57,000 mahogany trees were harvested to supply the U.S. furniture trade alone.\nMahogany is the national tree of the Dominican Republic and Belize. A mahogany tree with two woodcutters bearing an axe and a paddle also appears on the Belizean national coat of arms, under the national motto, , Latin for \"under the shade I flourish.\"\nThe specific density of mahogany is 0.55. Mahogany, African: (500\u2013850\u00a0kg/m3); Mahogany, Cuban: 660\u00a0kg/m3; Mahogany, Honduras: 650\u00a0kg/m3; Mahogany, Spanish: 850\u00a0kg/m3.\nSpecies.\nThe three species are:\nOther species.\nWhile only the three \"Swietenia\" species are classified officially as \"genuine mahogany\", the Federal Trade Commission allows certain species of trees other than \"Swietenia\" to be sold as \"mahoganies\" in the U.S. timber trade. This is due to the long-standing usage of the terms. But it must be prefixed with another descriptor, and they are not allowed to be sold under the name \"mahogany\" alone.\nTwo names are allowed. The first is \"African mahogany\" for the five species of the genus \"Khaya\" (which also belong to the mahogany family), namely: \"K.\u00a0anthotheca\", \"K.\u00a0grandifoliola\", \"K.\u00a0ivorensis\", \"K.\u00a0madagascariensis\", and \"K.\u00a0senegalensis\". All of them are native to Africa and Madagascar. The second is the name \"Philippine mahogany\" for seven species (all native to the Philippines) in the genus \"Shorea\" and \"Parashorea\" (which are unrelated dipterocarps, more commonly known as \"lauan\" or \"meranti\"), namely:\"S.\u00a0polysperma\", \"S.\u00a0negrosensis\", \"S.\u00a0contorta\", \"S.\u00a0ovata\", \"S.\u00a0almon\", \"S.\u00a0palosapis\", and \"P.\u00a0malaanonan.\" The timber from both \"African mahoganies\" and \"Philippine mahoganies\" as defined by the FTC, are very close in terms of appearance and properties to true mahoganies. No other species are allowed to be sold in the United States under the name \"mahogany\", aside from the three \"Swietenia\" species and the aforementioned exceptions.\nWithin the mahogany family, other closely related members of other genera which also resemble mahoganies in terms of appearance and properties are also sometimes known as \"mahoganies\", though they can not be sold as such in the US timber trade. This includes some members of the genus \"Toona\", namely: \"Philippine mahogany\" (\"Toona calantas\", different from the above usage); \"Indian mahogany\" (\"Toona ciliata\"); \"Chinese mahogany\" (\"Toona sinensis\"); and Indonesian mahogany (\"Toona sureni\");. However members of this genus are more usually known as \"toons\" or \"red cedars.\" They have similar properties to true mahoganies but differ in appearance. Other species in the same family sometimes known as \"mahoganies\" include \"Indian mahogany\" (\"Chukrasia velutina\", different from \"T. ciliata\"); \"sipo mahogany\" (\"Entandrophragma utile\"); \"sapele mahogany\" (\"Entandrophragma cylindricum\"); \"royal mahogany\" (\"Carapa guianensis\"); \"white mahogany\" (\"Turraeanthus africanus\"); \"New Zealand mahogany\" (\"Dysoxylum spectabile\"); \"pink mahogany\" (\"Guarea\" spp.); and \"demerara mahogany\" (\"Carapa guianensis\").\nMultiple other unrelated species are also known as \"mahogany\". These include the aforementioned \"Shorea\" species which does actually come close to true mahogany in terms of appearance and properties. But it also includes other species which do not resemble true mahogany at all and have very different wood properties, like the \"Santos mahogany\" (\"Myroxylon balsamum\"), \"mountain mahogany\" (\"Cercocarpus\" spp.), and \"swamp mahogany\" (\"Eucalyptus robusta\").\nDistribution.\nThe natural distribution of these species within the Americas is geographically distinct. \"S.\u00a0mahagoni\" grows on the West Indian islands as far north as the Bahamas, the Florida Keys and parts of Florida; \"S.\u00a0humilis\" grows in the dry regions of the Pacific coast of Central America from south-western Mexico to Costa Rica; \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" grows in Central America from Yucatan southwards and into South America, extending as far as Peru, Bolivia and extreme western Brazil. In the 20th century various botanists attempted to further define \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" in South America as a new species, such as \"S.\u00a0candollei\" Pittier and \"S.\u00a0tessmannii\" Harms., but many authorities consider these spurious. According to Record and Hess, all of the mahogany of continental North and South America can be considered as one botanical species, \"Swietenia macrophylla\" King.\nBoth major species of \"Swietenia\" were introduced in several countries outside of the Americas during the 1800s and early 1900s using seeds from South America and the Caribbean. Many of these plantings became naturalized forests over time.\nIndia had both \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" and \"S.\u00a0mahagoni\" introduced in 1865 using seeds from West Indies. Both eventually became naturalized forests. Bangladesh had Honduran \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" introduced in 1872 and as with India it became naturalized in some areas. \"S.\u00a0mahagoni\" and \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" were introduced in Indonesia in 1870 using seeds from India. \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" was included in plantation forests planted in Indonesia from the 1920s to the 1940s. Philippines had \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" introduced in 1907 and in 1913 as well as \"S.\u00a0mahagoni\" in 1911, 1913, 1914, 1920 and 1922. Planting resumed in the late 1980s. It was planted with many other exotic tree species for the purpose of reforestation. \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" was planted in Sri Lanka in 1897 but it was left unmanaged until the 1950s when reforestation efforts initiated by the Sri Lankan government led to plantations being consciously developed. In the early 1900s \"S.\u00a0mahagoni\" was planted on the islands of O'ahu and Maui in Hawaii but was neglected and became naturalized forests. Additionally, \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" was planted in 1922 on O'ahu and is now naturalized. Fiji had \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" introduced originally in 1911 as an ornamental species using seeds from Honduras and Belize. Fiji has become a major producer of mahogany in the 21st Century due to a robust plantation program spanning over 50 years. Harvesting began in 2003.\nHistory.\nThe name \"mahogany\" was initially associated only with those islands in the West Indies under British control (French colonists used the term \"acajou\", while in the Spanish territories it was called \"caoba\"). The origin of the name is uncertain, but it could be a corruption of 'm'oganwo', the name used by the Yoruba and Ibo people of West Africa to describe trees of the genus \"Khaya\", which is closely related to \"Swietenia\". When transported to Jamaica as slaves, they gave the same name to the similar trees they saw there. Though this interpretation has been disputed, no one has suggested a more plausible origin. The indigenous Arawak name for the tree is not known. In 1671 the word mahogany appeared in print for the first time, in John Ogilby's \"America\". Among botanists and naturalists, however, the tree was considered a type of cedar, and in 1759 was classified by Carl Linnaeus (1707\u20131778) as \"Cedrela mahagoni\". The following year it was assigned to a new genus by Nicholas Joseph Jacquin (1727\u20131817), and named \"Swietenia mahagoni\".\nUntil the 19th century all of the mahogany was regarded as one species, although varying in quality and character according to soil and climate. In 1836 the German botanist Joseph Gerhard Zuccarini (1797\u20131848) identified a second species while working on specimens collected on the Pacific coast of Mexico, and named it \"Swietenia humilis\". In 1886 a third species, \"Swietenia macrophylla\", was named by Sir George King (1840\u20131909) after studying specimens of Honduras mahogany planted in the Botanic Gardens in Calcutta, India.\nToday, all species of \"Swietenia\" grown in their native locations are listed by CITES, and are therefore protected. After \"S.\u00a0mahogani\" and \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\" were added to CITES appendixes in 1992 and 1995 respectively international conservation programs began in earnest aided by a 1993 World Bank report entitled \"Tropical Hardwood Marketing Strategies for Southeast Asia\". Efforts to repopulate mahogany largely failed in its native locations due to attacks from the shoot borer \"Hypsipyla grandella\" and similarly failed in Africa due to the attacks by the equivalent \"Hypsipyla robusta\". After so many years of mismanagement and illegal logging, \"Swietenia\" also suffered from genetic loss thus mutating and weakening the seeds. Additionally erosion in its native locations meant seeds could no longer even be planted. However, both species grew well in Asia and the Asia\u2013Pacific due to the absence of these shoot borers and absence of other limitations. Plantation management progressed throughout the 1990s and 2000s in Asia and the South Pacific. Global supply of genuine mahogany has been increasing from these plantations, notably Fiji, and Philippines. For \"Swietenia macrophylla\", the trees in these plantations are still relatively young compared to the trees being harvested from old growth forests in South America. Thus, the illegal trade of bigleaf mahogany continues apace.\nHistory of American mahogany trade.\nIn the 17th century, the buccaneer Alexandre Exquemelin recorded the use of mahogany or Caoba (Cedrela being the Spanish name) on Hispaniola for making canoes: \"The Indians make these canoes without the use of any iron instruments, by only burning the trees at the bottom near the root, and afterwards governing the fire with such industry that nothing is burnt more than what they would have...\"\nThe wood first came to the notice of Europeans with the beginning of Spanish colonisation in the Americas. A cross in the Cathedral at Santo Domingo, bearing the date 1514, is said to be mahogany, and Philip II of Spain apparently used the wood for the interior joinery of the palace El Escorial, begun in 1584. However, \"caoba\", as the Taino Natives called the wood, was principally reserved for shipbuilding, and it was declared a royal monopoly at Havana in 1622. Hence very little of the mahogany growing in Spanish controlled territory found its way to Europe.\nAfter the French established a colony in Saint Domingue (now Haiti), some mahogany from that island probably found its way to France, where joiners in the port cities of Saint-Malo, Nantes, La Rochelle and Bordeaux used the wood to a limited extent from about 1700. On the English-controlled islands, especially Jamaica and the Bahamas, mahogany was abundant but not exported in any quantity before 1700.\n18th century.\nWhile the trade in mahogany from the Spanish and French territories in America remained moribund for most of the 18th century, this was not true for those islands under British control. The British Parliament passed an act of Parliament, the Naval Stores Act 1721 (8 Geo. 1. c. 12), which removed all import duties from timber imported into Britain from British possessions in the Americas. This immediately stimulated the trade in West Indian timbers including, most importantly, mahogany. Importations of mahogany into England (and excluding those to Scotland, which were recorded separately) reached 525 tons per annum by 1740, 3,688 tons by 1750, and more than 30,000 tons in 1788, the peak year of the 18th century trade.\nAt the same time, the Naval Stores Act 1721 had the effect of substantially increasing exports of mahogany from the West Indies to the British colonies in North America. Although initially regarded as a joinery wood, mahogany rapidly became the timber of choice for makers of high quality furniture in both the British Isles and the 13 colonies of North America.\nUntil the 1760s over 90 per cent of the mahogany imported into Britain came from Jamaica. Some of this was re-exported to continental Europe, but most was used by British furniture makers. Quantities of Jamaican mahogany also went to the North American colonies, but most of the wood used in American furniture came from the Bahamas. This was sometimes called Providence wood, after the main port of the islands, but more often \"madera\" or \"madeira\", which was the West Indian name for mahogany.\nIn addition to Jamaica and Bahamas, all the British controlled islands exported some mahogany at various times, but the quantities were not large. The most significant third source was Black River and adjacent areas on the Mosquito Coast (now Republic of Honduras), from where quantities of mahogany were shipped from the 1740s onwards. This mahogany was known as 'Rattan mahogany', after the island of Ruatan, which was the main offshore entrepot for the British settlers in the area.\nAt the end of the Seven Years' War (1756\u201363), the mahogany trade began to change significantly. During the occupation of Havana by British forces between August 1762 and July 1763, quantities of Cuban or Havanna mahogany were sent to Britain, and after the city was restored to Spain in 1763, Cuba continued to export small quantities, mostly to ports on the north coast of Jamaica, from where it went to Britain. However, this mahogany was regarded as inferior to the Jamaican variety, and the trade remained sporadic until the 19th century.\nAnother variety new to the market was Hispaniola mahogany, also called 'Spanish' and 'St Domingo' mahogany. This was the result of the Free Port Act 1766 (6 Geo. 3. c. 49), which opened Kingston and other designated Jamaican ports to foreign vessels for the first time. The object was primarily to encourage importations of cotton from French plantations in Saint Domingue, but quantities of high quality mahogany were also shipped. These were then forwarded to Britain, where they entered the market in the late 1760s.\nIn terms of quantity, the most significant new addition to the mahogany trade was Honduras mahogany, also called 'baywood', after the Bay of Honduras. British settlers had been active in southern Yucatan since the beginning of the 18th century, despite the opposition of the Spanish, who claimed sovereignty over all of Central America.\nTheir main occupation was cutting logwood, a dyewood in high demand in Europe. The center of their activity and the primary point of export was Belize. Under Article XVII of the Treaty of Paris (1763), British cutters were for the first time given the right to cut logwood in Yucatan unmolested, within agreed limits. Such was the enthusiasm of the cutters that within a few years the European market was glutted, and the price of logwood collapsed.\nHowever, the price of mahogany was still high after the war, and so the cutters turned to cutting mahogany. The first Honduras mahogany arrived in Kingston, Jamaica, in November 1763, and the first shipments arrived in Britain the following year.\nBy the 1790s most of the viable stocks of mahogany in Jamaica had been cut, and the market was divided between two principal sources or types of mahogany. Honduras mahogany was relatively cheap, plentiful, but rarely of the best quality. Hispaniola (also called Spanish or Santo Domingo) mahogany was the wood of choice for high quality work.\nData are lacking, but it is likely that the newly independent United States now received a good proportion of its mahogany from Cuba. In the last quarter of the 18th century France began to use mahogany more widely; they had ample supplies of high quality wood from Saint Domingue. The rest of Europe, where the wood was increasingly fashionable, obtained most of their wood from Britain.\nRecent history.\nThe French Revolution of 1789 and the wars that followed radically changed the mahogany trade, primarily due to the progressive collapse of the French and Spanish colonial empires, which allowed British traders into areas previously closed to them. Saint Domingue became the independent republic of Haiti, and from 1808, Spanish controlled Santo Domingo and Cuba were both open to British vessels for the first time.\nFrom the 1820s mahogany from all these areas was imported into Europe and North America, with the majority of them going to Britain. In Central America British loggers moved northwest towards Mexico and south into Guatemala. Other areas of Central America as far south as Panama also began to be exploited.\nThe most important new development was the beginning of large scale logging in Mexico from the 1860s. Most mahogany was cut in the province of Tabasco and exported from a number of ports on the Gulf of Campeche, from Vera Cruz eastwards to Campeche and Sisal. By the end of the 19th century there was scarcely any part of Central America within reach of the coast untouched by logging, and activity also extended into Colombia, Venezuela, Peru and Brazil.\nTrade in American mahogany probably reached a peak in the last quarter of the 19th century. Figures are not available for all countries, but Britain alone imported more than 80,000 tons in 1875. This figure was not matched again. From the 1880s, African mahogany (\"Khaya\" spp.), a related genus, began to be exported in increasing quantities from West Africa, and by the early 20th century it dominated the market.\nIn 1907 the total of mahogany from all sources imported into Europe was 159,830 tons, of which 121,743 tons were from West Africa. By this time mahogany from Cuba, Haiti and other West Indian sources had become increasingly difficult to obtain in commercial sizes, and by the late 20th century Central American and even South American mahogany was heading in a similar direction. In 1975 \"S.\u00a0humilis\" was placed on CITES Appendix II (a list of species that would be in danger of extinction without strict regulation) followed by \"S.\u00a0mahagoni\" in 1992. The most abundant species, \"S.\u00a0macrophylla\", was placed on Appendix III in 1995 and moved to Appendix II in 2003.\nUses.\nMahogany has a straight, fine, and even grain, and is relatively free of voids and pockets. Its reddish-brown color darkens over time, and displays a reddish sheen when polished. It has excellent workability, and is very durable. Historically, the tree's girth allowed for wide boards from traditional mahogany species. These properties make it a favorable wood for crafting cabinets and furniture.\nMuch of the first-quality furniture made in the American colonies from the mid 18th century was made of mahogany, when the wood first became available to American craftsmen. Mahogany is still widely used for fine furniture; however, the rarity of Cuban mahogany, the over-harvesting of Honduras and Brazilian mahogany, and the protests by indigenous peoples and environmental organizations from the 1980s into the 2000s, have diminished their use. Recent mahogany production from Mexico and Fiji has a lighter color and density than South American production from the early 20th century.\nMahogany also resists wood rot, making it attractive in boat construction and outdoor decking. It is a tonewood, often used for musical instruments, particularly the backs, sides and necks of acoustic guitars, electric guitar bodies, and drum shells because of its ability to produce a very deep, warm tone compared to other commonly used woods, such as maple, alder, ash \"(Fraxinus)\" or spruce. Guitars featuring mahogany in their construction include many acoustic guitars from Martin, Taylor, and Gibson, and Gibson electric guitars such as the Les Paul and SG. In the 1930s Gibson used the wood to make banjo necks as well.\nMahogany as an invasive species.\nIn the Philippines, environmentalists are calling for an end to the planting of mahogany because of its negative impact on the environment and wildlife, including possibly causing soil acidification and no net benefit to wildlife.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44929", "revid": "34982654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44929", "title": "Dannii Minogue", "text": "Australian singer and actress (born 1971)\nDanielle Jane Minogue (; born 20 October 1971) is an Australian singer, television personality, and actress. As a child she appeared on the television talent show \"Young Talent Time\" (1982\u20131988), before gaining recognition for her role as Emma Jackson in the Australian soap opera \"Home and Away\" (1989\u20131990), for which she was nominated for two Logie Awards. Minogue began her music career in the early 1990s, achieving early success with her debut album, \"Love and Kisses\" (1991), and the singles \"Love and Kisses\", \"Jump to the Beat\" and \"Success\". Following the release of her second album, \"Get into You\" (1993), Minogue's popularity as a singer declined, leading her to make a name for herself with award-winning performances in theatre productions. \nThe late 1990s saw a brief return to music for Minogue, after the singer reinvented herself as a dance artist with her third album, \"Girl\" (1997), and its lead single \"All I Wanna Do\". Her fourth album, \"Neon Nights\" (2003), became the most successful of her career: it was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry and spawned the hit singles \"Who Do You Love Now?\", \"Put the Needle on It\", \"I Begin to Wonder\" and \"Don't Wanna Lose This Feeling\". In 2007, she released her fifth album, \"Club Disco\". In the UK, Minogue has achieved nine Top 10 singles and 13 consecutive number-one dance singles, becoming the best-performing artist on the UK Dance Chart. In her home country of Australia, she has achieved 12 Top 30 singles and 6 gold-certified singles. As of January 2017, Minogue has sold over 7 million records worldwide.\nMinogue has served as a judge on television talent shows, including \"The X Factor UK\" (2007\u20132010), \"Australia's Got Talent\" (2007\u20132012), \"Britain &amp; Ireland's Next Top Model\" (2013), \"The X Factor Australia\" (2013\u20132015), \"Let It Shine\" (2017), and \"The Masked Singer Australia\" (2019\u20132021). As a television presenter, she has hosted \"It's Not Just Saturday\" (1996), \"Dance Boss\" (2018), \"Ultimate Beastmaster\" (2018), \"I Kissed a Boy\" (2023\u2013present), and \"I Kissed a Girl\" (2024\u2013present).\nEarly life and career beginnings.\nDanielle Jane Minogue was born on 20 October 1971 and brought up in Surrey Hills, Melbourne. She attended Camberwell Primary School and later Camberwell High School. She is the younger daughter of Carol Ann Jones, a dancer from Maesteg, Wales, and accountant Ronald Charles Minogue. She is the youngest of three children; her older sister is singer Kylie Minogue, while her brother Brendan is a news cameraman in Australia.\nMinogue began her career as a child on Australian television. From the age of 7, she appeared in several soap operas, including \"Skyways\" and \"The Sullivans\". In 1982, she joined the weekly music programme \"Young Talent Time\". Minogue recorded her first solo recordings for the programme, including a cover version of Madonna's hit single \"Material Girl\"; during this time, she also performed live at several sold-out nationwide concert tours. In 1988, Minogue departed from \"Young Talent Time\" to continue her acting career, appearing as the rebellious tomboyish teenager Emma Jackson on the soap opera \"Home and Away\" in 1989. Minogue remained on the programme for only a year. She proved to be popular among Australian audiences when she was nominated for a Silver Logie as the Most Popular Actress on Australian television.\nIn September 1988, Minogue released her own fashion range, \"Dannii\". She became interested in fashion design while appearing on \"Young Talent Time\". Minogue had designed the clothing she had worn on the show, and the positive response from the audience resulted in her releasing her own line. Minogue's debut line \"Dannii\" sold out across Australia in ten days and was followed by three additional summer lines in 1989.\nMusic career.\n1990\u20131995: \"Dannii\" and \"Get into You\".\nMinogue signed a recording contract with Australian-based Mushroom Records in January 1989. Her first album, \"Dannii\", was released the following year and reached number twenty-four on the Australian albums chart. Outside Australia, the album was released in 1991 under the title \"Love and Kisses\" and peaked at number eight in the United Kingdom and was certified gold. Minogue's debut single \"Love and Kisses\" peaked at number four on the Australian singles chart and was certified gold. In the UK, the song peaked at number eight on the singles chart. Subsequent singles \"Success\", \"Jump to the Beat\", \"Baby Love\" and \"I Don't Wanna Take This Pain\" all reached the UK top 40.\nMinogue released \"Love and Kisses and...\", a re-issue of her debut album, in November 1991. The album, a collection of dance songs, comprised tracks and remixes from \"Love and Kisses\". It peaked at number 42 on the UK albums chart and sold nearly 60,000 copies in its own right. Several remixes by producer and DJ Steve \"Silk\" Hurley were successful in European dance clubs. She credits these remixes for providing her with a \"new image and sound to work with\" on future releases. Also that year, Minogue made her feature film debut in \"Secrets\", which co-starred Noah Taylor. The film revolved around five Australian teenagers who become stuck in the basement of a hotel in an attempt to see The Beatles. The film was not well received by audiences or critics, with Minogue's performance being described as \"not all that convincing\".\nMinogue released her second album \"Get into You\", which included the songs \"Show You the Way to Go\", \"This Is It\" and \"This Is the Way\", in October 1993. The album contained uptempo dance tracks, but despite her past chart success, failed to make the British top fifty. In mid-1994, Minogue returned to television as a presenter, co-hosting Channel 4's morning show \"The Big Breakfast\" in the UK. In 1995, Minogue released the singles \"Rescue Me\" and \"Boogie Woogie\", a collaboration with dance act Eurogroove. Released only in Japan, both songs reached number one on the Japanese singles chart. She began recording her third album in 1995; however, Minogue and her record label, Mushroom Records, parted ways in late 1995 following a contract disagreement.\nThe tracks recorded in 1994/1995 for Minogue's planned third album were unheard for many years, they were finally released in 2009 via Cargo Records on the compilation album \"The 1995 Sessions\". In 1991, Minogue appeared before the Queen at the Royal Variety Show where she sang \"Success\".\n1996\u20132004: \"Girl \"and \"Neon Nights\".\nIn 1996, Minogue resumed her co-hosting duties, presenting the \"Eggs on Legs\" road show segment. That same year, Minogue briefly hosted the children's show \"Disney Time\" and co-hosted, with Gareth Jones, the teenage Saturday morning entertainment show \"It's Not Just Saturday\" for 16. In 1997, Minogue hosted \"Top of the Pops\", a British music chart television programme, before returning to her recording career later that year. In April 1997, Minogue made her stage debut as Rizzo in the musical \"Grease: The Arena Spectacular\". In Australia, the show sold over 450,000 tickets during its first season. The following year, Minogue resumed her role as Rizzo, performing in New Zealand. At the 1998 Mo Awards, Minogue was nominated for \"Best Female Musical Theatre Performer\" for her role.\nFollowing the release of several remixes of her songs by Steve \"Silk\" Hurley, Minogue became interested in dance music. She commented that the remixes were \"the first thing I did that was really cool and my love of dance music and clubbing started from there.\" Minogue's interest in dance music and clubbing influenced her third album, \"Girl\", released in September 1997, which featured collaborations with musicians such as Brian Higgins of Xenomania. The album presented a more sophisticated and adult style of dance music, but despite generally positive reviews, failed to make the British top 50. The lead single \"All I Wanna Do\", which the \"Daily Mirror\" described as a \"bass-bumping, shuddering return\", peaked at number four on the UK singles chart. In her native Australia, the single peaked at number eleven and was certified gold. The album's second single \"Everything I Wanted\" made the top 20 in the UK and the top 50 in Australia, while the third single \"Disremembrance\" narrowly missed the top 20 in the UK, peaking at number 21. All three singles released from \"Girl\" reached number one on the UK dance chart.\nIn June 1998, Minogue began The Unleashed Tour, a 22-date UK tour. Mushroom Records released two budget compilation albums in December 1998, as part of the label's 25th anniversary. Released only in Australia, \"The Singles\" comprised all Minogue's single releases, while \"The Remixes\" contained popular remixes. These releases were promoted with the song \"Coconut\", which was previously only available as a hidden track on CD versions of the \"Girl\" album. In January 1999, following her performance at the 1998 Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras, Minogue released the festival's first official theme song, \"Everlasting Night\". It appeared on the compilation CD \"Gay &amp; Lesbian Mardi Gras of 1999\" and its music video, co-directed by Minogue, was a tribute to Australia's gay and lesbian community.\nIn November 2001, Minogue released the single, \"Who Do You Love Now?\", a collaboration with Riva. Described by \"Sound Generator\" as a \"nice serene and dreamy vocal on the dance floor anthem\", the song peaked at number three on the UK singles chart and reached number one on the dance charts. In Australia, the song peaked at number 15, while in the United States the song was released to dance clubs and reached number 12 on the US \"Billboard\" Dance Club chart. In 2001, Minogue signed a six-album deal with London Records, a subsidiary of Warner Music International.\nIn March 2003, Minogue released her fourth album, \"Neon Nights\", which the BBC called \"a pleasant cocktail of pop sophistication, club culture and accessibility\". It consisted of 1980s inspired dance-pop songs and provided Minogue with some of the strongest reviews of her career. \"Neon Nights\" peaked at number eight on the UK albums chart (her highest ranking since her debut) and produced four top 10 singles. \"Who Do You Love Now?\" was not officially released as the first single; however, it was included on the album. The official lead single was \"Put the Needle on It\", a 1980s inspired dance-pop song which became a top 10 hit in the UK, peaking at number seven. It enjoyed top 20 success in several countries including Australia, where it peaked at number 11 and was certified gold. The second single, \"I Begin to Wonder\", was declared one of the \"best things\" on the album by Ireland's Radio Telef\u00eds \u00c9ireann and became her highest-charting single in the UK, peaking at number two. In Australia, the single garnered Minogue another top 20 hit, peaking at number 14 and was also certified gold. Third single \"Don't Wanna Lose This Feeling\" reached number five in the UK, while in Australia the single just missed the top 20, charting at number 22. Following extensive airplay by North American dance radio, Warner Music Group released the album in the United States in late 2003. Singles \"I Begin to Wonder\" and \"Don't Wanna Lose This Feeling\" were also substantial successes on the US dance charts.\n2004\u20132006: \"The Hits &amp; Beyond\".\nIn June 2004, Afterlife released the album \"Speck of Gold\", which featured Minogue on the single \"Take Me Inside\". The album was released in Australia in 2008, featuring two different versions of the song. In October 2004, Minogue released the single \"You Won't Forget About Me\", a collaboration with the dance act Flower Power. Described by MSN Entertainment as a \"real grower\" and noted for its \"snip snapping house beats and '80s flecked synths\", the song peaked at number seven on the UK singles chart and also made the top 20 in Australia. \"Perfection\", a collaboration with the Soul Seekerz, followed in October 2005 where it reached the top twenty in both the UK and Australia.\nMinogue released \"The Hits &amp; Beyond\", a greatest hits album, in June 2006. The album consisted of new songs alongside singles from her four studio albums. It debuted at number 17 on the UK Albums Chart. The album introduced a new single, \"So Under Pressure\", inspired by the cancer diagnoses of her sister Kylie as well as that of an unnamed friend. On 11 December Minogue performed \"Kids\" with her sister Kylie during in Melbourne and \"Celebration\" on 31 December in London at Wembley Arena. The single made the top 20 in Australia and the UK and also became her 10th consecutive song to reach the number one spot on the UK Upfront Club chart. Minogue has described the recording of \"So Under Pressure\" as a \"real achievement\" as she was \"brave enough to put all [her feelings] into words\". In September 2006, Minogue's cover of \"I'll Be Home for Christmas\" appeared on \"Spirit of Christmas\", a compilation album of holiday songs available through the Myer department store chain across Australia.\nIn November 2006, Minogue performed Sister Sledge's 1979 song \"He's the Greatest Dancer\" on BBC One's \"Children in Need\" telethon. A studio version of the song, remixed by Fugitive, appeared on the dance compilation \"Clubland 10\", which was released in November 2006. The following month, \"He's the Greatest Dancer\" was released to UK dance clubs and reached number one on the Upfront Club chart. It also charted in the top 40 on the Australian singles chart.\n2007\u20132010: \"Unleashed\" and \"Club Disco\".\nOctober onwards saw a total of five releases from Minogue; first, on 29 October, reissues of her 1997 and 2003 albums \"Girl\" and \"Neon Nights\", each containing two discs, the second disc of which includes remixes. On 5 November, she released \"Unleashed\", a collection of previously unheard material from her time with London Records, and \"\", which includes every one of her music videos as well as bonus features. Minogue's fifth studio album \"Club Disco\" was released on the same date and in May 2008 in Australia, featuring several previously released singles, such as \"You Won't Forget About Me\", \"Perfection\", and \"So Under Pressure\", cancelled single \"I Can't Sleep at Night\" and covers of \"Xanadu\" and the disco classic \"He's the Greatest Dancer\". Finally, on 3 December, a single was released, titled \"Touch Me Like That\", which peaked at number one on the UK Dance Chart.\nIn early 2008, Minogue was hired as the headline performer at Australian Fashion Week. In particular, she was booked to make an appearance at the opening party hosted by MAC Cosmetics. She also released \"Club Disco\" as a double album in Australia with some changes to the track listing. At the start of 2009, a digital compilation album, \"The Early Years\", was released online that featured songs from Minogue's first two studio albums.\nOn 7 December 2009, Minogue released \"The 1995 Sessions\", an album full of previously unreleased recordings made for what would have been her then third studio album, which never materialised due to differences with her then label. On the same date, Minogue re-released remastered editions of her first two albums with MCA Records, her debut \"Love &amp; Kisses\" and the follow-up \"Get into You\". In total Minogue's music has achieved more than 200 weeks on the UK Sales Chart and she has sold more than seven-million records worldwide. On 23 June 2010, ITV2 announced \"Dannii Minogue: Style Queen\", a three-part documentary about Minogue's fashion line \"Project D\", \"The X Factor\", motherhood, her partner Kris Smith and her return to music as well as writing her autobiography \"My Story\", which was produced by Steve Vizard and broadcast in Australia on Foxtel.\n2011\u20132014: \"This Is It: The Very Best Of\".\nIn January 2012, Minogue appeared in the ITV documentary \"The Talent Show Story\" where she talked about her time on \"The X Factor UK\" and working on talent shows. Other talent show judges interviewed included Gary Barlow, Louis Walsh, Kelly Rowland, Tulisa, Amanda Holden, Piers Morgan, Carrie Grant and Simon Cowell, as well as \"The X Factor\" host Dermot O'Leary and \"Britain's Got Talent\" hosts Ant &amp; Dec. In February 2012, Minogue officially opened Madame Tussauds Sydney, unveiling a waxwork of herself at the launch.\nIn September 2013, Minogue teamed up with Ronan Keating to record a duet of the Christmas classic \"Santa Claus Is Coming to Town\" for department store chain Myer's \"The Spirit of Christmas 2013\" compilation. In late 2014, Minogue recorded a cover version of \"That's How You Know\" for the Australian \"We Love Disney\" album.\n2015\u2013present: Musical comeback.\nIn February 2015, Minogue announced that, after a long hiatus, she planned to make her musical comeback at the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras. Minogue also revealed she had been working on new music. Following the announcement, Minogue, British rapper Reece Robertson and the official Sydney Mardi Gras profiles launched a mysterious online campaign on social media featuring the \"#pressplay\" hashtag. At the end of February, Sydney Mardi Gras shared a YouTube link to a video called \"#pressplay\" featuring the extended mix of \"Summer of Love\". On 2 March, the extended mix of \"Summer of Love\" was made available to pre-order on iTunes.\nIn December 2015, she and her sister Kylie released their duet 100 Degrees for the latter\u2019s Christmas album Kylie Christmas. They performed the song on The X Factor Australia and on Kylie\u2019s Christmas Show at the Royal Albert Hall.\nIn August 2017, Minogue confirmed that she would be a support act for Take That on their first Australian tour in over twenty years, which would take place that November. She also announced a single titled \"Holding On\" would be released on 11 August and that more new music would be released around the time of the tour. On 2 November 2017, Minogue confirmed she would release a song titled \"Galaxy\" on 10 November, a day before the tour was due to start.\nIn February\u202f2023, Dannii\u202fMinogue appeared on\u2011stage alongside her sister Kylie\u202fMinogue at the opening concert of Sydney WorldPride 2023 in The\u202fDomain, Sydney \u2014 the first time the festival has been held in the Southern Hemisphere. Later in 2023, it was announced that Minogue would be releasing a new song just weeks after her sister, Kylie Minogue, would be releasing the lead single for her upcoming album \"Tension\", \"Padam Padam\". Minogue's song \"We Could Be the One\" was released on 2 June 2023, and also features as the opening song for the British gay sting show that she hosts, \"I Kissed a Boy.\" It charted at number 5 on the UK Singles Downloads Chart on 9 June 2023. On 16 June 2023, Minogue released an anniversary edition of her \"Neon Nights\" album. Titled \"Neon Nights 20\", the album was made available on all digital outlets and CD and vinyl. Minogue had confirmed the deluxe, expanded anniversary issue in April 2023. On 2 February 2024, she released a new single, \"Thinking \u2018Bout Us\". The song charted at number 24 on the UK singles chart.\nTelevision career.\nUK television.\nIn 2007, Minogue became a judge on the fourth series of \"The X Factor UK\", alongside Simon Cowell, Louis Walsh and Sharon Osbourne. She mentored the Boys category and selected Leon Jackson, Rhydian Roberts and Andy Williams to represent her in the live rounds of the competition. Ultimately, two of her chosen acts, Roberts and Jackson, became the final two, with Jackson eventually becoming the winner after topping the public vote. Minogue was the first female judge to win the show. On 20 September 2008, Minogue presented the Nickelodeon UK Kids' Choice Awards ceremony. That same year, Minogue returned to the show's fifth series alongside Cowell, Walsh and Cheryl Cole, who replaced Osbourne. Following the initial auditions and boot camp stages of the competition, Minogue was assigned the Over 25s category to mentor. She chose Daniel Evans, Rachel Hylton and Ruth Lorenzo as her top three contestants for the live shows and was assisted by Spice Girls member Emma Bunton. In the quarter-final, Minogue lost her final contestant as Lorenzo was the eighth contestant eliminated from the competition, leaving her without a contestant in the semi-final.\nThroughout the fifth series, several people in the entertainment industry, including Ronan Keating, Noel Gallagher and Graham Norton questioned Minogue's judging credentials and mentoring ability. On 22 November 2008, during a live broadcast of the programme, Minogue broke down in tears and was unable to introduce one of her acts, Rachel Hylton, following an on-air row with Louis Walsh over a choice of song. Despite the controversies, she proved popular in public votes and polls. Minogue later stated that she did not enjoy her experience on the fifth series and \"would never want to go through that again\". Minogue returned for the sixth series in 2009 and mentored the Girls category. She chose Rachel Adedeji, Lucie Jones and Stacey Solomon as her top three contestants to compete in the live shows and was assisted at the judges' houses stage by her older sister, Kylie Minogue. Despite losing Adedeji in week 4 and Jones the following week, Solomon went on to advance into the final and ultimately becoming the last contestant eliminated. In 2010, Minogue was pregnant. She later stated that, as her baby's expected arrival in July would clash with filming for \"The X Factor\" audition dates, she would be unable to judge in the audition episodes for the seventh series. Minogue returned during the judges' houses stage. She mentored the Boys category selecting Nicolo Festa, Matt Cardle and Aiden Grimshaw as her top three contestants, with Paije Richardson as her wildcard contestant. Minogue was assisted by fellow Australian and friend Natalie Imbruglia who was a guest judge in the Birmingham auditions that year filling in for Minogue. Cardle was her only contestant to make it into the final and eventually came first, with Minogue becoming the winning mentor for the second time.\nOn 14 May 2011, it was announced that Minogue would not be returning for the eighth series of \"The X Factor UK\". Of her decision, Minogue said \"During discussions for me to return (to \"The X Factor\") it became clear that unfortunately, this year, the \"X Factor\" audition dates in the UK clash with the live shows of \"Australia's Got Talent\" during June and July. For this reason I am unable to return.\" She was replaced by Kelly Rowland. In January 2012, Minogue appeared on the ITV documentary \"The Talent Show Story\" where she talked about her time on \"The X Factor\" and working on talent shows. Other \"The X Factor\" judges who were interviewed included Gary Barlow, Walsh, Tulisa, Rowland and Simon Cowell as well as the host Dermot O'Leary. In June 2013, Minogue joined Elle Macpherson and Tyson Beckford on the judging panel for the ninth series of Sky Living's \"Britain &amp; Ireland's Next Top Model\". She replaced Whitney Port and Julien McDonald.\nIn September 2016, it was revealed Minogue was returning to British television, as a judge on the judging panel of Gary Barlow talent show \"Let It Shine\" alongside fellow judges Martin Kemp and Barlow. In May 2022, it was announced that Minogue would host a brand new gay dating show in the UK on BBC Three called \"I Kissed a Boy.\" The list of contestants and a preview for the show were released in April 2023. The show officially aired on Saturday 13 May 2023 on BBC Three. In 2024, Minogue began hosting a spinoff of the show, for lesbians, with \"I Kissed a Girl\" also airing on BBC Three. In May 2024, it was announced that \"I Kissed a Boy\" would be returning for a second season, with Minogue returning as host.\nAustralian television.\nIn 2007, Minogue was hired by Simon Cowell to become a judge on the Seven Network talent show \"Australia's Got Talent\" along with Red Symons and Tom Burlinson. It was after this series that Minogue was offered the role on \"The X Factor UK\" after Cowell thought she proved good as a judge on \"Australia's Got Talent\". She returned to the panel for seasons two and three in 2008 and 2009. \"Australia's Got Talent\" returned for a fourth season in 2010, and Minogue was the only original judge to remain on the panel as producers revamped the series. Brian McFadden and Kyle Sandilands took the places of Red Symons and Tom Burlinson. Minogue also returned for the fifth season in 2011 and the sixth season in 2012. In November 2012, it was announced that Minogue would not be returning for the seventh season in an attempt to reboot the show. She was replaced by Geri Halliwell in the Nine Network's version of the show.\nIn 2013, Minogue joined the judging panel of the fifth season of \"The X Factor Australia\" as Mel B's replacement. She joined returning judges Ronan Keating and Natalie Bassingthwaighte and fellow new judge Redfoo, who replaced Guy Sebastian. Minogue mentored the Over 24s category and one of her contestants Dami Im came first place. Minogue reprised her judging role for the sixth season in 2014. She mentored the Groups category and one of her contestants Brothers3 were the last contestant to be eliminated in the competition. Minogue returned for the seventh season in 2015 for the final time as a judge where she mentored the Girls Category and ended up losing all of her contestants by the 7th week of the show. She was replaced by Mel B.\nIn 2019, she was announced as one of the panellists on the Australian version of The Masked Singer alongside Jackie O, Dave Hughes and Lindsay Lohan. Minogue returned for the second season alongside Jackie O and Hughes, and new judge Urzila Carlson who replaced Lohan. All judges returned for the third season in 2021. However, in June 2022, it was announced that Minogue, Jackie O and Carlson would not be returning to the judging panel for the fourth season. It was later announced that Minogue departed the show because she was busy filming a new show in the UK. She was replaced by international pop singer Mel B.\nOn 30 July 2025, production for Australian / UK co-commissioned series \"Imposter\" announced that Minogue had been cast to the series in her first major television role since \"Home and Away.\"\nOther ventures.\nTheatre productions.\nIn 1999, Minogue returned to theatre, starring in the production of Shakespeare's \"Macbeth\" at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival. The play received mixed reviews; critic Matt Grant wrote that Minogue \"lacks true conviction as she ploughs through the lines without capturing their full force\", while Fiachra Gibbons singled Minogue's performance out, noting in her review that Minogue's \"disco-queen-from-hell delivery works well\" for her character, Lady Macbeth. Two years later, Minogue appeared as Esmeralda in the musical production of \"Notre-Dame de Paris\" in London's West End. The musical received poor reviews from British critics who called it \"lame\" and its songs \"reminiscent of [the] Eurovision song contest\". At the 2002 \"Maxim\" Awards, she won \"Best Stage Performance\" for her role. In 2001, Minogue also appeared in the stage play \"The Vagina Monologues\", which co-starred Kika Markham and Meera Syal.\nRadio.\nIn June 2003, Minogue hosted her own radio programme, \"Dannii Minogue's Neon Nights\". Broadcast in Australia and the UK, Minogue played songs by up-and-coming DJs, as well as her own music. Minogue departed London Records when Warner (its parent owner) dismissed its staff and offered Minogue a deal to depart the label or stay and wait a year to release her next album which had been partially recorded. Minogue collaborated with producers Hugo Lira, Gareth Young, Ian Masterson, Ross Callum and Pascal Gabriel. Many of these tracks were later released on the album \"Unleashed\". Later that year she signed a new contract with independent dance label All Around the World Records.\nFashion.\nIn the late 1980s, Minogue had a fashion range that she designed which was sold in Target Australia. Since joining \"The X Factor\" and \"Australia's Got Talent\" in 2007, Minogue has become a Style Icon in Australia, Ireland and the United Kingdom, receiving critical acclaim from various fashion designers such as Victoria Beckham and wearing dresses from J'Aton Couture, Antonio Berardi, Dolce &amp; Gabbana, Marchesa, Philip Armstrong, Carla Zampatti, Gucci and Aurelio Costarella and has featured on fashion magazines like Cosmopolitan, InStyle and Vogue. The press in Britain have especially taken notice of her sense of fashion and different hairstyles since Cheryl Cole joined \"The X Factor\" in 2008 often comparing both of them. The praise Minogue got from the tabloids on \"The X Factor\" led her to set up her own fashion label with Tabitha Somerset-Webb called Project D, as well as a fragrance. The first line of Project D was sold exclusively by Selfridges in the United Kingdom, the Spring/Summer line was showcased by Minogue during the live first Sunday night show of \"The X Factor\" Season 7, wearing her Jingle prom-style dress. In August 2012, the label was rebranded and relaunched as Project D London. In May 2013, Minogue announced that she would no longer be associated with Project D, ending a three-year collaboration with Somerset-Webb.\nIn late July 2011, it was announced that Minogue would serve as the ambassador for 2011's Melbourne Spring Fashion Week, a role that will see Minogue participate in a series of appearances in September. In 2014, Minogue continued her expansion into the fashion world by launching her own ecommerce store fashion saga. In addition, Minogue announced the launch of her petite clothing line through Target Australia. To date, Minogue has released six \"Dannii For Target Petites\" Collection ranges along with a range of shoes and accessories.\nDannii has her own fashion range which she promotes and sells through QVCUK called Dannii Minogue.\nEndorsements.\nMinogue has been a global ambassador for Etihad Airways since 2008. It was confirmed that Minogue would be one of the new faces of Marks and Spencer. She filmed her first commercial in South Africa, which featured Cheryl Lynn's \"Got to be Real\", for their Spring campaign that aired 24 March 2010. She starred alongside Twiggy, Lisa Snowdon, VV Brown and Ana Beatriz Barros. Minogue didn't feature in the Autumn ad due to her pregnancy, she did feature in the Christmas ad with Peter Kay which featured the Bee Gees' \"You Should Be Dancing\". Minogue travelled to Miami, Florida in January 2011 to shoot the commercial for M&amp;S for the 2011 Spring collection. Minogue is a former face of world-famous cosmetics brand ModelCo, appearing in ad campaigns for the company. On 5 April 2015 Minogue was announced as the 2015 Style Ambassador for Westfield Australia. In January 2017, Minogue was announced as an Ambassador for L'Or\u00e9al Australia.\nWriting.\nIn 2010, Minogue released her autobiography, \"My Story\". The following year she released a fashion book titled \"My Style.\"\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nIn January 1994, Minogue married actor Julian McMahon, whom she met in 1990 while working on the television series \"Home and Away\". McMahon was the son of the former Prime Minister of Australia Sir William McMahon and Lady McMahon. Minogue and McMahon were married for less than two years and divorced in 1995. Minogue stated that McMahon's mother, Lady Sonia McMahon threatened not to attend their wedding and caused a rift. In October 1995, Minogue posed nude in the Australian edition of \"Playboy\". Commenting on the reason she posed nude, Minogue said she \"just had a marriage break-up. Most women go to the hairdressers \u2013 I did \"Playboy\". I chose the photographer, the location, what I did or didn't want to wear, and everything else about the pictures. I found it a really liberating, empowering experience.\" She later said that she had posed for the money, saying that she was broke following her divorce.\nIn October 1999, Minogue became engaged to 1997 Formula 1 World Champion Jacques Villeneuve, but their relationship ended in 2001.\nIn early 2002, she began dating music producer and Bros bassist Craig Logan, whom she met while recording material for \"Neon Nights\". Media reports in March 2002 claimed Minogue and Logan were engaged, but in December 2002 they ended their relationship.\nIn August 2008, Minogue began dating English model and former professional rugby league player Kris Smith. They met in Ibiza, where Smith was celebrating his 30th birthday. On 9 January 2010, it was announced that Minogue was pregnant; the news was revealed after receiving her 12-week scan. Minogue gave birth via caesarean section to an 8\u00a0lb 3oz/4\u00a0kg boy, at Royal Women's Hospital in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia on 5 July 2010. She had previously planned for a home birth. In April 2012, Minogue announced on Twitter that she and Smith had separated.\nIn May 2024, after Minogue stated \"I identify as queer in a weird way,\" it was widely reported that Minogue had come out as queer; however, Minogue later clarified in an Instagram post that she is straight.\nPolitics.\nIn 2002, the British National Party (BNP), a far-right and anti-immigration political party, falsely claimed that Minogue supported their cause following comments she had made in an interview with Britain's \"GQ\". In the interview, Minogue was quoted saying that French National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen had \"struck a chord with people\". Minogue responded saying that she had been misquoted and was \"mortified\" to be associated with the party adding that \"Australia is the most multicultural melting pot of people. I'm completely proud of that.\" Minogue responded to the British National Party's claims in \"Gay Times\" magazine saying, \"I am not a racist. That is not how I live my life. I have a Jewish manager, I perform in gay clubs, I come from a multicultural background and I am very proud of that.\"\nMedia portrayal and other activities.\nThroughout her career, Minogue has often been compared with her sister, Kylie, whose career has been more successful. Referring to the comparison, Minogue said: \"[I]t is hard to be compared all the time to Kylie. On the other hand, however, people will always try to compare you to somebody. Look at Britney and Christina.\" In an interview with \"Elle\" in April 2009, Kylie criticised \"X Factor\" judge Louis Walsh for his jibes at her sister: \"I'm so proud of my sister and it annoys the hell out of me when comparisons between us are made. In the UK, you lot don't know where she came from. She was on TV every week from 7 years old. It makes it harder for her when she gets Louis Walsh's rather pathetic jibes \u2013 one of which is she hasn't had a hit record and that's just not true.\" She also denied rumours that she did not get along with Cheryl Cole and that she had referred to former judge Sharon Osbourne as \"so cheap\".\nLike her sister, Minogue has a sizeable gay following and has performed multiple times at the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras and the London nightclub G-A-Y. She credits her gay following for much of her success, commenting that gay culture has \"always been a part of [her] music\". Minogue openly supports gay rights causes for social equality and believes that same-sex marriages should be accepted by all governments.\nMinogue is an ambassador for the Terrence Higgins Trust, an organisation that works to increase awareness of AIDS. She joined the charity in hope that her endorsement would encourage people to discuss safe sex and the disease more openly. In 2004 she posed nude, wrapped only in a red ribbon, to promote World AIDS Day in Australia and the UK. She has long been a supporter of breast cancer research and in August 2008 became an ambassador for the Olivia Newton-John Cancer and Wellness Centre Appeal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44930", "revid": "50637421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44930", "title": "Azadirachta indica", "text": "Species of plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAzadirachta indica, commonly known as neem, margosa, nimtree or Indian lilac, is a tree in the mahogany family Meliaceae. It is one of the two species in the genus \"Azadirachta\". It is native to the Indian subcontinent and to parts of Southeast Asia, but is naturalized and grown around the world in tropical and subtropical areas. Its fruits and seeds are the source of neem oil. \"Nim\" is a Hindustani noun derived from Sanskrit \"nimba\" ().\nDescription.\nThe neem tree is a fast-growing tree that can reach a height of , and rarely . It is evergreen, shedding many of its leaves during the dry winter months. The branches are wide and spreading. The fairly dense crown is roundish and may reach a diameter of . The opposite, pinnate leaves are long, with 20 to 30 medium to dark green leaflets about long. The terminal leaflet often is missing. The petioles are short.\nWhite and fragrant flowers are arranged in more-or-less drooping axillary panicles which are up to long. The inflorescences, which branch up to the third degree, bear from 250 to 300 flowers. An individual flower is long and wide. Protandrous, bisexual flowers and male flowers exist on the same individual tree.\nThe fruit is a smooth (glabrous), olive-like drupe which varies in shape from elongate oval to nearly roundish, and when ripe is by . The fruit skin (exocarp) is thin and the bitter-sweet pulp (mesocarp) is yellowish-white and very fibrous. The mesocarp is thick. The white, hard inner shell (endocarp) of the fruit encloses one, rarely two, or three, elongated seeds (kernels) having a brown seed coat.\nThe neem tree is similar in appearance to its relative, the chinaberry or bakain, \"Melia azedarach\", with which it may be confused. \"Melia azedarach\" also has toothed leaflets and similar looking fruit. One difference is that neem leaves are pinnate but chinaberry leaves are twice- and thrice-pinnate.\nTaxonomy.\nThe name \"Azadirachta indica\" was first published by Adrien-Henri de Jussieu in 1830. In 1753, Carl Linnaeus had described two species, \"Melia azedarach\" and \"Melia azadirachta\". De Jussieu considered \"Melia azadirachta\" to be sufficiently different from \"Melia azedarach\" to be placed in a new genus. For both his species, Linnaeus referred to the name 'azedarach', which is derived from the French 'az\u00e9darac', which in turn is from the Persian '\u0101z\u0101d dirakht' (\u0627\u0632\u0627\u062f\u0631\u062e\u062a), meaning 'free or noble tree'. The Persian name of the tree, \"azad darakhat-e-hind\", meaning 'the free tree of India', implies that it is free from disease and insect problems.\nDistribution.\n\"Azadirachta indica\" is considered to be native to the , Pakistan and Bangladesh in the Indian subcontinent and to Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Thailand and Vietnam in Indochina. It has been widely introduced elsewhere in tropical and subtropical regions, from South America to Indonesia.\nEcology.\nThe neem tree is noted for its drought resistance. Normally, it thrives in areas with sub-arid to sub-humid conditions, with an annual rainfall of . It can grow in regions with an annual rainfall below 400\u00a0mm, but in such cases it depends largely on ground water levels. Margosa can grow in many different types of soil, but it thrives best on well-drained deep and sandy soils. It is a typical tropical to subtropical tree and exists at annual mean temperatures of . It can tolerate high to very high temperatures and does not tolerate temperature below . Neem is one of very few shade-giving trees that thrive in drought-prone areas such as the dry coastal, southern districts of India and Pakistan. The trees are not at all delicate about water quality and thrive on the merest trickle of water, whatever the quality. In India and tropical countries where the Indian diaspora has reached, it is very common to see neem trees used for shade lining streets, around temples, schools and other such public buildings or in most people's backyards. In very dry areas, the trees are planted on large tracts of land.\nWeed status.\nNeem is considered a weed in many areas, including some parts of the Middle East, most of Sub-Saharan Africa including West Africa and Indian Ocean states, and some parts of Australia. Its weed potential has not been fully assessed.\nIn April 2015, \"A. indica\" was declared a class B and C weed in the Northern Territory, Australia, meaning its growth and spread must be controlled and plants or propagules are not allowed to be brought into the territory. It is illegal to buy, sell, or transport the plants or seeds. Its declaration as a weed came in response to its invasion of waterways in the \"Top End\" of the territory.\nAfter being introduced into Australia, possibly in the 1940s, \"A. indica\" was originally planted in the Northern Territory to provide shade for cattle. Trial plantations were established between the 1960s and 1980s in Darwin, Queensland, and Western Australia, but the Australian neem industry did not prove viable. The tree has now spread into the savanna, particularly around waterways, and naturalised populations exist in several areas.\nPhytochemicals.\nNeem fruit, seeds, leaves, stems, and bark contain diverse phytochemicals, some of which were first discovered in azadirachta seed extracts, such as azadirachtin established in the 1960s as an insect antifeedant, growth disruptor, and insecticide. The yield of azadirachtin from crushing 2\u00a0kg of seeds is about 5 g.\nIn addition to azadirachtin and related limonoids, the seed oil contains glycerides, diverse polyphenols, nimbolide, triterpenes, and beta-sitosterol. The yellow, bitter oil has a garlic-like odor and contains about 2% of limonoid compounds. The leaves contain quercetin, catechins, carotenes, and vitamin C.\nUses.\nNeem leaves are dried in India and placed in cupboards to prevent insects from eating clothes, and in containers in which rice and wheat are stored. The flowers are also used in many Indian festivals like Ugadi. \"See below: #Association with Hindu festivals in India.\"\nCulinary.\nThe tender shoots and flowers of the neem tree are eaten as a vegetable in India. A soup-like dish called \"\" () in Tamil (translated as \"margosa flower rasam\") made of the flower of neem is prepared in Tamil Nadu. In Bengal, young neem leaves are fried in oil with tiny pieces of aubergine (brinjal). The dish is called \"nim b\u0113gun bh\u0101j\u0101\" () and is the first item during a Bengali meal, which acts as an appetizer. It is eaten with rice.\nNeem is used in parts of mainland Southeast Asia, particularly in Cambodia, Laos (where it is called \"kadao\" []), Thailand (where it is known as \"sadao\" [ or \"satao\" ]), Myanmar (where it is known as \"ta.ma\" []) and Vietnam (where it is known as and is used to cook the salad ). Even if lightly cooked, the flavour is quite bitter, and the food is not consumed by all inhabitants of these countries. In Myanmar, young neem leaves and flower buds are boiled with tamarind fruit to soften its bitterness and eaten as a vegetable. Pickled neem leaves are also eaten with tomato and fish paste sauce in Myanmar.\nTraditional medicine.\nProducts made from neem trees have been used in the traditional medicine of India for centuries, but there is insufficient clinical evidence to indicate any benefits of using neem for medicinal purposes. \nIn small children, neem oil is toxic and can lead to death. Neem may also cause miscarriages, infertility, and low blood sugar.\nIn Southern India and the Middle-East, neem twigs are often used as a teeth-cleaning twig.\nPest and disease control.\nNeem is used as an insecticide, providing a natural alternative to synthetic pesticides. The active ingredient is azadirachtin. Neem seeds are ground into powder that is soaked overnight in water and sprayed on the crop. To be effective, it must be applied repeatedly, at least every ten days. In addition to directly killing insects, neem acts as an anti-feedant, repellent, and egg-laying deterrent and thus protects the crop from damage. The insects starve and die within a few days. Neem also suppresses the subsequent hatching of their eggs. Neem-based fertilizers have been effective against southern armyworm. Neem cake may be used as a fertilizer. Silver nanoparticles made from the bark and leaves of \"A. indica\" were also highly effective at killing first- and fourth-stage \"Culex quinquefasciatus\" mosquito larvae, but they worked less well against the pupae and adult mosquitoes.\nGenome and transcriptomes.\nThe neem genome and transcriptomes from various organs have been sequenced. Expressed sequence tags were identified by generation of subtractive hybridization libraries of neem fruit, leaf, fruit mesocarp, and fruit endocarp.\nCultural and social impact.\nThe name Nimai ('born under a neem tree'), of the Bhakti movement Vaishnava saint Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (believed to be an incarnation of Radha Krishna in Gaudiya Vaishnavism and ISKCON) is due to his birth under a neem tree.\nIn 1995, the European Patent Office (EPO) granted a patent on an anti-fungal product derived from neem to the United States Department of Agriculture and W. R. Grace and Company. The Indian government challenged the patent when it was granted, claiming that the process for which the patent had been granted had been in use in India for more than 2,000 years. In 2000, the EPO ruled in India's favour, but W. R. Grace appealed, claiming that prior art about the product had never been published. On 8 March 2005, that appeal was lost and the EPO revoked the Neem patent.\nBiotechnology.\nThe biopesticide produced by extraction from the tree seeds contains limonoid triterpenes. Currently, the extraction process has disadvantages, such as contamination with fungi and heterogeneity in the content of limonoids due to genetic, climatic, and geographical variations. To overcome these problems, production of limonoids from plant cell suspension and hairy root cultures in bioreactors has been studied, including the development of a two-stage bioreactor process that enhances growth and production of limonoids with cell suspension cultures of \"A. indica\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44932", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44932", "title": "Carlo Rubbia", "text": "Italian particle physicist and Nobel Prize winner (born 1934)\nCarlo Rubbia (born 31 March 1934) is an Italian particle physicist and inventor who shared the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1984 with Simon van der Meer for work leading to the discovery of the W and Z particles at CERN.\nEarly life and education.\nRubbia was born in 1934 in Gorizia, an Italian town on the border with Slovenia. His family moved to Venice then Udine because of wartime disruption. His father was an electrical engineer and encouraged him to study the same, though he stated his wish to study physics. In the local countryside, he collected and experimented with abandoned military communications equipment. After taking an entrance exam for the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa to study physics, he failed to get into the required top ten (coming eleventh), so began an engineering course in Milan in 1953. Soon after, a Pisa student dropped out, presenting Rubbia with his opportunity. He gained a degree and doctorate in a relatively short time with a thesis on cosmic ray experimentation; his adviser was Marcello Conversi. At Pisa, he met his future wife, Marisa, also a physics student.\nCareer and research.\nColumbia University.\nFollowing his degree, he went to the United States to do postdoctoral research, where he spent about one and a half years at Columbia University performing experiments on the decay and the nuclear capture of muons. This was the first of a long series of experiments that Rubbia has performed in the field of weak interactions and which culminated in the Nobel Prize-winning work at CERN.\nCERN.\nHe moved back to Europe for a placement at the University of Rome before joining the newly founded CERN in 1960, where he worked on experiments on the structure of weak interactions. CERN had just commissioned a new type of accelerator, the Intersecting Storage Rings, using counter-rotating beams of protons colliding against each other. Rubbia and his collaborators conducted experiments there, again studying the weak force. The main results in this field were the observation of the structure in the elastic scattering process and the first observation of the charmed baryons. These experiments were crucial in order to perfect the techniques needed later for the discovery of more exotic particles in a different type of particle collider.\nIn 1976, he suggested adapting CERN's Super Proton Synchrotron (SPS) to collide protons and antiprotons in the same ring \u2013 the Proton-Antiproton Collider. Using Simon van der Meers technology of stochastic cooling, the Antiproton Accumulator was also built. The collider started running in 1981 and, in early 1983, an international team of more than 100 physicists headed by Rubbia and known as the UA1 Collaboration, detected the intermediate vector bosons, the W and Z bosons, which had become a cornerstone of modern theories of elementary particle physics long before this direct observation. They carry the weak force that causes radioactive decay in the atomic nucleus and controls the combustion of the Sun, just as photons, massless particles of light, carry the electromagnetic force which causes most physical and biochemical reactions. The weak force also plays a fundamental role in the nucleosynthesis of the elements, as studied in theories of stars evolution. These particles have a mass almost 100 times greater than the proton. In 1984 Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der Meer were awarded the Nobel Prize \"for their decisive contributions to the large project, which led to the discovery of the field particles W and Z, communicators of weak interaction\".\nTo achieve energies high enough to create these particles, Rubbia, together with David Cline and Peter McIntyre, proposed a radically new particle accelerator design. They proposed to use a beam of protons and a beam of antiprotons, their antimatter twins, counter-rotating in the vacuum pipe of the accelerator and colliding head-on. The idea of creating particles by colliding beams of more \"ordinary\" particles was not new: electron-positron and proton-proton colliders were already in use. However, by the late 1970s / early 1980s those could not approach the needed energies in the centre of mass to explore the W/Z region predicted by theory. At those energies, protons colliding with anti-protons were the best candidates, but how to obtain sufficiently intense (and well-collimated) beams of anti-protons, which are normally produced by impinging a beam of protons on a fixed target? Van den Meer had in the meantime developed the concept of \"stochastic cooling\", in which particles, like anti-protons, could be kept in a circular array, and their beam divergence reduced progressively by sending signals to bending magnets downstream. Since decreasing the divergence of the beam meant to reduce transverse velocity or energy components, the suggestive term \"stochastic cooling\" was given to the scheme. The scheme could then be used to \"cool\" (to collimate) the anti-protons, which could thus be forced into a well-focused beam, suitable for acceleration to high energies, without losing too many anti-protons to collisions with the structure. Stochastic expresses the fact that signals to be taken resemble random noise, which was called \"Schottky noise\" when first encountered in vacuum tubes. Without van der Meer's technique, UA1 would never have had the sufficient high-intensity anti-protons it needed. Without Rubbia's realisation of its usefulness, stochastic cooling would have been the subject of a few publications and nothing else. Simon van de Meer developed and tested the technology in the proton Intersecting Storage Rings at CERN, but it is most effective on rather low-intensity beams, such as the anti-protons which were prepared for use in the SPS when configured as a collider.\nHarvard University.\nIn 1970, Rubbia was appointed Higgins Professor of Physics at Harvard University, where he spent one semester per year for 18 years, while continuing his research activities at CERN. In 1989, he was appointed Director-General of the CERN Laboratory. During his mandate, in 1993, \"CERN agreed to allow anybody to use the Web protocol and code free of charge \u2026 without any royalty or other constraint\".\nGran Sasso Laboratory.\nRubbia has also been one of the leaders in a collaboration effort deep in the Gran Sasso Laboratory, designed to detect any sign of decay of the proton. The experiment seeks evidence that would disprove the conventional belief that matter is stable. The most widely accepted version of the unified field theories predicts that protons do not last forever, but gradually decay into energy after an average lifetime of at least 1032 years. The same experiment, known as ICARUS and based on a new technique of electronic detection of ionizing events in ultra-pure liquid argon, is aiming at the direct detection of the neutrinos emitted from the Sun, a first rudimentary neutrino telescope to explore neutrino signals of cosmic nature.\nRubbia further proposed the concept of an energy amplifier, a novel and safe way of producing nuclear energy exploiting present-day accelerator technologies, which is actively being studied worldwide in order to incinerate high-activity waste from nuclear reactors, and produce energy from natural thorium and depleted uranium. In 2013 he proposed building a large number of small-scale thorium power plants.\nOther organisational affiliations.\nRubbia was principal Scientific Adviser of CIEMAT (Spain), a member of the high-level Advisory Group on global warming set up by EU's President Barroso in 2007 and of the board of trustees at the IMDEA Energy Institute. In 2009\u20132010, he was Special Adviser for Energy to the Secretary General of ECLAC, the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America, based in Santiago (Chile). In June 2010, Rubbia was appointed Scientific Director of the Institute for Advanced Sustainability Studies in Potsdam (Germany). He is a member of the Italy-USA Foundation. During his term as President of ENEA (1999\u20132005) he promoted a novel method for concentrating solar power at high temperatures for energy production, known as the Archimede Project, which is being developed by industry for commercial use.\nPersonal life.\nMarisa and Carlo Rubbia have two children.\nRubbia is also openly a believer, as his book shows, published by Rizzoli, \"The temptation to believe.\" He is also a member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences.\nAwards and honours.\nIn December 1984, Rubbia was nominated Cavaliere di Gran Croce OMRI.\nOn 30 August 2013, Rubbia was appointed to the Senate of Italy as a Senator for Life by President Giorgio Napolitano.\nOn 8 January 2016, he was awarded with the International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Award by the People's Republic of China.\nAsteroid 8398 Rubbia is named in his honour. He was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1984.\nIn 1984, Rubbia received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44934", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44934", "title": "Pavia", "text": "Pavia ( , ; ; ; ; ) is a town and comune of south-western Lombardy, in Northern Italy, south of Milan on the lower Ticino near its confluence with the Po. It has a population of c. 73,086.\nThe city was a major political centre in the medieval period, being the capital of the Ostrogothic Kingdom from 540 to 553, of the Kingdom of the Lombards from 572 to 774, of the Kingdom of Italy from 774 to 1024 and seat of the Visconti court from 1365 to 1413.\nPavia is the capital of the fertile province of Pavia, which is known for a variety of agricultural products, including wine, rice, cereals, and dairy products. Although there are a number of industries located in the suburbs, these tend not to disturb the peaceful atmosphere of the town. It is home to the ancient University of Pavia (founded in 1361 and recognized in 2022 by the Times Higher Education among the top 10 in Italy and among the 300 best in the world), which together with the IUSS (Institute for Advanced Studies of Pavia), Ghislieri College, Borromeo College, Nuovo College, Santa Caterina College, and the (EDiSU), belongs to the Pavia Study System. The 15th-century Policlinico San Matteo is one of the most important hospitals in Italy. Pavia is the episcopal seat of the Roman Catholic Bishop of Pavia. The city possesses many artistic and cultural treasures, including several important churches and museums, such as the well known Certosa di Pavia. The municipality of Pavia is part of the Parco naturale lombardo della Valle del Ticino (a Nature reserve included by UNESCO in the World Network of Biosphere Reserves) and preserves two forests (Strict nature reserve Bosco Siro Negri and Bosco Grande nature reserve).\nToponymy.\nIn Roman times, Pavia was called . It began to be called , whence \"Pavia\", only since Lombard times, one of the very few Roman municipia in Italy that changed their names during the early Middle Ages. The origin of the modern name is uncertain.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nDating back to pre-Roman times, the town of Pavia was said by Pliny the Elder to have been founded by the Laevi and Marici, two Ligurian, or Celto-Ligurian, tribes, while Ptolemy attributes it to the Insubres, a Celtic population. The Roman city, known as Ticinum, was a municipality and an important military site (a castrum) under the Roman Empire. It most likely began as a small military camp built by the consul Publius Cornelius Scipio in 218 BCE to guard a wooden bridge he had built over the river Ticinum, on his way to search for Hannibal, who was rumoured to have managed to lead an army over the Alps and into Italy. The forces of Rome and Carthage ran into each other soon thereafter, and the Romans suffered the first of many crushing defeats at the hands of Hannibal, with the consul himself almost losing his life. The bridge was destroyed, but the fortified camp, which at the time was the most forward Roman military outpost in the Po Valley, somehow survived the long Second Punic War, and gradually evolved into a garrison town.\nIts importance grew with the extension of the Via Aemilia from Ariminum (Rimini) to the river Po (187 BCE), which it crossed at Placentia (Piacenza) and there forked, one branch going to Mediolanum (Milan) and the other to Ticinum, and thence to Laumellum where it divided once more, one branch going to Vercellae \u2013 and thence to Eporedia and Augusta Praetoria \u2013 and the other to Valentia \u2013 and thence to Augusta Taurinorum (Turin).\nThe town was built on levelled ground with square blocks. The \"cardo Maximus\" road corresponded to the current Strada Nuova up to the Roman bridge while the \"decumanus\" road corresponded to corso Cavour-corso Mazzini. Under most of the streets of the historic center there are still the brick ducts of the Roman sewer system which continued to function throughout the Middle Ages and the modern age without interruption, until about 1970. Pavia was important as a Military site (near the city, in 271, the emperor Aurelian defeated the Juthungi) because of the easy access to water communications (through the rivers Ticino and Po) up to the Adriatic Sea and because of its defence structures.\nIn 325 Martin of Tours came to Pavia as a child following his father, a Roman officer. Pavia was the seat of an important Roman mint between 273 and 326.\nThe reign of Romulus Augustulus (r. 475\u2013476), the last emperor of the Western Roman Empire ended at Pavia in 476 CE, and Roman rule thereby ceased in Italy. Romulus Augustulus, while considered the last emperor of the Western Roman Empire, was actually a usurper of the imperial throne; his father Flavius Orestes dethroned the previous emperor, Julius Nepos, and raised the young Romulus Augustulus to the imperial throne at Ravenna in 475. Though being the emperor, Romulus Augustulus was simply the mouthpiece for his father Orestes, who was the person who actually exercised power and governed Italy during Romulus Augustulus' short reign. Ten months after Romulus Augustulus's reign began, Orestes's soldiers under the command of one of his officers named Odoacer, rebelled and killed Orestes in the city of Pavia in 476. The rioting that took place as part of Odoacer's uprising against Orestes sparked fires that burnt much of Pavia to the point that Odoacer, as the new king of Italy, had to suspend the taxes for the city for five years so that it could finance its recovery. Without his father, Romulus Augustulus was powerless. Instead of killing Romulus Augustulus, Odoacer pensioned him off at 6,000 solidi a year before declaring the end of the Western Roman Empire and himself king of the new Kingdom of Italy.\nOdoacer's reign as king of Italy did not last long, because in 488 the Ostrogothic peoples led by their king Theoderic invaded Italy and waged war against Odoacer. After fighting for 5 years, Theoderic defeated Odoacer and on 15 March 493, assassinated Odoacer at a banquet meant to negotiate a peace between the two rulers. With the establishment of the Ostrogoth kingdom based in northern Italy, Theoderic began his vast program of public building. Pavia was among several cities that Theodoric chose to restore and expand. He began the construction of the vast palace complex that would eventually become the residence of Lombard monarchs several decades later. Theoderic also commissioned the building of the Roman-styled amphitheatre and bath complex in Pavia; in the seventh century these would be among the few still functioning bath complexes in Europe outside of the Eastern Roman Empire. Near the end of Theoderic's reign the Christian philosopher Boethius was imprisoned in one of Pavia's churches from 522 to 525 before his execution for treason. It was during Boethius's captivity in Pavia that he wrote his seminal work the \"Consolation of Philosophy\".\nPavia played an important role in the war between the Eastern Roman Empire and the Ostrogoths that began in 535. After the Eastern Roman general Belisarius's victory over the Ostrogothic leader Wittigis in 540 and the loss of most of the Ostrogoth lands in Italy, Pavia was among the last centres of Ostrogothic resistance that continued the war and opposed Eastern Roman rule. After the capitulation of the Ostrogothic leadership in 540 more than a thousand men remained garrisoned in Pavia and Verona dedicated to opposing Eastern Roman rule. Since 540 Pavia became the permanent capital of the Ostrogothic Kingdom, stable site of the court and the royal treasury. The resilience of Ostrogoth strongholds like Pavia against invading forces allowed pockets of Ostrogothic rule to limp along until finally being defeated in 561.\nPavia and the peninsula of Italy did not remain long under the rule of the Eastern Roman Empire, for in 568 CE a new people invaded Italy: the Lombards (otherwise called the Longobards). In their invasion of Italy in 568, the Lombards were led by their king Alboin (r. 560\u2013572), who would become the first Lombard king of Italy. Alboin captured much of northern Italy in 568 but his progress was halted in 569 by the fortified city of Pavia. Paul the Deacon's History of the Lombards written more than a hundred years after the Siege of Ticinum provides one of the few records of this period: \"The city of Ticinum (Pavia) at this time held out bravely, withstanding a siege more than three years, while the army of the Langobards remained close at hand on the western side. Meanwhile, Alboin, after driving out the soldiers, took possession of everything as far as Tuscany except Rome and Ravenna and some other fortified places which were situated on the shore of the sea.\" The Siege of Ticinum finally ended with the Lombards capturing the city of Pavia in 572. Pavia's strategic location and the Ostrogoth palaces located within it would make Pavia by the 620s the main capital of the Lombards' Kingdom of Pavia and the main residence for the Lombard rulers.\nLombard capital.\nUnder Lombard rule many monasteries, nunneries, and churches were built at Pavia by the devout Christian Lombard monarchs. Even though the first Lombard kings were Arian Christians, sources from the period such as Paul the Deacon have recorded that the Arian Lombards were very tolerant of their Catholic subjects' faith and that up to the 690s Arian and Catholic cathedrals coexisted in Pavia. Lombard kings, queens, and nobles would engage in building churches, monasteries, and nunneries as a method to demonstrate their piety and their wealth by extravagantly decorating these structures which in many cases would become the site of that person's tomb, as in the case of Grimoald (r. 662\u2013671) who built San Ambrogio in Pavia and buried there after his death in 671. Aripert I had the basilica of Santissimo Salvatore built in 657, which became the mausoleum of the kings of the Bavarian dynasty. Perctarit (r. 661\u2013662, 672\u2013688) and his son Cunicpert (r.679\u2013700) built a nunnery and a church at Pavia during their reigns. Lombard churches were sometimes named after those who commissioned their construction, such as San Maria Theodota in Pavia. The monastery of San Michele alla Pusterla located at Pavia was the royal monastery of the Lombard kings.\nchurch San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro was commissioned by a Lombard king in Pavia, Liutprand (r. 712\u2013744) and it would become the site of his tomb as well as two other Christian figures. In building San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro the unit of measurement used by the builders was the length of Liutprand's royal foot. The first important Christian figure interred at San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro was the previously mentioned philosopher Boethius, author of \"The Consolation of Philosophy\", who is located in the cathedral's crypt. The third and largest tomb of the three located in San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro contains the remains of St. Augustine of Hippo. St. Augustine is the early fifth-century Christian writer from Roman North Africa whose works such as \"On Christian Doctrine\" revolutionized the way in which the Christian scripture is interpreted and understood. On 1 October 1695, artisans working in San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro rediscovered St. Augustine's remains after lifting up some of the paving stones that compose the cathedral's floor. Liutprand was a very devout Christian and like many of the Lombard kings was zealous about collecting relics of saints. Liutprand paid a great deal to have the relics removed from Cagliari and brought to Pavia so that they would be out of the reach and safe from the Saracens on Sardinia where St. Augustine's remains had been resting. Very little of Liutprand's original church of San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro consecrated by Pope Zacharias in 743 remains today. Originally the roof of its apse was decorated with mosaics, making San Pietro in Ciel d'Oro the first instance of mosaics being used to decorate a Lombard church. It is now a modern church with the only significant link to its antiquity being its round apse. The Lombards built their churches in a very Romanesque style, with the best example of Lombard churches from the period of Lombardic rule being the Basilica of San Michele still intact at Pavia.\nAs the kingdom's capital, Pavia in the late seventh century also became one of the central locations of the Lombards' efforts to mint their own coinage. The bust of the Lombard king would have been etched on the coins as a symbolic gesture so that those who used the coins, mostly Lombard nobles, would understand that king had the ultimate power and control of wealth in the Kingdom of Pavia. The role of the capital implies the residence of the royal court, the presence of the central administrative structure of the kingdom, and the city's pre-eminence over the other urban centres in the military organization of the seasonal wars. The city of Pavia played a key role in the war between the Lombard Kingdom of Pavia and the Franks led by Charlemagne. In 773, Charlemagne king of the Franks declared war and invaded across the Alps into northern Italy defeating the Lombard army commanded by king Desiderius (r. 757\u2013774). Between the autumn of 773 and June of 774 Charlemagne laid siege to Pavia first and then Verona, capturing the seat of Lombard power and quickly crushing any resistance from the northern Lombard fortified cities. Pavia had been the official capital of the Lombards since the 620s, but it was also the place upon where the Lombard Kingdom in Italy ended. Upon entering Pavia in triumph, Charlemagne crowned himself king of the lands of the former Kingdom of Pavia. The Lombard kingdom and its northern territories from then onwards were a sub-kingdom of the Frankish Empire, while the Lombard southern duchy of Benevento persisted for several centuries longer with relative independence and autonomy.\nThere is little information, but, again in the eighth century, a Jewish community was also present in Pavia: Alcuin of York recalls a religious disputation that took place in the city between 750 and 766 between the Jew Julius of Pavia and the Christian Peter of Pisa.\nMedieval history.\nEmperor Lothair I, king of Italy from 822 to 850, paid attention to schools when in 825 he issued his capitulary by means of which he prescribed that students from many towns of north Italy had to attend the lectures in the school of Pavia. In 924, the Hungarians, led by the deposed Lombard king, Berengar I, besieged but did not conquer the city. With Otto II Pavia become the stable site of the court, first with queen Adelaide of Italy and then with the wife of Otto II Theophanum. During the Ottonian period Pavia enjoyed a period of well-being and development. The ancient Lombard capital distinguished itself from the other cities of the Po Valley for its fundamental function as a crossroads of important trade, both in foodstuffs and in luxury items. Commercial traffic was favored above all by the waterways used by the emperor for his travels: from Ticino the Po was easily reached, a direct axis with the Adriatic Sea and maritime traffic. Furthermore, with the advent of the Ottoni, Milan again lost importance in favor of Pavia, whose pre-eminence was sanctioned, among other things, by the minting of the Pavia mint. The importance of the city in those centuries is also highlighted by the account of the Arab geographer Ibr\u0101h\u012bm al-Turtu\u0161i, who traveled to central-western Europe between 960 and 965 and visited Verona, Rocca di Garda and Pavia, which he defined the main city of Longobardia, very populous, rich in merchants and entirely built, unlike other centers in the region, in stone, brick and lime. In Pavia, Ibr\u0101h\u012bm al-Turtu\u0161i, was very impressed by the equestrian statue of Regisole, which he places near one of the doors of the Royal palace and by the 300 jurists working inside the palace. Also at the turn of the tenth and eleventh centuries, the city was the birthplace of Liutprand of Cremona, bishop, chronicler and diplomat in the service of Berengar II first and then of Otto I and Otto II and of Lanfranc, a close collaborator of William the Conqueror and, after the Norman conquest of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom, reorganizer of the English church. Pavia remained the capital of the Italian Kingdom and the centre of royal coronations until the diminution of imperial authority there in the 12th century. In 1004, Holy Roman Emperor Henry II bloodily suppressed a revolt of the citizens of Pavia, who disputed his recent coronation as King of Italy.\nIn 1018, Pope Benedict VIII convened a council in Pavia, at which the condemnation of simony and of clerical concubinage was reaffirmed. A new council, also convened by Pope Benedict VIII and Emperor Henry II, was held in Pavia in 1022 and established severe measures to suppress Nicolaitism and simony.\nIn 1037, Emperor Conrad II, together with the army of Pavia, laid siege to Milan, although the siege was later lifted, and the devastation of the Milanese fields continued until 1039. The rivalry between Pavia and Milan turned into a war in 1056, which continued for a long time with changing fortunes (Battle of Campomorto, 1061), and Pavia called upon the emperor for assistance.\nIn 1076, during the conflicts between Emperor Henry IV and Pope Gregory VII, the imperial-loyal bishops organized a council in Pavia, at which Pope Gregory VII was excommunicated.\nIn the 12th century, Pavia acquired the status of a self-governing commune. In the political division between Guelphs and Ghibellines that characterized the Italian Middle Ages, Pavia was traditionally Ghibelline, a position that was as much supported by the rivalry with Milan as it was a mark of the defiance of the Emperor that led the Lombard League against the emperor Frederick Barbarossa, who was attempting to reassert long-dormant Imperial influence over Italy. Frederick I celebrated two coronations in Pavia (1155 and 1162) in the basilica of San Michele Maggiore and resided in a new imperial palace near the royal monastery of St. Salvatore.\nIn the following centuries Pavia was an important and active town. Pavia supported the emperor Frederick II against the Lombard League and the Pavese army took part in numerous operations in the service of the emperor and participated in the battle of Cortenuova in 1237.\nUnder the Treaty of Pavia, Emperor Louis IV granted during his stay in Italy the Electorate of the Palatinate to his brother Duke Rudolph's descendants. Pavia held out against the domination of Milan, finally yielding to the Visconti family, rulers of that city in 1359 after a difficult siege; under the Visconti Pavia became an intellectual and artistic centre, being the seat from 1361 of the University of Pavia founded around the nucleus of the old school of law, which attracted students from many countries. During the regency of Galeazzo II and Gian Galeazzo the memory of the capital's role and the Lombard traditions of Pavia jointly entered the \"propaganda\" of the new masters of Pavia: Galeazzo II moved his court from Milan to Pavia and between 1361 and 1365 Galeazzo II built a large palace (Visconti castle) with a major Park (Visconti Park), which became the official residence of the dynasty. In 1396 Gian Galeazzo commissioned the building of the Certosa, built at the end of the Visconti Park, which connected the Certosa to the castle of Pavia. The church, the last edifice of the complex to be built, was to be the family mausoleum of the Visconti. In 1389, by the will of Gian Galeazzo Visconti, some families of German Jews settled in Pavia, mainly active in financial activities. The Jewish community of Pavia grew in the 15th century, when Elijah ben Shabbetai, personal doctor of Filippo Maria Visconti and professor at the University of Pavia and, above all, Joseph Colon Trabotto, who was a 15th-century rabbi who is considered Italy's foremost Judaic scholar and Talmudist of his era, and in the same university a Hebrew course was activated in 1490. Also in the fifteenth century, by the will of the Dukes of Milan, the University of Pavia experienced a phase of great development: it began to attract students from both Italy and other European countries and taught teachers of great fame, such as Baldo degli Ubaldi, Lorenzo Valla or Giasone del Maino.\nEarly modern.\nThe Battle of Pavia (1525) marked a watershed in the city's fortunes, since by that time, the former schism between the supporters of the Pope and those of the Holy Roman Emperor had shifted to one between a French party (allied with the Pope) and a party supporting the Emperor and King of Spain Charles V. Thus, during the Valois-Habsburg Italian Wars, Pavia was naturally on the Imperial (and Spanish) side. The defeat and capture of King Francis\u00a0I of France during the battle ushered in a period of Spanish occupation. In the same years, Girolamo Cardano studied at the University of Pavia, while, probably in 1511, Leonardo da Vinci studied anatomy together with Marcantonio della Torre, professor of anatomy at the university. In 1597, by the will of Philip II of Spain, the Jewish community of Pavia had to abandon the city.\nDuring the Franco-Spanish war, Pavia was besieged from 24 July to 14 September 1655 by a large French, Savoyard and Estense army commanded by Thomas Francis, prince of Carignano, but the besiegers were unable to conquer the city. The Spanish period ended in 1706, when Pavia was occupied, after a short siege, by the Austrians led by Wirich Philipp von Daun during the War of the Spanish Succession and the city remained Austrian until 1796, when it was occupied by the French army under Napoleon. During this Austrian period the university was greatly supported by Maria Theresa of Austria and oversaw a culturally rich period due to the presence of leading scientists and humanists like Ugo Foscolo, Alessandro Volta, Lazzaro Spallanzani, and Camillo Golgi, among others. In 1796, after the Jacobins demolished Regisole (a bronze classical equestrian monument), the inhabitants of Pavia revolted against the French and the revolt was quelled by Napoleon after a furious urban fight.\nModern History.\nIn 1814, it again came under Austrian administration. In 1818 the works on the Naviglio Pavese were completed: the canal, conceived as a waterway between Milan, Pavia and Ticino and as an irrigation canal, contributed to the development of the city, so much so that a few years after its construction, in 1821, Borgo Calvenzano was built behind the Visconti Castle, a long series of arcaded buildings where there were warehouses, taverns, shipping and customs offices, hotels, stables, all in support of inland navigation. In 1820 the first steamships began to operate in the Pavia dock and, between 1854 and 1859, the \u00d6sterreichischer Lloyd organized a regular navigation line, again using steamships, between Pavia, Venice and Trieste. With the Second War of Italian Independence (1859) and the unification of Italy one year later, Pavia passed, together with the rest of Lombardy, to the Kingdom of Italy. In 1894 Albert Einstein's father moved to Pavia to start a business supplying electrical materials, the Einstein. The Einsteins lived in the city in the same building (Palazzo Cornazzani) where Ugo Foscolo and Ada Negri had lived. The young Albert came to the family several times between 1895 and 1896. During his time in Italy he wrote a short essay with the title \"On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field\".\nIn 1943 Pavia was occupied by the German army. In September 1944, the US air forces carried out several bombings on the city with the aim of destroying the three bridges over the Ticino, strategic for supplying men. Weapons and provisions the German units engaged along the Gothic line. These operations led to the destruction of the Ponte Coperto and resulted in the deaths of 119 civilians. Allied troops entered the city on 30 April 1945. At the institutional referendum of 2 June 1946 Pavia assigned 67.1% of the votes to the Republic, while the monarchy obtained only 38.2%.\nSymbols.\nThe symbols of Pavia are the coat of arms, the banner and the seal, as reported in the municipal statute. The banner used by the modern city of Pavia faithfully reproduces the one used by the municipality of Pavia at least since the 13th century: a red banner with a white cross. This symbol, probably derived from blutfahne, the original flag of the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, had a clear political meaning: to underline Pavia's belonging to the Ghibelline faction. The coat of arms of the municipality also depicts the cross which, starting from the end of the 16th century, began to be represented in an oval shape and within a rich frame, on top of which there is a mask with a crown count and often flanked by two angels holding the shield and the letters CO-PP (Comunitas Papie).\nThe seal of the municipality depicts the Regisole, an ancient late antique bronze equestrian statue originally placed inside the Royal Palace and, probably in the 11th century, placed in the cathedral square. The statue was pulled down by the Jacobins in 1796.\nGeography.\nTopography.\nThe Pavia municipality falls in the orographic system of the Po Valley formed after the alluvial filling of the wide of the gulf occupied by the Adriatic Sea before the Quaternary. A large part of the historic city center is located on the edge of the river Ticino.\nThe city occupies an area of west of Lombardy, located along the so-called \"Karst spring's belt\", where there is the meeting, in the subsoil, between geological layers with different permeability, an aspect that allows the deep waters to resurface on the surface.\nThe fluvial terrace on which Pavia stands appears engraved by two deep furrows due to the erosive action of two postglacial rivers, represented today by the Navigliaccio (originally occupied by the Calvenza) and by the Vernavola. The two valleys tend to converge just behind the area of the ancient city, so that primitive Pavia found itself on an almost isolated and difficult to reach trunk or stump of terrace, almost triangular in shape, which Ticino had to the south, the Calvenza and then the Navigliaccio to the north-west and the Vernavola to the north-east. From an elevation point of view, the city has various heights. The highest point is located in the area of the Visconti Castle, about above sea level, and then slowly declines. From an altitude of , you pass to in about . Downstream from Piazza Vittoria, where the cardo and decumanus of the Roman city crossed, the slope becomes more pronounced, up to just under above sea level near the Ponte Coperto.\nThe humidity of the area is quite high (75\u201380% is the annual average), and this causes the typical fog, starting mainly during late autumn and winter.\nMain sights.\nThe \"Certosa\", or Carthusian monastery, founded in 1396 and located north of the city.\nAmong other notable structures are:\nCulture.\nMuseums.\nPavia possesses a remarkable artistic treasure, a legacy of the city's prestigious past, divided into several museums.\nThe Pavia Civic Museums (located, in the Visconti Castle) are divided into various sections: Archaeological, which preserves one of the richest collections of Roman glass in northern Italy and important artifacts and archeological finds of Lombard period, such as the plutei of Teodota and the collection (the largest in Italy) of Lombard epigraphs, some of which belong to the tombs of kings or queens. Then there is the Romanesque and Renaissance section which exhibits sculptural, architectural and mosaic. The Romanesque collection is very rich, one of the largest in northern Italy, which also preserves important oriental architectural dishes from the Islamic and Byzantine East that adorned the facades of churches and buildings. Works by Jacopino da Tradate, Giovanni Antonio Amadeo, Cristoforo and Antonio Mantegazza and Annibale Fontana are also exhibited. The Civic Museums also house the Risorgimento museum, dedicating particular space to the social, economic and cultural life of Pavia between the 18th and 19th centuries, the collection of African objects collected by Luigi Robecchi Bricchetti during his explorations and the numismatic collection, which houses more than 50,000 coins, most of them belonging to Camillo Brambilla, which cover a chronological period between the classical Greek issues and the minting of the modern period.\nThe Pinacoteca Malaspina (which is part of the Pavia Civic Museums) established by the Marquis Luigi Malaspina di Sannazzaro (Pavia 1754\u2013 1834), houses works by important artists of the Italian and international scene, from the 13th to the 20th century, such as Gentile da Fabriano, Vincenzo Foppa, Giovanni Bellini, Antonello da Messina, Bernardino Luini, Correggio, Paolo Veronese, Guido Reni, Francesco Hayez, Giovanni Segantini and Renato Gottuso. The monumental wooden model of the Pavia cathedral from 1497 is also exhibited inside the picture gallery.\nThe university's museum network is very vast, consisting of the University History Museum of the University of Pavia, divided between the Section of Medicine, where anatomical and pathological preparations, surgical instruments are also exhibited (the surgical paraphernalia of Giovanni Alessandro Brambilla) and life-size anatomical waxes, made by the Florentine ceroplast Clemente Susini and the Physics Section which houses the physics cabinet of Alessandro Volta (where hundreds of scientific instruments from the 18th and 19th centuries are exhibited, some belonging to Alessandro Volta).\nThe University's Museum of Archeology was established by Pier Vittorio Aldini in 1819 and houses prehistoric, Egyptian, Greek, Etruscan (including a collection of clay votive offerings donated by Pope Pius XI) and Roman (some from Pompeii).\nThe Natural History Museum of the University (Kosmos), housed inside Palazzo Botta Adorno, is one of the oldest in Italy, it was in fact founded by Lazzaro Spallanzani in 1771 and which preserves a naturalistic heritage of high scientific and historical value, including nearly 400,000 finds divided between the collections of zoology, comparative anatomy and paleontology. \nThen there is the Golgi Museum, located in the same environments in which both Camillo Golgi and his students worked, rooms and laboratories that preserve both the original furnishings and the scientific instruments of the time, in order to allow the visitor to enter inside a 19th-century research center; while the Museum of Electrical Technique, built in 2007, illustrates the history of electrical technology within five sections. \nThen come the Museum of Chemistry, that of Physics and the Museum of Mineralogy, founded by Lazzaro Spallanzani.\nNext to the Cathedral, inside the crypt of the ancient cathedral of Santa Maria del Popolo (11th century), is the Diocesan Museum of Pavia, inaugurated in 2023, which collects silverware and liturgical objects (among which a crosier in elephantine ivory carved, painted and gilded made by a Sicilian workshop by the hand of Arab craftsmen and dating back to the end of the 12th century), sculptures and paintings, such as the panel of the \"Madonna della Misericordia\" by Lorenzo Fasolo.\nLibraries and archives.\nThe history of the municipality of Pavia, from the tenth to the twentieth century, can be told through the amount of documentation collected within the Archivio Storico Civico (established in 1895), which also contains collections containing the archives of many aristocratic families from Pavia and of city personalities, such as Gaetano Sacchi, Benedetto Cairoli and Luigi Robecchi Bricchetti. The Archivio di Stato (founded in 1959) also collect funds from noble archives (Beccaria, Bottigella, Belcredi, Malaspina) and more, such as the Mori collection, which collects the papers of Cesare Mori. Also preserved in the archive are the acts of the notaries of Pavia (1256\u20131907), the maps of the Teresian Cadastre of the Pavia area (18th\u201319th centuries), and the archives of the university (1341\u20131897), of the San Matteo Hospital (1063\u20131900), the Prefecture, the Police Headquarters and the Court. Equally important is the Archivio Storico Diocesano, which houses the documentation of the diocese of Pavia since the tenth century.\nThe Centro per gli studi sulla tradizione manoscritta di autori moderni e contemporanei (Formerly the \"Research Center on the Manuscript Tradition of Modern and Contemporary Authors\", also known as the \"Manuscript Center\"), founded by Maria Corti in 1980, is responsible for the conservation and to the study of modern and contemporary archival and bibliographic heritage. The center, among the most important of its kind in Italy, preserves collections of documentary material (manuscripts, typescripts, letters, first editions, libraries, photographs, drawings, furnishings, paintings and other objects) relating to writers, intellectuals, publishers, artists and scientists of the past two centuries. Among the archival collections preserved we remember those of Alberto Arbasino, Riccardo Bacchelli, Romano Bilenchi, Emilio De Marchi, Ennio Flaiano, Alfonso Gatto, Tonino Guerra, Claudio Magris, Luigi Meneghello, Eugenio Montale, Indro Montanelli, Salvatore Quasimodo, Mario Rigoni Stern, Amelia Rosselli, Umberto Saba and Roberto Sanesi.\nThe library tradition of Pavia among its origins from the Visconteo Sforzesca Library, established in the second half of the fourteenth century by Gian Galeazzo Visconti in the Visconti Castle, where the precious illuminated manuscripts of the dukes of Milan were kept. In 1499, with the fall of Ludovico il Moro, the king of France Louis XII took most of the manuscripts from the castle and they are now kept in the Biblioth\u00e9que Nationale de France in Paris. Of the nearly one thousand manuscripts that made up the library, only one codex remained in Pavia: \"I Trionfi\" di Francesco Petrarca kept in the Biblioteca Universitaria.\nIn the second half of the 16th century, three historic libraries arose in the city: that of the Episcopal Seminary and the libraries of the Borromeo and Ghislieri Colleges, founded respectively by Charles Borromeo and Pope Pius V to allow access to the university (then the only one of all the Duchy of Milan) to promising young people, but with scarce economic resources. In 1754, by the will of Empress Maria Theresa, the Biblioteca Universitaria was created, the most important in terms of book heritage in the city, which also preserves 1,404 manuscripts, 702 incunabula, 1,153 parchments (from 1103 to 1787), the 3,592 old prints, and 1,287 old geographical maps.\nIn 1887 the Biblioteca Civica Carlo Bonetta was established, the main seat of the library system of the city which is divided into eight loan and reading points distributed evenly over the entire municipal area.\nAmong the university libraries we should mention the Library of Humanistic Studies, born from the amalgamation of several libraries of the university's humanistic faculties, such as that of archeology (built in 1819), the Library of Science and Technology, where the library also merged of the Botanical Garden (established in 1773), the Law Library (1880), The Science Library, which also houses the volumes of the Medical and Surgical Society of Pavia (founded by Camillo Golgi in 1885), the Area Library Medica Adolfo Ferrata, the Political Science Library (built in 1925), the Economics Library and the Giasone del Maino College Library (born in 2000).\nCuisine.\nCapital of a province shaped like a bunch of grapes\u2014as described by Gianni Brera\u2014Pavia is a land that yields many fruits, the origin of a variety of local dishes. Thanks to its wealth of spring waters and waterways, Pavia and its surrounding territory have become one of Italy\u2019s main rice-producing areas. It is no coincidence, then, that numerous recipes showcase the many facets of this grain. Among them is risotto alla certosina, said to have been created by the monks of the Certosa monastery and made with river crayfish, carrots, and onions; risotto with black-eyed peas; risotto with sausage and Bonarda wine; and risotto with wild hops (known in dialect as \"\u00fcrtis\").\nAmong the first courses, in addition to rice-based dishes, a notable mention goes to zuppa pavese, a rustic soup traditionally believed to have been invented by a peasant woman using the few ingredients she had on hand\u2014broth, eggs, and cheese\u2014to feed the King of France, Francis I, after his crushing defeat outside the city walls.\nAs for main courses, rag\u00f2 alla pavese stands out\u2014a local, lighter version of the better-known cassoeula, prepared solely with pork ribs. Other traditional dishes include \"munighili\" (Pavia\u2019s version of mondeghili), stufato alla pavese (Pavia-style stew), \"b\u00fcseca\" (veal tripe in the local style), ossobuco with peas (\"os b\u00fc\u0161 cum i erbion\"), and \u201cescaped birds\u201d (\"\u00fcslin scap\u00e0\")\u2014thin veal slices stuffed with pancetta and sage.\nMeat, especially when boiled, is traditionally served with two types of sauces: \"peverada\"\u2014already mentioned by Opicino de Canistris in the 14th century\u2014made with bell peppers, celery, anchovies, and eggs; and \"bagnet verd\", prepared with parsley, anchovies, garlic, and capers.\nAlongside meat dishes, Pavia\u2019s cuisine also includes many freshwater fish specialties, such as anguilla alla borghigiana (named after the ancient suburb of the city across the Ticino River beyond the Ponte Coperto), trout in white wine, and frittata with alborelle (a small freshwater fish). Not to be forgotten are frogs, served in risotto or stewed, and snails, often cooked with porcini mushrooms.\nAmong desserts, in addition to the well-known torta del paradiso, are pumpkin pie (\"turt\u00e2 d\u2019s\u00fcc\u00e2\"), San Sirini\u2014small, round sponge cakes soaked generously in rum and covered in dark chocolate, traditionally made in the weeks around 9 December, the feast day of Saint Siro\u2014and \"sf\u00e2s\u00f6\", typical carnival fritters.\nPanettone is found in a register of expenses of the Borromeo college of Pavia in 1599: on 23 December of that year in the list of courses provided for lunch Christmas costs also appear for 5 pounds of butter, 2 of raisins and 3 ounces of spices given to the baker to make 13 \"loaves\" to be given to college students on Christmas Day.\nBelonging to the province of Pavia, in particular to Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese are Pavese agnolotti, a type of stuffed pasta. The filling of the Pavese agnolotti is based on Pavese stew. The recipe for this stuffed pasta is characterized by influences from Piedmontese and Piacentino cuisine, characteristics of areas that border the Oltrep\u00f2 Pavese. \nThe shape of the pasta was based on the Piedmontese agnolotti, and the filling of Pavese stew is based on \"stracotto alla piacentina\", which is the filling for Piacentino anolini. The Piedmontese agnolotti, in particular, differ from the Pavese agnolotti due to the filling, which is instead based on roast meat. Pavese agnolotti is a typical dish of the Christmas tradition, and are consumed during celebrations and important occasions.\nParks and gardens.\nThe municipality of Pavia is part of the Parco naturale lombardo della Valle del Ticino and preserves two forests (Strict nature reserve Bosco Siro Negri and Bosco Grande nature reserve) that reflect the original state of the nature of the Po valley before the arrival of the Romans, before human settlement. To the north and east of the city, a small stream, originating from springs, the Vernavola, gives rise to a deep valley, escaped from urbanization, which is home to the Vernavola Park, while to the west, the green ring around Pavia is closed by the Sora Park. 9% of the surface of the municipality of Pavia is occupied by natural areas, parks or gardens (about , of which are covered with broad-leaved woods).\nEducation.\nSchools.\nIn 2021 there were over 45 schools of all types and levels, including: over 26 schools between Kindergarten and Primary schools (including one bilingual: Italian-English), 8 Lower secondary schools and 11 upper secondary schools. Some of these boast centuries of history, such as the Ugo Foscolo classical lyceum, originally started in 1557 near the convent of Santa Maria di Canepanova by the Barnabite Fathers or the Liceo Scientifico Torquato Taramelli (scientific lyceum), heir to the Normal Schools established in 1799.\nUniversities, colleges and other institutions.\nPavia is a major Italian college town, with several institutes, universities and academies, including the ancient University of Pavia. Here is an incomplete list of the main institutions located in the city:\nHealthcare.\nAlthough the ancient hospitals intended for the reception and treatment of the sick and travelers arose in the city at least from the 8th century, the first Pavia hospitals serving the entire city of which documented traces remain are the hospital of Santa Maria in Betlem (attested from 1130) and that of San Lazzaro (1157), which were operational for centuries. After 1449, they ceded their primary role to the San Matteo Hospital which became one of the most important Pavia institutions. The ancient dedication to San Matteo is still carried by the San Matteo Polyclinic, whose full name is the Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Hospital.\nIn addition to Policlinico San Matteo Hospital, Pavia has five hospitals, including public and affiliated, specialist or general hospitals that cover the pathologies provided for by national protocols. Patients from other regions often resort to them. Among the hospitals, there are several that belong to the category of scientific hospitalization and treatment institutes, the so-called IRCCS. We recall, among the specialized ones, the Casimiro Mondino National Neurological Institute and the Maugeri Scientific Clinical Institute, while among the general hospitals the most important are the Institute of Care of the City of Pavia and the Santa Margherita Institute of Rehabilitation and Care. In addition, Pavia hosts the National Center for Androtherapy Oncology (CNAO Foundation), the first hospital and clinical and radiobiological research in the center in Italy (the fourth country in the world to set up one). It was set up in 2010 by the Ministry of Health and specializes in the treatment of radioresistant tumors through the use of particle therapy. The Center also carries out scientific research to identify effective tools in the fight against cancer.\nThe CNAO uses a synchrotron where particles are produced in two sources, these are pre-accelerated by a linear accelerator and sent to an injection line for transfer into the synchrotron ring, where they are further accelerated and extracted.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Starting from the 1980s Pavia has undergone a notable demographic involution due to the transfer of many families within the municipalities immediately bordering the capital. Within the urban agglomeration of the city of Pavia, according to calculations made by applying the international criterion of Functional Urban Areas, approximately 121,000 inhabitants would reside.\nEthnic groups.\nAccording to the latest statistics conducted by ISTAT, approximately 14.54% of the population consists of non-Italians. About the 33% of the immigrant population consists of those of various other European origins (chiefly Romanian, Ukrainian, and Albanian), the remaining are those with non-European origins, chiefly Dominicans (5,99%), Egyptians (5,84%), Chinese (4,81%) and Cameroonian (4,03%).\nReligion.\nThe first religious confession in Pavia is the Catholic one, which, unlike other areas of Lombardy, is of the Roman rite, with the exclusion, within the city, of the church of San Giorgio in Montefalcone, entrusted to the Ukrainian community of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church. The second religious community is the Eastern Orthodox Church one, like the Romanian one in via Repubblica and the Greek Orthodox church of Sant'Ambrogio, in via Olevano. Then there is the Muslim, who finds herself in two Islamic cultural centers (via San Giovannino and Via Pollack), while for some time there have been places of worship for Protestants in Pavia, such as the Waldensian Church in via Alessandro Rolla, the Evangelical Church of Assemblies of God in via Angelo Ferrari, the Evangelical Church of Reconciliation in viale Cremona, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in via Grevellone and the Kingdom Hall of Jehovah's Witnesses in via Langosco.\nEconomy.\nAgriculture.\nThe 63.3% of the surface of the municipality of Pavia (about ) is destined for agriculture and in particular for the cultivation of rice (about ), which spread, starting from the 14th century, mainly in marshy land until it became, especially from the 18th century, the main cultivation. The large quantities of water required for the rice has meant that over the centuries a very dense irrigation network has been designed and built which still today characterizes the landscape of the Pavia countryside. It should also be noted that the city is the capital of the Italian province with the largest rice production in the country: over of the provincial land are used for paddy fields. The Province of Pavia alone produces as much rice as the entirety of Spain. The other crops present within the municipal area are that of corn and wheat (), poplar groves (), while very limited areas are used for meadows (), orchards and vegetable gardens (). Still within the territory of the municipality of Pavia, there are still around fifty farms destined for agricultural activity, 18 of which host cattle farms, where about 820 heads are raised.\nIndustry.\nThe city experienced a strong development of industry starting from the 1880s, so much so that it also hosted establishments of national importance, such as Necchi or the first large Italian factory of artificial silk and synthetic fabrics, the Snia Viscosa, built in 1905. In 1951 almost 27% of Pavia's workforce was employed in the industrial sector. Starting from the 1970s, the city underwent a sudden deindustrialization which led to the closure of many companies, especially those in the chemical and mechanical sectors, while those related to the food sector, such as Riso Scotti, pharmaceutical companies and related to packaging and labeling.\nTransport.\nPavia railway station, opened in 1862, forms part of the Milan\u2013Genoa railway, and is also a terminus of four secondary railways, linking Pavia with Alessandria, Mantua, Vercelli and Stradella.\nPavia is also connected to Milan through the S13 line of the Milan suburban railway service with trains every 30 minutes. Pavia P. Garibaldi is a small railway station on the Pavia\u2013Mantua railway.\nThe nearest airports are Milan's Malpensa Airport, Linate Airport and Bergamo Airport which can easily be reached by car, train and bus.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nPavia is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPeople.\nPeople born in Pavia include:\nPeople who have lived in Pavia include:\nAmong the illustrious scholars who studied or taught at the University of Pavia, the following are at least worth remembering: playwright and librettist Carlo Goldoni (1707\u20131793), Gerolamo Cardano, mathematician Gerolamo Saccheri (1667\u20131733), Ugo Foscolo, Alessandro Volta the inventor of the battery, biologist and physiologist Lazzaro Spallanzani (1729\u20131799), anatomist Antonio Scarpa (1752\u20131832), physician Carlo Forlanini (1847\u20131918), the Nobel laureate biologist Camillo Golgi, the Nobel laureate chemist Giulio Natta (1903\u20131979) and Emanuele Severino (1929\u20132020), one of the most important contemporary Italian philosophers.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nPublished in the 19th century\nPublished in the 20th century"}
{"id": "44935", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44935", "title": "World heritage", "text": ""}
{"id": "44937", "revid": "40123752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44937", "title": "Billboard Charts", "text": ""}
{"id": "44940", "revid": "10146143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44940", "title": "World Heritage Site", "text": "Place of significance listed by UNESCO\nWorld Heritage Sites are landmarks and areas with legal protection under an international treaty administered by UNESCO for having cultural, historical, or scientific significance. The sites are judged to contain \"cultural and natural heritage around the world considered to be of outstanding value to humanity\".\nTo be selected, a World Heritage Site is nominated by its host country and determined by the UNESCO's World Heritage Committee to be a unique landmark which is geographically and historically identifiable, having a special cultural or physical significance, and to be under a sufficient system of legal protection. World Heritage Sites might be ancient ruins or historical structures, buildings, cities, deserts, forests, islands, lakes, monuments, mountains, wilderness areas, and others. \nA World Heritage Site may signify a remarkable accomplishment of humankind and serve as evidence of humanity's intellectual history on the planet, or it might be a place of great natural beauty. As of July\u00a02025[ [update]], a total of 1,248 World Heritage Sites exist across 170 countries.\nThe sites are intended for practical conservation for posterity, which otherwise would be subject to risk from human or animal trespassing, unmonitored, uncontrolled or unrestricted access, or threat from local administrative negligence. Sites are demarcated by UNESCO as protected zones. The World Heritage Sites list is maintained by the international World Heritage Program administered by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee, composed of 21 \"states parties\" that are elected by the United Nations General Assembly, and advised by reviews of international panels of experts in natural or cultural history, and education. \nThe Program catalogues, names, and conserves sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common culture and heritage of humankind. The programme began with the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage, which was adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO on 16 November 1972. Since then, 196 states have ratified the convention, making it one of the most widely recognised international agreements and the world's most popular cultural programme.\nHistory.\nOrigin.\nIn 1954, the government of Egypt decided to build the new Aswan High Dam, whose resulting future reservoir would eventually inundate a large stretch of the Nile valley containing cultural treasures of ancient Egypt and ancient Nubia. In 1959, the governments of Egypt and Sudan requested the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) to assist them to protect and rescue the endangered monuments and sites. \nIn 1960, the Director-General of UNESCO launched the International Campaign to Save the Monuments of Nubia. This resulted in the excavation and recording of hundreds of sites, the recovery of thousands of objects, as well as the salvage and relocation to higher ground of several important temples. The most famous of these are the temple complexes of Abu Simbel and Philae. The campaign ended in 1980 and was considered a success. To thank countries which especially contributed to the campaign's success, Egypt donated four temples; the Temple of Dendur was moved to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City, the Temple of Debod to the Parque del Oeste in Madrid, the Temple of Taffeh to the Rijksmuseum van Oudheden in Leiden, and the Temple of Ellesyia to Museo Egizio in Turin.The project cost US$80\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024), about $40\u00a0million of which was collected from 50 countries. The project's success led to other safeguarding campaigns, such as saving Venice and its lagoon in Italy, the ruins of Mohenjo-daro in Pakistan, and the Borobodur Temple Compounds in Indonesia. Together with the International Council on Monuments and Sites, UNESCO then initiated a draft convention to protect cultural heritage.\nConvention and background.\nThe convention (the signed document of international agreement) guiding the work of the World Heritage Committee was developed over a seven-year period (1965\u20131972).\nThe United States initiated the idea of safeguarding places of high cultural or natural importance. A White House conference in 1965 called for a \"World Heritage Trust\" to preserve \"the world's superb natural and scenic areas and historic sites for the present and the future of the entire world citizenry\". The International Union for Conservation of Nature developed similar proposals in 1968, which were presented in 1972 at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm. Under the World Heritage Committee, signatory countries are required to produce and submit periodic data reporting providing the committee with an overview of each participating nation's implementation of the World Heritage Convention and a \"snapshot\" of current conditions at World Heritage properties.\nBased on the draft convention that UNESCO had initiated, a single text was eventually agreed upon by all parties, and the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage was adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO on 16 November 1972. The convention came into force on 17 December 1975. As of November 2024, it has been ratified by 196 states: 192 UN member states, two UN observer states (the Holy See and the State of Palestine), and two states in free association with New Zealand (the Cook Islands and Niue). Only one UN member state, Liechtenstein, has not ratified the convention.\nObjectives.\nBy assigning places as World Heritage Sites, UNESCO wants to help preserve them for future generations. Its motivation is that \"heritage is our legacy from the past, what we live with today\" and that both cultural and natural heritage are \"irreplaceable sources of life and inspiration\". UNESCO's mission with respect to World Heritage consists of eight sub targets. These include encouraging the commitment of countries and local population to World Heritage conservation in various ways, providing emergency assistance for sites in danger, offering technical assistance and professional training, and supporting States Parties' public awareness-building activities.\nBeing listed as a World Heritage Site can positively affect the site, its environment, and interactions between them. A listed site gains international recognition and legal protection, and can obtain funds from, among others, the World Heritage Fund to facilitate its conservation under certain conditions. UNESCO reckons the restorations of the following four sites among its success stories: Angkor in Cambodia, the Old City of Dubrovnik in Croatia, the Wieliczka Salt Mine near Krak\u00f3w in Poland, and the Ngorongoro Conservation Area in Tanzania. Additionally, the local population around a site may benefit from significantly increased tourism revenue. When there are significant interactions between people and the natural environment, these can be recognised as \"cultural landscapes\".\nNomination process.\nA country must first identify its significant cultural and natural sites in a document known as the Tentative List. Next, it can place sites selected from that list into a Nomination File, which is evaluated by the International Council on Monuments and Sites and the World Conservation Union. A country may not nominate sites that have not been first included on its Tentative List. The two international bodies make recommendations to the World Heritage Committee for new designations. The Committee meets once a year to determine which nominated properties to add to the World Heritage List; sometimes it defers its decision or requests more information from the country that nominated the site. There are ten selection criteria \u2013 a site must meet at least one to be included on the list.\nSelection criteria.\nUntil 2004, there were six sets of criteria for cultural heritage and four for natural heritage. In 2005, UNESCO modified these and now has one set of ten criteria. Nominated sites must be of \"outstanding universal value\" and must meet at least one of the ten criteria. \nExtensions and other modifications.\nA country may request to extend or reduce the boundaries, modify the official name, or change the selection criteria of one of its already listed sites. Any proposal for a significant boundary change or to modify the site's selection criteria must be submitted as if it were a new nomination, including first placing it on the Tentative List and then onto the Nomination File. \nA request for a minor boundary change, one that does not have a significant impact on the extent of the property or affect its \"outstanding universal value\", is also evaluated by the advisory bodies before being sent to the committee. Such proposals can be rejected by either the advisory bodies or the Committee if they judge it to be a significant change instead of a minor one. Proposals to change a site's official name are sent directly to the committee.\nEndangerment.\nA site may be added to the List of World Heritage in Danger if conditions threaten the characteristics for which the landmark or area was inscribed on the World Heritage List. Such problems may involve armed conflict and war, natural disasters, pollution, poaching, or uncontrolled urbanisation or human development. This danger list is intended to increase international awareness of the threats and to encourage counteractive measures. Threats to a site can be either proven imminent threats or potential dangers that could have adverse effects on a site.\nThe state of conservation for each site on the danger list is reviewed yearly; after this, the Committee may request additional measures, delete the property from the danger list if the threats have ceased, or consider deletion from the World Heritage List entirely if the site's integrity no longer exists or has fallen out of local protection. Only three sites have ever been delisted: the Arabian Oryx Sanctuary in Oman, the Dresden Elbe Valley in Germany, and the Liverpool Maritime Mercantile City in the United Kingdom.\nThe Arabian Oryx Sanctuary was directly delisted in 2007, instead of first being put on the danger list, after the Omani government decided to reduce the protected area's size by 90%. The Dresden Elbe Valley was first placed on the danger list in 2006 when the World Heritage Committee decided that plans to construct the Waldschl\u00f6sschen Bridge would significantly alter the valley's landscape. In response, the Dresden City Council attempted to stop the bridge's construction. However, after several court decisions allowed the building of the bridge to proceed, the valley was removed from the World Heritage List in 2009. Liverpool's World Heritage status was revoked in July 2021, following developments (Liverpool Waters and Bramley-Moore Dock Stadium) on the northern docks of the World Heritage site leading to the \"irreversible loss of (historical) attributes\" on the site.\nThe first global assessment to quantitatively measure threats to Natural World Heritage Sites found that 63% of sites have been damaged by increasing human pressures including encroaching roads, agriculture infrastructure and settlements over the last two decades. These activities endanger Natural World Heritage Sites and could compromise their unique values. Of the Natural World Heritage Sites that contain forest, 91% experienced some loss since 2000. Many of them are more threatened than previously thought and require immediate conservation action.\nThe destruction of cultural assets and identity-establishing sites is one of the primary goals of modern asymmetrical warfare. Terrorists, rebels, and mercenary armies deliberately smash archaeological sites, sacred and secular monuments and loot libraries, archives and museums. The UN, United Nations peacekeeping and UNESCO in cooperation with Blue Shield International are active in preventing such acts. \"No strike lists\" are also created to protect cultural assets from air strikes.\nThe founding president of Blue Shield International Karl von Habsburg summed it up with the words: \"Without the local community and without the local participants, that would be completely impossible\".\nCriticism.\nThe UNESCO-administered project has attracted criticism. This was caused by perceived under-representation of heritage sites outside Europe, disputed decisions on site selection and adverse impact of mass tourism on sites unable to manage rapid growth in visitor numbers. A large lobbying industry has grown around the awards, because World Heritage listing can significantly increase tourism returns. Site listing bids are often lengthy and costly, putting poorer countries at a disadvantage. Eritrea's efforts to promote Asmara are one example.\nIn 2016, the Australian government was reported to have successfully lobbied for the World Heritage Site Great Barrier Reef conservation efforts to be removed from a UNESCO report titled \"World Heritage and Tourism in a Changing Climate\". The Australian government's actions, involving considerable expense for lobbying and visits for diplomats, were in response to their concern about the negative impact that an \"at risk\" label could have on tourism revenue at a previously designated UNESCO World Heritage Site. \nIn 2021, international scientists recommended UNESCO to put the Great Barrier Reef on the endangered list, as global climate change had caused a further negative state of the corals and water quality. Again, the Australian government campaigned against this, and in July 2021, the World Heritage Committee, made up of diplomatic representatives of 21 countries, ignored UNESCO's assessment, based on studies of scientists, \"that the reef was clearly in danger from climate change and so should be placed on the list.\" According to environmental protection groups, this \"decision was a victory for cynical lobbying and [...] Australia, as custodians of the world's biggest coral reef, was now on probation.\"\nSeveral listed locations, such as Casco Viejo in Panama and H\u1ed9i An in Vietnam, have struggled to strike a balance between the economic benefits of catering to greatly increased visitor numbers after the recognition and preserving the original culture and local communities.\nAnother criticism is that there is a homogeneity to these sites, which contain similar styles, visitor centres, etc., meaning that a lot of the individuality of these sites has been removed to become more attractive to tourists.\nAnthropologist Jasper Chalcraft said that World Heritage recognition often ignores contemporary local usage of certain sites. This leads to conflicts on the local level which can result in the site being damaged. Rock art under world heritage protection at the Tadrart Acacus in Libya have occasionally been intentionally destroyed. Chalcraft links this destruction to Libyan national authorities prioritizing World Heritage status over local sensibilities by limiting access to the sites without consulting with the local population.\nUNESCO has also been criticized for alleged geographic bias, racism, and colourism in world heritage inscription. A major chunk of all world heritage inscriptions are located in regions whose populations generally have lighter skin, including Europe, East Asia, and North America.\nStatistics.\nThe World Heritage Committee has divided the world into five geographic regions: Africa, Arab states, Asia and the Pacific, Europe and North America, and Latin America and the Caribbean. Russia and the Caucasus states are classified as European, while Mexico and the Caribbean are classified as belonging to the Latin America and the Caribbean region. The UNESCO geographic regions also give greater emphasis on administrative, rather than geographic associations. Hence, Gough Island, located in the South Atlantic, is part of the Europe and North America region because the British government nominated the site.\nThe table below includes a breakdown of the sites according to these regions and their classification (as of \u00a02025[ [update]]):\nCountries with 15 or more sites.\nThis overview lists the 23 countries with 15 or more World Heritage Sites (): \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44941", "revid": "20542576", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44941", "title": "Dogma", "text": "Beliefs accepted by members of a group without question\nDogma, in its broadest sense, is any belief held definitively and without the possibility of reform. It may be in the form of an official system of principles or doctrines of a religion, such as Judaism, Roman Catholicism, Protestantism, or Islam, the positions of a philosopher or philosophical school, such as Stoicism, and political belief systems such as fascism, socialism, progressivism, liberalism, and conservatism.\nIn the pejorative sense, dogma refers to enforced decisions, such as those of aggressive political interests or authorities. More generally, it is applied to some strong belief that its adherents are not willing to discuss rationally. This attitude is named as a dogmatic one, or dogmatism, and is often used to refer to matters related to religion, though this pejorative sense strays far from the formal sense in which it is applied to religious belief. The pejorative sense is not limited to theistic attitudes alone and is often used with respect to political or philosophical dogmas.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"dogma\" was adopted in the 17th century from , derived from the from the . The plural is based on the , though \"dogmas\" may be more commonly used in English.\nIn philosophy.\nPyrrhonism.\nIn Pyrrhonism, \"dogma\" refers to assent to a proposition about a non-evident matter. The main principle of Pyrrhonism is expressed by the word \"acatalepsia\", which connotes the ability to withhold assent from doctrines regarding the truth of things in their own nature; against every statement its contradiction may be advanced with equal justification. Consequently, Pyrrhonists withhold assent with regard to non-evident propositions, i.e., dogmas. Pyrrhonists argue that dogmatists, such as the Stoics, Epicureans, and Peripatetics, have failed to demonstrate that their doctrines regarding non-evident matters are true.\nIn religion.\nChristianity.\nIn Christianity, a \"dogma\" is a belief communicated by divine revelation and defined by the Church, The organization's formal religious positions may be taught to new members or simply communicated to those who choose to become members. It is rare for agreement with an organization's formal positions to be a requirement for attendance, though membership may be required for some church activities.\nIn the narrower sense of the church's official interpretation of divine revelation, theologians distinguish between defined and non-defined dogmas, the former being those set out by authoritative bodies such as the Roman Curia for the Catholic Church, the latter being those which are universally held but have not been officially defined, the nature of Christ as universal redeemer being an example. The term originated in late ancient Greek philosophy legal usage, in which it meant a decree or command, and came to be used in the same sense in early Christian theology. Protestants to differing degrees are less formal about doctrine, and often rely on denomination-specific beliefs, but seldom refer to these beliefs as dogmata. The first unofficial institution of dogma in the Christian church was by Saint Irenaeus in his \"Demonstration of Apostolic Teaching\", which provides a 'manual of essentials' constituting the 'body of truth'.\nCatholicism and Eastern Christianity.\nFor Catholicism and Eastern Christianity, the dogmata are contained in the Nicene Creed and the canon laws of two, three, seven, or twenty ecumenical councils (depending on whether one is Church of the East, Oriental Orthodox, Eastern Orthodox, or Roman Catholic). These tenets are summarized by John of Damascus in his \"Exact Exposition of the Orthodox Faith\", which is the third book of his main work, titled \"The Fount of Knowledge\". In this book he takes a dual approach in explaining each article of the faith: one, directed at Christians, where he uses quotes from the Bible and, occasionally, from works of other Church Fathers, and the second, directed both at members of non-Christian religions and at atheists, for whom he employs Aristotelian logic and dialectics.\nThe decisions of fourteen later councils that Catholics hold as dogmatic and a small number of decrees promulgated by popes exercising papal infallibility (for examples, see Immaculate Conception and Assumption of Mary) are considered as being a part of the Catholic Church's sacred body of dogma.\nJudaism.\nIn the Jewish commentary tradition, \"dogma\" is a principle by which the Rabbanim can try the proofs of faith about the existence of God and truth; \"dogma\" is what is necessarily true for rational thinking. In Jewish Kabbalah, a \"dogma\" is an \"archetype\" of the Pardes or \"Torah Nistar\", the secrets of Bible. In the relation between \"logical thinking\" and \"rational Kabbalah\" the \"Partzuf\" is the means to identify \"dogma\".\nBuddhism.\nView or position (; ) is a central idea in Buddhism that corresponds with the Western notion of dogma. In Buddhist thought, a view is not a simple, abstract collection of propositions, but a charged interpretation of experience which intensely shapes and affects thought, sensation, and action. Having the proper mental attitude toward views is therefore considered an integral part of the Buddhist path, as sometimes correct views need to be put into practice and incorrect views abandoned, while at other times all views are seen as obstacles to enlightenment.\nIslam.\nIn the context of Islam, dogma is best translated as \u0639\u0642\u064a\u062f\u0629 (\u02bfAq\u012bda).\n\u02bfAq\u012bda refers to the core tenets of Islamic belief, such as faith in Allah, the prophets, the afterlife, and other essential doctrines. It is a fundamental aspect of Islamic theology, and different Islamic schools (e.g., Ash\u02bfar\u012b, M\u0101tur\u012bd\u012b, and Salaf\u012b) have varying interpretations of \u02bfAq\u012bda while agreeing on its foundational principles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44942", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44942", "title": "Reggio Calabria", "text": "City in Calabria, Italy\nReggio di Calabria (; ), commonly and officially referred to as Reggio Calabria, or simply Reggio by its inhabitants, is the largest city in Calabria as well as the seat of the Metropolitan City of Reggio Calabria. As of 2025, it has 168,572 inhabitants and is the twenty-first most populous city in Italy, after Modena and other Italian cities. Reggio Calabria is located near the center of the Mediterranean and is known for its climate, ethnic and cultural diversity. It is the third economic centre of mainland Southern Italy. About 511,935 people live in its metropolitan city.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;Reggio is located on the \"toe\" of the Italian Peninsula and is separated from the island of Sicily by the Strait of Messina. It is situated on the slopes of the Aspromonte, a long, craggy mountain range that runs up through the centre of the region.\nAs a major functional pole in the region, it has strong historical, cultural and economic ties with the city of Messina, which lies across the strait in Sicily, forming a metro city of less than 1 million people.\nReggio is the oldest city in the region, and during ancient times, it was an important and flourishing colony of Magna Graecia. Reggio has a modern urban system, set up after the catastrophic earthquake of 1908, which destroyed most of the city. Before that seismic event, the region had been subject to several other previous earthquakes. The seismicity is caused by Reggio being on the Eurasian Plate near the faultline where it meets the African Plate that runs through the strait, dividing the two European regions of Calabria and Sicily into two different tectonic regions.\nIt is a major economic centre for regional services and transport on the southern shores of the Mediterranean. Reggio, with Naples and Taranto, is home to one of the most important archaeological museums, the National Archaeological Museum of Magna Gr\u00e6cia, dedicated to Ancient Greece (which houses the Bronzes of Riace, rare example of Greek bronze sculpture, which became one of the symbols of the city). Reggio is the seat, since 1907, of the Archeological Superintendence of Bruttium and Lucania. The city is home to football club Reggina, that previously played in the Italian top flight.\nThe city centre, consisting primarily of Liberty buildings, has a linear development along the coast with parallel streets, and the promenade is dotted with rare magnolias and exotic palms. Reggio has commonly used popular nicknames: The \"City of Bronzes\", after the Bronzes of Riace that are testimonials of its Greek origins; the \"City of bergamot\", which is exclusively cultivated in the region; and the \"City of Fatamorgana\", an optical phenomenon visible in Italy only from the Reggio seaside.\nEtymology.\nDuring its 3,500-year history Reggio has often been renamed. Each name corresponds with the city's major historical phases:\nThe toponym of the city might derive from an Italic word (meaning 'king', cognate with Latin ). Ancient Greek and Roman etymologists derived it from the Greek (, 'break'), referring to a mythic earthquake in which Sicily was broken off from the Italian mainland.\nHistory.\nAncient times.\nThe history of the area before the arrival of the Greeks in the eighth century BC is not reliably known. Mythical accounts record a series of different peoples in the region, including the Osci (sometimes referred to as \"Opici\"), Trojans, Oenotrians, Ligures, Ausones, Mamertines, Taureani, Sicels, Morgetes and Itali. They also claim that the land around Reggio was first known as Saturnia, or Neptunia. The term 'Italia' initially referred to the area around Reggio itself, before expanding to cover present-day southern Calabria (later known as Bruttium), and finally becoming the name of the whole Italian peninsula around the third century BC. Allegedly, the name derives from king Italus, an Oenotrian king of the region.\nAfter Cumae, Reggio was one of the first Greek colonies in southern Italy. The colony was settled by the inhabitants of Chalcis in 730 or 743 BC on the site of the older settlement, Erythra (), meaning 'red'. The legendary founder of the city was King Iocastus, son of Aeolus, who was later said to be buried on the Punta Calamizzi promontory (called \"Pallantion\") and appeared on the city's coinage. The colony retained the name of \"Rhegion\" (). Pseudo-Scylax also writes that it was a Greek city.\nRhegion was one of the most important cities in Magna Graecia, reaching great economic and political power during the 5th and 6th centuries BC under Anaxilas, who reigned as tyrant from 494 to 476 BC. Anaxilas conquered Zancle (modern Messina), extending Rhegian control over both shores of the Straits of Messina. He attempted to conquer Locri as well in 477 BC but was rebuffed. When he died in 476 BC, his two sons were too young to rule, so power was held by their regent Micythus. Under his rule, Rhegion founded a colony, Pyxous (modern Policastro Bussentino) in Campania in 471 BC. Hieron I of Syracuse orchestrated Micythus' removal from power in 467 BC, after which Anaxilas' sons ruled on their own until they were deposed in 461 BC. During the Peloponnesian War, Rhegion allied with Athens. An Athenian inscription (\"IG\" I3 53) reports a renewal of this alliance in 433 BC. The Athenians supported Rhegion in a war with Locri during the First Sicilian Expedition (427\u2013425 BC). However, when the Athenians launched the much larger Sicilian Expedition of 415\u2013413 BC, Rhegion offered them only limited assistance.\nDuring the Third Sicilian War, Rhegion became hostile to Dionysius I of Syracuse. He attacked the city for the first time in 396 BC, but he was rebuffed. Dionysius destroyed the Rhegian navy in 389 BC, besieged the city again in 388 BC and, when it finally fell in 387 BC, destroyed it. His son, Dionysius II refounded the city as 'Phoebeia' in the 360s BC. When he was expelled from Syracuse in 356 BC, he retained control of Phoebeia, but it was captured by Syracusan forces led by Leptines and Callippus in 351 BC. Rhegion then reverted to its original name.\nThroughout classical antiquity Rhegion remained an important maritime and commercial city as well as a cultural centre, as is demonstrated by the presence of academies of art, philosophy, and science, such as the Pythagorean School, and also by its well-known poet Ibycus, the historian , the musicologist Glaucus, and the sculptors Pythagoras and Clearchus.\nRhegion made an alliance with the Roman Republic in 282 BC, shortly before the Pyrrhic War. The Legio Campana, under the command of Decius Vibellus, was installed as a garrison but subsequently launched a violent coup and seized control of the city. Roman forces deposed Decius and restored the city's independence in 271 BC. Thereafter, Rhegium was an important ally of Rome, with the status of and \"socia navalis\" (naval ally). It retained its Greek customs and language, as well as its mint. It was a central pivot for both maritime and mainland traffic, reached by the final part of the Via Popilia, which was built in the 2nd century BC and joined the older Via Appia at Capua, south of Rome. Close to Rhegion, on the Straits of Messina, was the busy port of Columna Rhegina. Under the Emperor Augustus, the city was renamed Rhegium Juli in honour of the emperor's adoptive father Julius Caesar and was the seat of the (governor) of \"Regio III Lucania et Bruttii\" (the southernmost of the eleven regiones into which Italy was divided). In AD 61 the apostle St. Paul passed through Rhegium on his final voyage towards Rome, converting the first local Christians and, according to tradition, laying the foundations of the Christianization of Bruttium.\nRhegium boasted in imperial times nine thermal baths, one of which is still visible today on the sea-front. Due to its seismic activity, the area was often damaged by earthquakes, such as in 91 BC, AD 17, 305 and 374.\nMiddle Ages.\nNumerous occupying armies came to Reggio during the early Middle Ages due to the city's strategic importance.\nInvasions by the Vandals, the Lombards and the Goths occurred in the 5th\u20136th centuries. Then, under Byzantine rule, it became a metropolis of the Byzantine possessions in Italy and was also the capital of the Duchy of Calabria several times between 536 and 1060 AD. Following wars between the Lombards and Byzantines in the 6th century, Bruttium was renamed Calabria.\nAs a Byzantine centre of culture, certain monks there undertook scribal work, carrying out the transcription of ancient classical works. Until the 15th century, Reggio was one of the most important Greek-rite Bishoprics in Italy\u2014even today Greek words are used and are recognisable in local speech and Byzantine terms can be found in local liturgy, in religious icons and even in local recipes. During this period, constant migrations of Greeks fleeing the Slavic invasion of Peloponnese, further strengthened the Hellenic element of the city.\nThe Arabs occupied Reggio in 918 and held some of its inhabitants to ransom or kept them prisoners as slaves. For brief periods in the 10th\u201311th centuries the city was ruled by the Arabs and, renamed (or sometimes ), became part of the Emirate of Sicily. During the period of Arab rule various beneficial ideas were introduced into Calabria, such as citrus fruit trees, mulberry trees (used in silk production) and several ways of cooking local vegetables such as aubergines. The Arabs introduced water ices and ice cream and also greatly improved agricultural and hydraulic techniques for irrigation.\nIn 1005, a Christian fleet coming from Pisa sacked the city and massacred all the Saracens to the great jubilation of the local population.\nIn 1060, the Normans seized it permanently from the Eastern Roman Empire, gradually bringing it into the Latin cultural sphere under Papal influence, which sought to extend its power over the entire peninsula.\nIn 1122, hostilities arose between Roger II, Count of Sicily, and his cousin William II, the new Duke of Calabria, culminating in a conflict that was resolved only through the intervention of Pope Callixtus II. In 1121, the Pope succeeded in reconciling the two rivals by securing an agreement whereby the Count of Sicily would provide his cousin with a cavalry squadron to suppress the revolt led by Giordano, Count of Ariano. In exchange, William renounced his possessions in Sicily and Calabria. Roger II, already Prince of Salerno, then travelled to Reggio, where he was recognized as Duke of Calabria and Apulia, Count of Sicily, and sovereign over Amalfi and Gaeta, parts of Naples, as well as Taranto, Capua, and the Abruzzi. When Roger II was crowned King of Sicily in 1131, he transferred his seat from Reggio to Palermo, although Reggio remained the capital of the Justiciarate of Calabria. In 1234 the town fair was established by decree of King Frederick II. Following Norman rule, the city experienced the alternating dominion of the Angevin and the Aragonese, yet it consistently remained the capital and principal center of the Calabrian territories.\nFrom 1266 it was ruled by the Angevins, under whom life in Calabria deteriorated because of their tendency to accumulate wealth in their capital, Naples, leaving Calabria in the power of local barons. In 1282, during the Sicilian Vespers, Reggio rallied in support of Messina and the other oriental Sicily cities because of the shared history, commercial and cultural interests. From 1147 to 1443 and again from 1465 to 1582, Reggio was the capital of the Calabrian \"Giustizierato\". It supported the Aragonese forces against the House of Anjou. In the 14th century it obtained new administrative powers. In 1459, the Aragonese enlarged its medieval castle.\nReggio, throughout the Middle Ages, was first an important centre of calligraphy and then of printing after its invention. It boasts the first dated, printed edition of a Hebrew text, a Rashi commentary on the Pentateuch, printed in 1475 in La Giudecca of Reggio, even though scholars consider Rome as the city where Hebrew printing began. The Jewish community of Reggio was also considered to be among the foremost internationally, for the dyeing and the trading of silk: silk woven in Reggio was esteemed and bought by the Spaniards, the Genoese, the Dutch, the English and the Venetians, as it was recognised as the best silk in the Kingdom of Naples.\nEarly modern period.\nFrom the early 16th century, the Kingdom of Naples was under the Habsburgs of Spain, who put Reggio under a viceroy from 1504 to 1713. The 16th and 17th centuries were an age of decay due to high Spanish taxes, pestilence, the 1562 earthquake, and the Ottoman Turkish invasions suffered by Reggio between 1534 and 1594. In 1534, facing attack by an Ottoman fleet under Hayreddin Barbarossa, the townspeople abandoned Reggio. Barbarossa captured eight hundred of those who remained and then burned the town. After Barbary pirates attacked Reggio in 1558, they took most of its inhabitants as slaves to Tripoli.\nIn 1714, southern Italy became once more property of the Austrian Habsburgs, who remained until 1734, when they were replaced by the Bourbons of Spain. Reggio was the capital of Calabria Ulteriore Prima from 1759 to 1860. In 1783, a disastrous earthquake damaged Reggio, all of southern Calabria and Messina.\nThe precious citrus fruit, Bergamot orange, had been cultivated and used in the Reggio area since the 15th century. By 1750 it was being grown intensively in the Rada Giunchi area of Reggio and was the first plantation of its kind in the world.\nIn 1806, Napoleon Bonaparte took Reggio and made the city a Duchy and General Headquarters. After the former's fall, in 1816, the two ancient Kingdoms of Naples and of Sicily were unified, becoming the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.\nDuring the course of the 19th century new public gardens were laid out, the piazzas (or squares) were embellished and caf\u00e9s and a theatre were opened. On the newly opened sea promenade a Civic Museum was inaugurated. In fact, some 60 years after the devastation caused by the 1783 earthquake, the English traveller and painter Edward Lear remarked \"Reggio is indeed one vast garden, and doubtless one of the loveliest spots to be seen on earth. A half-ruined castle, beautiful in colour and picturesque in form, overlooks all the long city, the wide straits, and snow-topped Mongibello beyond.\"\nLate modern and contemporary.\nOn 21 August 1860, during the \"Battaglia di Piazza Duomo\" (Cathedral Square Battle), Giuseppe Garibaldi conquered the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies. Bruno Antonio Rossi (the mayor of Reggio after the historian Domenico Span\u00f2 Bolani, who helped the citizenship during the previous turbulent years) was the first in the kingdom to proclaim the new Garibaldi Dictatorship and the end of the rule of Francis II.\nOn 28 December 1908, at 5:21 am, the town was hit by a heavy earthquake and shook violently for 31 seconds. Damage was even worse in Messina across the Straits. It is estimated that 25,000 people perished in Reggio and 65,000 in Messina. Reggio lost 27% of its inhabitants and Messina lost 42%. Ten minutes after the catastrophic earthquake, those who tried to escape by running towards the open spaces of the coast were engulfed by a 10-metre-high tsunami. Three waves of 6\u201312 metres swept away the whole waterfront. The 1908 Messina earthquake remains one of the worst on record in modern western European history.\nDuring the World War II, due to its strategic military position, it suffered a devastating air raid and was used as the invasion target by the British Eighth Army in 1943, which led to the city's capture. After the war Reggio recovered considerably. During 1970\u201371 the city was the scene of a popular uprising\u2014known as the Moti di Reggio\u2014against the government choice of Catanzaro as capital of the newly instituted Region of Calabria. The revolt was taken over by young neofascists of the Italian Social Movement, backed by the 'Ndrangheta, a Mafia-type criminal organisation based in Calabria. The Reggio Calabria protests were the expression of malcontent about cronyism and the lack of industrial planning. In the 1970s and 1980s, Reggio went through twenty years of increasing organized crime by the 'Ndrangheta as well as urban decay. The town is home to several , such as the Condello-Imerti and the De Stefano-Tegano clans, who were involved in bloody wars against each other during this period. The 'Ndrangheta extorts protection money (\"pizzo\") from every shop and viable business in town and has more power than the city council in awarding licences to retailers.\nThe spiral of corruption reached its zenith in the early 1990s. The sitting mayor at the time, Agatino Licandro, made a confession reporting \"suitcases coming into city hall stuffed with money but going out empty\". As a result of the nationwide corruption scandals most of the city council was arrested. Since the early 1990s, the so-called \"Primavera di Reggio\" (Reggio Spring)\u2014a spontaneous movement of people and government institutions\u2014encouraged city recovery and a renewed and stronger identity. The symbol of the Reggio Spring is the Lungomare Falcomat\u00e0, the sea-side boulevard named after Italo Falcomat\u00e0, the centre-left mayor who initiated the recovery of the town.\nOn 9 October 2012, the Italian government decided to dissolve the city council of Reggio Calabria for infiltration by the 'Ndrangheta. The move came after some councillors were suspected of having ties to the powerful crime syndicate, under the 10-year centre-right rule of Giuseppe Scopelliti, mayor from 2002 to 2010. His successor, the centre-right mayor Demetrio Arena and all 30 city councillors, were sacked to prevent any \"mafia contagion\" in the local government. It was the first time that the entire government of a provincial capital had been dismissed over suspected links to organized crime. Three commissioners ran the city for 18 months until a new election. According to anti-mafia investigators in 2016, Scopelliti was elected thanks to votes from the 'Ndrangheta.\nEarthquakes in history.\nReggio has been destroyed by earthquakes several times over the centuries, such as in 91 BC, after which the city was reconstructed by order of the Emperor Augustus, followed by another in the year 17 AD; yet another one in 305 AD, and again another in 374. In 1562 one destroyed the natural, medieval port of the city and brought about the submersion of the Calamizzi promontory, known in ancient times as the Pallanti\u00f2n, where, we are told, the first Greek settlers, the Calcidesi, had set foot. The particularly devastating of 1783 and that of 1908, which was the worst natural calamity to take place in Europe in human memory, both profoundly altered the urban aspect of the city, due to the successive re-building which gave the present-day layout of straight, intersecting roads, planned by Giovanbattista Mori in 1784 and by Pietro de Nava in 1911. But some town-planning policies at the time were decided upon with no respect for the architectural history of Reggio, as is shown by the demolition of the remaining Norman part of the Castle, following the last big earthquake in 1923.\nEuropean travellers who visited Reggio.\nAlthough Reggio and Calabria in general were less popular destinations than Sicily or Naples for the first Northern European travellers, several famous names such as the Flemish Pieter Bruegel (in c. 1550), the German Johann Hermann von Riedesel (in 1767), the Frenchmen Jean Claude Richard de Saint-Non (in 1778) and Stendhal (in 1817), the British travellers Henry Swinburne (in c. 1775), Richard Keppel Craven (in c. 1820), Craufurd Tait Ramage (in 1828), the Strutt family and Elizabeth Byron (in 1840), Edward Lear (in 1847), Norman Douglas (in 1911), D. H. Lawrence (in c. 1920) and Eric Whelpton (in 1950s) and the Belgian Jules Destr\u00e9e (in 1915 and in 1930) visited Reggio.\nGeography.\nWith an exceptionally high population density, Reggio Calabria was cited as having the least green space in a study of 386 European cities. The study reported that green space coverage varied markedly, averaging 18.6 per cent and \"ranging from 1.9 (Reggio di Calabria, Italy) to 46 (Ferrol, Spain) per cent.\" The study further reported \"Per capita green space provision varied by two orders of magnitude, from 3 to 4\u200am2 per person in C\u00e1diz, Fuenlabrada and Almer\u00eda (Spain) and Reggio di Calabria (Italy) to more than 300\u200am2 in Li\u00e8ge (Belgium), Oulu (Finland) and Valenciennes (France).\" Even so, outside of the urban area, the nearby elevated areas have plenty of green space and extensive forests. This includes the Aspromonte National Park.\nClimate.\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, Reggio Calabria possesses a typical Mediterranean climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Csa\"). Its climate has warmer days and cooler nights than Messina which lies on the other side of the strait. Precipitation is another big difference since Messina receives approximately more.\nAdministrative division and city government.\nThe municipality of Reggio is divided into 15 sub-municipalities () containing the \"frazioni\" ('subdivisions', mainly villages and hamlets) of Catona, Gallico, Archi, Pentimele, Gallina, Mosorrofa (), Ort\u00ec (), Pellaro () and Saracinello. They are: Centro Storico (1st); Pineta Zerbi, Tremulini and Eremo (2nd); Santa Caterina, San Brunello and Vito (3rd); Trabochetto, Condera and Spirito Santo (4th); Rione Ferrovieri, Stadio and Gebbione (5th); Sbarre (6th); San Giorgio, Modena, Scido and San Sperato (7th); Catona, Salice, Rosal\u00ec and Villa San Giuseppe (8th); Gallico and Sambatello (9th); Archi (10th); Ort\u00ec, Pod\u00e0rgoni and Terreti (11th); Cannav\u00f2, Mosorrofa and Cataforio (12th); Ravagnese, San Gregorio, Croce Valanidi and Trunca (13th); Gallina (14th); Pellaro and Bocale (15th).\nTwin towns.\nReggio di Calabria is twinned with:\nEconomy.\nReggio retains a somewhat rural ambience despite its sizable population. Industry in the city revolves primarily around agriculture and export, fruits, tobacco, briar and the precious essence of the bergamot which is used in perfume production. Reggio is a port city with a sizeable fishing industry.\nThe beaches of the city have become a popular tourist destination. Tourism is distributed between the Ionian coast (Costa Jonica), the Tyrrhenian coast (the Costa Viola, Purple Coast) and the Aspromonte mountain behind the city, containing the natural reserve of the Aspromonte National Park where, at 1,300\u20131,950 metres above sea level, there is a panoramic view of the Strait of Messina from the snowy Mount Etna to the Aeolian Islands.\nMain sights.\nNew waterfront: Museum and Performing Arts Centre.\nThe new waterfront, designed by architect Zaha Hadid, is located on a narrow strait separating Italy from Sicily. The museum (13,400 m2) draws inspiration from the organic form of the starfish, utilizing a radial symmetry to coordinate communication and circulation between different program elements: exhibition spaces, restoration facilities, archive, aquarium and library. A second, multifunctional building (8,000 m2), comprises two separate elements, placed around a partially covered piazza. It houses offices, gyms, craft laboratories, cinema and flexible auditoria.\nCulture.\nSport.\nThe city's main association football team is Reggina. They play at the Stadio Oreste Granillo and are fierce rivals with neighbours Messina, who are just a twenty-five minutes ferry ride apart from each other. Throughout their histories they have clashed in the \"Derby dello Stretto\" (Strait of Messina Derby). There is also a major Calabrian derby with Crotone. There is also a second much smaller team HinterReggio Calcio.\nPolitics.\nThe members of Parliament representing Reggio Calabria are Federica Dieni (M5S) in the Chamber and Marco Siclari (FI) in the Senate.\nTransport.\nHighway.\nReggio is a road junction on the SS18 Naples\u2013Reggio and on the SS106 Reggio\u2013Taranto roads and also on the A2 Salerno\u2013Reggio motorway.\nTramway.\nThe Tramway of Reggio was operative since 1918 until 1937. Tramway line was 5.3\u00a0km long, from Sbarre district (southern suburbs) until Annunziata bridge (northern part of town centre) passing by the whole historical centre.\nRailway.\nIt has an important main central railway station, the largest in Calabria, opened in 1866, with ten smaller stations.\nPort.\nThe Port of Reggio was enlarged after the 1908 earthquake. It is directly connected to the city of Messina through a ferryboat line system.\nAirport.\nReggio Calabria, served by air from the Reggio Calabria Airport (IATA: REG, ICAO: LICR) also known as \"Aeroporto dello Stretto\" or \"Tito Minniti Airport\", is located a few kilometres south of Reggio. The airport has been at the center of polemics about its financial loss, risking to be closed. It is currently connected to the airports of Rome Fiumicino and Milan Linate.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "44943", "revid": "37314277", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44943", "title": "Campania", "text": "Campania is an administrative region of Italy, located in the south of the country; most of it is in the southwestern portion of the Italian Peninsula (with the Tyrrhenian Sea to its west), but it also includes the small Phlegraean Islands and the island of Capri. The capital is Naples. Campania has a population of 5,575,025 as of 2025, making it Italy's third-most populous region, and, with an area of , its most densely populated. Based on its GDP, Campania is also the most economically productive region in Southern Italy and the 7th most productive in the whole country. Naples' urban area, which is in Campania, is the eighth most populous in the European Union. The region is home to 10 of the 58 UNESCO sites in Italy, including Pompeii and Herculaneum, the Royal Palace of Caserta, the Amalfi Coast, the Longobardian Church of Santa Sofia in Benevento, and the Historic Centre of Naples. In addition, Campania's Mount Vesuvius is part of the UNESCO World Network of Biosphere Reserves. The region plays a key international role in international diplomacy, since it is home to NATO's Allied Joint Force Command Naples and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean.\nThe Campania's hinterland was inhabited from the beginning of the 1st millennium BC by the Osci, Samnites, and Etruscans, while between the 8th and 7th centuries BC its coastal areas were colonised by the ancient Greeks (Magna Graecia). At that time, Capua was Campania's leading city, while Naples was an anomaly, being predominantly Greek-speaking.\nCampania is rich in culture, especially food, music, architecture, and archaeological and ancient sites such as Pompeii, Herculaneum, Oplontis, Paestum, Aeclanum, Stabiae, and Velia. The name \"Campania\" derives from Latin; the Romans knew the region as \"Campania felix\" (\"fertile countryside\" or \"happy countryside\"). Campania\u2019s rich natural beauty makes it important to the tourism industry: Naples, the Amalfi Coast, Mount Vesuvius, and the islands of Capri and Ischia have long been major attractions.\nHistory.\nPre-Roman period.\nThe region known today as \"Campania\" was inhabited from at least the beginning of the 1st millennium BC by several Oscan-speaking Italic tribes: the Osci, the Opici, the Aurunci, the Ausones, the Sidicini, the Hirpini, the Caudini, the Oenotrians, the Campanians (after whom the region is named) and the Lucanians (who inhabited the southernmost part of Campania, known in ancient times as Lucania, roughly where modern-day Salerno is). Many of these tribes lived in simple agro-towns. Not much is known about the pre-Indo-European tribes that had lived in the region earlier; they were probably not as technologically or culturally advanced as the Oscans, and any who still flourished had become fully Oscanised by the middle of the first millennium BC.\nBetween the 9th and 6th centuries BC, the Etruscans from Central Italy established colonies in the Campanian Plains (the inland territories that today are the provinces of Caserta and Naples), as well as in the regions of Agro Nocerino-Sarnese and Agro Picentino (which today are in the province of Salerno). There, they essentially replicated their \"Dodecapolis\" (twelve cities) political model, founding the cities of \"Hyria\" (modern-day Nola), \"Irnthi\" or \"Marcina\" (modern-day Salerno), \"Amina\" (modern-day Pontecagnano Faiano), \"Velcha\", \"Velsu\" and \"Uri\". In addition to assimilating into their urban-political domains, the Etruscans also incorporated the pre-existing tribal Oscan agro-towns of \"Capua\" (modern-day Santa Maria Capua Vetere), \"Nuceria\" (modern-day \"comuni\" of Nocera Superiore and Nocera Inferiore), Suessula, Acerra, Ercolano, Pompeii, Stabiae and Sorrento.\nMeanwhile, during the 8th century BC, Greek-speaking people from Euboea (in Central Greece), known as Cumaeans, began to establish colonies themselves roughly around the coastal areas of the modern-day province of Naples and in the nearby islands founding, among others, the cities of Cumae, \"Pitheko\u016bsai\" (modern-day Ischia), Paestum, Herculaneum and \"Dicaearchia\", later 'Puteoli', in Latin (modern-day Pozzuoli). The city of Naples began as a small commercial port called Parthenope (\u03a0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b8\u03b5\u03bd\u03cc\u03c0\u03b7, meaning \"Pure Eyes\", a Siren in Greek mythology), which was established by Greek colonial sailors from Rhodes. The region thus became one of the centers of Magna Graecia.\nAt one point in history, a distinct group of Oscan-speaking tribes from Samnium (in south-central Italy), the Samnites, moved down into Campania.\nSince the Samnites were more warlike than the other Oscan populations, they easily took over the cities of Capua and Cumae, in an area which was one of the most prosperous and fertile in the Italian Peninsula at the time. During the 340s BC, the Samnites were engaged in a war with the Roman Republic in a dispute known as the Samnite Wars, with Rome claiming the rich pastures of northern Campania during the First Samnite War. The First Samnite War was initiated when the Etruscan-influenced Oscan city of Capua (in Etruscan \"Capeva\") was being attacked by the Samnites, and thus appealed to Rome for defensive help.\nAs the majority of Southern Italy was under Roman control at the time, the sole major remaining independent settlement in the region was the Greek colony of Neapolis, and when the city was eventually captured by the Samnites, the Neapolitan Greeks were left with no option but to call on the Romans, with whom they established an alliance, setting off the Second Samnite War. The Roman consul Quintus Publilius Filo recaptured Neapolis by 326 BC and allowed it to remain a Greek city with some autonomy as a \"civitas foederata\" while strongly aligned with Rome. The Second Samnite War ended with the Romans controlling all of southern Campania and additional regions further to the south, such as parts of Lucania.\nRoman period.\nCampania was a full-fledged part of the Roman Republic by the end of the 4th century BC, valued for its pastures and rich countryside. Naples, with its Greek language and customs, made it a centre of Hellenistic culture for the Romans, creating the first traces of Greco-Roman culture. During the Pyrrhic War in 275 BC, the Battle of Beneventum took place in Campania in the Samnite city of Maleventum, in which the Romans, led by the consul Curius Dentatus, were victorious. They renamed it Beneventum (modern day Benevento), which grew in stature until it was second only to Capua in southern Italy. During the Second Punic War in 216 BC, Capua, in a bid for equality with Rome, allied with Carthage. The rebellious Capuans were isolated from the rest of Campania, which remained allies of Rome. Naples resisted Hannibal due to the imposing walls. Capua was eventually starved into submission in the Roman retaking of 211 BC, and the Romans were victorious.\nWith the initial exception of Naples, the region adopted Latin as official language, in that sense gradually replacing the native Oscan and the Greek and the Etruscan still talked respectively in their colonies of the region, subsequently becoming fully Romanised. As part of the Roman Empire, Campania, with Latium, formed the most important region of the Augustan divisions of Italia, the \"Regio I Latium et Campania\"; Campania was one of the main areas for granary. In ancient times Misenum (modern 'Miseno'), at the extreme northern end of the bay of Naples, was the largest base of the Roman navy, since its port (Portus Julius) was the base of the Classis Misenensis, the most important Roman fleet. It was first established as a naval base in 27 BC by Marcus Agrippa, the right-hand man of the emperor Augustus. Roman Emperors chose Campania as a holiday destination, among them Claudius and Tiberius, the latter of whom is infamously linked to the island of Capri. It was also during this period that Christianity came to Campania. Two of the apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, are said to have preached in the city of Naples, and there were also several martyrs during this time. The period of relative calm was violently interrupted by the epic eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 which buried the cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum. With the Decline of the Roman Empire, its last emperor, Romulus Augustus, was put in a manor house prison near Castel dell'Ovo, Naples, in 476, ushering in the beginning of the Middle Ages and a period of uncertainty in regard to the future of the area.\nFeudalism in the Middle Ages.\nThe area had many duchies and principalities during the Middle Ages, in the hands of the Byzantine Empire (also referred to as the Eastern Roman Empire) and the Lombards. Under the Normans, the smaller independent states were brought together as part of the Kingdom of Sicily, before the mainland broke away to form the Kingdom of Naples. It was during this period that elements of Spanish, French and Aragonese culture were introduced to Campania. Allegiances with the Muslim Saracens were made in 836, and the Arabs were requested to repel the siege of Lombard troops coming from the neighbouring Duchy of Benevento.\nThe Kingdom.\nNorman to Angevin.\nAfter a period as a Norman kingdom, the Kingdom of Sicily passed to the Hohenstaufens, who were a powerful Germanic royal house of Swabian origins. The University of Naples Federico II was founded by Frederick II in the city, the oldest state university in the world, making Naples the intellectual centre of the kingdom. Conflict between the Hohenstaufen house and the Papacy, led in 1266 to Pope Innocent IV crowning Angevin Dynasty duke Charles I as the king. Charles officially moved the capital from Palermo to Naples where he resided at the \"Castel Nuovo\". During this period, much Gothic architecture sprang up around Naples, including the Naples Cathedral, the main church of the city.\nIn 1281, with the advent of the Sicilian Vespers, the kingdom split in half. The Angevin Kingdom of Naples included the southern part of the Italian peninsula, while the island of Sicily became the Aragonese Kingdom of Sicily. The wars continued until the peace of Caltabellotta in 1302, which saw Frederick III recognised as king of the Isle of Sicily, while Charles II was recognised as the king of Naples by Pope Boniface VIII. Despite the split, Naples grew in importance, attracting Pisan and Genoese merchants, Tuscan bankers, and with them some of the most championed Renaissance artists of the time, such as Boccaccio, Petrarch and Giotto. Alfonso I conquered Naples after his victory against the last Angevin king, Ren\u00e9, and Naples was unified for a brief period with Sicily again.\nAragonese to Bourbon.\nSicily and Naples were separated in 1458 but remained as dependencies of Aragon under Ferrante. The new dynasty enhanced Naples' commerce by establishing relations with the Iberian Peninsula. Naples also became a centre of the Renaissance, with artists such as Laurana, da Messina, Sannazzaro and Poliziano arriving in the city. During 1501 Naples came under direct rule from France at the time of Louis XII, as Neapolitan king Frederick was taken as a prisoner to France; this lasted four years. Spain won Naples at the Battle of Garigliano and, as a result, Naples then became part of the Spanish Empire throughout the entire Habsburg Spain period. The Spanish sent viceroys to Naples to directly deal with local issues: the most important of which was Pedro \u00c1lvarez de Toledo, who was responsible for considerable social, economic and urban progress in the city; he also supported the Inquisition.\nDuring this period Naples became Europe's second largest city after Paris. During the Baroque era it was home to artists including Caravaggio, Rosa and Bernini; philosophers such as Telesio, Bruno, Campanella and Vico; and writers such as Battista Marino. A revolution led by local fisherman Masaniello saw the creation of a brief independent Neapolitan Republic, though this lasted only a few months before Spanish rule was regained. Finally, by 1714, the Spanish ceased to rule Naples as a result of the War of the Spanish Succession; it was the Austrian Charles VI who ruled from Vienna, similarly, with viceroys. However, the\nWar of the Polish Succession saw the Spanish regain Sicily and Naples as part of a personal union, which in the Treaty of Vienna were recognised as independent under a cadet branch of the Spanish Bourbons in 1738 under Charles VII.\nDuring the time of Ferdinand IV, the French Revolution made its way to Naples: Horatio Nelson, an ally of the Bourbons, even arrived in the city in 1798 to warn against it. However, Ferdinand was forced to retreat and fled to Palermo, where he was protected by a British fleet. Naples' lower classes (the \"lazzaroni\") were pious and Royalist, favouring the Bourbons; in the m\u00eal\u00e9e that followed, they fought the Neapolitan pro-Republican aristocracy, causing a civil war. The Republicans conquered Castel Sant'Elmo and proclaimed a Parthenopaean Republic, secured by the French Army. A counter-revolutionary religious army of \"lazzaroni\" under Fabrizio Ruffo was raised; they had great success and the French surrendered the Neapolitan castles and were allowed to sail back to Toulon.\nFerdinand IV was restored as king; however, after only seven years Napoleon conquered the kingdom and instated Bonapartist kings including his brother Joseph Bonaparte. With the help of the Austrian Empire and allies, the Bonapartists were defeated in the Neapolitan War and Bourbon Ferdinand IV once again regained the throne and the kingdom. The Congress of Vienna in 1815 saw the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily combined to form the Two Sicilies, with Naples as the capital city. Naples became the first city on the Italian peninsula to have a railway in 1839, there were many factories throughout the kingdom making it a highly important trade centre.\nWorld War II.\nIn September 1943, Salerno was the scene of Operation Avalanche and suffered a great deal of damage. From 12 February to 17 July 1944, it hosted the Government of Marshal Pietro Badoglio. In those months Salerno was the temporary \"Capital of the Kingdom of Italy\", and the King Victor Emmanuel III lived in a mansion in its outskirts. Salerno received the first \"Tricolore\" in an official ceremony on 7 January 2012 from the premier Mario Monti, to celebrate the glorious story of Italy and its old capitals.\nGeography.\nCampania has an area of and a coastline of on the Tyrrhenian Sea. Campania is famous for its gulfs (Naples, Salerno and Policastro) as well as for three islands (Capri, Ischia and Procida).\nFour other regions border Campania; Lazio to the northwest, Molise to the north, Apulia (Puglia) to the northeast and Basilicata to the east.\nThe mountainous interior is fragmented into several massifs, rarely reaching (Miletto of ), whereas close to the coast there are volcanic massifs: Vesuvio () and Campi Flegrei.\nThe climate is typically Mediterranean along the coast with warm, sunny and sultry summers and mild, rainy winters, whereas in the inner zones it is more continental, with lower temperatures in winter and warm summers. Snow is possible at higher elevations but rare at sea level. 51% of the total area is hilly, 34% mountainous and the remaining 15% is made up of plains. There is a high seismic risk across the region.\nEconomy.\nThe GDP per capita in Campania is rank 18 from 20 Italian regions, surpassing only Sicily and Calabria. It is only 66.7% of the Italian average. It has been speculated that a factor could be the failure to connect the region's economy with the rest of Italy, while another factor could be its peripheral position with respect to the developed central areas of Europe.\nOverall, Campania appears to be a region with great economic potential, which is partly held back by organized crime (Camorra) and the resulting corruption. The economy of Campania is one of the most affected nationwide by the economic and financial crisis that began in 2008, but between 2015 and 2016 it came out of the recession and began to recover due to, above all, industry, but also tourism and tertiary.\nTourism.\nTourism is supported by the abundant presence of artistic and naturalistic beauty which attract millions of people from all over the world every year. Precisely in this sector the region finds its strong point (through which it was able to react to the recession in 2015), in fact, according to 2018 studies done by Eurostat, Campania is in the top 20 of the most visited regions in Europe and fifth in Italy after Lombardy, Lazio, Veneto and Tuscany (in order), as well as first among the southern regions.\nThe tourist flow sees more than half of the Italian and foreign tourists of the entire region gather in the Metropolitan City of Naples. Of all the locations, Pompeii and Herculaneum stand out, two of the most visited archaeological sites in Italy and among the most visited in the world where there is an average of four million tourists a year. Then there are the Campanian Archipelago (Capri, Ischia and Procida, the latter named Italian capital of culture in 2022), Vesuvius and the Sorrento coast; a notable growth in the cruise sector was observed in the Port of Naples.\nTourist data on other sites in Campania show important records that the region holds nationally and worldwide. Among these above all the data relating to Capri (which is the most visited minor island in Italy and among the most sought after in the world), the Amalfi Coast (which is among the most visited sites in Italy) and finally Vesuvius (the most visited and well-known volcano in the world). There is also a growing influx of tourists to Cilento (Paestum and Certosa di Padula.\nCampania has many small and picturesque villages, 11 of them have been selected by (), a non-profit private association of small Italian towns of strong historical and artistic interest, that was founded on the initiative of the Tourism Council of the National Association of Italian Municipalities.\nDecline of heavy industry.\nCampania is traditionally the most industrialized region of southern Italy, particularly the Neapolitan territory was one of the most industrialized areas of Italy until the beginning of the 20th century, preceded only by the provinces of the so-called \"industrial triangle\" (Milan, Turin and Genoa).\nIn recent decades, the gap with respect to other regions is no longer as significant as it used to be, given that southern regions such as Apulia and Abruzzo have grown considerably economically, while Campania has paradoxically undergone a constant process of de-industrialisation. The symbol of this phenomenon is the reclamation process of the area in Bagnoli where the former Italsider and Eternit operated promoted by the region.\nFood and agriculture.\nCampania mainly produces fruit and vegetables, but has also expanded its production of flowers grown in greenhouses, becoming one of the leading regions of the sector in Italy. In 2021 the value added of this sector represents around 2.34% of the total value added of the region, equalling \u20ac2.2 billion. Campania produces over 50% of Italy's nuts and is also the leader in the production of tomatoes.\nTypical products are:\nA distinctive point of regional agriculture in the breeding of buffalos. The milk is used to produce mozzarella di bufala.\nOlive trees, mainly of the varieties Carpellese (PDO designated), Cornia (Val di Cornia DOC), Frantoio, Leccino, Ogliarola Barese, Olivella, Ortice, Pisciottana (Also Ogliastrina or Olivo dell'Ascea), Ravece (also known as Rotondello), and Salella, cover over .\nVineyards cover 41,129 ha, but only ca. 5,100 ha using to produce quality wine of DOC and DOCG types. There are 4 DOCG wines: Aglianico del Taburno (red and rose), Fiano di Avellino (white), Greco di Tufo (white and sparkling) and Taurasi (red). Wine production has increased as well as the quality of the wine.\nThere is a problem with illegal toxic waste dump in the Triangle of death north of Naples between Acerra, Nola and Marigliano. In the region, over 12,000 cattle, river buffaloes and sheep had been culled before 2006. High levels of mortality and abnormal foetuses were also recorded in farms in Acerra linked to elevated levels of dioxin. Local studies have shown higher than permissible levels of lead in vegetables grown in the area. The government blames the Mafia's illegal garbage disposal racket. In samples of milk, which is using to produce mozzarella di bufala, found cancerogenic dioxins. In Naples-Bagnoli is an asbestos contamination from former Eternit cement plant. Millions of tons of toxic industrial waste has been dumped in Campania, not only in the Triangle of death, a region once celebrated for the fertility of its soil, but now the local population have been exposed to land contaminated with waste. This includes highly dangerous materials such as asbestos, zinc, lead, germanium, arsenic, mercury, cadmium, chromium, dioxins, and uranium. Blood tests of people living in Campania show alarming levels of dioxins.\nAutomotive.\nCampania had a massive automotive industrial production till 2011, focused on Alfa Romeo. Production of Alfa Romeo was reduced and relocated to a plant in Cassino near Rome. Currently only one low-level Fiat Panda model is produced in facilities located in Pomigliano d'Arco in the Naples metropolitan area (140,478 units in 2020). A FIAT plant manufacturing engines is in Pratola Serra, Avellino. There are also plants for automotive parts suppliers like Magneti Marelli (exhaust systems) and Denso (engine cooling and air-conditioners). Buses are produced by Industria Italiana Autobus in Flumeri (ex-Irisbus).\nAerospace and rail.\nThere is also a significant aerospace industry:\nHitachi Rail Italy has headquarters, manufacturing plant and service facilities in Naples. Here it produces the metro trains Meneghino and Driverless Metro.\nFashion.\nLuxury brands like Kiton, Cesare Attolini, Isaia, Rubinacci, Harmont &amp; Blaine, E. Marinella are also located in Campania. All of them are relative small-sized with annual sales of less than 100 million euros each.\nOther industrial districts.\nThere are other industrial districts in Campania:\nTransport.\nThe region has a dense network of roads and motorways, a system of maritime connections and an international airport (Naples Airport). The port of Naples connects the region with the Mediterranean basin, and brings tourists to the archaeological sites, the cities of art (Naples and Caserta), to the coastal areas and to the islands.\nRail.\nThere are high-speed rail lines:\nThere is a maintenance and service centre for high-speed trains Alstom AGV in Nola.\nMaritime.\nSea-based activity accounts for about 3.9% of the economy, which includes port movements of goods and passengers and sea transportation, as well as a sizable seaside tourism economy. In Castellammare di Stabia there is a big Fincantieri shipyard. Shipping companies Grimaldi and Tirrenia both headquarter in Naples.\nService.\nThe services sector makes up for 78% of the region's gross domestic product.\nUnemployment.\nThe unemployment rate stood at 17.4% in 2022 and was one of the highest in Italy.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;The region, with a population of over 5.8 million inhabitants, is divided into five provinces: Naples, Benevento, Avellino, Caserta and Salerno. Over half of the population is resident in the province of Naples, where there is a population density of 2,626 inhabitants per km2. Within the province, the highest density can be found along the coast, where it reaches 13,000 inhabitants per km2 in the city of Portici. The region, which was characterised until recently by an acute economic contrast between internal and coastal areas, has shown an improvement in the last decade thanks to the development of the provinces of Benevento and Avellino. At the same time, the provinces of Naples, Caserta and in part Salerno, have developed a variety of activities connected to advanced types of services.\nInhabitants rarely identify themselves as Campanians. Rather, provinces are what people use to identify themselves with.\nImmigration and ethnicity.\nUnlike central and northern Italy, in the first decade of the 2000s the region of Campania has not attracted large numbers of immigrants, despite having increased from approximately 100,000 in 2007 to 240,000 in 2021. The Italian national institute of statistics ISTAT estimated in December 2022 that 241,008 foreign-born immigrants live in Campania, equal to 4.32% of the total regional population. Part of the reason for this is in recent times, there have been more employment opportunities in northern regions than in the Southern Italian regions.\nGovernment and politics.\nThe Politics of Campania, takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democracy, whereby the President of Regional Government is the head of government, and of a pluriform multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the Regional Government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Regional Council.\nThe Regional Council of Campania (\"Consiglio Regionale della Campania\") is composed of 60 members, of which 47 are elected in provincial constituencies with proportional representation, 12 from the so-called \"regional list\" of the elected president and the last one is for the candidate for president who comes second, who usually becomes the leader of the opposition in the council. If a coalition wins more than 55% of the vote, only 6 candidates from the \"regional list\" will be elected and the number of those elected in provincial constituencies will be 53.\nAdministrative divisions.\nCampania is divided into four provinces and one metropolitan city:\nCulture.\nCuisine.\nCampanian cuisine varies within the region. While Neapolitan dishes centre on seafood, Casertan and Aversan ones rely more on fresh vegetables and cheeses. The cuisine from Sorrento combines the culinary traditions from both Naples and Salerno. Pizza was conceived in Naples. Spaghetti is also a well-known dish from southern Italy and Campania. \nCampania produces wines including Lacryma Christi, Fiano, Aglianico, Greco di Tufo, Falerno del Massico, Taburno, Solopaca, and Taurasi. The cheeses of Campania consist of Mozzarella di Bufala (buffalo mozzarella) (mozzarella made from buffalo milk), fiordilatte (\"flower of milk\") a mozzarella made from cow's milk, ricotta from sheep or buffalo milk, provolone from cow milk, and caciotta made from goat milk. Buffalo are bred in the provinces of Salerno and Caserta.\nSeveral different cakes and pies are made in Campania. Pastiera pie is made during Easter. Casatiello and tortano are Easter breads made by adding lard or oil and various types of cheese to bread dough and garnishing it with slices of salami. Bab\u00e0 cake is a well known Neapolitan delicacy, best served with rum or limoncello (a liqueur invented in the Sorrento peninsula). It is an old Austrian cake, which arrived in Campania during the Austrian domination of the Kingdom of Two Sicilies and was modified there to become a \"walking cake\" for citizens always in a hurry for work and other pursuits. Sfogliatella is another pastry from the Amalfi Coast, as is Zeppole, traditionally eaten on Saint Joseph's day. Struffoli, little balls fried dough dipped in honey, are enjoyed during the Christmas holidays.\nAnother Campanian dish is the Russian salad, also known as Olivier salad, which is based on similar dishes from France. It is made of potatoes in mayonnaise garnished with shrimp and vegetables in vinegar. Another French-derived dish is \"gatt\u00f2\" or \"g\u00e2teau di patate\" (an oven-baked pie made of boiled potatoes). As with the Russian salad, Campania is home to popular seafood-based dishes, such as \"insalata di mare\" (seafood salad), \"zuppa di polpo\" (octopus soup), and \"zuppa di cozze\" (mussel soup). Other regional seafood dishes include \"frittelle di mare\" (fritters with seaweed), made with edible poseidonia algae, \"triglie al cartoccio\" (red mullet in the bag), and \"alici marinate\" (fresh anchovies in olive oil). The island of Ischia is known for its fish dishes, as well as for cooked rabbit. Campania is also home to the lemons of Sorrento. Rapini (or Broccoli rabe), known locally as \"friarielli\", are often used in regional cooking. Campania also produces many nuts, especially in the area of Avellino, Salerno and Benevento. Hazelnut production is especially relevant in the province of Avellino \u2013 in Spanish, in Portuguese and in Occitan the hazelnut is respectively called \"avellana\", \"avel\u00e3\" and \"avelano\", after the city of Avella. That is also the case of ancient Italian \"avellana\", which is however not in use anymore.\nAncient, medieval, and early arts.\nSince the Greek colony of Elea, now Velia, Campania was home to philosophers of the Pre-Socratic philosophy school, such as Parmenides and Zeno of Elea, who came to prominence around 490\u2013480 BC. The Latin poet Vergil (70 BC\u201319 BC) settled in Naples in his late-life: parts of his epic poem Aeneid are located in Campania. The ancient scientist Pliny the Elder studied Mount Vesuvius and died after being poisoned and killed by gas emitted from the volcano during the 79 AD eruption.\nRomulus Augustus, the last emperor of the Western Roman Empire, died as a prisoner of the German general Odoacer at Naples around 500. In the Middle Ages, the artist Giotto made some frescoes in Castel Nuovo. These works of art were subsequently destroyed by an earthquake.\nBy the end of the Middle Ages, the medical school of Salerno, which combined ancient Roman and Greek medicine with Arab medicine, was known throughout Europe and its methods were adopted across the continent. Some have suggested that this may have been one of the first universities in Europe. Boccaccio, the Tuscan poet, visited Naples on various occasions, and in the Decameron described it as a dissolute city. He also wrote a love story involving a noblewoman close to the King of Naples.\nIn 1570, the Spanish writer Miguel de Cervantes, who wrote the romance novel \"Don Quixote\", served as a Spanish soldier for a period in Naples. Poet Torquato Tasso was born in Sorrento in 1575. Years earlier in 1558, the first modern description and studies of the \"camera obscura\" (\"dark chamber\"), were established in Italy by Giovanni Battista della Porta in his \" Magiae Naturalis\".\nPhilosopher Giordano Bruno was born in Nola. He was the first to theorize infinite suns and infinite worlds in the universe. He was burnt in Rome by the Spanish Inquisition in 1600. Later, in c.\u20091606, the Baroque painter Caravaggio established his studio in Naples. Italian Baroque architect Cosimo Fanzago from Bergamo also decided to move to Naples.\nIn the 18th century, Naples was the last city to be visited by philosophers who created the \"Grand Tour\" which was the big touring voyage to visit all the important cultural sites of the European continent. Italian architect Luigi Vanvitelli son of Dutch architect Caspar van Wittel built the Royal Palace in Caserta in c.\u20091750. He contributed to the construction of many neoclassic-style palaces in which the nobles of Naples spent their holidays. These palaces are now known worldwide as \"Ville Vesuviane\".\nRaimondo di Sangro, prince of Sansevero, was a scientist and one of the last alchemists. Around this time, in 1786, German writer Goethe visited Campania and Naples. German archaeologist Johann Joachim Winckelmann also visited Naples, Paestum, Herculaneum and Pompeii in 1748 and later, studying how archaeological surveys were conducted in the kingdom of Naples. He was one of the first to study drawings, statues, stones, and ancient burned scrolls made of papyrus found in the excavations of the city of Herculaneum. Archaeological excavations in Pompeii were initiated by King Charles III of Naples in 1748. He issued the first modern laws in Europe to protect, defend and preserve archaeological sites. Neapolitan musicians of that period include Niccol\u00f2 Antonio Zingarelli and Giovanni Paisiello.\nMusician Gioachino Rossini lived for several years in Naples, where he wrote numerous compositions. Italian poet and writer Giacomo Leopardi established his home in Naples and Torre del Greco, remaining there at the end of his brief young life. He died at Naples in 1837. The first volcano observatory, the Vesuvius Observatory, was founded in Naples in 1841. Geologist Giuseppe Mercalli, born in Milan in 1850, was a director of the Vesuvius Observatory.\nIn February 1851, British statesman William Ewart Gladstone was allowed to visit the prison where Giacomo Lacaita, legal adviser to the British embassy, was imprisoned by the Neapolitan government, along with other political dissidents. He deplored their condition, and in April and July, he published two \"Letters to the Earl of Aberdeen\" against the Neapolitan government, followed by \"An Examination of the Official Reply of the Neapolitan Government\" in 1852. His pamphlets may have contributed to the cause of the unification of Italy in 1861.\nFrench writer Alexandre Dumas, p\u00e8re was directly involved in the process of the Unification of Italy and sojourned two or three years in Naples, where he wrote several historical novels regarding that city. He was also a known newspaper correspondent. Francesco de Sanctis, writer, politician and twice Minister of Instruction after the reunification of Italy in 1861, was born in Morra De Sanctis near Avellino.\nGerman scientist Anton Dohrn founded in Naples the first public aquarium in the world and laboratory for the study of the sea, known as Maritime Zoological Station. The Astronomic Observatory of Capodimonte was founded by King Joachim Murat, in 1816. The observatory now hosts the Italian Laboratory of Astrophysics. Doctors and surgeons Antonio Cardarelli and Giuseppe Moscati were representatives of medical studies in Naples.\nContemporary and modern arts.\nThe so-called \"School of Posillipo\" and \"School of Resina\", dating from the late 19th to early 20th centuries, included painters, such as Giacinto Gigante, Federico Cortese, Domenico Morelli, Saverio Altamura, Giuseppe De Nittis, Vincenzo Gemito, Antonio Mancini, and Raffaello Pagliaccetti.\nAmongst the painters who inspired directly these schools, are Salvator Rosa, Pierre-Jacques Volaire, and Anton Sminck van Pitloo, who spent his last years in Naples. Opera singer Enrico Caruso was also a native of Naples. Russian revolutionary leader Vladimir Lenin lived for a period in Capri. In the 20th century, the music genre called Neapolitan song became popular worldwide, with songs such as \"'O sole mio\", \"Funicul\u00ec, Funicul\u00e0\", \"'O surdato 'nnammurato\", \"Torna a Surriento\", \"Santa Lucia\", \"Malafemmena\", \"'A vucchella\", and \"Passione\".\nMathematician Renato Caccioppoli, nephew of the Russian anarchic revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin, was born in Naples. The first President of the Italian Republic in 1946 (with a pro-tempore mandate of six months) was Enrico De Nicola from Torre del Greco. Campania is also home to the former Prime Minister and 6th President of the Republic Giovanni Leone, as well as the 11th President, Giorgio Napolitano.\nThe 20th century's best known philosopher and literate in Naples was Benedetto Croce, known for his studies in aesthetics, ethics, logic, economy, history, politics.\nNeapolitan artists, actors, playwrights, and showmen included Eduardo De Filippo and Peppino De Filippo, and their sister Titina De Filippo. Tot\u00f2 (byname of Antonio de Curtis) was one of the most important comedians in Naples in the 20th century. He is also known for the song \"Malafemmena\".\nPop artist Andy Warhol created two famous paintings of the 1980 Irpinia earthquake: \"Fate presto\" and \"Vesuvius 365\". Both originals are hosted in the exhibit Terrae Motus in the Palace of Caserta.\nOscar\u2013winning actress Sophia Loren grew up in Pozzuoli.\nOscar and David-winning film producer Dino De Laurentiis was born in Torre Annunziata. One of his grandchildren is Food Network personality Giada De Laurentiis.\nContemporary Campanian writers include Curzio Malaparte and Roberto Saviano.\n20th- and 21st-century Campanian actors and directors include Francesco Rosi, Iaia Forte, Pappi Corsicato, Teresa De Sio, Lello Arena, Massimo Troisi and director Gabriele Salvatores.\nModern Italian singers and musicians from Campania include Peppino di Capri, Renato Carosone, Edoardo Bennato, Eugenio Bennato, Mario Merola, Sergio Bruni, Aurelio Fierro, Roberto Murolo, Tony Tammaro, Teresa De Sio, Eduardo De Crescenzo, Alan Sorrenti, Tullio De Piscopo, Massimo Ranieri, Pino Daniele, James Senese and his group Napoli Centrale, Enzo Avitabile, Enzo Gragnaniello, Nino D'Angelo, Gigi D'Alessio, 99 Posse, and Almamegretta.\nArtists who directed movies about Naples or actors who played in movies in Campania, or interpreted Neapolitans on-screen, include Vittorio De Sica, Domenico Modugno, Renzo Arbore, Lina Wertm\u00fcller, Mario Lanza as \"Caruso\", Clark Gable in \"\"It Started in Naples\", and Jack Lemmon in the movies \"Maccheroni\" (which co-starred Marcello Mastroianni) and \"Avanti!\"\".\nThe international Giffoni Film Festival, established in 1971, is the first and most important festival for a young public.\nSports.\nCampania is home to several national football, futsal, water polo, volleyball, basketball and tennis clubs.\nThe fencing school in Naples is the oldest in the country and the only school in Italy in which a swordsman can acquire the title \"master of swords\", which allows him or her to teach the art of fencing.\nThe Circolo Savoia and Circolo Canottieri Napoli sailing clubs are among the oldest in Italy and are known for their regattas. These are also home of the main water polo teams in the city. Many sailors from Naples and Campania participate as crew in the America's Cup sailing competition.\nRowers Giuseppe Abbagnale and Carmine Abbagnale were born in Castellammare di Stabia: they were four times rowing world champions and Olympic gold medalists.\nAcross the top 3 levels of Italian football, the clubs in Campania include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
