{"id": "51970", "revid": "6702527", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51970", "title": "Weaving", "text": "Technology for the production of textiles\nWeaving is a method of textile production in which two distinct sets of yarns or threads are interlaced at right angles to form a fabric or cloth. The longitudinal threads are called the warp and the lateral threads are the weft, woof, or filling. The method in which these threads are interwoven affects the characteristics of the cloth.\nCloth is usually woven on a loom, a device that holds warp threads in place while filling threads are woven through them. A fabric band that meets this definition of cloth (warp threads with a weft thread winding between) can also be made using other methods, including tablet weaving, back strap loom, or other techniques that can be done without looms.\nThe way the warp and filling threads interlace with each other is called the weave. The majority of woven products are created with one of three basic weaves: plain weave, satin weave, or twill weave. Woven cloth can be plain or classic (in one colour or a simple pattern), or can be woven in decorative or artistic design.\nProcess and terminology.\nIn general, weaving involves using a loom to interlace two sets of threads at right angles to each other: the warp which runs longitudinally and the weft (older \"woof\") that crosses it. ( is an Old English word meaning \"that which is woven\"; compare \"leave\" and \"left\".) One warp thread is called an \"end\" and one weft thread is called a \"pick\". The warp threads are held taut and in parallel to each other, typically in a loom. There are many types of looms.\nWeaving can be summarized as a repetition of these three actions, also called the \"primary motions of the loom\".\nThe warp is divided into two overlapping groups, or lines (most often adjacent threads belonging to the opposite group) that run in two planes, one above another, so the shuttle can be passed between them in a straight motion. Then, the upper group is lowered by the loom mechanism, and the lower group is raised (shedding), allowing the shuttle to pass in the opposite direction, also in a straight motion. Repeating these actions forms a fabric mesh but without beating-up, the final distance between the adjacent wefts would be irregular and far too large.\nThe \"secondary motions of the loom\" are the:\nThe \"tertiary motions of the loom\" are the stop motions: to stop the loom in the event of a thread break. The two main stop motions are the\nThe principal parts of a loom are the frame, the warp-beam or weavers beam, the cloth-roll (apron bar), the heddles, and their mounting, the reed. The warp-beam is a wooden or metal cylinder on the back of the loom on which the warp is delivered. The threads of the warp extend in parallel order from the warp-beam to the front of the loom where they are attached to the cloth-roll. Each thread or group of threads of the warp passes through an opening (eye) in a heddle. The warp threads are separated by the heddles into two or more groups, each controlled and automatically drawn up and down by the motion of the heddles. In the case of small patterns the movement of the heddles is controlled by \"cams\" which move up the heddles by means of a frame called a harness; in larger patterns the heddles are controlled by a dobby mechanism, where the healds are raised according to pegs inserted into a revolving drum. Where a complex design is required, the healds are raised by harness cords attached to a Jacquard machine. Every time the harness (the heddles) moves up or down, an opening (shed) is made between the threads of warp, through which the pick is inserted. Traditionally the weft thread is inserted by a shuttle.\nOn a conventional loom, continuous weft thread is carried on a bobbin or pirn, in a shuttle that passes through the shed. A handloom weaver could propel the shuttle by throwing it from side to side with the aid of a picking stick. The \"picking\" on a power loom is done by rapidly hitting the shuttle from each side using an overpick or underpick mechanism controlled by cams 80\u2013250 times a minute. When a pirn is depleted, it is ejected from the shuttle and replaced with the next pirn held in a battery attached to the loom. Multiple shuttle boxes allow more than one shuttle to be used. Each can carry a different colour which allows banding across the loom.\nThe rapier-type weaving machines do not have shuttles, they propel cut lengths of weft by means of small grippers or rapiers that pick up the filling thread and carry it halfway across the loom where another rapier picks it up and pulls it the rest of the way. Some carry the filling yarns across the loom at rates in excess of 2,000 metres per minute. Manufacturers such as Picanol have reduced the mechanical adjustments to a minimum, and control all the functions through a computer with a graphical user interface. Other types use compressed air to insert the pick. They are all fast, versatile and quiet.\nThe warp is sized in a starch mixture for smoother running. The loom warped (loomed or dressed) by passing the sized warp threads through two or more heddles attached to harnesses. The power weavers loom is warped by separate workers. Most looms used for industrial purposes have a machine that ties new warps threads to the waste of previously used warps threads, while still on the loom, then an operator rolls the old and new threads back on the warp beam. The harnesses are controlled by cams, dobbies or a Jacquard head.\nThe raising and lowering sequence of warp threads in various sequences gives rise to many possible weave structures:\nBoth warp and weft can be visible in the final product. By spacing the warp more closely, it can completely cover the weft that binds it, giving a \"warp faced\" textile such as rep weave. Conversely, if the warp is spread out, the weft can slide down and completely cover the warp, giving a \"weft faced\" textile, such as a tapestry or a Kilim rug. There are a variety of loom styles for hand weaving and tapestry.\nArchaeology.\nThere are some indications that weaving was already known in the Paleolithic Era, as early as 27,000 years ago. An indistinct textile impression has been found at the Doln\u00ed V\u011bstonice site. According to the find, the weavers of the Upper Palaeolithic were manufacturing a variety of cordage types, produced plaited basketry and sophisticated twined and plain woven cloth. The artifacts include imprints in clay and burned remnants of cloth.\nThe oldest known textiles found in the Americas are remnants of six finely woven textiles and cordage found in Guitarrero Cave, Peru. The weavings, made from plant fibres, are dated between 10,100 and 9080 BCE.\nIn 2013 a piece of cloth woven from hemp was found in burial F. 7121 at the \u00c7atalh\u00f6y\u00fck site, suggested to be from around 7000 BCE Further finds come from the Neolithic civilisation preserved in the pile dwellings in Switzerland.\nAnother extant fragment from the Neolithic was found in Fayum, at a site dated to about 5000 BCE. This fragment is woven at about 12 threads by 9 threads per centimetre in a plain weave. Flax was the predominant fibre in Egypt at this time (3600 BCE) and had continued popularity in the Nile Valley, though wool became the primary fibre used in other cultures around 2000 BCE.\nThe oldest-known weavings in North America come from the Windover Archaeological Site in Florida. Dating from 4900 to 6500 BCE and made from plant fibres, the Windover hunter-gatherers produced \"finely crafted\" twined and plain weave textiles. Eighty-seven pieces of fabric were found associated with 37 burials. Researchers have identified seven different weaves in the fabric. One kind of fabric had 26 strands per inch (10 strands per centimetre). There were also weaves using two-strand and three-strand wefts. A round bag made from twine was found, as well as matting. The yarn was probably made from palm leaves. Cabbage palm, saw palmetto and scrub palmetto are all common in the area, and would have been so 8,000 years ago.\nEvidence of weaving as a commercial household industry in the historical region of Macedonia has been found at the Olynthus site. When the city was destroyed by Philip II in 348 BCE, artifacts were preserved in the houses. Loomweights were found in many houses, enough to produce cloth to meet the needs of the household, but some of the houses contained more loomweights, enough for commercial production, and one of the houses was adjacent to the \"agora\" and contained three shops where many coins were found. It is probable that such homes were engaged in commercial textile manufacture.\nHistory.\nWeaving was known in all the great civilisations, but no clear line of causality has been established. Early looms required two people to create the shed and one person to pass through the filling. Early looms wove a fixed length of cloth, but later ones allowed warp to be wound out as the fell progressed. Weaving became simpler when the warp was sized.\nAfrica.\nAround the 4th century BCE , the cultivation of cotton and the knowledge of its spinning and weaving in Mero\u00eb reached a high level. Export of textiles was one of the main sources of wealth for Kush. Aksumite King Ezana boasted in his inscription that he destroyed large cotton plantations in Mero\u00eb during his conquest of the region.\nLatin America.\nThe Indigenous people of the Americas wove textiles of cotton throughout tropical and subtropical America and in the South American Andes of wool from camelids, primarily domesticated llamas and alpacas. Cotton and the camelids were both domesticated by about 4,000 BCE. American weavers are \"credited with independently inventing nearly every non-mechanized technique known today.\"\nIn the Inca Empire of the Andes, both men and women produced textiles. Women mostly did their weaving using backstrap looms to make small pieces of cloth and vertical frame and single-heddle looms for larger pieces. Men used upright looms. The Inca elite valued \"cumbi\", which was a fine tapestry-woven textile produced on upright looms. The elite often offered as gifts of reciprocity to lords (other elite) in the Empire. In regions under direct control of the Inca, special artisans produced \"cumbi\" for the elite. Women who created \"cumbi\" in these regions were called \"acllas\" or \"mamaconas\" and men were called \"cumbicamayos\". Andean textile weavings were of practical, symbolic, religious, and ceremonial importance and used as currency, tribute, and as a determinant of social class and rank. Sixteenth-century Spanish colonists were impressed by both the quality and quantity of textiles produced by the Inca Empire. Some of the techniques and designs are still in use in the 21st century.\nWhereas European cloth-making generally created ornamentation through \"suprastructural\" means\u2014by adding embroidery, ribbons, brocade, dyeing, and other elements onto the finished woven textile\u2014pre-Columbian Andean weavers created elaborate cloth by focusing on \"structural\" designs involving manipulation of the warp and weft of the fabric itself. Andeans used \"tapestry techniques; double-, triple- and quadruple-cloth techniques; gauze weaves; warp-patterned weaves; discontinuous warp or scaffold weaves; and plain weaves\" among many other techniques, in addition to the suprastructural techniques listed above.\nEast Asia.\nThe weaving of silk from silkworm cocoons has been known in China since about 3500 BCE. Silk that was intricately woven and dyed, showing a well developed craft, has been found in a Chinese tomb dating back to 2700 BCE.\nSilk weaving in China was an intricate process that was very involved. Men and women, usually from the same family, had their own roles in the weaving process. The actual work of weaving was done by both men and women. Women were often weavers since it was a way they could contribute to the household income while staying at home. Women would usually weave simpler designs within the household while men would be in charge of the weaving of more intricate and complex pieces of clothing. The process of sericulture and weaving emphasized the idea that men and women should work together instead of women being subordinate to men. Weaving became an integral part of Chinese women's social identity. Several rituals and myths were associated with the promotion of silk weaving, especially as a symbol of female power. Weaving contributed to the balance between men and women's economic contributions and had many economic benefits.\nThere were many paths into the occupation of weaver. Women usually married into the occupation, belonged to a family of weavers and or lived in a location that had weather conditions suitable for the process of silk weaving. Weavers usually belonged to the peasant class. Silk weaving became a specialized job requiring specific technology and equipment that was completed domestically within households. Although most of the silk weaving was done within the confines of the home and family, there were some specialized workshops that hired skilled silk weavers as well. These workshops took care of the weaving process, although the raising of the silkworms and reeling of the silk remained work for peasant families. The silk that was woven in workshops rather than homes were of higher quality, since the workshop could afford to hire the best weavers. These weavers were usually men who operated more complicated looms, such as the wooden draw-loom. This created a competitive market of silk weavers.\nThe quality and ease of the weaving process depended on the silk that was produced by the silk worms. The easiest silk to work with came from breeds of silk worms that spun their cocoons so that it could be unwound in one long strand. The reeling, or unwinding of silk worm cocoons is started by placing the cocoons in boiling water in order to break apart the silk filaments as well as kill the silk worm pupae. Women would then find the end of the strands of silk by sticking their hand into the boiling water. Usually this task was done by girls aged eight to twelve, while the more complex jobs were given to older women. They would then create a silk thread, which could vary in thickness and strength from the unwound cocoons.\nAfter the reeling of the silk, the silk would be dyed before the weaving process began. There were many different looms and tools for weaving. For high quality and intricate designs, a wooden draw-loom or pattern loom was used. This loom would require two or three weavers and was usually operated by men. There were also other smaller looms, such as the waist loom, that could be operated by a single woman and were usually used domestically.\nSericulture and silk weaving spread to Korea by 200 BCE, to Khotan by 50 CE, and to Japan by about 300 CE.\nThe pit-treadle loom may have originated in India though most authorities establish the invention in China. Pedals were added to operate heddles. By the Middle Ages such devices also appeared in Persia, Sudan, Egypt and possibly the Arabian Peninsula, where \"the operator sat with his feet in a pit below a fairly low-slung loom\". In 700 CE, horizontal looms and vertical looms could be found in many parts of Asia, Africa and Europe. In Africa, the rich dressed in cotton while the poorer wore wool.\nBy the 12th century it had come to Europe either from the Byzantium or Moorish Spain where the mechanism was raised higher above the ground on a more substantial frame.\nSoutheast Asia.\nIn the Philippines, numerous pre-colonial weaving traditions exist among different ethnic groups. They used various plant fibers, mainly abac\u00e1 or banana, but also including tree cotton, buri palm (locally known as ) and other palms, various grasses (like and ), and barkcloth. The oldest evidence of weaving traditions are Neolithic stone tools used for preparing barkcloth found in archeological sites in Sagung Cave of southern Palawan and Arku Cave of Pe\u00f1ablanca, Cagayan. The latter has been dated to around 1255\u2013605 BCE.\nOther countries in Southeast Asia have their own extensive history of weaving traditions. Weaving was introduced to Southeast Asia at the same time rice agriculture was introduced from China. As it was introduced alongside rice farming, weaving is more popular in communities where rice is being farmed as compared to communities that rely on hunting, gathering, and animal farming.\nEach country has its own distinctive weaving traditions or has absorbed weaving traditions from their neighboring countries. The most common material used for weaving is cotton that is interwoven with threads made of different materials. Brunei is famous for its Jong Sarat, a cloth usually used in traditional weddings, uses silver and gold threads interwoven usually with cotton threads. Similarly, Indonesia has the Songket, also used in traditional weddings, which also utilizes gold and silver wrapped thread to create elaborate designs on their weaved textiles. On the other hand, Cambodia has the Ikat, which utilizes the method of dyeing thunks of thread tied with fiber to create patterns while weaving. In addition to using threads, weavers of Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam combine silk and other fibers with cotton for weaving. While in Laos, natural materials are used, like roots, tree bark, leaves, flowers, and seeds, but for dyeing the textile that has been already weaved. These countries in Southeast Asia have more weaving traditions but these techniques are the popular ones.\nTo create threads of cotton for weaving, spindle whorls were commonly used in Southeast Asia. It is made from either clay, stone or wood and has a variety of appearances regarding its shape and size. Spindle whorls were said to emerge in Southeast Asia along with expansion of rice agriculture from Yangtse, China. Additionally, its increasing appearance in certain regions of Southeast Asia back then may be also a sign of the enlargement of cotton thread and textile production. Due to its low cost and portability because of its small size, it was favored among rural weaving communities in countries of Southeast Asia.\nWeaved textiles in Southeast Asia are mostly made with looms. The foot brace loom is the earliest loom introduced to Southeast Asia from China, having its first appearance in Vietnam. Although, it was only used in certain areas of Vietnam, Laos, Indonesia, and Cambodia. Another loom that is widely used across Southeast Asia is the ground level body tension loom, also known as the belt loom, as a part of it needs to be attached to a belt-like strap on the weaver\u2019s waist to control and hold the tension of the warped threads. It is usually operated at the ground level and the weaver is able to control the threads by leaning backwards and forward. The body tension loom was developed from the foot-brace loom to eventually accommodate weaving of larger and wider cloth types.\nMedieval Europe.\nThe predominant fibre in Europe during the medieval period was wool, followed by linen and nettlecloth for the lower classes. Cotton was introduced to Sicily and Spain in the 9th century. When Sicily was captured by the Normans, they took the technology to Northern Italy and then the rest of Europe. Silk fabric production was reintroduced towards the end of this period and the more sophisticated silk weaving techniques were applied to the other staples.\nThe weaver worked at home and marketed his cloth at fairs. Warp-weighted looms were commonplace in Europe before the introduction of horizontal looms in the 10th and 11th centuries. Weaving became an urban craft and to regulate their trade, craftsmen applied to establish a guild. These initially were merchant guilds, but developed into separate trade guilds for each skill. The cloth merchant who was a member of a city's weavers guild was allowed to sell cloth; he acted as a middleman between the tradesmen weavers and the purchaser. The trade guilds controlled quality and the training needed before an artisan could call himself a weaver.\nBy the 13th century, an organisational change took place, and a system of putting out was introduced. The cloth merchant purchased the wool and provided it to the weaver, who sold his produce back to the merchant. The merchant controlled the rates of pay and economically dominated the cloth industry. The merchants' prosperity is reflected in the wool towns of eastern England; Norwich, Bury St Edmunds and Lavenham being good examples. Wool was a political issue. The supply of thread has always limited the output of a weaver. About that time, the spindle method of spinning was replaced by the great wheel and soon after the treadle-driven spinning wheel. The loom remained the same but with the increased volume of thread it could be operated continuously.\nThe 14th century saw considerable flux in population. The 13th century had been a period of relative peace; Europe became overpopulated. Poor weather led to a series of poor harvests and starvation. There was great loss of life in the Hundred Years War. Then in 1346, Europe was struck with the Black Death and the population was reduced by up to a half. Arable land was labour-intensive and sufficient workers no longer could be found. Land prices dropped, and land was sold and put to sheep pasture. Traders from Florence and Bruges bought the wool, then sheep-owning landlords started to weave wool outside the jurisdiction of the city and trade guilds. The weavers started by working in their own homes then production was moved into purpose-built buildings. The working hours and the amount of work were regulated. The putting-out system had been replaced by a factory system. \nThe migration of the Huguenot Weavers, Calvinists fleeing from religious persecution in mainland Europe, to Britain around the time of 1685 challenged the English weavers of cotton, woollen and worsted cloth, who subsequently learned the Huguenots' superior techniques.\nColonial United States.\nColonial America relied heavily on Great Britain for manufactured goods of all kinds. British policy was to encourage the production of raw materials in colonies and discourage manufacturing. The Wool Act 1699 restricted the export of colonial wool.\nAs a result, many people wove cloth from locally produced fibres. The colonists also used wool, cotton and flax (linen) for weaving, though hemp could be made into serviceable canvas and heavy cloth. They could get one cotton crop each year; until the invention of the cotton gin it was a labour-intensive process to separate the seeds from the fibres. Functional tape, bands, straps, and fringe were woven on box and paddle looms. \nA plain weave was preferred as the added skill and time required to make more complex weaves kept them from common use. Sometimes designs were woven into the fabric but most were added after weaving using wood block prints or embroidery. \nIndustrial Revolution.\nBefore the Industrial Revolution, weaving was a manual craft and wool was the principal staple. In the great wool districts a form of factory system had been introduced but in the uplands weavers worked from home on a putting-out system. The wooden looms of that time might be broad or narrow; broad looms were those too wide for the weaver to pass the shuttle through the shed, so that the weaver needed an expensive assistant (often an apprentice). This ceased to be necessary after John Kay invented the flying shuttle in 1733. The shuttle and the picking stick sped up the process of weaving. There was thus a shortage of thread or a surplus of weaving capacity. The opening of the Bridgewater Canal in June 1761 allowed cotton to be brought into Manchester, an area rich in fast flowing streams that could be used to power machinery. Spinning was the first to be mechanised (spinning jenny, spinning mule), and this led to limitless thread for the weaver.\nIn 1784 Edmund Cartwright first proposed building a weaving machine that would function similarly to recently developed cotton-spinning mills, drawing scorn from critics who said the weaving process was too nuanced to automate. He built a factory at Doncaster and obtained a series of patents between 1785 and 1792. In 1788, his brother Major John Cartwight built Revolution Mill at Retford (named for the centenary of the Glorious Revolution). In 1791, he licensed his loom to the Grimshaw brothers of Manchester, but their Knott Mill burnt down the following year (possibly a case of arson). Edmund Cartwight was granted a reward of \u00a310,000 by Parliament for his efforts in 1809. However, success in power-weaving also required improvements by others, including H. Horrocks of Stockport. Only during the two decades after about 1805, did power-weaving take hold. At that time there were 250,000 hand weavers in the UK. Textile manufacture was one of the leading sectors in the British Industrial Revolution, but weaving was a comparatively late sector to be mechanised. The loom became semi-automatic in 1842 with Kenworthy and Bulloughs Lancashire Loom. The various innovations took weaving from a home-based artisan activity (labour-intensive and man-powered) to steam driven factories process. A large metal manufacturing industry grew to produce the looms, firms such as Howard &amp; Bullough of Accrington, and Tweedales and Smalley and Platt Brothers. Most power weaving took place in weaving sheds, in small towns circling Greater Manchester away from the cotton spinning area. The earlier combination mills where spinning and weaving took place in adjacent buildings became rarer. Wool and worsted weaving took place in West Yorkshire and particular Bradford, here there were large factories such as Lister's or Drummond's, where all the processes took place. Both men and women with weaving skills emigrated, and took the knowledge to their new homes in New England, to places like Pawtucket and Lowell.\nWoven 'grey cloth' was then sent to the finishers where it was bleached, dyed and printed. Natural dyes were originally used, with synthetic dyes coming in the second half of the 19th century. A demand for new dyes followed the discovery of mauveine in 1856, and its popularity in fashion. Researchers continued to explore the chemical potential of coal tar waste from the growing number of gas works in Britain and Europe, creating an entirely new sector in the chemical industry.\nThe invention in France of the Jacquard loom, patented in 1804, enabled complicated patterned cloths to be woven, by using punched cards to determine which threads of coloured yarn should appear on the upper side of the cloth. The jacquard allowed individual control of each warp thread, row by row without repeating, so very complex patterns were suddenly feasible. Samples exist showing calligraphy, and woven copies of engravings. Jacquards could be attached to handlooms or powerlooms.\nA distinction can be made between the role and lifestyle and status of a handloom weaver, and that of the power loom weaver and craft weaver. The perceived threat of the power loom led to disquiet and industrial unrest. Well known protests movements such as the Luddites and the Chartists had handloom weavers amongst their leaders. In the early 19th-century power weaving became viable. Richard Guest in 1823 made a comparison of the productivity of power and handloom weavers:\nA very good Hand Weaver, a man twenty-five or thirty years of age, will weave two pieces of nine-eighths shirting per week, each twenty-four yards long, and containing one hundred and five shoots of weft in an inch, the reed of the cloth being a forty-four, Bolton count, and the warp and weft forty hanks to the pound, A Steam Loom Weaver, fifteen years of age, will in the same time weave seven similar pieces.\nHe then speculates about the wider economics of using power loom weavers:\n...it may very safely be said, that the work is done in a Steam Factory containing two hundred Looms, would, if done by hand Weavers, find employment and support for a population of more than two thousand persons.With the Industrial Revolution came a growth in opportunity for women to work within textile factories. However, in spite of their gender, their work was perceived to have a lower social and economic value than work done by their male counterparts.\nModern day.\nIn the 1920s the weaving workshop of the Bauhaus design school in Germany aimed to raise weaving, previously seen as a craft, to a fine art, and also to investigate the industrial requirements of modern weaving and fabrics. Under the direction of Gunta St\u00f6lzl, the workshop experimented with unorthodox materials, including cellophane, fibreglass, and metal. From expressionist tapestries to the development of soundproofing and light-reflective fabric, the workshop's innovative approach instigated a modernist theory of weaving. Former Bauhaus student and teacher Anni Albers published the seminal 20th-century text \"On Weaving\" in 1965. Other notables from the Bauhaus weaving workshop include Otti Berger, Margaretha Reichardt, and Benita Koch-Otte.\nIn the Bauhaus, the weaving workshop was considered \"the women's department\", and many women were forced to join against wishes to study another art form. Some weavers, like Helene Nonn\u00e9-Schmidt believed that women were made to weave because they could only produce work in 2-D. She thought women lacked the spatial imagination and genius men had to work in other mediums.\nHand weaving of Persian carpets and kilims has been an important element of the tribal crafts of many of the subregions of modern day Iran. Examples of carpet types are the Lavar Kerman carpet from Kerman and the Seraband rug from Ar\u0101k.\nIn Southeast Asia, some communities are working to revive weaving traditions as a way to address poverty, improve living conditions, support local communities, and to promote environmental sustainability. Several initiatives have been established to support this effort, such as the Maybank Women Eco-Weavers program by the Maybank Foundation which currently operates in Laos, Cambodia, Malaysia and Indonesia. This program helps create opportunities for women weavers throughout the Southeast Asia region to improve their livelihoods and to give them financial independence.\nAdditionally, similar programs exist in Taiwan and in the Philippines. In Taiwan, The Lihang Studio and S\u2019uraw Education was founded by Yuma Taru to revive the Atayal weaving culture and to promote indigenous education in weaving and dyeing. In the Philippines, the Kyyangan Weavers Association was established in the Ifugao Province as a way to conserve and promote the Ifugao weaving culture and other traditional practices. Also, this association collaborates with academic institutions, government agencies and other non-government organizations on research and product development to be able to offer economic opportunities for communities.\nTypes of weaving.\nHand loom weavers.\nHandloom weaving was done by both genders but men outnumbered women partially due to the strength needed to batten. They worked from home sometimes in a well-lit attic room. The women of the house would spin the thread they needed, and attend to finishing. Later women took to weaving, they obtained their thread from the spinning mill, and working as outworkers on a piecework contract. Over time competition from the power looms drove down the piece rate and they existed in increasing poverty.\nPower loom weavers.\nPower loom workers were usually girls and young women. They had the security of fixed hours, and except in times of hardship, such as in the cotton famine, regular income. They were paid a wage and a piece work bonus. Even when working in a combined mill, weavers stuck together and enjoyed a tight-knit community. The women usually minded the four machines and kept the looms oiled and clean. They were assisted by 'little tenters', children on a fixed wage who ran errands and did small tasks. They learnt the job of the weaver by watching. Often they would be half timers, carrying a green card which teacher and overlookers would sign to say they had turned up at the mill in the morning and the afternoon at the school. At fourteen or so they come full-time into the mill, and started by sharing looms with an experienced worker where it was important to learn quickly as they would both be on piece work.Serious problems with the loom were left to the tackler to sort out. He would inevitably be a man, as were usually the overlookers. The mill had its health and safety issues, there was a reason why the women tied their hair back with scarves. Inhaling cotton dust caused lung problems, and the noise was causing total hearing loss. Weavers would mee-maw as normal conversation was impossible. Weavers used to 'kiss the shuttle', that is, suck thread through the eye of the shuttle. This left a foul taste in the mouth due to the oil, which was also carcinogenic.\nCraft weavers.\nArts and Crafts was an international design philosophy that originated in England and flourished between 1860 and 1910 (especially the second half of that period), continuing its influence until the 1930s. Instigated by the artist and writer William Morris (1834\u20131896) during the 1860s and inspired by the writings of John Ruskin (1819\u20131900), it had its earliest and most complete development in the British Isles but spread to Europe and North America. It was largely a reaction against mechanisation and the philosophy advocated of traditional craftsmanship using simple forms and often medieval, romantic or folk styles of decoration. Handweaving was highly regarded and taken up as a decorative art.\nIndigenous cultures.\nNative Americans.\nTextile weaving, using cotton dyed with pigments, was a dominant craft among pre-colonization tribes of the American southwest, including various Pueblo peoples, the Zuni, and the Ute tribes. The first Spaniards to visit the region wrote about seeing Navajo blankets. With the introduction of Navajo-Churro sheep, the resulting woolen products have become very well known. By the 18th century the Navajo had begun to import yarn with their favorite color, Bayeta red. Using an upright loom, the Navajo wove blankets worn as garments and then rugs after the 1880s for trade. Navajo traded for commercial wool, such as Germantown, imported from Pennsylvania. Under the influence of European-American settlers at trading posts, Navajos created new and distinct styles, including \"Two Gray Hills\" (predominantly black and white, with traditional patterns), \"Teec Nos Pos\" (colorful, with very extensive patterns), \"Ganado\" (founded by Don Lorenzo Hubbell), red dominated patterns with black and white, \"Crystal\" (founded by J. B. Moore), \"Oriental\" and Persian styles (almost always with natural dyes), \"Wide Ruins,\" \"Chinlee,\" banded geometric patterns, \"Klagetoh,\" diamond type patterns, \"Red Mesa\" and bold diamond patterns. Many of these patterns exhibit a fourfold symmetry, which is thought to embody traditional ideas about harmony, or \"h\u00f3zh\u00f3\".\nAmazon cultures.\nAmong the indigenous people of the Amazon basin densely woven palm-bast mosquito netting, or tents, were utilized by the Panoans, Tupinamb\u00e1, Western Tucano, Yameo, Z\u00e1paroans, and perhaps by the indigenous peoples of the central Huallaga River basin (Steward 1963:520). Aguaje palm-bast (Mauritia flexuosa, Mauritia minor, or swamp palm) and the frond spears of the Chambira palm (Astrocaryum chambira, A.munbaca, A.tucuma, also known as Cumare or Tucum) have been used for centuries by the Urarina of the Peruvian Amazon to make cordage, net-bags hammocks, and to weave fabric. Among the Urarina, the production of woven palm-fiber goods is imbued with varying degrees of an aesthetic attitude, which draws its authentication from referencing the Urarina's primordial past. Urarina mythology attests to the centrality of weaving and its role in engendering Urarina society. The post-diluvial creation myth accords women's weaving knowledge a pivotal role in Urarina social reproduction.\nEven though palm-fiber cloth is regularly removed from circulation through mortuary rites, Urarina palm-fiber wealth is neither completely inalienable, nor fungible since it is a fundamental medium for the expression of labor and exchange. The circulation of palm-fiber wealth stabilizes a host of social relationships, ranging from marriage and fictive kinship (\"compadrazco\", spiritual compeership) to perpetuating relationships with the deceased.\nComputer science.\nThe Nvidia Parallel Thread Execution ISA derives some terminology (specifically the term Warp to refer to a group of concurrent processing threads) from historical weaving traditions.\nGender politics.\nWomen's work.\nWeaving is a practice that is typically considered to be \"women's work\", either part of their employment, cultural practices, or leisure. The categorization of weaving as women's work has bled into many fields, from art history, anthropology, sociology, and even psychology. While claiming that women had not contributed much to civilization's history, Sigmund Freud wrote that \"one technique which they may have invented [is] that of plaiting and weaving.\"\nWomen's work is often not recorded as a central activity to building Western history and culture. Yet, some anthropologists argue that textile production facilitated societal establishment and growth, therefore women were integral to perpetuating communities. To record their stories, beliefs, and symbols important to their culture, women engaged in weaving, embroidering, or other fiber practices. These practices have existed for centuries documented through art history, myth, and oral history and are still practiced today.\nReception in the mainstream art world.\nWeaving is often classified as \"craft\" alongside other art forms like ceramics, embroidery, basket weaving, and more. Historically, there has been a hierarchy between artists who were considered \"craftspeople\" and artists who worked in traditional mediums of painting and sculpture. The traditional artists wanted to keep artisans in the minority, so there was little reception for arts that were considered craft.\nIn 1939, art critic Clement Greenberg wrote \"Avant-Garde and Kitsch\" where he presented his ideas about \"high\" and \"low\" art. His definition of \"low\" art was likely informed by years of theory against decoration and ornamentation, which was correlated with femininity in the early 1900s by critics like Adolf Loos and Karl Scheffler. Although Greenberg never explicitly says the word \"craft\", many scholars postulate that this is one of the origins of Western opposition to weaving, and more largely art that is considered craft.\nOnly recently has the art world begun to recognize weaving as an art form and to exhibit woven articles as art objects. Exhibitions of large scope have been organized to affirm the importance of textiles in the art historical canon, such as the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles' With Pleasure: Pattern and Decoration in American Art 1972\u20131985. Women weavers, like Anni Albers, Lenore Tawney, Magdalena Abakanowicz, Olga de Amaral, and Sheila Hicks, are now the subject of exhibitions and major retrospectives across the world.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51971", "revid": "40473921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51971", "title": "Yarn", "text": "Long continuous length of interlocked fibres\nYarn is a long continuous length of interlocked fibres, used in sewing, crocheting, knitting, weaving, embroidery, ropemaking, and the production of textiles. \"Thread\" is a type of yarn intended for sewing by hand or machine. Modern manufactured sewing threads may be finished with wax or other lubricants to withstand the stresses involved in sewing. Embroidery threads are yarns specifically designed for needlework. Yarn can be made of a number of natural or synthetic materials, and comes in a variety of colors and thicknesses (referred to as \"weights\"). Although yarn may be dyed different colours, most yarns are solid coloured with a uniform hue.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"yarn\" comes from Middle English, from the Old English , akin to Old High German ', \"yarn\", Dutch ', Ancient Greek (\"chord\u0113\", \"string\"), and Sanskrit , \"band\". It originally referred to entrails.\nHistory.\nThe human production of yarn is known to have existed since the Stone Age. Fiber materials came from animal hides, reeds, cotton, wool, and silk. Textile trade contributed immensely to the ancient global economy.\nMaterials.\nYarn can be made from a number of natural or synthetic fibers, or a blend of natural and synthetic fibers.\nNatural fibers.\nCotton.\nThe most common plant fiber is cotton, which is typically spun into fine yarn for mechanical weaving or knitting into cloth.\nSilk.\nSilk is a natural protein fiber, some forms of which can be woven into textiles. The protein fiber of silk is composed mainly of fibroin and is produced by the larvae of the moth \"Bombyx mori\". Silk production is thought to have begun in China and silk thread and cloth manufacture was well-established by the Shang dynasty (1600\u20131050 BCE).\nLinen.\nLinen is another natural fiber with a long history of use for yarn and textiles. Linen fibers are derived from the flax plant.\nOther plant fibers.\nOther plant fibers which can be spun include bamboo, hemp, maize, nettle, and soy fiber.\nAnimal fibers.\nThe most common spun animal fiber is wool harvested from sheep. As long fibers make better yarn, sheep have been bred over time to produce longer fibers. This increases the need for shearing to prevent pests and overheating.\nOther animal fibers used include alpaca, angora, mohair, llama, cashmere, and silk. More rarely, yarn may be spun from camel, yak, possum, musk ox, vicu\u00f1a, cat, dog, wolf, rabbit, bison, or chinchilla hair, as well as turkey or ostrich feathers.\nSynthetic fibers.\nSome examples of synthetic fibers that are used as yarn are nylon, acrylic fiber, rayon, and polyester. Synthetic fibers are generally extruded in continuous strands of gel-state materials. These strands are drawn (stretched), annealed (hardened), and cured to obtain properties desirable for later processing.\nSynthetic fibers come in three basic forms: staple, tow, and filament. Staple is cut fibers, generally sold in lengths up to 120\u00a0mm. Tow is a continuous \"rope\" of fibers consisting of many filaments loosely joined side-to-side. Filament is a continuous strand consisting of anything from one filament to many. Synthetic fiber is most often measured in a weight per linear measurement basis, along with cut length. Denier and Dtex are the most common weight to length measures. Cut-length only applies to staple fiber.\nFilament extrusion is sometimes referred to as \"spinning,\" but most people equate spinning with spun yarn production.\nYarn from recycled materials.\nT-shirt yarn is a recycled yarn made from the same fabric as is used in T-shirts and other clothes. It is often made from the remainder fabric of clothing manufacture, and therefore is considered a recycled and eco-friendly product. It can also be made at home out of used clothing. The resulting yarn can be used in knitted or crocheted items.\nComparison of material properties.\nIn general, natural fibers tend to require more careful handling than synthetics because they can shrink, felt, stain, shed, fade, stretch, wrinkle, or be eaten by moths more readily, unless special treatments such as mercerization or super washing are performed to strengthen, fix color, or otherwise enhance the fiber's own properties.\nSome types of protein yarns (i.e.,\u00a0hair, silk, feathers) may feel irritating to some people, causing contact dermatitis, hives, or wheezing. These reactions are likely a sensitivity to thicker and coarser fiber diameter or fiber ends. In fact, contrary to popular belief, wool allergies are practically unknown. According to a study reviewing the evidence of wool as an allergen conducted by Acta Dermato-Venereologica, contemporary superfine or ultrafine Merino wool with their reduced fibre diameters do not provoke itch, are well tolerated and in fact benefit eczema management. Further studies suggest that known allergens applied during textile processing are minimally present in wool garments today given current industry practices and are unlikely to lead to allergic reactions.\nWhen natural hair-type fibers are burned, they tend to singe and have a smell of burnt hair; this is because many, like human hair, are protein-derived. Cotton and viscose (rayon) yarns burn as a wick. Synthetic yarns generally tend to melt, though some synthetics are inherently flame-retardant. Noting how an unidentified fiber strand burns and smells can assist in determining if it is natural or synthetic, and what the fiber content is.\nBoth synthetic and natural yarns can pill. Pilling is a function of fiber content, spinning method, twist, contiguous staple length, and fabric construction. Single ply yarns or using fibers like merino wool are known to pill more due to the fact that in the former, the single ply is not tight enough to securely retain all the fibers under abrasion, and the merino wool's short staple length allows the ends of the fibers to pop out of the twist more easily.\nYarns combining synthetic and natural fibers inherit the properties of each parent, according to the proportional composition. Synthetics are added to lower cost, increase durability, add unusual color or visual effects, provide machine washability and stain resistance, reduce heat retention, or lighten garment weight.\nStructure.\nSpun yarn.\nSpun yarn is made by twisting staple fibres together to make a cohesive thread, or \"single\". Twisting fibres into yarn in the process called spinning can be dated back to the Upper Paleolithic, and yarn spinning was one of the first processes to be industrialized. Spun yarns are produced by placing a series of individual fibres or filaments together to form a continuous assembly of overlapping fibres, usually bound together by twist. Spun yarns may contain a single type of fibre, or be a blend of various types. Combining synthetic fibres (which can have high strength, lustre, and fire retardant qualities) with natural fibres (which have good water absorbency and skin comforting qualities) is very common. The most widely used blends are cotton-polyester and wool-acrylic fibre blends. Blends of different natural fibres are common too, especially with more expensive fibres such as alpaca, angora and cashmere.\nYarn is selected for different textiles based on the characteristics of the yarn fibres, such as warmth (wool), light weight (cotton or rayon), durability (nylon is added to sock yarn, for example), or softness (cashmere, alpaca).\nYarn is composed of twisted strands of fiber, which are known as plies when grouped together. These strands of yarn are twisted together (plied) in the opposite direction to make a thicker yarn. Depending on the direction of this final twist, the yarn will have either \"s-twist\" (the threads appear to go \"up\" to the left) or \"z-twist\" (to the right). For a single ply yarn, the direction of the final twist is the same as its original twist. The twist direction of yarn can affect the final properties of the fabric, and combined use of the two twist directions can nullify skewing in knitted fabric.\nThe mechanical integrity of yarn is derived from frictional contacts between its composing fibers. The science behind this was first studied by Galileo.\nCarded and combed yarn.\nCombed yarns are produced by adding another step of yarn spinning, namely combing, which aligns the fibres and removes the short fibres carried over from the previous step of carding. Combed yarn results in superior-quality fabrics. In comparison to carded yarns, this particular yarn is slightly more expensive, because the weaving is a long, consuming process. Combing separates small fibres from elongated fibres, in which this procedure makes the yarn softer and smoother.\nHosiery yarn.\nHosiery yarns are used in the manufacturing of knitted fabrics. Since the knitted materials are more delicate than woven materials; hence hosiery yarns are made 'softer' with fewer twists per inch than their woven counterparts. Hosiery yarn comes from a separate spinning process (melt spinning), and is used with circular knitting machines to form fabric.\nOpen-end yarn.\nOpen-end yarn is produced by open-end spinning without a spindle. The method of spinning is different from ring spinning. In open-end yarn, there is no roving frame stage. Sliver from the card goes into the rotor, is spun into yarn directly. Open-end yarn can be produced from short fibers. Open-end yarns are different from ring yarns. Open-end yarns are limited to coarser counts.\nNovelty yarn.\nNovelty yarns or complex yarns are yarns with special (fancy) effects introduced during spinning or plying. One example is slub yarns, yarn with thick or thin sections alternating regularly or irregularly. In a similar manner, creating deliberate unevenness, additions or injections of neps or metallic or synthetic fibers (along with natural fibers) in spinning creates novelty yarns.\nFilament yarn.\nFilament yarn consists of filament fibres (very long continuous fibres) either twisted together or only grouped together. Thicker monofilaments are typically used for industrial purposes rather than fabric production or decoration. Silk is a natural filament, and synthetic filament yarns are used to produce silk-like effects.\nTexturized yarn.\nTexturized yarns are made by a process of air texturizing filament yarns (sometimes referred to as \"taslanizing\"), which combines multiple filament yarns into a yarn with some of the characteristics of spun yarns. They are synthetic continuous filaments that are modified to impart special texture and appearance. It was originally applied to synthetic fibers to reduce transparency, slipperiness and increase warmth, absorbency and makes the yarn more opaque. It was used to manufacture a variety of textile products: knitted underwear and outer wear, shape-retaining knitted suits, overcoats. They also were used in the production of artificial fur, carpets, blankets, etc.\nColour.\nYarn may be used undyed, or may be coloured with natural or artificial dyes. Most yarns have a single uniform hue, but there is also a wide selection of variegated yarns:\nEach of these different colours and styles are achieved through a process called yarn dyeing. There are many different methods of yarn dyeing: package dyeing, skein dyeing, space dyeing, warp beam dyeing, and more.\nWeight.\nYarn quantities for handcrafts are usually measured and sold by weight in ounces (oz) or grams (g). Common sizes include 25g, 50g, and 100g skeins. Some companies also primarily measure in ounces with common sizes being three-ounce, four-ounce, six-ounce, and eight-ounce skeins. Textile measurements are taken at a standard temperature and humidity because variations in heat and humidity can cause fibers to absorb different amounts of moisture from the air, thus increasing the measured weight of the yarn without adding any fiber material. The actual length of the yarn contained in a ball or skein can vary due to the inherent heaviness of the fibre and the thickness of the strand; for instance, a 50\u00a0g skein of lace weight mohair may contain several hundred metres, while a 50\u00a0g skein of bulky wool may contain only 60 metres.\nCraft yarn comes in several thicknesses or weights. This is not to be confused with the measurement and weight listed above. The Craft Yarn Council of America promotes a standardized industry system for measuring yarn weight, where weights are numbered from 0 (finest) to 7 (thickest). Each weight can be described by a number and name: Size 0 yarn is called Lace, size 1 is Super Fine, size 2 is Fine, size 3 is Light, size 4 is Medium, size 5 is Bulky, size 6 is Super Bulky, and size 7 is Jumbo.\nEach weight also has several commonly used but unregulated terms associated with it. However, this naming convention is more descriptive than precise; fibre artists disagree about where on the continuum each lies, and the precise relationships between the sizes. These terms include: fingering, sport, double-knit (or DK), worsted, aran (or heavy worsted), bulky, super-bulky, and roving.\nAnother measurement of yarn weight, often used by weavers, is wraps per inch (WPI). The yarn is wrapped snugly around a ruler and the number of wraps that fit in an inch are counted.\nLabels on yarn for handicrafts often include information on gauge, which can also help determine yarn weight. Gauge, known in the UK as tension, is a measurement of how many stitches and rows are produced per inch or per cm on a specified size of knitting needle or crochet hook. The proposed standardization uses a four-by-four inch/ten-by-ten cm knitted stockinette or single crocheted square, with the resultant number of stitches across and rows high made by the suggested tools on the label to determine the gauge.\nIn Europe, textile engineers often use the unit tex, which is the weight in grams of a kilometre of yarn, or decitex, which is a finer measurement corresponding to the weight in grams of 10\u00a0km of yarn. Many other units have been used over time by different industries.\nYarn skeins.\nThere are many different ways in which yarn is wound, including hanks, skeins, donut balls, cakes, and cones.\nHank.\nA hank of yarn is a looped bundle of yarn, similar to how wire is typically sold. The yarn is usually tied in two places directly opposite each other to keep the loops together and to keep them from tangling. Hanks are a preferred method of fastening yarn for many yarn sellers and yarn-dyers due to its ability to more widely display the qualities of the fiber. It is often wound using a swift, a standing contraption that holds a yarn hank without obstruction and spins on a central axis to facilitate yarn ball winding There are two subtypes of hanks: twisted and folded. A twisted hank is a hank that has been twisted into a rope braid. A folded hank is a hank that has been folded in half and wrapped in a label for retail purposes.\nSkein.\nSkeins are one of the most common types of yarn ball. Although skeins are technically described as yarn that has been wound into an oblong shape, the word \"skein\" is used generically to describe any ball of yarn. Many large-scale yarn retailers like Lion brand and parent companies like Yarnspirations sell their yarn in skeins. Unlike other types of yarn balls, a skein allows you to access both ends of the yarn. The yarn end in the inside of the skein is called a center pull. One major complaint of center pull bullet skeins is that the inside yarn end is not easily found, and often is pulled out of the skein in a jumble of tangled yarn called \"yarn barf\". There are two types of skeins: a pull skein, which is more rectangular in shape, and a bullet skein, which is rounder.\nMicroscopic aspect of selected yarns.\nBelow are the images taken by a digital USB microscope. These show how the yarn looks in different kinds of clothes when magnified.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51972", "revid": "3113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51972", "title": "Farouk I", "text": ""}
{"id": "51973", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51973", "title": "Romantic comedy movie", "text": ""}
{"id": "51974", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51974", "title": "Mountain Dew", "text": "Soft drink brand\nMountain Dew, stylized as Mtn Dew in some countries and colloquially known as Dew in some areas, is a soft drink brand owned by PepsiCo. The original formula was invented in 1940 by Tennessee beverage bottlers Barney and Ally Hartman. A revised formula was created by Bill Bridgforth in 1958. The rights to this formula were obtained by the Tip Corporation of Marion, Virginia. William H. \"Bill\" Jones of the Tip Corporation further refined the formula, launching that version of Mountain Dew in 1961. In August 1964, the Mountain Dew brand and production rights were acquired from Tip by the Pepsi-Cola company, and the distribution expanded across the United States and Canada.\nBetween the 1940s and 1980s there was only one variety of Mountain Dew, which was citrus-flavored and caffeinated in most markets. Diet Mountain Dew was introduced in 1988, followed by Mountain Dew Red, which was introduced and discontinued in 1988. In 2001, a cherry-flavored variant called Code Red debuted. Expansions of the product line have continued to this day, including specialty offerings, limited time productions, region-specific and retailer-specific flavors of Mountain Dew.\nProduction was extended to the United Kingdom in 1996, but was phased out in 1998. A similarly named but different-tasting product, with a recipe more similar to the original American product has been sold in the U.K. under the name \"Mountain Dew Energy\" since 2010 and in Ireland since the spring of 2011, but in 2015 it was changed to \"Mountain Dew Citrus Blast\" to shift away from the energy drink marketing. As of 2017, Mountain Dew represented a 6.6% share of the carbonated soft drinks market in the U.S., and is the leading soft drink brand in several states including almost the entire Midwestern United States. Its competition includes the Coca-Cola Company's Mello Yello and Surge, and Keurig Dr Pepper's Sun Drop; Mountain Dew accounted for 80% of citrus soft drinks sold within the U.S. in 2010.\nOrigin.\nTennessee bottlers Barney and Ally Hartman developed Mountain Dew as a mixer in the 1940s. Soft drinks were sold regionally in the 1930s, and the Hartmans had difficulty in Knoxville obtaining their preferred soda to mix with liquor, preferably whiskey, so the two developed their own. Originally a 19th-century slang term for whiskey, especially Highland Scotch whisky, the Mountain Dew name was trademarked for the soft drink in 1948.\nCharles Gordon, who had partnered with William Swartz to bottle and promote Dr. Enuf, was introduced to Mountain Dew when he met the Hartman brothers on a train and they offered him a sample. Gordon and the Hartman brothers subsequently made a deal to bottle Mountain Dew by the Tri-Cities Beverage Corporation in Johnson City, Tennessee.\nThe Tip Corporation of Marion, Virginia, bought the rights to Mountain Dew, revising the flavor and launching it in 1961. In 1964, Pepsico purchased the Tip Corporation and thus acquired the rights to Mountain Dew. In 1999, the Virginia legislature recognized Tip Corporation president Bill Jones and the town of Marion for their role in the history of Mountain Dew.\nPackaging.\n\"Mountain Dew\" was originally Southern and/or Scots-Irish slang for moonshine (i.e., homemade whiskey or poit\u00edn), as referenced in the Irish folk song \"The Rare Old Mountain Dew\", dating from 1882. Using it as the name for the soda was originally suggested by Carl E. Retzke at an Owens-Illinois Inc. meeting in Toledo, Ohio, and was first trademarked by Ally and Barney Hartman in the 1940s. Early bottles and signage carried the reference forward by showing a cartoon-stylized hillbilly. The first sketches of the original Mountain Dew bottle labels were devised in 1948 by John Brichetto, and the representation on product packaging has changed at multiple points in the history of the beverage.\nLogo.\nPepsiCo (then The Pepsi-Cola Company) acquired the Mountain Dew brand in 1964, and shortly thereafter in 1969 the logo was modified as the company sought to shift its focus to a \"younger, outdoorsy\" generation. This direction continued as the logo remained the same through the 1970s, 1980s. In 1996, PepsiCo began using a strategy it was already using with its flagship cola Pepsi, changing Mountain Dew's logo every few years. New logos were introduced in 1996, 1998, and 2005. In October 2008, the Mountain Dew logo was redesigned to \"Mtn Dew\" within the U.S. market, as a result of PepsiCo announcing that it would rebrand its core carbonated soft-drink products by early 2009. Returning flavors were given redesigned packaging and logos when re-released.\nIn October 2024, PepsiCo announced a major rebrand. The new branding, inspired by the logo introduced in 1996, reverts the naming to the full \"Mountain\" spelling; the key art features mountain scenery in the background.\nSidekick bottles.\nIn summer 2010, a secondary type of Mountain Dew bottles began appearing on some US shelves. Designed by 4sight, a design and innovation firm, these bottles featured a sleeker design, smaller packaging labels, and a built-in grip. The bottles were dubbed \"sidekick bottles\" and were tested in North Carolina, South Carolina, and Indiana markets. By 2014, sidekick bottles had become the predominant Mountain Dew bottle design in most of the United States.\nIngredients.\nIn its primary market of the United States, the ingredient composition of Mountain Dew is listed as: \"carbonated water, high-fructose corn syrup (in much of the U.S.), concentrated orange juice, citric acid, natural flavors, sodium benzoate, caffeine, sodium citrate, erythorbic acid, gum arabic, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, and yellow 5.\" The ingredient makeup of Mountain Dew varies based on the country of production. For example, in Canada, the sweetener listed is \"glucose-fructose\" (another name for high-fructose corn syrup), and until 2012, it was caffeine-free by default. Formerly, the composition included brominated vegetable oil, an emulsifier banned in foods throughout Europe and in Japan. As of 2020, this ingredient has been removed.\nIn response to negative publicity around high-fructose corn syrup, PepsiCo in 2009 released a limited-run production of Mountain Dew Throwback, a variation consisting of sugar in place of high-fructose corn syrup. Mountain Dew Throwback subsequently was re-released for brief periods (generally 8\u201312 weeks at a time), including a second wave from December 2009 to February 2010 and a third wave in the summer and fall of 2010. A fourth eight-week production run began in March 2011, before becoming a permanent addition to the Mountain Dew flavor line-up, until being discontinued again during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nA can of Mountain Dew contains 54\u00a0mg of caffeine (equivalent to ).\nTartrazine.\nAn urban legend about Mountain Dew ingredients is that dye Yellow #5 (tartrazine) lowers sperm count. Tartrazine has never been scientifically linked to any of the alleged effects in the legends, nor has any other component of the drink.\nAlcohol.\nIn 2022, PepsiCo partnered with the Boston Beer Company to produce a line of alcohol-infused drinks in four flavors. Labelled \"Hard Mtn Dew\", the drinks were initially sold in Florida, Iowa and Tennessee, before expanding to other states.\nDespite having been on the market for a few years and the drink clearly stating it had alcohol in it, the drink gained some controversy in 2025 when a middle school teacher in San Antonio, Texas mistakenly gave five of his special education students cans of Hard Mountain Dew as an end-of-school-year treat, thinking it was regular Mountain Dew. The mistake led to an investigation by the school district after the parents of the students complained and in at least one case tried to file a police report.\nPromotions.\nMountain Dew Amp.\nMountain Dew Amp is an energy drink distributed by PepsiCo under the Mountain Dew brand, originally launched in 2001. From 2007 to 2008, several additional flavors of Amp were introduced. In 2012, Amp's labeling and ingredients changed, as did the flavor and appeal, according to fans. The Mountain Dew branding was also removed from cans during this change, though it has since been reintroduced.\nTaco Bell's Mountain Dew Baja Blast.\nIn spring 2014, Mountain Dew began distributing its Baja Blast flavor in standard 12-ounce cans, 20-ounce bottles and 24-ounce cans for sale at supermarkets and retail businesses in the U.S. This was to celebrate the drink's 10th anniversary and would be the first time the drink has been sold at retail. The new retail product bore the Taco Bell logo. Taco Bell's chief marketing officer, Chris Brandt, said the exclusive drinks have helped increase the company's beverage sales, even as soda sales have declined in the broader market. He noted that people are more likely to buy drinks when they are available exclusively at the chain. Due to the drink's success, many other new beverages were introduced at Taco Bell, including a new Taco Bell exclusive, Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast, a non-alcoholic sangrita-flavored Mountain Dew.\nDEWmocracy 1.\nBeginning in 2007, Mountain Dew began a promotion entitled \"DEWmocracy\", which involved the public electing new flavors, colors, names, packaging graphics and advertisements for upcoming Mountain Dew products. The campaign has been the subject of recognition within the advertising industry, cited as one of the earliest and longest-running examples of a consumer product brand employing crowdsourcing to make decisions which are traditionally made internally by employees. In its initial phase, DEWmocracy participation and voting was conducted via an online game. Television advertisements at the time featured actor Forest Whitaker asking people to decide the next new flavor of Mountain Dew. Online voters selected from three choices: Supernova (a strawberry/melon flavor), Revolution (a berry flavor), and Voltage (a raspberry/citrus flavor). Each included ginseng. The event ended on 17 August 2008, with Voltage announced as the winning flavor. It was officially released on 29 December 2008. According to Beverage Digest, sales of DEWmocracy flavors totaled 25 million cases in 2008.\nDEWmocracy 2.\nMountain Dew announced a continuation of the DEWmocracy campaign\u00a0\u2013 referred to as \"DEWmocracy 2\"\u00a0\u2013 which launched in July 2009. A marked difference between DEWmocracy 2 and its predecessor was the wider range of online voting methods, expanding beyond the DEWmocracy website to include Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and the \"Dew Labs Community\"\u00a0\u2013 a private, online forum for the \"most passionate Dew fans.\" In July 2009, Dew Labs sampling trucks distributed product samples of seven potential flavor variations. At the same time, 50 \"Dew fanatics\" were chosen based on their video submissions to the video website 12seconds.tv, and were shipped boxes of the seven prototype flavors. From the initial seven flavors, taste testers were asked to elect three final flavors for later release at retail stores. The three new candidate flavors were Distortion (a Key lime flavor), Typhoon (a tropical punch flavor), and White Out (a smooth citrus flavor). The three new candidate flavors were released on 19 April 2010 and voting lasted until 14 June. The following day, White Out was announced as the winner. Mountain Dew White Out was released for sale on 4 October 2010. A limited production White Out Slurpee (Mtn Dew White Out Freeze) was made available at 7-Eleven stores beginning in January 2011. In July 2011, Mountain Dew Typhoon was re-released briefly in 2-liter form; in June 2022, it was re-released on the Mountain Dew online store.\nGame Fuel.\nIn 2007, after using the term \"Game Fuel\" to market their sodas to the video-gaming subculture, Mountain Dew introduced a new flavor variant (citrus cherry) with the Game Fuel name. Coinciding with the release of the Xbox 360 game \"Halo 3\", Mountain Dew Game Fuel sported a label that was almost entirely image-based, showing promotional artwork for the game and featuring the game series' main character Master Chief prominently. This variant remained on shelves for 12 weeks, and was discontinued afterwards.\nTwo years later, the website for the popular MMORPG \"World of Warcraft\" stated that two Mountain Dew Game Fuel flavors would be sold in June 2009 and would promote the game. Shortly afterwards, the bottle art was released, and showed that the two flavors would promote different player races in the game. One of the two was exactly the same citrus cherry flavor from the original \"Halo 3\" promotion, with updated packaging. The second flavor was a new wild fruit drink, similar to the previously released Pepsi Blue. Both drinks were given \"World of Warcraft\"-based packaging, and sported the newly updated \"MTN Dew\" logo. Like their precursor, these two flavors lasted for 12 weeks and were discontinued.\nOn 24 August 2011, Mountain Dew announced another return of the Game Fuel promotion on their Facebook page. The original citrus cherry would once again return, along with a new tropical companion flavor. The announcement gave a planned release date of October 2011 and stated that the packaging would feature codes granting players double experience points in \"\". Both flavors were mailed out to Dew Labs members in early September 2011, a month before the planned release date. Later that same month, it was announced through the Facebook page that Game Fuel would be arriving to the public in mid-October, though it would vary by market. These flavors began appearing from the first week of October and were also discontinued after 12 weeks of being on shelves.\nGame Fuel returned in October 2012 to promote \"Halo 4\", in the original citrus-cherry flavor. In August 2013, Mountain Dew announced that Game Fuel would be returning to stores in the fall of 2013, with a new blueberry-flavored version titled \"Electrifying Berry\". In October 2013, boxes of original citrus cherry Game Fuel appeared on store shelves with packaging promoting the Xbox One and the games \"Dead Rising 3\" and \"Forza Motorsport 5\" and with cans featuring \"Dead Rising 3\" graphics. The new Electrifying Berry flavor of Game Fuel simultaneously appeared with packaging promoting \"Kinect Sports Rivals\" and the game \"\", graphics from which appear on the cans as well.\nIn May 2014, the original citrus cherry Game Fuel began reappearing on shelves, but this time, the soda does not seem to be promoting any video game.\nIn October 2014, Game Fuel returned with a new lemonade flavor for the promotion of \"\". Unlike past two-variant Game Fuel releases, both drinks sport the same artwork (unlike 2009's Horde Red and Alliance Blue or 2011's citrus cherry and tropical), albeit differing colors to match their respective flavors. After the promotion ended, Citrus Cherry reverted to packaging not promoting a game, while lemonade flavor was permanently removed from shelves.\nIn October 2015, Game Fuel returned with a new companion flavor, Berry Lime, for the promotion of \"\". After the promotion, Citrus Cherry once again reverted to promotion-less packaging, while the Berry Lime flavor remained available as a Slurpee.\nImages leaked in May 2016 led to speculation that Game Fuel would once again see a new release later in 2016, with a new mango-flavored variant alongside the original citrus cherry flavor, promoting the game \"Titanfall 2\". Mountain Dew announced the return of Game Fuel and the new flavor, Mango Heat, in September. Then, in October, Game Fuel was released with the \"Titanfall 2\" promotion, with a lower calorie version of the original citrus cherry variant returning alongside the new Mango Heat.\nIn 2017, Game Fuel returned with two previously discontinued flavors: Arctic Burst (originally released as a Slurpee flavor in 2006 to promote \"Superman Returns\") and Tropical Smash (originally Flavor #736, one of the four prototype flavors for \"DEWmocracy II\" that lost to Mountain Dew White Out and did not even make the final round). As was the case with the 2013 promotion, the two flavors promoted two different Xbox games (Arctic Burst promoted \"\" while Tropical Smash promoted \"Forza 7\"). For the first time, Citrus Cherry was not fully part of the promotion; instead, promotion-less Citrus Cherry was sold with the same white caps with codes under them as the other flavors in the promotion.\nIn January 2019, PepsiCo introduced a new line of Game Fuel drinks called Amp Game Fuel, since renamed to simply \"Game Fuel\". The can features a re-sealable lid. Game Fuel has 90\u00a0mg of caffeine and also includes theanine and vitamins A and B. The Citrus Cherry flavor from the original Game Fuel lineup was re-released under this new product line in April 2022.\nIn 2023, Game Fuel returned with two flavors: Citrus Cherry and Mystic Punch. As was the case with the 2017 promotion, the two flavors promoted two different Xbox games (Citrus Cherry promoted Halo Infinite while Mystic Punch promoted Diablo IV).\nGreen Label.\nGreen Label is an online magazine, a partnership between Mountain Dew and Complex Media producing sponsored content covering action sports, music, art and style, housed at http://. The site replaces several websites and a YouTube channel that have been overseen by PepsiCo since 2007. The initiative originated in 2013 and will continue through the year.\nGreen Label Art.\nMountain Dew's Green Label promotion originated in 2007, when a line of limited edition aluminum bottles was put into production, featuring artwork from a range of tattoo artists and other artists. This initial series marked the first use of the term \"Green Label Art\" to describe the use of artistic works on Mountain Dew packaging. In June 2010, a contest entitled \"Green Label Art: Shop Series\" was announced, involving 35 independent skateboard store owners who partnered with local artists to design and submit future can artwork designs. Approximately one million votes were submitted by the conclusion of the contest in October of the same year, with Street Science Skate Shop\u00a0\u2013 a store in Tracy, California\u00a0\u2013 named the winner of a cash prize. This winning can design was scheduled to appear on Mountain Dew cans at some point in 2011.\nGreen Label Sound.\nIn 2008, a Mountain Dew-sponsored music label was launched under the name \"Green Label Sound\". In December 2010, a Mountain Dew Code Red television advertisement was produced, incorporating the hip-hop artist Jay Electronica performing his song \"The Announcement\". The advertisement concludes with the tagline \"Hip Hop is different on the mountain\".\nThe label released its first full-length album release, \"When Fish Ride Bicycles\" by the hip hop group The Cool Kids, on 12 June 2011.\nDew Tour/Green Label experience.\nSponsorship of action sports athletes has been a part of Mountain Dew marketing since the late 1990s, with present sponsorship including Eli Reed (skateboarder), Paul Rodriguez (skateboarder), and Danny Davis (snowboarder). Mountain Dew also sponsors its own namesake festival, \"The Dew Tour\", which is an action sports tour made up of events held in five U.S. cities over several months. The first Dew Tour was held in the summer of 2005 with events in skateboarding, BMX and Freestyle Motocross. In 2008 it expanded to add a \"Winter Dew Tour\", comprising snowboarding and snow skiing competitions. It is \"the most watched and attended action sports event in the world,\" according to \"Transworld Snowboarding\" magazine. In coordination with its Dew Tour sponsorship, a sponsored television show entitled \"Mountain Dew's Green Label Experience\" premiered on Fuel TV in July 2010, for the primary purpose of broadcasting interviews with action sports athletes from each of the stops on the Dew Tour.\nGreen Label Gaming.\nUnder the term \"Green Label Gaming\"\u00a0\u2013 coined in 2007\u00a0\u2013 Mountain Dew has broadened its sponsorship of independent video game designers and players. The brand was often the subject of media attention for its popularity among video game enthusiasts, as several flavors of Mountain Dew have been produced in partnership with video games. In December 2008, Mountain Dew produced a 30-minute television special which documented independent gamers in Japan and the U.S., which aired on the Spike TV network. In 2009, Mountain Dew sponsored two prominent gaming events: the Independent Games Festival and the Game Developers Conference. \"Green Label Gaming\" has since come under controversy over a sponsored Game Jam-themed reality show by Matti Leshem.\nDoritos Quest.\nIn 2008, Doritos debuted a mystery flavor known as \"Quest\", featuring a campaign of online puzzles and prizes to identify the Quest flavor. The flavor was later identified as Mountain Dew.\nFanDEWmonium.\nIn October 2010, Mountain Dew started the \"FanDEWmonium\" promotion, a competition in which new flavors would compete to become permanent similar to the two DEWmocracy campaigns, but with eight diet flavors instead of three regular ones. Five of the participating flavors were diet versions of previous DEWmocracy flavors: Diet SuperNova, Diet Voltage, Diet Crave, Diet Distortion, Diet Typhoon, and Diet White Out. Another flavor, Diet Ultra Violet, returned from its own limited release in 2009. The remaining competitor was a brand-new Diet flavor created specifically for the promotion - Flare (berry/citrus-flavored). Each of the eight flavors was available for tasting at specific tour locations, and special cans were also mailed to some Dew Labs members.\nAlso similar to the DEWmocracy campaign, those who taste-tested the Diet flavors were asked to go online and vote for which flavors they thought should be permanently sold in stores. After the first round of voting was completed, two flavor finalists were chosen to receive a limited release to store shelves for a final round of voting. Diet Voltage and Diet SuperNova were sold in stores for an eight-week period beginning in March 2011. After votes were cast, it was announced that Diet SuperNova had won, with 55% of all votes, and it returned in January 2012. Afterwards, it was removed from shelves permanently after a 12-week release due to low sales.\nBack by Popular DEWmand.\nOn 7 January 2011, Mountain Dew posted on their Facebook that Pitch Black would return to the shelves in May 2011, also stating that this may be the start of many re-releases of old favorites. The company promoted Pitch Black's return heavily with giveaways and contests. About a month before the planned release date, a photo was posted on a Mountain Dew worker's Pongr, which showed Pitch Black and 2008's Supernova. Two weeks before the release, Dew Labs announced the return of 2010's Typhoon in 2-liter bottles exclusively at Walmart Supercenters. The three flavors were re-released to stores on 2 May.\nAt the same time of the DEWmand Promotion, Mountain Dew launched the Throwback Shack, a website where participators could enter to win exclusive Dew merchandise, including a \"secret stash\" of Mountain Dew Revolution, a losing competitor from 2008's DEWmocracy. The promotional advertisements were then taken down from the Mountain Dew website. Mountain Dew later stated via tweet that there would not be any more flavors returning 'by Popular DEWmand' for now, as it was only intended to be a summer program.\nDub the Dew.\nIn August 2012, Villa Enterprises held a promotion known as \"Dub the Dew\", where users were asked to submit and vote on name ideas for a green apple flavor of Mountain Dew. The promotion was infamously hijacked by users, particularly those originating from the imageboard 4chan, who submitted and upvoted entries such as \"Hitler did nothing wrong\", \"Diabeetus\", \"Fapple\", \"Bill Cosby Sweat\", \"Jimmie Rustle's Jumpin' Juice\", and numerous variations of \"Gushing Granny\". Although the promotion was not directly connected to Mountain Dew, a representative from the company did offer to \"help clean up\" the site. \"Adweek\" compared the incident to another recent campaign hijacked under similar circumstances, where musician Pitbull was sent to perform in Kodiak, Alaska, in a Walmart promotion.\nPuppy Monkey Baby.\nOn 7 February 2016, for Super Bowl 50, Mountain Dew aired a spot featuring a CGI character dubbed \"the puppy monkey baby\" (also styled PuppyMonkeyBaby). The promotion has garnered a wide amount of media coverage, both positive and negative. According to iSpot.tv, the spot was rated #1 of all the Super Bowl commercials of the night, having generated 2.2 million online views and 300,000 social media interactions after airing.\nThe ad features a computer-generated mash-up of three things that the public generally finds to be cute or harmless; a pug puppy (the head), a monkey (the body and tail), and a dancing baby (the hips and legs). The puppy monkey baby dances with three men who are presumably watching the Super Bowl, offering them Mountain Dew Kickstart, which is similarly described as being a combination of three things (Mountain Dew, juice, and caffeine).\nThe media response to the advertisement was mixed to negative. Melissa Cronin of Gawker described it as a \"horror-hallucination of brand awareness\", while noting the beverage itself contains brominated vegetable oil, a chemical that is banned in several countries. Jim Joseph, chief integrated marketing officer at Cohn &amp; Wolfe, called it \"weird\".\nDEWcision 2016.\nOn 16 April 2016, Mountain Dew announced the return of two popular favorites, Baja Blast and Pitch Black. Fans could vote on which flavor stays permanently on store shelves via the Mountain Dew website. Voting ended on 9 July, and, after many delays, Pitch Black was announced the winner on 18 July 2016. Pitch Black became part of the brand's flavor lineup starting in September, and was produced for several years before being discontinued by early 2020.\nMountain Dew Spark and Spark Zero.\nMountain Dew Spark is a raspberry lemonade flavored beverage and a part of the Mountain Dew line up of offerings.\nIn popular culture.\nThe computer worm Code Red was named because the person who discovered the worm was drinking this version of Mountain Dew at the time.\nIn the musical \"Be More Chill\", green Mountain Dew activates the \"squip\", a tiny super-computer in a pill that tells the user what to do, in order to help them achieve their goals. Mountain Dew Red shuts them off. In the musical, it is said that this is the reason for Mountain Dew Red being discontinued.\nBakar\u2019s song \"Hell N Back\" includes the lyric \u201c She liked petty crimes, she had green eyes like Mountain Dew.\u201d Sabrina Carpenter's 2024 hit song \"Espresso\" included the lyric \"I know I Mountain Dew it for ya\".\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51976", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51976", "title": "Jumbo Jet", "text": ""}
{"id": "51978", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51978", "title": "Jonkoping", "text": ""}
{"id": "51979", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51979", "title": "October war", "text": ""}
{"id": "51980", "revid": "11521989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51980", "title": "Ramadan War", "text": ""}
{"id": "51981", "revid": "50932998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51981", "title": "List of planned cities", "text": "This is a list of planned cities (sometimes known as planned communities or new towns) by country. Additions to this list should be cities whose overall form (as opposed to individual neighborhoods or expansions) has been determined in large part in advance on a drawing board, or which were planned to a degree which is unusual for their time and place.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA.\nAfghanistan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArgentina.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAustralia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nB.\nBelarus.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBrazil.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nC.\nCanada.\nIt is a misconception that virtually all cities and towns in Western Canada, which were created after the federal \"Dominion Lands Act\" of 1870, (the majority of all such cities), were planned. Most of these were, indeed, railway towns, founded after surveying and planning by the powerful railway companies during construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway, Canada's first transcontinental line, or the Canadian National Railway, but this initial start generally only provided one or two streets with a few lots set out, from which the cities grew unplanned.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCzech Republic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nD \u2013 F.\nEstonia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFinland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrance.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nG \u2013 H.\nGermany.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGreece.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHungary.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nI.\nIndia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIndonesia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIran.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIreland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIsrael.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nItaly.\nAbruzzo.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nBasilicata.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCalabria.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCampania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nEmilia Romagna.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriuli Venezia Giulia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLazio.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLombardia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPuglia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSardinia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSicily.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTuscany.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nJ \u2013 L.\nJapan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAll the cities in Hokkaido are planned cities.\nLithuania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nM \u2013 N.\nMalaysia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMalta.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMexico.\nMost Mexican cities founded during the period of New Spain were planned from the beginning. There are historical maps showing the designs of most cities; however, as time passed and the cities grew, the original planning disappeared. A number of tourist cities have recently been built, such as Cancun or Puerto Pe\u00f1asco; the latest city to be planned in Mexico was Delicias. Some of these cities are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRecent times.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMonaco.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNetherlands.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nP.\nPakistan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPhilippines.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPoland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPortugal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nQ \u2013 R.\nRomania.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRussia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nS.\nSaudi Arabia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSerbia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSingapore.\nTowns built in the 1970s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCities built in the 1980s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSlovakia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSlovenia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSouth Africa.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSouth Korea.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSpain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSweden.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nU.\nUkraine.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnited Kingdom.\nThis includes all new towns created under the New Towns Act 1946 (9 &amp; 10 Geo. 6. c. 68) and successive acts, as well as some communities not designated under this name. Salisbury is not listed as the chequers were part of its medieval design. Roman towns are not listed.\nEngland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNorthern Ireland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nScotland.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWales.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnited States.\nNew communities built in the Colonial and post-Colonial era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew communities built in the 19th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew communities built in the early 20th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew communities built with federal aid in the 1930s and for Defense Housing in Early 1940s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSecret cities built as part of the Manhattan Project.\nThe Manhattan Project was the successful effort by the U.S. government to develop an atomic bomb during World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew communities built privately in the post-World War II era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew communities built in the 1960s and 1970s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u00a0\u2022 Anaheim Hills and Irvine, California; and Mililani, Hawaii, began construction in the 1970s, but have not been completed due to their size, and will not be completed for at least ten years.\nNew communities sponsored by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development after 1970.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNew communities built privately in the 1980s and 1990s.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUnbuilt or under construction planned cities.\nExamples of unbuilt planned cities include Walt Disney's Progress City in Florida and Frank Lloyd Wright's Broadacre City.\nThe following list is organized by state:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nV \u2013 Z.\nVietnam.\nformerly Th\u1ee7 \u0110\u1ee9c District, District 9, Ho Chi Minh City and District 2, Ho Chi Minh City\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51982", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51982", "title": "New Delhi, India", "text": ""}
{"id": "51983", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51983", "title": "Canberra", "text": "Capital city of Australia\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox_Australian_place/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCanberra ( ; ) is the capital city of Australia and the capital and largest city of the Australian Capital Territory. Founded following the federation of the colonies of Australia as the seat of government for the new nation, it is Australia's largest inland city, and the eighth-largest Australian city by population. The city is located at the northern end of the Australian Capital Territory at the northern tip of the Australian Alps, the country's highest mountain range. As of June 2024,[ [update]] Canberra's estimated population was 473,855.\nThe area chosen for the capital had been inhabited by Aboriginal Australians for up to 21,000 years, by groups including the Ngunnawal and Ngambri. \nEuropean settlement commenced in the first half of the 19th century, as evidenced by surviving landmarks such as St John's Anglican Church and Blundells Cottage. On 1 January 1901, federation of the colonies of Australia was achieved. Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne should be the national capital, a compromise was reached: the new capital would be built in New South Wales, so long as it was at least from Sydney. \nThe capital city was founded and formally named as Canberra in 1913. A plan by the American architects Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin was selected after an international design contest, and construction commenced in 1913. Unusual among Australian cities, it is an entirely planned city. The Griffins' plan featured geometric motifs and was centred on axes aligned with significant topographical landmarks such as Black Mountain, Mount Ainslie, Capital Hill and City Hill. Canberra's mountainous location makes it the only mainland Australian city where snow-capped mountains can be seen for much of the winter, although snow in the city itself is uncommon.\nAs the seat of the Government of Australia, Canberra is home to many important institutions of the federal government, national monuments and museums. These include Parliament House, Government House, the High Court building and the headquarters of numerous government agencies. It is the location of many social and cultural institutions of national significance such as the Australian War Memorial, the Australian National University, the Royal Australian Mint, the Australian Institute of Sport, the National Gallery, the National Museum and the National Library. The city is home to many important institutions of the Australian Defence Force including the Royal Military College Duntroon and the Australian Defence Force Academy. It hosts all foreign embassies in Australia as well as regional headquarters of many international organisations, not-for-profit groups, lobbying groups and professional associations.\nCanberra has been ranked among the world's best cities to live in and visit. Although the Commonwealth Government remains the largest single employer in Canberra, it is no longer the majority employer. Other major industries have developed in the city, including in health care, professional services, education and training, retail, accommodation and food, and construction. Compared to the national averages, the unemployment rate is lower and the average income higher; tertiary education levels are higher, while the population is younger. At the 2021 Census, 28.7% of Canberra's inhabitants were reported as having been born overseas.\nCanberra's design is influenced by the garden city movement and incorporates significant areas of natural vegetation. Its design can be viewed from its highest point at the Telstra Tower and the summit of Mount Ainslie. Other notable features include the National Arboretum, born out of the 2003 Canberra bushfires, and Lake Burley Griffin, named for Walter Burley Griffin. \nHighlights in the annual calendar of cultural events include Floriade, the largest flower festival in the Southern Hemisphere, the Enlighten Festival, Skyfire, the National Multicultural Festival and Summernats. Canberra's main sporting venues are Canberra Stadium and Manuka Oval. The city is served with domestic and international flights at Canberra Airport, while interstate train and coach services depart from Canberra railway station and the Jolimont Centre respectively. City Interchange and Alinga Street station form the main hub of Canberra's bus and light rail transport network.\nName.\nThe word \"Canberra\" is derived from the Ngunnawal language of a local Ngunnawal or Ngambri clan who resided in the area and were referred to by the early British colonists as either the , or tribe. Joshua John Moore, the first European land-owner in the region, named his grant \"Canberry\" in 1823 after these people. \"Canberry Creek\" and \"Canberry\" first appeared on regional maps from 1830, while the derivative name \"Canberra\" started to appear from around 1857. Other early recorded variants of the spelling include \"Canbury\" (potentially influenced by the settlement of the same name in England), \"Canburry\" and \"Kembery\".\nNumerous local commentators, including the Ngunnawal elder Don Bell, have speculated upon possible meanings of \"Canberra\" over the years. These include \"meeting place\", \"woman's breasts\" and \"the hollow between a woman's breasts\".\nAlternative proposals for the name of the city during its planning included Austral, Australville, Aurora, Captain Cook, Caucus City, Cookaburra, Dampier, Eden, Eucalypta, Flinders, Gonebroke, Home, Hopetoun, Kangaremu, Myola, Meladneyperbane, New Era, Olympus, Paradise, Shakespeare, Sydmelperadbrisho, Swindleville, The National City, Union City, Unison, Wattleton, Wheatwoolgold, Yass-Canberra.\nHistory.\nFirst Nations peoples.\nThe first peoples of the Canberra area include the Ngunnawal, Ngunawal and Ngambri peoples. Other groups claiming a connection to the land include the Ngarigo (who also lived directly to the south) and the Ngambri-Guumaal. Neighbouring groups include the Wandandian to the east, the Walgulu also to the south, Gandangara people to the north and Wiradjuri to the north-west.\nThe first British settlers into the Canberra area described two clans of Ngunnawal people resident to the vicinity. The \"Canberry\" or \"Nganbra\" clan lived mostly around Sullivan's Creek and had ceremonial grounds at the base of Galambary (Black Mountain), while the \"Pialligo\" clan had land around what is now Canberra Airport. The people living here carefully managed and cultivated the land with fire, farmed yams, and hunted for food.\nArchaeological evidence of settlement in the region includes inhabited rock shelters, rock paintings and engravings, burial places, camps and quarry sites as well as stone tools and arrangements. Artefacts suggests early human activity occurred at some point in the area 21,000 years previously.\nStill today, Ngunnawal men into the present conduct ceremony on the banks of the river, Murrumbidgee River. They travel upstream as they receive their Totems and corresponding responsibilities for land management. 'Murrum' means 'Pathway' and Bidgee means 'Boss'.\nThe submerged limestone caves beneath Lake Burley Griffin contained Aboriginal rock art, some of the only sites in the region.\nGalambary (Black Mountain) is an important Aboriginal meeting and business site, predominantly for men's business. According to the Ngunnawal and Ngambri people, Mt Ainslie is primarily for place of women's business. Black Mountain and Mount Ainslie are referred to as women's breasts. Galambary was also used by Ngunnawal people as an initiation site, with the mountain itself said to represent the growth of a boy into a man.\nBritish exploration and colonisation.\n In October 1820, Charles Throsby Smith led the first British expedition to the area. Four other expeditions occurred between 1820 and 1823 with the first accurate map being produced by explorer Mark John Currie in June 1823. By this stage, the area had become known as the Limestone Plains.\nBritish settlement of the area probably dates from late 1823, when a sheep station was formed on what is now the Acton Peninsula by James Cowan, the head stockman employed by Joshua John Moore. Moore had received a land grant in the region in 1823 and formally applied to purchase the site on 16 December 1826. He named the property \"Canberry\". On 30 April 1827, Moore was told by letter that he could retain possession of at Canberry.\nOther colonists soon followed Moore's example to take up land in the region. Around 1825, James Ainslie, working on behalf of the wealthy merchant Robert Campbell, arrived to establish a sheep station. He was guided to the region by a local Aboriginal girl who showed him the fine lands of her \"Pialligo\" clan. The area then became the property of Campbell and it was initially named Pialligo before Campbell changed it to the Scottish title of Duntroon. Campbell and his family built a dairy on the site in 1832, now regarded as the oldest standing European building in Canberra, followed by the imposing stone house that is now the officers' mess of the Royal Military College, Duntroon. The Campbells sponsored settlement by other farmer families to work their land, such as the Southwells of \"Weetangera\".\nOther notable early colonists included Henry Donnison, who established the Yarralumla estate\u2014now the site of the official residence of the Governor-General of Australia\u2014in 1827, and John Palmer who employed Duncan Macfarlane to form the Jerrabomberra property in 1828. A year later, John MacPherson established the Springbank estate, becoming the first British owner-occupier in the region.\nThe Anglican church of St John the Baptist, in the suburb of Reid, was consecrated in 1845, and is now the oldest surviving public building in the city. St John's churchyard contains the earliest graves in the district. It has been described as a \"sanctuary in the city\", remaining a small English village-style church even as the capital grew around it. Canberra's first school, St John's School (now a museum), was situated next to the church and opened in the same year of 1845. It was built to educate local settlers children, including the Blundell children who lived in nearby Blundell's Cottage.\nAs the European presence increased, the Indigenous population dwindled largely due to the destruction of their society, dislocation from their lands and from introduced diseases such as influenza, smallpox, alcoholism, and measles.\nCreation of the nation's capital.\nThe district's change from a rural area in New South Wales to the national capital started during debates over federation in the late 19th century. Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne should be the national capital, a compromise was reached: the new capital would be built in New South Wales, so long as it was at least from Sydney, with Melbourne to be the temporary seat of government while the new capital was built. A survey was conducted across several sites in New South Wales with Bombala, southern Monaro, Orange, Yass, Albury, Tamworth, Armidale, Tumut, and Dalgety all discussed. Dalgety was chosen by the federal parliament and it passed the \"Seat of Government Act 1904\" confirming Dalgety as the site of the nation's capital. However, the New South Wales government refused to cede the required territory as they did not accept the site. In 1906, the New South Wales Government finally agreed to cede sufficient land provided that it was in the Yass-Canberra region as this site was closer to Sydney. Newspaper proprietor John Gale circulated a pamphlet titled 'Dalgety or Canberra: Which?' advocating Canberra to every member of the Commonwealth's seven state and federal parliaments. By many accounts, it was decisive in the selection of Canberra as the site in 1908 as was a result of survey work done by the government surveyor Charles Scrivener. The NSW government ceded the district to the federal government in 1911 and the Federal Capital Territory was established.\nAn international design competition was launched by the Department of Home Affairs on 30 April 1911, closing on 31 January 1912. The competition was boycotted by the Royal Institute of British Architects, the Institution of Civil Engineers and their affiliated bodies throughout the British Empire because the Minister for Home Affairs King O'Malley insisted that the final decision was for him to make rather than an expert in city planning. A total of 137 valid entries were received. O'Malley appointed a three-member board to advise him but they could not reach unanimity. On 24 May 1911, O'Malley came down on the side of the majority of the board with the design by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin of Chicago, Illinois, United States, being declared the winner. Second was Eliel Saarinen of Finland and third was Alfred Agache of Brazil but resident in Paris, France. O'Malley then appointed a six-member board to advise him on the implementation of the winning design. On 25 November 1912, the board advised that it could not support the Griffins' plan in its entirety and suggested an alternative plan of its own devising. This plan ostensibly incorporated the best features of the three place-getting designs as well as of a fourth design by H. Caswell, R.C.G. Coulter and W. Scott-Griffiths of Sydney, the rights to which it had purchased. It was this composite plan that was endorsed by Parliament and given formal approval by O'Malley on 10 January 1913. However, it was the Griffin plan which was ultimately proceeded with. In 1913, Walter Burley Griffin was appointed Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction and construction began. On 23 February, King O'Malley drove the first peg in the construction of the future capital city.\nIn 1912, the government invited suggestions from the public as to the name of the future city. Almost 750 names were suggested. At midday on 12\u00a0March 1913, Lady Denman, the wife of Governor-General Lord Denman, announced that the city would be named \"Canberra\" at a ceremony at Kurrajong Hill, which has since become Capital Hill and the site of the present Parliament House. Canberra Day is a public holiday observed in the ACT on the second Monday in March to celebrate the founding of Canberra. After the ceremony, bureaucratic disputes hindered Griffin's work; a Royal Commission in 1916 ruled his authority had been usurped by certain officials and his original plan was reinstated. Griffin's relationship with the Australian authorities was strained and a lack of funding meant that by the time he was fired in\u00a01920, little work had been done. By this time, Griffin had revised his plan, overseen the earthworks of major avenues and established the Glenloch Cork Plantation.\nDevelopment throughout 20th century.\nThe Commonwealth government purchased the pastoral property of Yarralumla in 1913 to provide an official residence for the Governor-General of Australia in the new capital. Renovations began in 1925 to enlarge and modernise the property. In 1927, the property was officially dubbed Government House. On 9 May that year, the Commonwealth parliament moved to Canberra with the opening of the Provisional Parliament House. The Prime Minister Stanley Bruce had officially taken up residence in The Lodge a few days earlier. Planned development of the city slowed significantly during the depression of the 1930s and during World War\u00a0II. Some projects planned for that time, including Roman Catholic and Anglican cathedrals, were never completed. (Nevertheless, in 1973 the Roman Catholic parish church of St. Christopher was remodelled into St Christopher's Cathedral, Manuka, serving the Archdiocese of Canberra and Goulburn. It is the only cathedral in Canberra.)\nFrom 1920 to 1957, three bodies \u2014 successively the Federal Capital Advisory Committee, the Federal Capital Commission, and the National Capital Planning and Development Committee \u2014 continued to plan the further expansion of Canberra in the absence of Griffin. However, they were only advisory and development decisions were made without consulting them, which increased inefficiency.\nThe largest event in Canberra up to World War II was the 24th Meeting of ANZAAS in January 1939. \"The Canberra Times\" described it as \"a signal event ... in the history of this, the world's youngest capital city\". The city's accommodation was not nearly sufficient to house the 1,250 delegates and a tent city had to be set up on the banks of the Molonglo River. One of the prominent speakers was H. G. Wells, who was a guest of the Governor-General Lord Gowrie for a week. This event coincided with a heatwave across south-eastern Australia during which the temperature in Canberra reached 108.5 degrees Fahrenheit (42.5 Celsius) on 11 January. On Friday, 13 January, the Black Friday bushfires caused 71 deaths in Victoria and Wells accompanied the Governor-General on his tour of areas threatened by fires.\nImmediately after the end of the war, Canberra was criticised for resembling a village and its disorganised collection of buildings was deemed ugly. Canberra was often derisively described as \"several suburbs in search of a city\". Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies regarded the state of the national capital as an embarrassment. Over time his attitude changed from one of contempt to that of championing its development. He fired two ministers charged with the development of the city for poor performance. Menzies remained in office for over a decade and in that time the development of the capital sped up rapidly. The population grew by more than 50\u00a0per\u00a0cent in every five-year period from 1955 to\u00a01975. Several Government departments, together with public servants, were moved to Canberra from Melbourne following the war. Government housing projects were undertaken to accommodate the city's growing population.\nThe National Capital Development Commission (NCDC) formed in 1957 with executive powers and ended four decades of disputes over the shape and design of Lake Burley Griffin \u2014 the centrepiece of Griffin's design \u2014 and construction was completed in\u00a01964 after four years of work. The completion of the lake finally laid the platform for the development of Griffin's Parliamentary Triangle. Since the initial construction of the lake, various buildings of national importance have been constructed on its shores.\nThe newly built Australian National University was expanded and sculptures as well as monuments were built. A new National Library was constructed within the Parliamentary Triangle, followed by the High Court and the National Gallery. Suburbs in Canberra Central (often referred to as North Canberra and South Canberra) were further developed in the\u00a01950s and urban development in the districts of Woden Valley and Belconnen commenced in the mid and late 1960s respectively, followed by the district of Tuggeranong in the mid-1970s. Many of the new suburbs were named after Australian politicians such as Barton, Deakin, Reid, Braddon, Curtin, Chifley and Parkes.\nOn 9 May 1988, a larger and permanent Parliament House was opened on Capital Hill as part of Australia's bicentenary celebrations. The Commonwealth Parliament moved there from the Provisional Parliament House, now known as Old Parliament House.\nSelf-government.\nIn December 1988, the Australian Capital Territory was granted full self-government by the Commonwealth Parliament, a step proposed as early as 1965. Following the first election on 4 March 1989, a 17-member Legislative Assembly sat at temporary offices at 1\u00a0Constitution Avenue, Civic, on 11 May 1989. Permanent premises were opened on London Circuit in 1994. The Australian Labor Party formed the ACT's first government, led by the Chief Minister Rosemary Follett, who made history as Australia's first female head of government. The 1990s also saw urban development begin in the district of Gungahlin in the far north of the ACT.\nParts of Canberra were engulfed by bushfires on 18 January 2003 that killed four people, injured 435 and destroyed more than 500 homes as well as the major research telescopes of Australian National University's Mount Stromlo Observatory.\nThroughout 2013, several events celebrated the 100th anniversary of the naming of Canberra. On 11 March 2014, the last day of the centennial year, the Canberra Centenary Column was unveiled in City Hill. Other works included \"The Skywhale\", a hot air balloon designed by the sculptor Patricia Piccinini, and \"StellrScope\" by visual media artist Eleanor Gates-Stuart. On 7 February 2021, \"The Skywhale\" was joined by \"Skywhalepapa\" to create a \"Skywhale family\", an event marked by Skywhale-themed pastries and beer produced by local companies as well as an art pop song entitled \"We are the Skywhales\".\nIn 2014, Canberra was named the best city to live in the world by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, and was named the third best city to visit in the world by Lonely Planet in 2017.\nGeography.\nCanberra covers an area of and is located near the Brindabella Ranges (part of the Australian Alps), approximately inland from Australia's east coast. It has an elevation of approximately AHD; the highest point is Mount Majura at . Other low mountains include Mount Taylor , Mount Ainslie , Mount Mugga Mugga and Black Mountain .\nThe native forest in the Canberra region was almost wholly eucalypt species and provided a resource for fuel and domestic purposes. By the early 1960s, logging had depleted the eucalypt, and concern about water quality led to the forests being closed. Interest in forestry began in 1915 with trials of a number of species including \"Pinus radiata\" on the slopes of Mount Stromlo. Since then, plantations have been expanded, with the benefit of reducing erosion in the Cotter catchment, and the forests are also popular recreation areas.\nThe urban environs of the city of Canberra straddle the Ginninderra plain, Molonglo plain, the Limestone plain, and the Tuggeranong plain (Isabella's Plain). The Molonglo River which flows across the Molonglo plain has been dammed to form the national capital's iconic feature Lake Burley Griffin. The Molonglo then flows into the Murrumbidgee north-west of Canberra, which in turn flows north-west toward the New South Wales town of Yass. The Queanbeyan River joins the Molonglo River at Oaks Estate just within the ACT.\nA number of creeks, including Jerrabomberra and Yarralumla Creeks, flow into the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee. Two of these creeks, the Ginninderra and Tuggeranong, have similarly been dammed to form Lakes Ginninderra and Tuggeranong. Until recently the Molonglo River had a history of sometimes calamitous floods; the area was a flood plain prior to the filling of Lake Burley Griffin.\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen-Geiger classification, Canberra has an oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"). In January, the warmest month, the average high is approximately ; in July, the coldest month, the average high drops to approximately .\nFrost is common in the winter months. Snow is rare in the CBD (central business district) due to being on the leeward (eastern) side of the dividing range, but the surrounding areas get annual snowfall through winter and often the snow-capped Brindabella Range can be seen from the CBD. The last significant snowfall in the city centre was in 1968. Canberra is often affected by foehn winds, especially in winter and spring, evident by its anomalously warm maxima relative to altitude.\nThe highest recorded maximum temperature was on 4 January 2020. Winter 2011 was Canberra's warmest winter on record, approximately above the average temperature. \nThe lowest recorded minimum temperature was on the morning of 11 July 1971. Light snow falls only once in every few years, and is usually not widespread and quickly dissipates.\nCanberra is protected from the west by the Brindabellas which create a strong rain shadow in Canberra's valleys. Canberra gets 100.4 clear days annually. Annual rainfall is the third lowest of the capital cities (after Adelaide and Hobart) and is spread fairly evenly over the seasons, with late spring bringing the highest rainfall. Thunderstorms occur mostly between October and April, owing to the effect of summer and the mountains. \nThe area is generally sheltered from a westerly wind, though strong northwesterlies can develop. A cool, vigorous afternoon easterly change, colloquially referred to as a 'sea-breeze' or the 'Braidwood Butcher', is common during the summer months and often exceeds 40\u00a0km/h in the city. Canberra is also less humid than the nearby coastal areas.\nCanberra was severely affected by smoke haze during the 2019/2020 bushfires. On 1 January 2020, Canberra had the worst air quality of any major city in the world, with an AQI of 7700 (USAQI 949).\nUrban structure.\nCanberra is a planned city and the inner-city area was originally designed by Walter Burley Griffin, a major 20th-century American architect. Within the central area of the city near Lake Burley Griffin, major roads follow a wheel-and-spoke pattern rather than a grid. Griffin's proposal had an abundance of geometric patterns, including concentric hexagonal and octagonal streets emanating from several radii. However, the outer areas of the city, built later, are not laid out geometrically.\nLake Burley Griffin was deliberately designed so that the orientation of the components was related to various topographical landmarks in Canberra. The lakes stretch from east to west and divided the city in two; a land axis perpendicular to the central basin stretches from Capital Hill\u2014the eventual location of the new Parliament House on a mound on the southern side\u2014north northeast across the central basin to the northern banks along Anzac Parade to the Australian War Memorial. This was designed so that looking from Capital Hill, the War Memorial stood directly at the foot of Mount Ainslie. At the southwestern end of the land axis was Bimberi Peak, the highest mountain in the ACT, approximately south west of Canberra.\nThe straight edge of the circular segment that formed the central basin of Lake Burley Griffin was perpendicular to the land axis and designated the water axis, and it extended northwest towards Black Mountain. A line parallel to the water axis, on the northern side of the city, was designated the municipal axis. The municipal axis became the location of Constitution Avenue, which links City Hill in Civic Centre and both Market Centre and the Defence precinct on Russell Hill. Commonwealth Avenue and Kings Avenue were to run from the southern side from Capital Hill to City Hill and Market Centre on the north respectively, and they formed the western and eastern edges of the central basin. The area enclosed by the three avenues was known as the Parliamentary Triangle, and formed the centrepiece of Griffin's work.\nThe Griffins assigned spiritual values to Mount Ainslie, Black Mountain, and Red Hill and originally planned to cover each of these in flowers. That way each hill would be covered with a single, primary colour which represented its spiritual value. This part of their plan never came to fruition, as World War I slowed construction and planning disputes led to Griffin's dismissal by Prime Minister Billy Hughes after the war ended.\nThe urban areas of Canberra are organised into a hierarchy of districts, town centres, group centres, local suburbs as well as other industrial areas and villages. There are seven residential districts, each of which is divided into smaller suburbs, and most of which have a town centre which is the focus of commercial and social activities. The districts were settled in the following chronological order:\nThe Canberra Central district is substantially based on Walter Burley Griffin's designs. In 1967 the then National Capital Development Commission adopted the \"Y Plan\" which laid out future urban development in Canberra around a series of central shopping and commercial area known as the 'town centres' linked by freeways, the layout of which roughly resembled the shape of the letter Y, with Tuggeranong at the base of the Y and Belconnen and Gungahlin located at the ends of the arms of the Y.\nDevelopment in Canberra has been closely regulated by government, both through planning processes and the use of crown lease terms that have tightly limited the use of parcels of land. Land in the ACT is held on 99-year crown leases from the national government, although most leases are now administered by the Territory government. There have been persistent calls for constraints on development to be liberalised, but also voices in support of planning consistent with the original 'bush capital' and 'urban forest' ideals that underpin Canberra's design.\nMany of Canberra's suburbs are named after former Prime Ministers, famous Australians, early settlers, or use Aboriginal words for their title. Street names typically follow a particular theme; for example, the streets of Duffy are named after Australian dams and reservoirs, the streets of Dunlop are named after Australian inventions, inventors and artists and the streets of Page are named after biologists and naturalists. Most diplomatic missions are located in the suburbs of Yarralumla, Deakin, and O'Malley. There are three light industrial areas: the suburbs of Fyshwick, Mitchell, and Hume.\nSustainability and the environment.\nThe average Canberran was responsible for 13.7 tonnes of greenhouse gases in 2005. In 2012, the ACT Government legislated greenhouse gas targets to reduce its emissions by 40\u00a0per\u00a0cent from 1990 levels by 2020, 80\u00a0per\u00a0cent by 2050, with no net emissions by\u00a02060. The government announced in 2013 a target for 90% of electricity consumed in the ACT to be supplied from renewable sources by 2020, and in 2016 set an ambitious target of 100% by 2020.\nIn 1996, Canberra became the first city in the world to set a vision of no waste, proposing an ambitious target of 2010 for completion. The strategy aimed to achieve a waste-free society by 2010, through the combined efforts of industry, government and community. By early 2010, it was apparent that though it had reduced waste going to landfill, the ACT initiative's original 2010 target for absolutely zero landfill waste would be delayed or revised to meet the reality.\nPlastic bags made of polyethylene polymer with a thickness of less than 35\u00a0\u03bcm were banned from retail distribution in the ACT from November 2011. The ban was introduced by the ACT Government in an effort to make Canberra more sustainable.\nOf all waste produced in the ACT, 75\u00a0per\u00a0cent is recycled. Average household food waste in the ACT remains above the Australian average, costing an average $641\u00a0per\u00a0household per\u00a0annum.\nCanberra's annual Floriade festival features a large display of flowers every Spring in Commonwealth Park. The organisers of the event have a strong environmental standpoint, promoting and using green energy, \"green catering\", sustainable paper, the conservation and saving of water. The event is also smoke-free.\nGovernment and politics.\nTerritory government.\nThere is no local council or city government for the city of Canberra. The Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly performs the roles of both a city council for the city and a territory government for the rest of the Australian Capital Territory. However, the vast majority of the population of the Territory reside in Canberra and the city is therefore the primary focus of the ACT Government.\nThe assembly consists of 25 members elected from five districts using proportional representation. The five districts are Brindabella, Ginninderra, Kurrajong, Murrumbidgee and Yerrabi, which each elect five members. The Chief Minister is elected by the Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) and selects colleagues to serve as ministers alongside him or her in the Executive, known informally as the cabinet.\nWhereas the ACT has federally been dominated by Labor, the Liberals have been able to gain some footing in the ACT Legislative Assembly and were in government during a period of &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;6+1\u20442 years from 1995 and 2001. Labor took back control of the Assembly in 2001. At the 2004 election, Chief Minister Jon Stanhope and the Labor Party won 9 of the 17 seats allowing them to form the ACT's first majority government. Since 2008, the ACT has been governed by a coalition of Labor and the Greens. As of 2022[ [update]], the Chief Minister was Andrew Barr from the Australian Labor Party.\nThe Australian federal government retains some influence over the ACT government. In the administrative sphere, most frequently this is through the actions of the National Capital Authority which is responsible for planning and development in areas of Canberra which are considered to be of national importance or which are central to Griffin's plan for the city, such as the Parliamentary Triangle, Lake Burley Griffin, major approach and processional roads, areas where the Commonwealth retains ownership of the land or undeveloped hills and ridge-lines (which form part of the Canberra Nature Park). The national government also retains a level of control over the Territory Assembly through the provisions of the \"Australian Capital Territory (Self-Government) Act 1988\". This federal act defines the legislative power of the ACT assembly.\nFederal representation.\nThe ACT was given its first federal parliamentary representation in 1949 when it gained a seat in the House of Representatives, the Division of Australian Capital Territory. However, until 1966, the ACT member could only vote on matters directly affecting the territory and did not count for purposes of forming government. In 1974, the ACT was allocated two Senate seats and the House of Representatives seat was divided into two. A third was created in 1996, but was abolished in 1998 because of changes to the regional demographic distribution. At the 2019 election, the third seat has been reintroduced as the Division of Bean.\nThe House of Representatives seats have mostly been held by Labor and usually by comfortable margins. The Labor Party has polled at least seven percentage points more than the Liberal Party at every federal election since 1990 and their average lead since then has been 15 percentage points. The ALP and the Liberal Party held one Senate seat each until the 2022 election when Independent candidate David Pocock unseated the Liberal candidate Zed Seselja.\nJudiciary and policing.\nThe Australian Federal Police (AFP) provides all of the constabulary services in the territory in a manner similar to state police forces, under a contractual agreement with the ACT Government. The AFP does so through its community policing arm ACT Policing.\nPeople who have been charged with offences are tried either in the ACT Magistrates Court or, for more severe offences, the ACT Supreme Court. Prior to its closure in 2009, prisoners were held in remand at the Belconnen Remand Centre in the ACT but usually imprisoned in New South Wales. The Alexander Maconochie Centre was officially opened on 11 September 2008 by then Chief Minister Jon Stanhope. The total cost for construction was $130\u00a0million. The ACT Civil and Administrative Tribunal deal with minor civil law actions and other various legal matters.\nCanberra has the lowest rate of crime of any capital city in Australia as of 2019[ [update]]. As of 2016[ [update]], the most common crimes in the ACT were property related crimes, unlawful entry with intent and motor vehicle theft. They affected 2,304 and 966 people (580 and 243 per 100,000 persons respectively). Homicide and related offences\u2014murder, attempted murder and manslaughter, but excluding driving causing death and conspiracy to murder\u2014affect 1.0 per 100,000 persons, which is below the national average of 1.9 per 100,000. Rates of sexual assault (64.4 per 100,000 persons) are also below the national average (98.5 per 100,000). However the 2017 crime statistics showed a rise in some types of personal crime, notably burglaries, thefts and assaults.\nEconomy.\nIn February 2020, the unemployment rate in Canberra was 2.9% which was lower than the national unemployment rate of 5.1%. As a result of low unemployment and substantial levels of public sector and commercial employment, Canberra has the highest average level of disposable income of any Australian capital city. The gross average weekly wage in Canberra is $1827 compared with the national average of $1658 (November 2019).\nThe median house price in Canberra as of February 2020 was $745,000, lower than only Sydney among capital cities of more than 100,000 people, having surpassed Melbourne and Perth since 2005. The median weekly rent paid by Canberra residents is higher than rents in all other states and territories. As of January 2014 the median unit rent in Canberra was $410 per week and median housing rent was $460, making the city the third most expensive in the country. Factors contributing to this higher weekly rental market include; higher average weekly incomes, restricted land supply, and inflationary clauses in the ACT Residential Tenancies Act.\nThe city's main industry is public administration and safety, which accounted for 27.1% of Gross Territory Product in 2018-19 and employed 32.49% of Canberra's workforce. The headquarters of many Australian Public Service agencies are located in Canberra, and Canberra is also host to several Australian Defence Force establishments, most notably the Australian Defence Force headquarters and , which is a naval communications centre that is being converted into a tri-service, multi-user depot. Other major sectors by employment include Health Care (10.54%), Professional Services (9.77%), Education and Training (9.64%), Retail (7.27%), Accommodation &amp; Food (6.39%) and Construction (5.80%).\nThe former RAAF Fairbairn, adjacent to the Canberra Airport was sold to the operators of the airport, but the base continues to be used for RAAF VIP flights. A growing number of software vendors have based themselves in Canberra, to capitalise on the concentration of government customers; these include Tower Software and RuleBurst. A consortium of private and government investors is making plans for a billion-dollar data hub, with the aim of making Canberra a leading centre of such activity in the Asia-Pacific region. A Canberra Cyber Security Innovation Node was established in 2019 to grow the ACT's cyber security sector and related space, defence and education industries.\nDemographics.\nAt the 2021 census, the population of Canberra was 453,558, up from 395,790 at the 2016 census, and 355,596 at the 2011 census. Canberra has been the fastest-growing city in Australia in recent years, having grown 23.3% from 2011 to 2021.\nCanberrans are relatively young, highly mobile and well educated. The median age is 35 years and only 12.7% of the population is aged over 65 years. Between 1996 and 2001, 61.9% of the population either moved to or from Canberra, which was the second highest mobility rate of any Australian capital city. A 2024 report from the Australian Bureau of Statistics indicates that 49% of ACT residents aged 15\u201374 held a bachelor's degree or higher, the highest proportion among all Australian states and territories.\nAccording to statistics collected by the National Australia Bank and reported in \"The Canberra Times\", Canberrans on average give significantly more money to charity than Australians in other states and territories, for both dollar giving and as a proportion of income.\nAncestry and immigration.\nAt the 2016 census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: \nThe 2021 census showed that 28.7% of Canberra's inhabitants were born overseas. Of inhabitants born outside Australia, the most prevalent countries of birth were India, England, China and Nepal.\n2.0% of the population, or 8,949 people, identified as Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders) in 2021. This was an increase from 6,508 counted in 2016, and lower than the Australian percentage of 3.2% in 2021.\nLanguage.\nAt the 2021 census, 71.3% of people spoke only English at home, down from 72.7% in 2016. The other languages most commonly spoken at home were Mandarin (3.2%), Nepali (1.3%), Vietnamese (1.1%), Punjabi (1.1%) and Hindi (1.0%).\nReligion.\nIn 2021, the main religious affiliation in the ACT was Christianity (38.1%). This proportion has decreased over time as people reporting non-Christian religions and no religious affiliation have increased. The most common religions were Hinduism (4.5%), Islam (3.2%) and Buddhism (2.8%). 44.2% described themselves as having no religion.\nCulture.\nEducation.\nThe two main tertiary institutions are the Australian National University (ANU) in Acton and the University of Canberra (UC) in Bruce, with over 10,500 and 8,000 full-time-equivalent students respectively. Established in 1946, the ANU has always had a strong research focus and is ranked among the leading universities in the world and the best in Australia by \"The Times Higher Education Supplement\" and the Shanghai Jiao Tong World University Rankings. There are two religious university campuses in Canberra: Signadou in the northern suburb of Watson is a campus of the Australian Catholic University; St Mark's Theological College in Barton is part of the secular Charles Sturt University. The ACT Government announced on 5 March 2020 that the CIT campus and an adjoining carpark in Reid would be leased to the University of New South Wales (UNSW) for a peppercorn lease, for it to develop as a campus for a new UNSW Canberra. UNSW released a master plan in 2021 for a 6,000 student campus to be realised over 15 years at a cost of $1 billion.\nThe Australian Defence College has two campuses: the Australian Command and Staff College (ACSC) plus the Centre for Defence and Strategic Studies (CDSS) at Weston, and the Australian Defence Force Academy (ADFA) beside the Royal Military College, Duntroon located in the inner-northern suburb of Campbell. ADFA teaches military undergraduates and postgraduates and includes UNSW@ADFA, a campus of the University of New South Wales; Duntroon provides Australian Army officer training.\nTertiary level vocational education is also available through the Canberra Institute of Technology (CIT), with campuses in Bruce, Reid, Gungahlin, Tuggeranong and Fyshwick. The combined enrolment of the CIT campuses was over 28,000 students in 2019. Following the transfer of land in Reid for the new UNSW Canberra, a new CIT Woden is scheduled to be completed by 2025.\nIn 2016 there were 132 schools in Canberra; 87 were operated by the government and 45 were private. During 2006, the ACT Government announced closures of up to 39 schools, to take effect from the end of the school year, and after a series of consultations unveiled its \"Towards 2020: Renewing Our Schools\" policy. As a result, some schools closed during the 2006\u201308 period, while others were merged; the creation of combined primary and secondary government schools was to proceed over a decade. The closure of schools provoked significant opposition. Most suburbs were planned to include a primary and a nearby preschool; these were usually located near open areas where recreational and sporting activities were easily available. Canberra also has the highest percentage of non-government (private) school students in Australia, accounting for 40.6\u00a0per\u00a0cent of ACT enrollments.\nArts and entertainment.\nCanberra is home to many national monuments and institutions such as the Australian War Memorial, the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies, the National Gallery of Australia, the National Portrait Gallery, the National Library, the National Archives, the Australian Academy of Science, the National Film &amp; Sound Archive and the National Museum. Many Commonwealth government buildings in Canberra are open to the public, including Parliament House, the High Court and the Royal Australian Mint.\nLake Burley Griffin is the site of the Captain James Cook Memorial and the National Carillon. Other sites of interest include the Australian\u2013American Memorial, Commonwealth Park, Commonwealth Place, the Telstra Tower, the Australian National Botanic Gardens, the National Zoo and Aquarium, the National Dinosaur Museum, and Questacon \u2013 the National Science and Technology Centre.\nThe Canberra Museum and Gallery in the city is a repository of local history and art, housing a permanent collection and visiting exhibitions. Several historic homes are open to the public: Lanyon and Tuggeranong Homesteads in the Tuggeranong Valley, Mugga-Mugga in Symonston, and Blundells' Cottage in Parkes all display the lifestyle of the early European settlers. Calthorpes' House in Red Hill is a well-preserved example of a 1920s house from Canberra's very early days. Strathnairn Homestead is an historic building which also dates from the 1920s.\nCanberra has many venues for live music and theatre: the Canberra Theatre and Playhouse which hosts many major concerts and productions; and Llewellyn Hall (within the ANU School of Music), a world-class concert hall are two of the most notable. The Street Theatre is a venue with less mainstream offerings. The Albert Hall was the city's first performing arts venue, opened in 1928. It was the original performance venue for theatre groups such as the Canberra Repertory Society.\nStonefest was a large annual festival, for some years one of the biggest festivals in Canberra. It was downsized and rebranded as Stone Day in 2012. There are numerous bars and nightclubs which also offer live entertainment, particularly concentrated in the areas of Dickson, Kingston and the city. Most town centres have facilities for a community theatre and a cinema, and they all have a library. Popular cultural events include the National Folk Festival, the Royal Canberra Show, the Summernats car festival, Enlighten festival, the National Multicultural Festival in February and the \"Celebrate Canberra\" festival held over 10 days in March in conjunction with Canberra Day.\nCanberra maintains sister-city relationships with both Nara, Japan and Beijing, China. Canberra has friendship-city relationships with both Dili, East Timor and Hangzhou, China. City-to-city relationships encourage communities and special interest groups both locally and abroad to engage in a wide range of exchange activities. The Canberra Nara Candle Festival held annually in spring, is a community celebration of the Canberra Nara Sister City relationship. The festival is held in Canberra Nara Park on the shores of Lake Burley Griffin.\nThe history of Canberra was told in the 1938 radio feature \"Canberra the Great\".\nMedia.\nAs Australia's capital, Canberra is the most important centre for much of Australia's political reportage and thus all the major media, including the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, the commercial television networks, and the metropolitan newspapers maintain local bureaus. News organisations are represented in the \"press gallery\", a group of journalists who report on the national parliament. The National Press Club of Australia in Barton has regular television broadcasts of its lunches at which a prominent guest, typically a politician or other public figure, delivers a speech followed by a question-and-answer session.\nCanberra has a daily newspaper, \"The Canberra Times\", which was established in 1926. There are also several free weekly publications, including news magazines \"CityNews\" and \"Canberra Weekly\" as well as entertainment guide \"BMA Magazine\". \"BMA Magazine\" first went to print in 1992; the inaugural edition featured coverage of the Nirvana Nevermind tour.\nThere are a number of AM and FM stations broadcasting in Canberra (AM/FM Listing). The main commercial operators are the Capital Radio Network (2CA and 2CC), and Austereo/ARN (104.7 and Mix 106.3). There are also several community operated stations.\nA DAB+ digital radio trial is also in operation, it simulcasts some of the AM/FM stations, and also provides several digital only stations (DAB+ Trial Listing).\nFive free-to-air television stations service Canberra:\nEach station broadcasts a primary channel and several multichannels. Of the three main commercial networks:\nPrior to 1989, Canberra was serviced by just the ABC, SBS and Capital Television (CTC), which later became Ten Capital in 1994 then Southern Cross Ten in 2002 then Channel 9/Southern Cross Nine in 2016 and finally Channel 10 in 2021, with Prime Television (now Prime7) and WIN Television arriving as part of the Government's regional aggregation program in that year.\nPay television services are available from Foxtel (via satellite) and telecommunications company TransACT (via cable).\nSport.\nIn addition to local sporting leagues, Canberra has a number of sporting teams that compete in national and international competitions. The best known teams are the Canberra Raiders and the ACT Brumbies who play rugby league and rugby union respectively; both have been champions of their leagues. Both teams play their home games at Canberra Stadium, which is the city's largest stadium and was used to hold group matches in football for the 2000 Summer Olympics and in rugby union for the 2003 Rugby World Cup.\nCanberra United represents the city in the A-League Women (formerly the W-League), the national women's soccer league and were champions in the 2011\u201312 season. A men's team is set to join the A-League Men in the 2026\u201327 season.\nThe city also has a successful basketball team, the Canberra Capitals, which has won seven out of the last eleven national women's basketball titles. The Canberra Vikings represent the city in the National Rugby Championship and finished second in the 2015 season.\nThere are also teams that participate in national competitions in netball, field hockey, ice hockey, cricket and baseball.\nThe historic Prime Minister's XI cricket match is played at Manuka Oval annually. Other significant annual sporting events include the Canberra Marathon and the City of Canberra Half Ironman Triathlon.\nCanberra has been bidding for an Australian Football League club since 1981 when Australian rules in the Australian Capital Territory was more popular. While the league has knocked back numerous proposals, according to the AFL Canberra belongs to the Greater Western Sydney Giants who play three home games at Manuka Oval each season.\nThe Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) is located in the Canberra suburb of Bruce. The AIS is a specialised educational and training institution providing coaching for elite junior and senior athletes in a number of sports. The AIS has been operating since 1981 and has achieved significant success in producing elite athletes, both local and international. The majority of Australia's team members and medallists at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney were AIS graduates.\nCanberra has numerous sporting ovals, golf courses, skate parks, and swimming pools that are open to the public. Tennis courts include those at the National Sports Club, Lyneham, former home of the Canberra Women's Tennis Classic. A Canberra-wide series of bicycle paths are available to cyclists for recreational and sporting purposes. Canberra Nature Parks have a large range of walking paths, horse and mountain bike trails. Water sports like sailing, rowing, dragon boating and water skiing are held on Canberra's lakes. The Rally of Canberra is an annual motor sport event, and from 2000 to 2002, Canberra hosted the Canberra 400 event for V8 Supercars on the temporary Canberra Street Circuit, which was located inside the Parliamentary Triangle.\nA popular form of exercise for people working near or in the Parliamentary Triangle is to do the \"bridge to bridge walk/run\" of about 5\u00a0km around Lake Burley Griffin, crossing the Commonwealth Avenue Bridge and Kings Avenue Bridge, using the paths beside the lake. The walk takes about 1 hour, making it ideal for a lunchtime excursion. This is also popular on weekends. Such was the popularity during the COVID-19 isolation in 2020 that the ACT Government initiated a 'Clockwise is COVID-wise' rule for walkers and runners.\nInfrastructure.\nHealth.\nCanberra has two large public hospitals, the approximately 600-bed Canberra Hospital\u2014formerly the Woden Valley Hospital\u2014in Garran and the 250-bed North Canberra Hospital in Bruce. The latter was called Calvary Public Hospital Bruce before its acquisition by the ACT Government in 2023. Both are teaching institutions. The largest private hospital is the Calvary John James Hospital in Deakin. Calvary Bruce Private Hospital in Bruce and Healthscope's National Capital Private Hospital in Garran are also major healthcare providers.\nThe Royal Canberra Hospital was located on Acton Peninsula on Lake Burley Griffin; it was closed in 1991 and was demolished in 1997 in a controversial and fatal implosion to facilitate construction of the National Museum of Australia. The city has 10 aged care facilities. Canberra's hospitals receive emergency cases from throughout southern New South Wales, and ACT Ambulance Service is one of four operational agencies of the ACT Emergency Services Authority. NETS provides a dedicated ambulance service for inter-hospital transport of sick newborns within the ACT and into surrounding New South Wales.\nTransport.\nOverview.\nThe automobile is by far the dominant form of transport in Canberra. The city is laid out so that arterial roads connecting inhabited clusters run through undeveloped areas of open land or forest, which results in a low population density; this also means that idle land is available for the development of future transport corridors if necessary without the need to build tunnels or acquire developed residential land. In contrast, other capital cities in Australia have substantially less green space.\nCanberra's districts are generally connected by parkways\u2014limited access dual carriageway roads with speed limits generally set at a maximum of . An example is the Tuggeranong Parkway which links Canberra's CBD and Tuggeranong, and bypasses Weston Creek. In most districts, discrete residential suburbs are bounded by main arterial roads with only a few residential linking in, to deter non-local traffic from cutting through areas of housing.\nHistory.\nIn 1974 the announced a shift in transport planning to prioritise public transport and discourage commuting by car.\nThe Commission's Transport Policy was a progressive, possibly radical, approach to transport planning for the time. Unwilling to accept the advice of a 1977 traffic study, the NCDC abandoned its commitment to expert-led planning, suppressed the modelling report and revived its car-oriented transport plans from the 1960s. This led to Canberra being a car-dominated city today. In 2006 Canberrans were the most likely of any Australian city dwellers to use their cars to get to work.\nIn an effort to improve road safety, traffic cameras were first introduced to Canberra by the Kate Carnell Government in 1999. The traffic cameras installed in Canberra include fixed red-light and speed cameras and point-to-point speed cameras; together they bring in revenue of approximately $11\u00a0million per year in fines.\nPublic Transport.\nACTION, the government-operated bus service, provides public transport throughout the city. CDC Canberra provides bus services between Canberra and nearby areas of New South Wales of (Murrumbateman and Yass) and as Qcity Transit (Queanbeyan). A light rail line commenced service on 20 April 2019 linking the CBD with the northern district of Gungahlin. A planned Stage 2A of Canberra's light rail network will run from Alinga Street station to Commonwealth Park, adding three new stops at City West, City South and Commonwealth Park. In February 2021 ACT Minister for Transport and City Services Chris Steel said he expects construction on Stage 2A to commence in the 2021-22 financial year, and for \"tracks to be laid\" by the next Territory election in 2024. At the 2016 census, 7.1% of the journeys to work involved public transport, while 4.5% walked to work.\nTaxis and Rideshare.\nThere are two local taxi companies. Aerial Capital Group enjoyed monopoly status until the arrival of Cabxpress in 2007. In October 2015 the ACT Government passed legislation to regulate ride sharing, allowing ride share services including Uber to operate legally in Canberra. The ACT Government was the first jurisdiction in Australia to enact legislation to regulate the service. Since then many other ride sharing and taxi services have started in ACT namely Ola, Glide Taxi and GoCatch\nInterstate Rail.\nAn interstate NSW TrainLink railway service connects Canberra to Sydney. Canberra railway station is in the inner south suburb of Kingston. Between 1920 and 1922 the train line crossed the Molonglo River and ran as far north as the city centre, although the line was closed following major flooding and was never rebuilt, while plans for a line to Yass were abandoned. A gauge construction railway was built in 1923 between the Yarralumla brickworks and the provisional Parliament House; it was later extended to Civic, but the whole line was closed in May 1927. Train services to Melbourne are provided by way of a NSW TrainLink bus service which connects with a rail service between Sydney and Melbourne in Yass, about a one-hour drive from Canberra.\nPlans to establish a high-speed rail service between Melbourne, Canberra and Sydney, have not been implemented, as the various proposals have been deemed economically unviable. The original plans for Canberra included proposals for railed transport within the city, however none eventuated. The phase 2 report of the most recent proposal, the High Speed \nRail Study, was published by the Department of Infrastructure and Transport on 11 April 2013. A railway connecting Canberra to Jervis Bay was also planned but never constructed.\nInterstate Roads.\nCanberra is about three hours by road from Sydney on the Federal Highway (National Highway 23), which connects with the Hume Highway (National Highway 31) near Goulburn, and seven hours by road from Melbourne on the Barton Highway (National Highway 25), which joins the Hume Highway at Yass. It is a two-hour drive on the Monaro Highway (National Highway 23) to the ski fields of the Snowy Mountains and the Kosciuszko National Park. Batemans Bay, a popular holiday spot on the New South Wales coast, is also two hours away via the Kings Highway.\nInterstate coach services operate on these roads, with three companies operating a Sydney-Canberra express route: Murrays, FlixBus, and Greyhound Australia. Other coach routes include: Murrays buses to Wollongong (via Moss Vale) and Narooma (via Batemans Bay); FlixBus buses to Melbourne (via Albury); V/Line buses to Wodonga (via Gundagai) and Bairnsdale and Traralgon (via Cooma); NSW TrainLink buses to Bombala and Eden (via Cooma), Wagga Wagga, Cootamundra and Goulburn; and CDC Canberra buses to Queanbeyan, Yass and Bungendore.\nAir travel.\nCanberra Airport provides direct domestic services to Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns, Darwin, Gold Coast, Hobart, Melbourne, Perth, Sunshine Coast and Sydney with connections to other domestic centres. There are also direct flights to small regional towns: Ballina, Dubbo, Newcastle and Port Macquarie in New South Wales. Canberra Airport is, as of September 2013, designated by the Australian Government Department of Infrastructure and Regional Development as a restricted use designated international airport. International flights have previously been operated by both Singapore Airlines and Qatar Airways. Fiji Airways has announced direct flights to Nadi commencing in July 2023. Until 2003 the civilian airport shared runways with RAAF Base Fairbairn. In June of that year, the Air Force base was decommissioned and from that time the airport was fully under civilian control.\nActive Transport.\nCanberra has one of the highest rates of active travel of all Australian major cities, with 7.1\u00a0per\u00a0cent of commuters walking or cycling to work in 2011. An ACT Government survey conducted in late 2010 found that Canberrans walk an average of 26\u00a0minutes each day. According to \"The Canberra Times\" in March 2014, Canberra's cyclists are involved in an average of four reported collisions every week. The newspaper also reported that Canberra is home to 87,000 cyclists, translating to the highest cycling participation rate in Australia; and, with higher popularity, bike injury rates in 2012 were twice the national average.\nSince late 2020, two scooter-sharing systems have been operational in Canberra: orange scooters from Neuron Mobility and purple scooters from Beam Mobility, both Singapore-based companies that operate in many Australian cities. These services cover much of Canberra Central and Central Belconnen, with plans to expand coverage to more areas of the city in 2022.\nUtilities.\nThe government-owned Icon Water manages Canberra's water and sewerage infrastructure. ActewAGL is a joint venture between ACTEW and AGL, and is the retail provider of Canberra's utility services including water, natural gas, electricity, and also some telecommunications services via a subsidiary TransACT.\nCanberra's water is stored in four reservoirs, the Corin, Bendora and Cotter dams on the Cotter River and the Googong Dam on the Queanbeyan River. Although the Googong Dam is located in New South Wales, it is managed by the ACT government. Icon Water owns Canberra's two wastewater treatment plants, located at Fyshwick and on the lower reaches of the Molonglo River.\nElectricity for Canberra mainly comes from the national power grid through substations at Holt and Fyshwick (via Queanbeyan). Power was first supplied from the Kingston Powerhouse near the Molonglo River, a thermal plant built in 1913, but this was finally closed in 1957. The ACT has four solar farms, which were opened between 2014 and 2017: Royalla (rated output of 20 megawatts, 2014), Mount Majura (2.3 MW, 2016), Mugga Lane (13 MW, 2017) and Williamsdale (11 MW, 2017). In addition, numerous houses in Canberra have photovoltaic panels or solar hot water systems. In 2015 and 2016, rooftop solar systems supported by the ACT government's feed-in tariff had a capacity of 26.3 megawatts, producing 34,910 MWh. In the same year, retailer-supported schemes had a capacity of 25.2 megawatts and exported 28,815 MWh to the grid (power consumed locally was not recorded).\nThere are no wind-power generators in Canberra, but several have been built or are being built or planned in nearby New South Wales, such as the 140.7 megawatt Capital Wind Farm. The ACT government announced in 2013 that it was raising the target for electricity consumed in the ACT to be supplied from renewable sources to 90% by 2020, raising the target from 210 to 550 megawatts. It announced in February 2015 that three wind farms in Victoria and South Australia would supply 200 megawatts of capacity; these are expected to be operational by 2017. Contracts for the purchase of an additional 200 megawatts of power from two wind farms in South Australia and New South Wales were announced in December 2015 and March 2016. The ACT government announced in 2014 that up to 23 megawatts of feed-in-tariff entitlements would be made available for the establishment of a facility in the ACT or surrounding region for burning household and business waste to produce electricity by 2020.\nThe ACT has the highest rate with internet access at home (94\u00a0per\u00a0cent of households in 2014\u201315).\nTwin towns and sister cities.\nCanberra has three sister cities:\nIn addition, Canberra has the following friendship cities:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51984", "revid": "6575218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51984", "title": "Models of deafness", "text": "Frameworks explaining perspectives on deafness: cultural, social, and medical models\nThe three models of deafness are rooted in either social or biological sciences. These are the \"cultural model, the social model, and the\" \"medical\" (or \"infirmity\") \"model\". The model through which the deaf person is viewed can impact how they are treated as well as their own self perception. In the cultural model, the Deaf belong to a culture in which they are neither infirm nor disabled, but rather have their own fully grammatical and natural language. In the medical model, deafness is viewed undesirable, and it is to the advantage of the individual as well as society as a whole to \"cure\" this condition. The social model seeks to explain difficulties experienced by deaf individuals that are due to their environment.\nCultural Model.\nWithin the cultural model of deafness, Deaf people see themselves as a linguistic and cultural minority community rather than a \"disability group\". Advocates of Deaf culture use a capital \"D\" to distinguish cultural Deafness from deafness as a pathology.\nDeaf culture is distinct in that the inability to hear is not seen as a \"loss\" or something that negatively impacts an individual's quality of life. It is an asset of and for the Deaf community to be deaf in behavior, values, knowledge and fluency in sign language. The experience of the Deaf being a language minority is comparable to other minorities' native languages being important to group identification and the preservation of their culture. Deaf clubs (such as NAD- The National Association of the Deaf) and Deaf schools have played large roles in the preservation of sign language and Deaf culture. Residential schools for deaf children serve as a vital link in the transmission of the rich culture and language, seeing as they are ideal environments for children to acquire and master sign language and pass on Deaf cultural values. Like all educational settings, these environments are key to providing deaf children valuable life lessons and skills that will help them prosper in any environment they may find themselves in.\nRather than embrace the view that deafness is a \"personal tragedy\", the Deaf community contrasts the medical model of deafness by seeing all aspects of the deaf experience as positive. The birth of a deaf child is seen as a cause for celebration. Deaf people point to the perspective on child rearing they share with hearing people. For example, hearing parents may feel that they relate to their hearing child because of their experience and intimate understanding of the hearing state of being. It follows that a Deaf parent will have easier experiences raising a deaf child since Deaf parents have an intimate understanding of the deaf state of being. Evidence of Deaf parental success is revealed in scholastic achievement. Deaf children who have Deaf parents that communicate in sign language from birth, generally perform better in their academics than other deaf children with hearing parents. This includes children who adapted using speech and lipreading, prosthetic devices such as the cochlear implants, hearing aid technology, and artificial language systems such as Signing Exact English and Cued Speech. Deaf children acquiring sign languages from birth also reach language milestones at similar rates to their hearing counterparts, unlike deaf children born to hearing parents acquiring speech.\nMembers of the Deaf community define deafness as a matter of culturally determined behaviors rather than an audiological factor. Thus, those within the Deaf community tend to be, but are not limited to, deaf people, especially congenitally deaf people whose primary language is the sign language of their nation or community, as well as their hearing or deaf children (hearing children of Deaf adults are typically called CODAs: Child of Deaf adult), families, friends and other members of their social networks. This cultural model of deafness represents the natural evolution of the social networks of a minority language group. From the conceptual framework of the cultural model come implicit questions, such as: \"How is deafness influenced by the physical and social environment in which it is embedded? What are the interdependent values, mores, art forms, traditions, organizations, and language that characterize this culture?\"\nSocial Model.\nThe social model of deafness stems from the social model of disability. The concept of social disability was created by people who are disabled themselves, their families, friends, and associated social and political networks. Professionals in the human services fields and the social sciences greatly contributed to the social model. This model describes a person's disability on the basis of two factors:\nThrough this lens individuals who are deaf are considered disabled due to their inability to hear, which hearing counterparts in their surroundings have historically viewed as a disadvantage. Deaf people may also have other disabilities. People with disabilities affirm that the design of the environment often disables them. In more accessible environments where those that are deaf have access to language that is not only spoken they are disabled less, or not at all. Areas where hearing and deaf individuals interact, called contact zones, often leave deaf individuals at a disadvantage because of the environment being tailored to suit the needs of the hearing counterpart. The history of Martha's Vineyard, when looking specifically at Martha's Vineyard Sign Language, supports this notion. At one point in time, the deaf population on the island was so great that it was commonplace for hearing residents to know and use both signed and spoken language to communicate with their neighbors. In this environmental design, it was not \"bad\" or \"disabling\" if one was not able to hear in order to communicate. With certain disabilities, medical intervention can improve subsequent health issues. This is true to parts of the deaf population, as in some cases hearing can be gained with the assistance of medical technologies. The social model acknowledges the hard truth that medical intervention does not address societal issues that prevail - regardless of its extent or success.\nIn addition to changing environments from disabling to enabling atmospheres, advocates of the social model support the complete integration of disabled people into society. They encourage maximum integration with peers who are not disabled by their environment, especially, but not exclusively, in the school setting. Ultimately, the goal of proponents of the social model is to ensure all people are fully able to enjoy \"all human rights and fundamental freedoms\". The social model of disability's ideology of \"all-inclusive\" school environments is not adhered to in the cultural model. Residential schools separate deaf and hard of hearing children from their hearing counterparts. The existence of these schools demonstrate an example of respecting and embracing the totality of the deaf experience rather than dismissing it. While the social model's promotion of inclusion at every level is a great principle, it may not always be the best environment in practice. In the case of deafness, there is a lot a child can miss in a mainstreamed schooling environment. In a poorly constructed mainstreamed environment, fostering relationships with classmates may be difficult and auditory important material shared verbally by teachers may be missed. As a result, the child may fall behind both academically and socially. In residential school settings, these challenges may not be experienced to the same degree, and would allow for deaf children's social and academic lives to instead flourish.\nMedical Model.\nThe medical model of deafness originates from medical, social welfare and majority cultural notions of the absence of the ability to hear as being an illness or a physical disability. It stems from a more comprehensive and far-reaching medical model of disability. Under the perspective that deafness is an impairment, the inability to hear interferes with a person's ability to respond to environmental cues, to communicate, and to enjoy aspects of mainstream culture such as music. People who experience hearing loss after acquiring a mastery of spoken language as well as those who are hard-of-hearing commonly identify with this model.\nWithin the medical model deafness is conceptualized from a \"personal tragedy\" stance, indicating that it should be avoided, eradicated, or normalized by all possible means. Often, the attitudes of professionals own assumptions of deafness as tragedy promote responses of loss; thus, hearing parents may experience diagnosis of their child's deafness as a tragedy with reactions of grief. Similarly, common reactions such as stress and anger are not necessarily understandable psychological responses to deafness, but may result from situations in which parents have not encountered in others an adequate response to their needs and questions.\nWhile medical ethics and law dictate that it is up to the patient (or the patient's legal representative) to decide the treatments he or she wishes, the press and professional literature are increasingly normalizing the discussion regarding using cochlear implants, oral education, and mainstream placement; all being popular choices under the medical model of deafness. The medical model suggests that, overall, the effects of deafness may be lessened through the use of technology such as hearing aids, cochlear implants, assistive listening devices, and lip reading. Similarly, doctors and scientists who engage in research are doing so simply because there is demand for information and for techniques which can restore hearing. The view that deafness is a \"disability\" also has economic consequences in political environments concerned with social welfare. It is the basis on which the governments in many developed countries provide financial support for the cost of cochlear implants and other therapies.\nUnder the medical model of deafness, implicit questions may naturally arise, such as: \"By what criteria and by whom is the impairment construed as an infirmity; how did the infirmity arise; what are the risks and benefits of the available treatment, if any; what can be done to minimize the disabling effects of the infirmity?\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51985", "revid": "948213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51985", "title": "Buzzkunst", "text": "Buzzkunst is the sole album by UK group ShelleyDevoto. The studio album reunited Pete Shelley and Howard Devoto, founding members of the punk group Buzzcocks and was their first collaboration since the 1970s.\nTrack listing.\nAll music written by Howard Devoto and Pete Shelley. All lyrics by Howard Devoto.\nVideos were recorded live at 'Irregular' in London on 9 February 2000.\nPersonnel.\nwith:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51987", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51987", "title": "Dirac delta", "text": ""}
{"id": "51988", "revid": "13054498", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51988", "title": "Eiffle tower", "text": ""}
{"id": "51991", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51991", "title": "CGS unit", "text": ""}
{"id": "51992", "revid": "9203640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51992", "title": "Eschscholzia californica", "text": "Species of flowering plant and state flower of California\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEschscholzia californica, the California poppy, golden poppy, Mexican poppy, California sunlight or cup of gold, is a species of flowering plant in the family Papaveraceae, native to the United States and Mexico. It is cultivated as an ornamental plant flowering in summer (spring in southern Australia), with showy flowers in brilliant shades of red, orange and yellow (occasionally pink and white). It is also used as food or a garnish. It had various uses in indigenous herbalism. It became the official state flower of California in 1903.\nDescription.\nCalifornia poppy is a perennial or annual plant growing to tall with alternately branching glaucous blue-green foliage. The leaves are alternately divided into round, lobed segments. The flowers are solitary on long stems, silky-textured, with four petals, each petal long and broad; flower color ranges through yellow, orange and red. Flowering occurs from February to September in the northern hemisphere. The petals close at night (or in cold, windy weather) and open again the following morning, although they may remain closed in cloudy weather. The fruit is a slender, dehiscent capsule long, which splits in two, sometimes explosively with an audible snap, to release numerous small wide black or dark brown seeds. The plant will reseed under ideal conditions, or when winters are cold. Anecdotally, it can be an aggressive reseeder in the home garden context, eventually becoming a groundcover. It survives mild winters in its native range, dying completely in colder climates.\nHabitat.\nIts native habitat includes California and extends to Oregon, Washington, Nevada, Arizona, New Mexico, Sonora and northwest Baja California. The Antelope Valley California Poppy Reserve is located in northern Los Angeles County. At the peak of the blooming season, orange flowers seem to cover all 1,745 acres (706 ha) of the reserve. Other prominent locations of California poppy meadows include Bear Valley (Colusa County) and Point Buchon (San Luis Obispo County).\nTaxonomy.\n\"Eschscholzia californica\" was the first named species of the genus \"Eschscholzia\", named by the German botanist Adelbert von Chamisso after the Baltic German botanist Johann Friedrich von Eschscholtz, his friend and colleague on Otto von Kotzebue's scientific expedition to California and the greater Pacific circa 1810 aboard the Russian ship \"Rurik\".\nCalifornia poppy is highly variable, with over 90 synonyms. Some botanists accept two subspecies\u2014one with four varieties (e.g., )\u2014though others do not recognize them as distinct (e.g., ):\nBotanical research has held significant implications towards the classification of \"Eschscholzia\". Despite some unresolved aspects in the phylogenies, it is evident that taxonomic are necessary within the genus, particularly in three areas: supporting two subspecies of \"E. californica\", endorsing two subspecies of \"E. lemmonii\", and recognizing two potential new taxa. Currently, 8 taxa are officially recognized.\nIt belongs to the subfamily \"Eschscholzioideae\", sister group to the subfamily \"Papaveroideae\" (which includes \"Papaver somniferum\", the opium poppy).\nPollen.\nAs poppies are not wind-pollinated, their pollen poses no allergy risk via inhalation.\nA UK study of meadow flowers including commercial mixes and common plants such as ragwort and dandelion ranked the California poppy highly in pollen production, although it did not produce a significant amount of nectar. On a per-flower basis it ranked second, with a rate of 8.3 \u00b1 1.1\u03bcl. The corn poppy, \"Papaver rhoeas\", topped the list for per-flower pollen production with its rate of 13.3 \u00b1 2.8\u03bcl. When measuring the entire capitulum the top two species were the ox-eye daisy, \"Leucanthemum vulgare\", with 15.9 \u00b1 2\u03bcl, and \"Cosmos bipinnatus\", which had a rate nearly equivalent to that of the corn poppy.\nCultivation.\n\"E. californica\" is drought-tolerant, self-seeding, and easy to cultivate. It is best grown as an annual, in full sun, and well-draining sandy or loam soil. Horticulturalists have produced numerous cultivars with a range of colors and blossom and stem forms. These typically do not breed true on reseeding. Seeds are often sold as mixtures. The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit:- \nUses.\nCalifornia poppy leaves are used as food or garnish, while the seeds are used in cooking. There are no clinical trials showing it can effectively treat psychiatric disorders in humans.\nChemical compounds.\n\"E. californica\" contains californidine (N+(CH3)2), allocryptopine, eschscholtzine N-CH3 (californidine), and other similar (Papaveraceae) alkaloids. Also berberine.\nPreparation.\nThe California poppy has been used through two methods: fresh petals to create a syrup, and dried petals added to water to make an infusion or boiled for tea.\nAs an introduced species.\nCalifornia poppies are commercially sold and widely naturalized in Australia, including Tasmania, and the species has also been introduced to South Africa, Chile, New Zealand, and Argentina. In both Chile and California, there are marked differences between California poppies grown in low and high altitudes. Coastal or low-altitude specimens produce fewer flowers and seeds, experience longer flowering times, and have shorter stems.\nHistorical and cultural significance.\nIndigenous people.\nThe California poppy has been historically used as traditional medicine and cosmetics by some indigenous people in California, particularly those native to the regions where the plant is found. In particular, Tongva Gabrielino, Cahuilla, Costanoan, Luiseno, and Pomo have cultural and historical connections with the poppy. These connections involve traditional uses of the plant, cultural significance, and even folklore.\nThe Tongva peoples of the San Gabriel Valley region recognized the California poppy by the term \"Mekachaa.\" Such indigenous communities interpret the Mekechaa as a plant relative, and actively resisted attempts to appropriate its existence through artistic community projects. In \"Waa'aka',\" the final plant created by the Tongva's god of creation, \"Wiyot\", was the \"Island poppy\", described as \"\"golden as the sun, bringing beauty to the world\".\"\n18th and 19th centuries.\nIn the late 1700s, Spanish settlers affectionately called the poppy \"copa de oro\" (gold cup). By 1816, Russian explorers officially named the flower \"Eschscholzia californica\". Since California's statehood in 1850, local residents have embraced it as the California poppy or \"golden poppy\".\nSeveral years later, Chamisso introduced the wildflower through a detailed description and life-sized color painting in \"Horae Physicae Berolinenses\" (1820). This marked the entry of the poppy into European taxonomic systems as \"Eschscholzia californica\". The living flower made its European debut in 1826, courtesy of Scottish botanist David Douglas, who collected various plant seeds, including \"Eschscholzia californica\", for the Royal Horticultural Society of England. While evidence indicates that the golden poppy started appearing in British gardens over the subsequent fifty years, it had not yet become strongly associated with ideas of California identity and statehood. An 1883 Scottish report, recounting a visit to California and an encounter with the golden wildflowers, reflects the early attitudes forming around the poppy.\nIn the 19th century, the California poppy held a dual identity, both as a botanical native and as a symbolic representation of California. It was crafted to embody the essence of a \"true\" Californian, celebrated and used predominantly by the white Californian community. The Native Daughters and Sons of the Golden West played a pivotal role in establishing the California poppy as a cultural icon.\nBy the 1890s, \"Eschscholzia californica\" had transformed from merely the California or golden poppy to the designated state poppy\u2013 a shift from a botanical specimen with regional ties to a symbol of the state.\nState flower of California.\nDuring the 1890s Sarah Plummer Lemmon advocated for the adoption of the golden poppy as the state flower of California, eventually writing the bill passed by the California Legislature and signed by Governor George Pardee in 1903. In this era, the state aimed to construct an external identity grounded in the natural wealth of the region, enticing newcomers and businesses with promises of celebration and prosperity. Publicly, products synonymous with the color gold, such as oranges, wheat, actual gold, and the iconic golden poppy, were strategically employed as influential elements in the endeavor to shape and promote the state.\nIn the aftermath of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and fire, the California poppy became a central design motif and symbol influencing various decorative objects. Such decorative objects featured California scenes and prominently showcased the California poppy symbolizing the imagined, pastoral and prosperous California that artists sought to create.\nA particular example is a wooden box painted by Lucia Mathews in 1929. This box serves as a visual representation of the symbiotic relationship between the poppy and California, reinforcing the state's identity through design. As the official state flower of California, \"Eschscholzia californica\" is pictured on welcome signs along highways entering California and on official Scenic Route signs.\nIn March 2019, a \"super bloom\" of California poppies in the city of Lake Elsinore, California, drew nationwide attention. So-called super blooms occur after a period of heavy rainfall and often draw large crowds. The most popular sightseeing spot, Walker Canyon, was overwhelmed by more than 100,000 visitors in the span of a few days, causing city officials to temporarily shut down surrounding roads to motor vehicles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51993", "revid": "48256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51993", "title": "J.F.v.Eschscholtz", "text": ""}
{"id": "51994", "revid": "38179619", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51994", "title": "Dorpat", "text": ""}
{"id": "51995", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51995", "title": "Roosevelt Island, New York", "text": ""}
{"id": "52000", "revid": "41481129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52000", "title": "Eleusinian Mysteries", "text": "Secret religious rites in ancient Greece\nThe Eleusinian Mysteries () were initiations held every year for the cult of Demeter and Persephone based at the Panhellenic Sanctuary of Eleusis in ancient Greece. They are considered the \"most famous of the secret religious rites of ancient Greece\". Their basis was a Bronze Age agrarian cult, and there is some evidence that they were derived from the religious practices of the Mycenean period. The Mysteries represented the myth of the abduction of Persephone from her mother Demeter by the king of the underworld Hades, in a cycle with three phases: the \"descent\" (loss), the \"search\", and the \"ascent\", with the main theme being the \"ascent\" () of Persephone and the reunion with her mother. It was a major festival during the Hellenic era, and later spread to Rome. \nThe rites, ceremonies, and beliefs were kept secret and consistently preserved from antiquity. For the initiated, the rebirth of Persephone symbolized the eternity of life which flows from generation to generation, and they believed that they would have a reward in the afterlife. There are many paintings and pieces of pottery that depict various aspects of the Mysteries. Since the Mysteries involved visions and conjuring of an afterlife, some scholars believe that the power and longevity of the Eleusinian Mysteries, a consistent set of rites, ceremonies and experiences that spanned two millennia, came from psychedelic drugs . The name of the town, Eleusis, seems to be pre-Greek, and is likely a counterpart with Elysium and the goddess Eileithyia.\nEtymology.\n\"Eleusinian Mysteries\" () was the name of the \"mysteries\" of the city \"Eleusis\".\nThe name of the city Eleusis is Pre-Greek, and may be related with the name of the goddess Eileithyia. Her name \"\" (\"Elysia\") in Laconia and Messene probably relates her with the month \"Eleusinios\" and Eleusis, but this is debated.\nThe ancient Greek word from which English \"mystery\" derives, \"myst\u1e17rion\" (), means \"mystery or secret rite\" and is related with the verb \"my\u00e9\u014d\" (), which means \"(I) teach, initiate into the mysteries\", and the noun \"m\u00fdst\u0113s\" (), which means \"one initiated\". The word \"mystik\u00f3s\" (), source of the English \"mystic\", means \"connected with the mysteries\", or \"private, secret\" (as in Modern Greek).\nDemeter and Persephone.\nThe Mysteries are related to a myth concerning Demeter, the goddess of agriculture and fertility as recounted in one of the Homeric Hymns (c. 650 BC). According to the hymn, Demeter's daughter Persephone (also referred to as \"Kore\", \"maiden\") was assigned the task of painting all the flowers of the earth. Before completion, she was seized by Hades, the god of the underworld, who took her to his underworld kingdom. Distraught, Demeter searched high and low for her daughter. Because of her distress, and in an effort to coerce Zeus to allow the return of her daughter, she caused a terrible drought in which the people suffered and starved, depriving the gods of sacrifice and worship. As a result, Zeus relented and allowed Persephone to return to her mother.\nAccording to the myth, during her search Demeter traveled long distances and had many minor adventures along the way. In one she taught the secrets of agriculture to Triptolemus. Finally, by consulting Zeus, Demeter reunited with her daughter and the earth returned to its former verdure and prosperity: the first spring.\nZeus, pressed by the cries of the hungry people and by the other deities who also heard their anguish, forced Hades to return Persephone. However, it was a rule of the Fates that whoever consumed food or drink in the Underworld was doomed to spend eternity there. Before Persephone was released to Hermes, who had been sent to retrieve her, Hades tricked her into eating pomegranate seeds (either six or four according to the telling), which forced her to return to the underworld for some months each year. She was obliged to remain with Hades for six or four months (one month per seed) and lived above ground with her mother for the rest of the year. This left a long period of time when Demeter was unhappy due to Persephone's absence, neglecting to cultivate the earth. When Persephone returned to the surface, Demeter became joyful and cared for the earth again.\nIn the central foundation document of the mystery, the Homeric \"Hymn to Demeter\" line 415, Persephone is said to stay with Hades during winter and return to her mother in the spring of the year: \"This was the day [of Persephone's return], at the very beginning of bountiful springtime.\"\nPersephone's rebirth is symbolic of the rebirth of all plant life and the symbol of eternity of life that flows from the generations that spring from each other.\nHowever, a scholar has proposed a different version, according to which the four months during which Persephone is with Hades correspond to the dry Greek summer, a period during which plants are threatened with drought.\nMysteries.\nThe Eleusinian Mysteries are believed to have ancient origins. Some findings in the temple \"Eleusinion\" in Attica suggest that their basis was an old agrarian cult. Some practices of the mysteries seem to have been influenced by the religious practices of the Mycenaean period, thus predating the Greek Dark Ages. Excavations showed that a private building existed under the Telesterion in the Mycenean period, and it seems that originally the cult of Demeter was private. In the Homeric Hymn is mentioned the palace of the king Keleos.\nOne line of thought by modern scholars has been that the Mysteries were intended \"to elevate man above the human sphere into the divine and to assure his redemption by making him a god and so conferring immortality upon him\".\nSome scholars argued that the Eleusinian cult was a continuation of a Minoan cult, and that Demeter was a poppy goddess who brought the poppy from Crete to Eleusis. Some useful information from the Mycenean period can be taken from the study of the cult of Despoina (the precursor goddess of Persephone) and the cult of Eileithyia, who was the goddess of childbirth. The megaron of Despoina at Lycosura is quite similar to the Telesterion of Eleusis, and Demeter is united with the god Poseidon, bearing a daughter, the unnamable \"Despoina\" (the mistress). In the cave of Amnisos at Crete, the goddess Eileithyia is related with the annual birth of the divine child, and she is connected with \"Enesidaon \" (The Earth Shaker), who is the chthonic aspect of Poseidon.\nAt Eleusis inscriptions refer to \"the Goddesses\" accompanied by the agricultural god Triptolemus (probably son of Ge and Oceanus), and \"the God and the Goddess\" (Persephone and Plouton) accompanied by Eubuleus who probably led the way back from the underworld. The myth was represented in a cycle with three phases: the \"descent\", the \"search\", and the \"ascent\" (Greek \"anodos\") with contrasted emotions from sorrow to joy which roused the \"mystae\" to exultation.\nThe main theme was the ascent of Persephone and the reunion with her mother Demeter. At the beginning of the feast, the priests filled two special vessels and poured them out, one towards the west and the other towards the east. The people looking both to the sky and the earth shouted in a magical rhyme \"rain and conceive\". In a ritual, a child was initiated from the hearth (the divine fire). The name \"pais\" (child) appears in the Mycenean inscriptions, it was the ritual of the \"divine child\" who originally was Ploutos. In the Homeric hymn the ritual is connected with the myth of the agricultural god Triptolemus. The goddess of nature survived in the mysteries where the following words were uttered: \"Mighty Potnia bore a great son\". Potnia (Linear B \"po-ti-ni-ja\" : lady or mistress), is a Mycenaean title applied to goddesses, and probably the translation of a similar title of pre-Greek origin.\nThe high point of the celebration was \"an ear of grain cut in silence\", which represented the force of the new life. The idea of immortality did not exist in the mysteries at the beginning, but the initiated believed that they would have a better fate in the underworld. Death remained a reality, but at the same time a new beginning like the plant which grows from the buried seed. A depiction from the old palace of Phaistos is very close to the image of the \"anodos\" of Persephone. An armless and legless deity grows out of the ground, and her head turns to a large flower.\nAccording to George Mylonas, the lesser mysteries were held \"as a rule once a year in the early spring in the month of flowers, the Anthesterion,\" while \"the Greater Mysteries were held once a year and every fourth year they were celebrated with special splendor in what was known as the \"penteteris\". Ker\u00e9nyi concurs with this assessment: \"The Lesser Mysteries were held at Agrai in the month of Anthesterion, our February... The initiates were not even admitted to the \"epopteia\" [Greater Mysteries] in the same year, but only in September of the following year.\" This cycle continued for about two millennia. In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter, King Celeus is said to have been one of the first people to learn the secret rites and mysteries of her cult. He was also one of her original priests, along with Diocles, Eumolpos, Polyxeinus, and Triptolemus, Celeus' son, who had supposedly learned agriculture from Demeter.\nUnder Peisistratos of Athens, the Eleusinian Mysteries became pan-Hellenic, and pilgrims flocked from Greece and beyond to participate. Around 300 BC, the state took over control of the mysteries; they were controlled by two families, the Eumolpidae and the Kerykes. This led to a vast increase in the number of initiates. The only requirements for membership were freedom from \"blood guilt\", meaning never having committed murder, and not being a \"barbarian\" (being unable to speak Greek). Men, women, and even slaves were allowed initiation.\nParticipants.\nTo participate in these mysteries one had to swear a vow of secrecy.\nFour categories of people participated in the Eleusinian Mysteries:\nPriesthood.\nThe priesthood officiating at the Eleusinian Mysteries and in the sanctuary was divided into several offices with different tasks.\nSix categories of priests officiated in the Eleusinian Mysteries:\nThe offices of Hierophant, High Priestess, and Dadouchousa priestess were all inherited within the Phileidae or Eumolpidae families, and the Hierophant and the High Priestess were of equal rank. It was the task of the High Priestess to impersonate the roles of the goddesses Demeter and Persephone in the enactment during the mysteries, and at Eleusis events were dated by the name of the reigning High Priestess.\nSecrets.\nThe outline below is only a capsule summary; much of the concrete information about the Eleusinian Mysteries was never written down. For example, only initiates knew what the \"kiste\", a sacred chest, and the \"calathus\", a lidded basket, contained.\nHippolytus of Rome, one of the Church Fathers writing in the early 3rd century AD, discloses in \"Refutation of All Heresies\" that \"the Athenians, while initiating people into the Eleusinian rites, likewise display to those who are being admitted to the highest grade at these mysteries, the mighty, and marvellous, and most perfect secret suitable for one initiated into the highest mystic truths: \"an ear of grain in silence reaped\".\"\nLesser Mysteries.\nThere were two Eleusinian Mysteries, the Greater and the Lesser. According to Thomas Taylor, \"the dramatic shows of the Lesser Mysteries occultly signified the miseries of the soul while in subjection to the body, so those of the Greater obscurely intimated, by mystic and splendid visions, the felicity of the soul both here and hereafter, when purified from the defilements of a material nature and constantly elevated to the realities of intellectual [spiritual] vision.\" According to Plato, \"the ultimate design of the Mysteries ... was to lead us back to the principles from which we descended, ... a perfect enjoyment of intellectual [spiritual] good.\"\nThe Lesser Mysteries took place in the month of Anthesterion \u2013 the eighth month of the Attic calendar, falling in mid winter around February or March \u2013 under the direction of Athens' \"archon basileus\". In order to qualify for initiation, participants would sacrifice a piglet to Demeter and Persephone, and then ritually purify themselves in the river Illisos. Upon completion of the Lesser Mysteries, participants were deemed \"mystai\" (initiates) worthy of witnessing the Greater Mysteries.\nGreater Mysteries.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor among the many excellent and indeed divine institutions which your Athens has brought forth and contributed to human life, none, in my opinion, is better than those mysteries. For by their means we have been brought out of our barbarous and savage mode of life and educated and refined to a state of civilization; and as the rites are called \"initiations,\" so in very truth we have learned from them the beginnings of life, and have gained the power not only to live happily, but also to die with a better hope.\nCicero, Laws II, xiv, 36\nThe Greater Mysteries took place in Boedromion \u2013 the third month of the Attic calendar, falling in late summer around September or October \u2013 and lasted ten days.\nThe first act (on the 14th of Boedromion) was the bringing of the sacred objects from Eleusis to the Eleusinion, a temple at the base of the Acropolis of Athens.\nOn the 15th of Boedromion, a day called the Gathering (\"Agyrmos\"), the priests (\"hierophantes\", those who show the sacred ones) declared the start of the rites (\"prorrhesis\"), and carried out the sacrifice (\"hiere\u00eda de\u00faro,\" hither the victims).\nThe seawards initiates (\"halade mystai\") started out in Athens on 16th Boedromion with the celebrants washing themselves in the sea at Phaleron.\nOn the 17th, the participants began the \"Epidauria\", a festival for Asklepios named after his main sanctuary at Epidauros. This \"festival within a festival\" celebrated the healer's arrival at Athens with his daughter Hygieia, and consisted of a procession leading to the Eleusinion, during which the \"mystai\" apparently stayed at home, a great sacrifice, and an all-night feast (\"pannykh\u00eds\").\nThe procession to Eleusis began at Kerameikos (the Athenian cemetery) on the 18th, and from there the people walked to Eleusis, along the Sacred Way (\u1f39\u03b5\u03c1\u1f70 \u1f49\u03b4\u03cc\u03c2, \"Hier\u00e1 Hod\u00f3s\"), swinging branches called \"bacchoi\". At a certain spot along the way, they shouted obscenities in commemoration of Iambe (or Baubo), an old woman who, by cracking dirty jokes, had made Demeter smile as she mourned the loss of her daughter. The procession also shouted \"\u00cdakch', O \u00cdakche!\", possibly an epithet for Dionysus, or a separate deity Iacchus, son of Persephone or Demeter.\nUpon reaching Eleusis, there was an all-night vigil (\"pannychis\") according to Mylonas and Ker\u00e9nyi. perhaps commemorating Demeter's search for Persephone. At some point, initiates had a special drink (\"kykeon\"), of barley and pennyroyal, which has led to speculation about its chemicals perhaps having psychotropic effects from ergot (a fungus that grows on barley, containing psychedelic alkaloids similar to LSD). Discovery of fragments of ergot in a temple dedicated to the two Eleusinian goddesses excavated at the Mas Castellar site (Girona, Spain) provided legitimacy for this theory. Ergot fragments were found inside a vase and within the dental calculus (plaque) of a 25-year-old man, providing evidence of ergot being consumed (Juan-Stresserras, 2002). This finding seems to support the hypothesis of ergot as an ingredient of the Eleusinian kykeon.\nInside the Telesterion.\nOn the 19th of Boedromion, initiates entered a great hall called Telesterion; in the center stood the Palace (\"Anaktoron\"), built of ruins dating back to the Mycenaean Age, which only the hierophants could enter, where sacred objects were stored. Before mystai could enter the Telesterion, they would recite, \"I have fasted, I have drunk the \"kykeon\", I have taken from the \"kiste\" (box) and after working it have put it back in the \"calathus\" (open basket).\nIt is widely supposed that the rites inside the Telesterion comprised three elements:\nCombined, these three elements were known as the \"aporrheta\" (unrepeatables); the penalty for divulging them was death.\nAthenagoras of Athens, Cicero, and other ancient writers cite that it was for this crime (among others) that Diagoras was condemned to death in Athens; the tragic playwright Aeschylus was allegedly tried for revealing secrets of the mysteries in some of his plays, but was acquitted. The ban on divulging the core ritual of the mysteries was thus absolute, which is probably why almost nothing is known about what transpired there.\nClimax\nAs to the climax of the mysteries, there are two modern theories.\nSome hold that the priests were the ones to reveal the visions of the holy night, consisting of a fire that represented the possibility of life after death, and various sacred objects. Others hold this explanation to be insufficient to account for the power and longevity of the mysteries, and that the experiences must have been internal and mediated by a powerful psychoactive ingredient contained in the \"kykeon\" drink (see Entheogenic theories below). Although this hypothesis continues to receive attention, it was not well received by classicists\nFollowing this section of the Mysteries was an all-night feast (\"Pannychis\") accompanied by dancing and merriment. This portion of the festivities was open to the public. The dances took place in the Rarian Field, rumored to be the first spot where grain grew. A bull sacrifice also took place late that night or early the next morning. That day (22nd Boedromion), the initiates honoured the dead by pouring libations from special vessels.\nOn the 23rd of Boedromion, the mysteries ended and everyone returned home.\nDemise.\nIn 170 AD, the Temple of Demeter was sacked by the Sarmatians but was rebuilt by Marcus Aurelius. Aurelius was then allowed to become the only lay person ever to enter the anaktoron. As Christianity gained in popularity in the 4th and 5th centuries, Eleusis's prestige began to fade. The last pagan emperor of Rome, Julian, reigned from 361 to 363 after about fifty years of Christian rule. Julian attempted to restore the Eleusinian Mysteries and was the last emperor to be initiated into them. The closing of the Eleusinian Mysteries in 392 AD by the emperor Theodosius I is reported by Eunapius, a historian and biographer of the Greek philosophers. Eunapius had been initiated by the last legitimate Hierophant, who had been commissioned by the emperor Julian to restore the Mysteries, which had by then fallen into decay. According to Eunapius, the last Hierophant was a usurper, \"the man from Thespiae who held the rank of Father in the mysteries of Mithras\". According to Eunapius, in 396, during his raiding campaign in Attica, the king of the Goths Alaric I looted the remains of the shrines.\nAccording to historian Hans Kloft, despite the destruction of the Eleusinian Mysteries, elements of the cult survived in the Greek countryside. There, local peasants and shepherds partially transferred Demeter's rites and religious duties onto Saint Demetrius of Thessaloniki, who gradually became the local patron of agriculture and \"heir\" to the pagan mother goddess.\nIn art, literature, and culture.\nThere are many paintings and pieces of pottery that depict various aspects of the Mysteries. The \"Eleusinian Relief\", from the late 5th century BC, displayed in the National Archaeological Museum of Athens is a representative example. Triptolemus is depicted receiving seeds from Demeter and teaching mankind how to work the fields to grow crops, with Persephone holding her hand over his head to protect him. Vases and other works of relief sculpture, from the 4th, 5th and 6th centuries BC, depict Triptolemus holding an ear of corn, sitting on a winged throne or chariot, surrounded by Persephone and Demeter with pine torches. The monumental Protoattic amphora from the middle of the 7th century BC, with the depiction of Medusa's beheading by Perseus and the blinding of Polyphemos by Odysseus and his companions on its neck, is kept in the Archaeological Museum of Eleusis which is located inside the archaeological site of Eleusis.\nThe Ninnion Tablet, found in the same museum, depicts Demeter, followed by Persephone and Iacchus, and then the procession of initiates. Then, Demeter is sitting on the kiste inside the Telesterion, with Persephone holding a torch and introducing the initiates. The initiates each hold a bacchoi. The second row of initiates were led by Iakchos, a priest who held torches for the ceremonies. He is standing near the omphalos while an unknown female (probably a priestess of Demeter) sat nearby on the kiste, holding a scepter and a vessel filled with kykeon. Pannychis is also represented.\n\"The Myth of Er\", part of Plato's \"Republic\", is thought to be a representation of the teaching of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Er, after being killed in battle and brought to the underworld, is reincarnated without drinking from the River Lethe. He retains his memories and tells the living about his experience in the underworld. He no longer has a fear of death.\nIn \"Shakespeare's Mystery Play: A Study of The Tempest\", Colin Still argued that \"The Tempest\" was an allegory for initiation into the Eleusinian Mysteries. Though widely rejected, this interpretation was supported by Michael Srigley in \"Images of Regeneration\".\nCarl Gustav Jung (1875\u20131961) borrowed terms and interpretations from the late 19th and early 20th century classical scholarship in German and French as a source of metaphors for his reframing of psychoanalytic treatment into a spiritualistic ritual of initiation and rebirth. The Eleusinian mysteries, particularly the qualities of the Kore, figured prominently in his writings.\nDimitris Lyacos in the second book of the \"Poena Damni\" trilogy \"With the People from the Bridge\", a contemporary, avant-garde play focusing on the return of the dead and the revenant legend combines elements from the Eleusinian mysteries as well as early Christian tradition in order to convey a view of collective salvation. The text uses the pomegranate symbol in order to hint at the residence of the dead in the underworld and their periodical return to the world of the living.\nOctavio Vazquez's symphonic poem \"Eleusis\" draws on the Eleusinian Mysteries and on other Western esoteric traditions. Commissioned by the Sociedad General de Autores y Editores and the RTVE Symphony Orchestra, it was premiered in 2015 by the RTVE Orchestra and conductor Adrian Leaper at the Teatro Monumental in Madrid.\nEntheogenic theories.\nNumerous scholars have proposed that the power of the Eleusinian Mysteries came from the kykeon's functioning as an entheogen, or psychedelic agent. The use of potions or philtres for magical or religious purposes was relatively common in Greece and the ancient world. The initiates, sensitized by their fast and prepared by preceding ceremonies (see set and setting), may have been propelled by the effects of a powerful psychoactive potion into revelatory mind states with profound spiritual and intellectual ramifications. In opposition to this idea, skeptical scholars note the lack of any solid evidence and stress the collective rather than individual character of initiation into the Mysteries. \nMany psychoactive agents have been proposed as the significant element of kykeon, though without consensus or conclusive evidence. These include the ergot species Claviceps paspali, a fungal parasite of paspalum, which contains the alkaloids ergotamine, a precursor to LSD, and ergonovine. However, modern attempts to prepare a kykeon using ergot-parasitized barley have yielded inconclusive results, though Alexander Shulgin and Ann Shulgin describe ergonovine and LSA to be known to produce LSD-like effects.\nDiscovery of fragments of ergot (fungi containing LSD-like psychedelic alkaloids) in a temple dedicated to the two Eleusinian Goddesses excavated at the Mas Castellar site (Girona, Spain) provided some legitimacy for this theory. Ergot fragments were found inside a vase and within the dental calculus of a 25-year-old man, providing evidence of ergot being consumed. This finding seems to support the hypothesis of ergot as an ingredient of the Eleusinian kykeon.\nPsychoactive mushrooms are another candidate. Scholars such as Robert Graves and Terence McKenna, speculated that the mysteries were focused around a variety of \"Psilocybe\". Other entheogenic fungi, such as \"Amanita muscaria\", have also been suggested. A recent hypothesis suggests that the ancient Egyptians cultivated \"Psilocybe cubensis\" on barley and associated it with the deity Osiris.\nAnother candidate for the psychoactive drug is an opioid derived from the poppy. The cult of the goddess Demeter may have brought the poppy from Crete to Eleusis; it is certain that opium was produced in Crete.\nAnother theory is that the psychoactive agent in kykeon is DMT, which occurs in many wild plants of the Mediterranean, including \"Phalaris\" and/or \"Acacia\". To be active orally (like in ayahuasca) it must be combined with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor such as Syrian rue (\"Peganum harmala\"), which grows throughout the Mediterranean.\nAlternatively, J. Nigro Sansonese (1994), using the mythography supplied by Mylonas, hypothesizes that the Mysteries of Eleusis were a series of practical initiations into trance involving proprioception of the human nervous system induced by breath control (similar to samyama in yoga). Sansonese speculates that the \"kist\u00e9\", a box holding sacred objects opened by the hierophant, is actually an esoteric reference to the initiate's skull, within which is seen a sacred light and are heard sacred sounds, but only \"after\" instruction in trance practice. Similarly, the seed-filled chambers of a pomegranate, a fruit associated with the founding of the cult, esoterically describe proprioception of the initiate's heart during trance.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "52004", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52004", "title": "Gero von Wilpert", "text": "German writer\nGero von Wilpert (13 March 1933 \u2013 24 December 2009) was a German author, a senior lecturer in German at the University of New South Wales and, from 1980, Professor of German at the University of Sydney.\nLife and career.\nWilpert was born in Tartu (Dorpat), Estonia. Like all Baltic Germans, he was forced to leave Estonia after the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and the takeover of the country by the Soviet Union (1939\u201340).\nFrom 1953 to 1957 he studied at the University of Heidelberg, where he was at times a docent. He then settled near Stuttgart to work as independent author and lecturer.\nWilpert published several editions of an encyclopedia of literary descriptions \"Sachw\u00f6rterbuch der Literatur\". He also wrote a comprehensive \"Lexikon der Weltliteratur\" [Lexicon of World Literature] and earlier had published his \"Deutsche Literatur in Bildern\" [German Literature in Pictures] and a journal on Schiller.\nHe was elected a Fellow of the Australian Academy of the Humanities in 1983.\nWilpert died in Sydney.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52006", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52006", "title": "223", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 223 (CCXXIII) was a common year starting on Wednesday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Maximus and Aelianus (or, less frequently, year 976 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 223 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52007", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52007", "title": "224", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 224 (CCXXIV) was a leap year starting on Thursday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Iulianus and Crispinus (or, less frequently, year 977 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 224 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nRoman Empire.\nParthia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52008", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52008", "title": "225", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 225 (CCXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Fuscus and Domitius (or, less frequently, year 978 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 225 for this year has been used since the early medieval period when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nArt and Science.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52010", "revid": "1281967072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52010", "title": "226", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 226 (CCXXVI) was a common year starting on Sunday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Severus and Marcellus (or, less frequently, year 979 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 226 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy place.\nParthian Empire.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52011", "revid": "1317451151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52011", "title": "227", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Events by month/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n January\n February\n March\n April\n May\n June\n July\n August\n September\n October\n November\n December\nCalendar year\nYear 227 (CCXXVII) was a common year starting on Monday of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Senecio and Fulvius (or, less frequently, year 980 \"Ab urbe condita\"). The denomination 227 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.\nEvents.\nBy place.\nAsia.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52012", "revid": "50635743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52012", "title": "Shiritori", "text": "Japanese word game\nShiritori (; ) is a Japanese word game in which the players are required to say a word which begins with the final \"kana\" of the previous word. No distinction is made between \"hiragana\", \"katakana\", and \"kanji\". \"Shiritori\" literally means \"taking the end\" or \"taking the rear\".\nRules.\nThere are various optional and advanced rules, which the players must agree on before the game begins.\nStandard rules.\nExample:\"sakura\" () \u2192 \"rajio\" () \u2192 \"onigiri\" () \u2192 \"risu\" () \u2192 \"sumou\" () \u2192 \"udon\" ().The player who used the word \"udon\" lost this game, because the word ends in \"N\" ().\nEnglish shiritori.\nA version of Shiritori using only English words was invented to help people learn English. Most rules are the same, yet there are several original and optional rules that are used.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52015", "revid": "166386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52015", "title": "Proper motion", "text": "Measure of observed changes in the apparent locations of stars\nProper motion is the angular speed of a celestial object, such as a star, as it moves across the sky. It is an astrometric measure, giving an object's change in angular position over time relative to the center of mass of the Solar System. This parameter is measured relative to the distant stars or a stable reference such as the International Celestial Reference Frame (ICRF). Patterns in proper motion reveal larger structures like stellar streams, the general rotation of the Milky Way disk, and the random motions of stars in the Galactic halo.\nThe components for proper motion in the equatorial coordinate system (of a given epoch, often J2000.0) are given in the direction of right ascension (\"\u03bc\"\u03b1) and of declination (\"\u03bc\"\u03b4). Their combined value is computed as the \"total proper motion\" (\"\u03bc\"). It has dimensions of angle per time, typically arcseconds per year or milliarcseconds per year.\nKnowledge of the proper motion, distance, and radial velocity allows calculations of an object's motion from the Solar System's frame of reference and its motion from the galactic frame of reference \u2013 that is motion in respect to the Sun, and by coordinate transformation, that in respect to the Milky Way.\nIntroduction.\nOver the course of centuries, stars appear to maintain nearly fixed positions with respect to each other, so that they form the same constellations over historical time. As examples, both Ursa Major in the northern sky and Crux in the southern sky, look nearly the same now as they did hundreds of years ago. However, precise long-term observations show that such constellations change shape, albeit very slowly, and that each star has an independent motion.\nThis motion is caused by the movement of the stars relative to the Sun and Solar System. The Sun travels in a nearly circular orbit (the \"solar circle\") about the center of the galaxy at a speed of about 220\u00a0km/s at a radius of from Sagittarius A* which can be taken as the rate of rotation of the Milky Way itself at this radius.\nAny proper motion is a two-dimensional vector (as it excludes the component as to the direction of the line of sight) typically defined by its position angle and its magnitude. The first is the direction of the proper motion on the celestial sphere (with 0\u00a0degrees meaning the motion is north, 90 degrees meaning the motion is east, (left on most sky maps and space telescope images) and so on), and the second is its magnitude, typically expressed in arcseconds per year (symbols: arcsec/yr, as/yr, \u2033/yr, \u2033\u00a0yr\u22121) or milliarcseconds per year (symbols: mas/yr, mas\u00a0yr\u22121).\nProper motion may alternatively be defined by the angular changes per year in the star's right ascension (\"\u03bc\u03b1\") and declination (\"\u03bc\u03b4\") with respect to a defined epoch.\nThe components of proper motion by convention are arrived at as follows. Suppose an object moves from coordinates (\u03b11, \u03b41) to coordinates (\u03b12, \u03b42) in a time \u0394\"t\". The proper motions are given by:\nformula_1\nformula_2\nThe magnitude of the proper motion \"\u03bc\" is given by the Pythagorean theorem:\nformula_3\n\"technically abbreviated:\"\nformula_4\nwhere \"\u03b4\" is the declination. The factor in cos2\"\u03b4\" accounts for the widening of the lines (hours) of right ascension away from the poles, cos\"\u03b4\", being zero for a hypothetical object fixed at a celestial pole in declination. Thus, a co-efficient is given to negate the misleadingly greater east or west velocity (angular change in \"\u03b1\") in hours of Right Ascension the further it is towards the imaginary infinite poles, above and below the earth's axis of rotation, in the sky. The change \"\u03bc\"\u03b1, which must be multiplied by cos\"\u03b4\" to become a component of the proper motion, is sometimes called the \"proper motion in right ascension\", and \"\u03bc\"\u03b4 the \"proper motion in declination\".\nIf the proper motion in right ascension has been converted by cos\"\u03b4\", the result is designated \"\u03bc\"\u03b1*. For example, the proper motion results in right ascension in the Hipparcos Catalogue (HIP) have already been converted. Hence, the individual proper motions in right ascension and declination are made equivalent for straightforward calculations of various other stellar motions.\nThe position angle \"\u03b8\" is related to these components by:\nformula_5\nformula_6\nMotions in equatorial coordinates can be converted to motions in galactic coordinates.\nExamples.\nFor most stars seen in the sky, the observed proper motions are small and unremarkable. Such stars are often either faint or are significantly distant, have changes of below 0.01\u2033 per year, and do not appear to move appreciably over many millennia. A few do have significant motions, and are usually called \"high-proper motion stars.\" Two or more stars which are moving in similar directions, exhibit so-called shared or \"common proper motion\" (or cpm.), suggesting they may share similar motion in space (if the distances and radial velocities are also consistent) and thus be gravitationally linked as binary stars or star clusters.\nBarnard's Star has the largest proper motion of all stars, moving at 10.3\u2033\u00a0yr\u22121. Large proper motion usually strongly indicates an object is close to the Sun. This is so for Barnard's Star, about 6 light-years away. After the Sun and the Alpha Centauri system, it is the nearest known star. Being a red dwarf with an apparent magnitude of 9.54, it is too faint to see without a telescope or powerful binoculars. Of the stars visible to the naked eye (conservatively limiting unaided visual magnitude to 6.0), 61 Cygni A (magnitude V=5.20) has the highest proper motion at 5.281\u2033\u00a0yr\u22121, discounting Groombridge 1830 (magnitude V=6.42), proper motion: 7.058\u2033\u00a0yr\u22121.\nA proper motion of 1\u00a0arcsec per year 1\u00a0light-year away corresponds to a relative transverse speed of 1.45\u00a0km/s. Barnard's Star's transverse speed is 90\u00a0km/s and its radial velocity is 111\u00a0km/s (perpendicular (at a right, 90\u00b0 angle), which gives a true or \"space\" motion of 142\u00a0km/s. True or absolute motion is more difficult to measure than the proper motion, because the true transverse velocity involves the product of the proper motion times the distance. As shown by this formula, true velocity measurements depend on distance measurements, which are difficult in general.\nIn 1992 Rho Aquilae became the first star to have its Bayer designation invalidated by moving to a neighbouring constellation \u2013 it is now in Delphinus.\nUsefulness in astronomy.\nStars with large proper motions tend to be nearby; most stars are far enough away that their proper motions are very small, on the order of a few thousandths of an arcsecond per year. It is possible to construct nearly complete samples of high proper motion stars by comparing photographic sky survey images taken many years apart. The Palomar Sky Survey is one source of such images. In the past, searches for high proper motion objects were undertaken using blink comparators to examine the images by eye. More modern techniques such as image differencing can scan digitized images, or comparisons to star catalogs obtained by satellites. As any selection biases of these surveys are well understood and quantifiable, studies have confirmed more and inferred approximate quantities of unseen stars \u2013 revealing and confirming more by studying them further, regardless of brightness, for instance. Studies of this kind show most of the nearest stars are intrinsically faint and angularly small, such as red dwarfs.\nMeasurement of the proper motions of a large sample of stars in a distant stellar system, like a globular cluster, can be used to compute the cluster's total mass via the Leonard-Merritt mass estimator. Coupled with measurements of the stars' radial velocities, proper motions can be used to compute the distance to the cluster.\nStellar proper motions have been used to infer the presence of a super-massive black hole at the center of the Milky Way. This now confirmed to exist black hole is called Sgr A*, and has a mass of 4.3 \u00d7 106\u00a0M\u2609 (solar masses).\nProper motions of objects in galaxies in the Local Group can be used to estimate their distance. In 1999, the proper motion of water masers moving very rapidly around the center of NGC 4258 (M106) galaxy was measured via Very Long Baseline Interferometry. In combination with their radial motion this yielded an accurate distance to the galaxy of . In 2005, the first measurement was made of the proper motion of the Triangulum Galaxy M33, the third largest and only ordinary spiral galaxy in the Local Group, located 0.860 \u00b1 0.028 Mpc beyond the Milky Way. The motion of the Andromeda Galaxy was measured in 2012, and an Andromeda\u2013Milky Way collision is predicted in about 4.5 billion years. \nHistory.\nProper motion was suspected by early astronomers (according to Macrobius, \"c.\" AD 400) but a proof was not provided until 1718 by Edmond Halley, who noticed that Sirius, Arcturus and Aldebaran were over half a degree away from the positions charted by the ancient Greek astronomer Hipparchus roughly 1850 years earlier.\nThe lesser meaning of \"proper\" used is arguably dated English (but neither historic, nor obsolete when used as a postpositive, as in \"the city proper\") meaning \"belonging to\" or \"own\". \"Improper motion\" would refer to perceived motion that is nothing to do with an object's inherent course, such as due to Earth's axial precession, and minor deviations, nutations well within the 26,000-year cycle.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52018", "revid": "19928630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52018", "title": "Alexandra Romanov", "text": ""}
{"id": "52019", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52019", "title": "Shaw alphabet", "text": ""}
{"id": "52021", "revid": "36506559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52021", "title": "W. T. Tutte", "text": "British-Canadian codebreaker and mathematician (1917\u20132002)\nWilliam Thomas Tutte (; 14 May 1917 \u2013 2 May 2002) was an English and Canadian code breaker and mathematician. During the Second World War, he made a fundamental advance in cryptanalysis of the Lorenz cipher, a major Nazi German cipher system which was used for top-secret communications within the Wehrmacht High Command. \nThe high-level, strategic nature of the intelligence obtained from Tutte's crucial breakthrough, in the bulk decrypting of Lorenz-enciphered messages specifically, contributed greatly, and perhaps even decisively, to the defeat of Nazi Germany. He also had a number of significant mathematical accomplishments, including foundation work in the fields of graph theory and matroid theory.\nTutte's research in the field of graph theory proved to be of remarkable importance. At a time when graph theory was still a primitive subject, Tutte commenced the study of matroids and developed them into a theory by expanding from the work that Hassler Whitney had first developed around the mid-1930s. Even though Tutte's contributions to graph theory have been influential to modern graph theory and many of his theorems have been used to keep making advances in the field, most of his terminology was not in agreement with their conventional usage and thus his terminology is not used by graph theorists today. \"Tutte advanced graph theory from a subject with one text (D. K\u0151nig's) toward its present extremely active state.\"\nEarly life and education.\nTutte was born in Newmarket in Suffolk. He was the younger son of William John Tutte (1873\u20131944), an estate gardener, and Annie (\"n\u00e9e\" Newell; 1881\u20131956), a housekeeper. Both parents worked at Fitzroy House stables where Tutte was born. The family spent some time in Buckinghamshire, County Durham and Yorkshire before returning to Newmarket, where Tutte attended Cheveley Church of England primary school in the nearby village of Cheveley. In 1927, when he was ten, Tutte won a scholarship to the Cambridge and County High School for Boys. He took up his place there in 1928.\nIn 1935 he won a scholarship to study natural sciences at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he specialized in chemistry and graduated with first-class honours in 1938. He continued with physical chemistry as a graduate student, but transferred to mathematics at the end of 1940. As a student, he (along with three of his friends) became one of the first to solve the problem of squaring the square, and the first to solve the problem without a squared subrectangle. Together the four created the pseudonym Blanche Descartes, under which Tutte published occasionally for years.\nSecond World War.\nSoon after the outbreak of the Second World War, Tutte's tutor, Patrick Duff, suggested him for war work at the Government Code and Cypher School at Bletchley Park (BP). He was interviewed and sent on a training course in London before going to Bletchley Park, where he joined the Research Section. At first, he worked on the Hagelin cipher that was being used by the Italian Navy. This was a rotor cipher machine that was available commercially, so the mechanics of enciphering was known, and decrypting messages only required working out how the machine was set up.\nIn the summer of 1941, Tutte was transferred to work on a project called Fish. Intelligence information had revealed that the Germans called the wireless teleprinter transmission systems \"S\u00e4gefisch\" ('sawfish'). This led the British to use the code Fish for the German teleprinter cipher system. The nickname Tunny (tunafish) was used for the first non-Morse link, and it was subsequently used for the Lorenz SZ machines and the traffic that they enciphered.\nTelegraphy used the 5-bit International Telegraphy Alphabet No. 2 (ITA2). Nothing was known about the mechanism of enciphering other than that messages were preceded by a 12-letter indicator, which implied a 12-wheel rotor cipher machine. The first step, therefore, had to be to diagnose the machine by establishing the logical structure and hence the functioning of the machine. Tutte played a pivotal role in achieving this, and it was not until shortly before the Allied victory in Europe in 1945, that Bletchley Park acquired a Tunny Lorenz cipher machine. Tutte's breakthroughs led eventually to bulk decrypting of Tunny-enciphered messages between the German High Command (OKW) in Berlin and their army commands throughout occupied Europe and contributed\u2014perhaps decisively\u2014to the defeat of Germany.\nDiagnosing the cipher machine.\nOn 31 August 1941, two versions of the same message were sent using identical keys, which constituted a \"depth\". This allowed John Tiltman, Bletchley Park's veteran and remarkably gifted cryptanalyst, to deduce that it was a Vernam cipher which uses the Exclusive Or (XOR) function (symbolised by \"\u2295\"), and to extract the two messages and hence obtain the obscuring key. After a fruitless period during which Research Section cryptanalysts tried to work out how the Tunny machine worked, this and some other keys were handed to Tutte, who was asked to \"see what you can make of these\".\nAt his training course, Tutte had been taught the Kasiski examination technique of writing out a key on squared paper, starting a new row after a defined number of characters that was suspected of being the frequency of repetition of the key. If this number was correct, the columns of the matrix would show more repetitions of sequences of characters than chance alone. Tutte knew that the Tunny indicators used 25 letters (excluding J) for 11 of the positions, but only 23 letters for the other. He therefore tried Kasiski's technique on the first impulse of the key characters, using a repetition of 25 \u00d7 23 = 575. He did not observe a large number of column repetitions with this period, but he did observe the phenomenon on a diagonal. He therefore tried again with 574, which showed up repeats in the columns. Recognising that the prime factors of this number are 2, 7 and 41, he tried again with a period of 41 and \"got a rectangle of dots and crosses that was replete with repetitions\".\nIt was clear, however, that the first impulse of the key was more complicated than that produced by a single wheel of 41 key impulses. Tutte called this component of the key formula_1 (\"chi\"1). He figured that there was another component, which was XOR-ed with this, that did not always change with each new character, and that this was the product of a wheel that he called formula_2 (\"psi\"1). The same applied for each of the five impulses (formula_3 and formula_4). So for a single character, the whole key K consisted of two components:\nformula_5\nAt Bletchley Park, mark impulses were signified by x and space impulses by \u2022. For example, the letter \"H\" would be coded as \u2022\u2022x\u2022x. Tutte's derivation of the \"chi\" and \"psi\" components was made possible by the fact that dots were more likely than not to be followed by dots, and crosses more likely than not to be followed by crosses. This was a product of a weakness in the German key setting, which they later eliminated. Once Tutte had made this breakthrough, the rest of the Research Section joined in to study the other impulses, and it was established that the five \"chi\" wheels all advanced with each new character and that the five \"psi\" wheels all moved together under the control of two \"mu\" or \"motor\" wheels. Over the following two months, Tutte and other members of the Research Section worked out the complete logical structure of the machine, with its set of wheels bearing cams that could either be in a position (raised) that added x to the stream of key characters, or in the alternative position that added in \u2022.\nDiagnosing the functioning of the Tunny machine in this way was a truly remarkable cryptanalytical achievement which, in the citation for Tutte's induction as an Officer of the Order of Canada, was described as \"one of the greatest intellectual feats of World War II\".\nTutte's statistical method.\nTo decrypt a Tunny message required knowledge not only of the logical functioning of the machine, but also the start positions of each rotor for the particular message. The search was on for a process that would manipulate the ciphertext or key to produce a frequency distribution of characters that departed from the uniformity that the enciphering process aimed to achieve. While on secondment to the Research Section in July 1942, Alan Turing worked out that the XOR combination of the values of successive characters in a stream of ciphertext and key emphasised any departures from a uniform distribution. The resultant stream (symbolised by the Greek letter \"delta\" \u0394) was called the difference because XOR is the same as modulo 2 subtraction.\nThe reason that this provided a way into Tunny was that although the frequency distribution of characters in the ciphertext could not be distinguished from a random stream, the same was not true for a version of the ciphertext from which the \"chi\" element of the key had been removed. This was the case because where the plaintext contained a repeated character and the \"psi\" wheels did not move on, the differenced \"psi\" character (formula_6) would be the null character ('/ ' at Bletchley Park). When XOR-ed with any character, this character has no effect. Repeated characters in the plaintext were more frequent both because of the characteristics of German (EE, TT, LL and SS are relatively common), and because telegraphists frequently repeated the figure-shift and letter-shift characters.\nTo quote the General Report on Tunny:Turingery introduced the principle that the key differenced at one, now called \u0394\u039a, could yield information unobtainable from ordinary key. This \u0394 principle was to be the fundamental basis of nearly all statistical methods of wheel-breaking and setting.\nTutte exploited this amplification of non-uniformity in the differenced values and by November 1942 had produced a way of discovering wheel starting points of the Tunny machine which became known as the \"Statistical Method\". The essence of this method was to find the initial settings of the \"chi\" component of the key by exhaustively trying all positions of its combination with the ciphertext, and looking for evidence of the non-uniformity that reflected the characteristics of the original plaintext. Because any repeated characters in the plaintext would always generate \u2022, and similarly formula_7 would generate \u2022 whenever the \"psi\" wheels did not move on, and about half of the time when they did \u2013 some 70% overall.\nAs well as applying differencing to the full 5-bit characters of the ITA2 code, Tutte applied it to the individual impulses (bits). The current \"chi\" wheel cam settings needed to have been established to allow the relevant sequence of characters of the \"chi\" wheels to be generated. It was totally impracticable to generate the 22 million characters from all five of the \"chi\" wheels, so it was initially limited to 41 \u00d7 31 = 1271 from the first two. After explaining his findings to Max Newman, Newman was given the job of developing an automated approach to comparing ciphertext and key to look for departures from randomness. The first machine was dubbed Heath Robinson, but the much faster Colossus computer, developed by Tommy Flowers and using algorithms written by Tutte and his colleagues, soon took over for breaking codes.\nDoctorate and career.\nIn late 1945, Tutte resumed his studies at Cambridge, now as a graduate student in mathematics. He published some work begun earlier, one a now famous paper that characterises which graphs have a perfect matching, and another that constructs a non-Hamiltonian graph.\nTutte completed a doctorate in mathematics from Cambridge in 1948 under the supervision of Shaun Wylie, who had also worked at Bletchley Park on Tunny. His thesis \"An Algebraic Theory of Graphs\" was considered ground breaking and was about the subject later known as matroid theory.\nThe same year, invited by Harold Scott MacDonald Coxeter, he accepted a position at the University of Toronto. In 1962, he moved to the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario, where he stayed for the rest of his academic career. He officially retired in 1985, but remained active as an emeritus professor. Tutte was instrumental in helping to found the Department of Combinatorics and Optimization at the University of Waterloo.\nHis mathematical career concentrated on combinatorics, especially graph theory, which he is credited as having helped create in its modern form, and matroid theory, to which he made profound contributions; one colleague described him as \"the leading mathematician in combinatorics for three decades\". He was editor in chief of the \"Journal of Combinatorial Theory\" until retiring from Waterloo in 1985. He also served on the editorial boards of several other mathematical research journals.\nResearch contributions.\nTutte's work in graph theory includes the structure of cycle spaces and cut spaces, the size of maximum matchings and existence of \"k\"-factors in graphs, and Hamiltonian and non-Hamiltonian graphs. He disproved Tait's conjecture, on the Hamiltonicity of polyhedral graphs, by using the construction known as Tutte's fragment. The eventual proof of the four colour theorem made use of his earlier work. The graph polynomial he called the \"dichromate\" has become famous and influential under the name of the Tutte polynomial and serves as the prototype of combinatorial invariants that are universal for all invariants that satisfy a specified reduction law.\nThe first major advances in matroid theory were made by Tutte in his 1948 Cambridge PhD thesis which formed the basis of an important sequence of papers published over the next two decades. Tutte's work in graph theory and matroid theory has been profoundly influential on the development of both the content and direction of these two fields. In matroid theory, he discovered the highly sophisticated homotopy theorem and founded the studies of chain groups and regular matroids, about which he proved deep results.\nIn addition, Tutte developed an algorithm for determining whether a given binary matroid is a graphic matroid. The algorithm makes use of the fact that a planar graph is simply a graph whose circuit-matroid, the dual of its bond-matroid, is graphic.\nTutte wrote a paper entitled \"How to Draw a Graph\" in which he proved that any face in a 3-connected graph is enclosed by a peripheral cycle. Using this fact, Tutte developed an alternative proof to show that every Kuratowski graph is non-planar by showing that \"K\"5 and \"K\"3,3 each have three distinct peripheral cycles with a common edge. In addition to using peripheral cycles to prove that the Kuratowski graphs are non-planar, Tutte proved that every simple 3-connected graph can be drawn with all its faces convex, and devised an algorithm which constructs the plane drawing by solving a linear system. The resulting drawing is known as the Tutte embedding.\nTutte's algorithm makes use of the barycentric mappings of the peripheral circuits of a simple 3-connected graph.\nThe findings published in this paper have proved to be of much significance because the algorithms that Tutte developed have become popular planar graph drawing methods.\nOne of the reasons for which Tutte's embedding is popular is that the necessary computations that are carried out by his algorithms are simple and guarantee a one-to-one correspondence of a graph and its embedding onto the Euclidean plane, which is of importance when parameterising a three-dimensional mesh to the plane in geometric modelling. \"Tutte's theorem is the basis for solutions to other computer graphics problems, such as morphing.\"\nTutte was mainly responsible for developing the theory of enumeration of planar graphs, which has close links with chromatic and dichromatic polynomials. This work involved some highly innovative techniques of his own invention, requiring considerable manipulative dexterity in handling power series (whose coefficients count appropriate kinds of graphs) and the functions arising as their sums, as well as geometrical dexterity in extracting these power series from the graph-theoretic situation.\nTutte summarised his work in the \"Selected Papers of W.T. Tutte\", 1979, and in \"Graph Theory as I have known it\", 1998.\nPositions, honours and awards.\nTutte's work in World War II and subsequently in combinatorics brought him various positions, honours and awards:\nTutte served as Librarian for the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada in 1959\u20131960, and asteroid 14989 Tutte (1997 UB7) was named after him.\nBecause of Tutte's work at Bletchley Park, Canada's Communications Security Establishment named an internal organisation aimed at promoting research into cryptology, the Tutte Institute for Mathematics and Computing (TIMC), in his honour in 2011.\nIn September 2014, Tutte was celebrated in his hometown of Newmarket, England, with the unveiling of a sculpture, after a local newspaper started a campaign to honour his memory.\nBletchley Park in Milton Keynes celebrated Tutte's work with an exhibition \"Bill Tutte: Mathematician + Codebreaker\" from May 2017 to 2019, preceded on 14 May 2017 by lectures about his life and work during the Bill Tutte Centenary Symposium.\nPersonal life and death.\nIn addition to the career benefits of working at the new University of Waterloo, the more rural setting of Waterloo County appealed to Bill and his wife Dorothea. They bought a house in the nearby village of West Montrose, Ontario where they enjoyed hiking, spending time in their garden on the Grand River and allowing others to enjoy the beautiful scenery of their property.\nThey also had an extensive knowledge of all the birds in their garden. Dorothea, an avid potter, was also a keen hiker and Bill organised hiking trips. Even near the end of his life Bill still was an avid walker. After his wife died in 1994, he moved back to Newmarket (Suffolk), but then returned to Waterloo in 2000, where he died two years later. He is buried in West Montrose United Cemetery.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52023", "revid": "47503973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52023", "title": "Farouk of Egypt", "text": "King of Egypt and the Sudan from 1936 to 1952\nFarouk I (; ; 11 February 1920 \u2013 18 March 1965) was the tenth ruler of Egypt from the Muhammad Ali dynasty and the penultimate King of Egypt and the Sudan, succeeding his father, Fuad I, in 1936 and reigning until his overthrow in a military coup in 1952.\nHis full title was \"His Majesty Farouk I, by the grace of God, King of Egypt and the Sudan\". As king, Farouk was known for his extravagant playboy lifestyle. While initially popular, his reputation eroded due to the corruption and incompetence of his government. He was overthrown in the 1952 coup d'\u00e9tat and forced to abdicate in favour of his infant son, Ahmed Fuad, who succeeded him as Fuad II. Farouk died in exile in Italy in 1965.\nHis sister, Princess Fawzia bint Fuad, was the first wife and consort of the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.\nEarly life and education.\nHe was born as \"His Sultanic Highness\" Farouk bin Fuad, Hereditary Prince of Egypt and Sudan, on 11 February 1920 (Jumada al-Awwal 21, 1338 A.H.) at Abdeen Palace, Cairo, the eldest child of Sultan Fuad I (later King Fuad I) and his second wife, Nazli Sabri. He had Albanian, Circassian, Turkish, French, Greek and Egyptian ancestry. Farouk's first languages were Egyptian Arabic, Turkish and French (the languages of the Egyptian elite), and he always thought of himself as an Egyptian rather than as an Arab, having no interest in Arab nationalism except as a way of increasing Egypt's power in the Middle East. Egypt at that time was quite rich, but its wealth was very maldistributed. The pashas, representing less than .5% of all landowners, owned a third of all cultivated land in the country.\nIn addition to his sisters, Fawzia, Faiza, Faika and Fathia, he had one half-sister from his father's previous marriage to Princess Shivakiar Khanum Effendi, Princess Fawkia. Fuad gave all of his children names starting with F after an Indian fortune-teller told him names starting with F would bring him good luck. King Fuad kept tight control over his only son when he was growing up and Farouk was only allowed to see his mother once every day for an hour. The prince grew up in the very closeted world of the royal palaces, and he never visited the Great Pyramids at Giza until he became king, despite the fact that only separated the Abdeen Palace from the Pyramids. Farouk had a very spoiled upbringing with the Sudanese servants when meeting him always getting down on their knees to first kiss the ground and then his hand. Aside from his sisters, Farouk had no friends when growing up as Fuad would not allow any outsiders to meet him.\nFuad, who did not speak Arabic, insisted that the crown prince learn Arabic so he could talk to his subjects. Farouk became fluent in classical Arabic, the language of the Quran, and he always gave his speeches in classical Arabic. As a child, Farouk showed a facility for languages, learning Arabic, English, French and Italian, which were the only subjects he excelled in. The more honest of Farouk's tutors often wrote comments on his childhood essays such as \"Improve your bad handwriting and pay attention to the cleanliness of your notebook\" and \"It is regrettable that you do not know the history of your ancestors\". The more sycophantic of his tutors wrote comments like \"Excellent. A brilliant future awaits you in the world of literature\" on an essay that began with the sentence \"My father had a lot of ministers and I have a cat\". Farouk was known for his love of practical jokes, a trait that continued as an adult. For instance, he liked to free the quail that the game keepers had captured on the grounds of the Montaza Palace, and he once used an air gun to shoot out the windows at the Koubbeh Palace. When Queen Marie of Romania visited the Koubbeh Palace to see Queen Nazli, Farouk asked her if she wanted to see his two horses; when she answered in the positive, Farouk had the horses brought into the royal harem, which greatly displeased the two queens as the animals defecated all over the floor. Farouk's Swedish au pair, Gerda Sj\u00f6berg, wrote in her diary: \"The truth doesn't exist in Egypt. Breaking promises is normal. Farouk is already perfect at this. He loves to lie. But it's amazing Farouk is as good as he, given his mother.\" Knowing of his family's genetic predisposition to obesity, King Fuad kept Farouk on a strict diet, warning him that the male descendants of Muhammad Ali the Great tended to get obese very easily.\nFarouk's closest friend when growing up and later as an adult was the Italian electrician at the Abdeen Palace, Antonio Pulli, who became one of Egypt's most powerful men during his reign. An attempt to enroll Farouk at Eton was thwarted when he failed the entrance exams. Before his father's death, he was educated at the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich, England. The Italophile Fuad wanted to have Farouk educated at the Turin Military Academy, but the British High Commissioner Sir Miles Lampson vetoed this choice as growing Italian claims for the entire Mediterranean to be \"Mare Nostrum\" (\"Our Sea\") made it unacceptable for the Crown Prince to be educated in Italy.\nIn October 1935, Farouk left Egypt to settle at Kenry House in the countryside of Surrey to attend the Royal Military Academy at Woolwich as an extramural student. Farouk attended classes occasionally at \"the Shop\", as the academy was known, to prepare himself for the entrance exam. Farouk stayed at Kenry House and twice a week was driven in a Rolls-Royce to the Royal Military Academy to attend classes, but still failed the entrance exam. One of Farouk's tutors, General Aziz Ali al-Misri, complained to King Fuad that the principal problem with Farouk as a student was he never studied and expected the answers to be given to him when he wrote his exam. Instead of studying, Farouk spent his time in London where he went shopping, attended football matches with the Prince of Wales, and visited restaurants and brothels. Farouk's other tutor, the famous desert explorer, Olympic athlete and poet Ahmed Hassanein reported to King Fuad that Farouk was studying hard, but the inability of the crown prince to pass entrance exams supports General al-Misri's reports. When King George V died in January 1936, Farouk represented Egypt at his funeral in Westminster Abbey.\nAscension to the throne.\nOn 28 April 1936, King Fuad died of a heart attack and Farouk left England to return to Egypt as king. Farouk's first act as king was to visit Buckingham Palace to accept the condolences of King Edward VIII, one of the few Englishmen whom Farouk liked, and then he went to Victoria Station to take a train to Dover and was seen off by the Foreign Secretary, Sir Anthony Eden. At Dover, Farouk boarded a French ship, the \"C\u00f4te d'Azur\", which took him to Calais. After a stop in Paris to shop and visit the Elysee Palace, Farouk took the train to Marseille, where he boarded an ocean liner, the \"Viceroy of India\" to take him to Alexandria, where he landed on 6 May 1936. Upon landing in Alexandria, Farouk was greeted by huge crowds who shouted \"Long live the king of the Nile!\" and \"Long live the king of Egypt and the Sudan!\" In 1936, Farouk was known by his subjects as \"al malik al mahbub\" (\"the beloved king\"). Besides inheriting the throne, Farouk also received all of the land that his father had acquired, which amounted to one seventh of all the arable land in Egypt. As the Nile river valley has some of the most fertile and productive farmland in the entire world, this was a considerable asset. Fuad left Farouk a fortune worth about US$100 million (a sum worth about US$2.3 billion in 2025 dollars when adjusted for inflation) plus of land in the Nile river valley, five palaces, 200 cars and 2 yachts. Farouk's biographer, William Stadiem, wrote:no pharaoh, no Mameluke, no khedive ever began a reign with such unquestionable, enthusiastic goodwill as King Farouk. And none was as unprepared to rule. Here was a completely sheltered, virtually uneducated sixteen-year old, expected to fill the spats of his wily, politically astute father in a loaded tug-of-war between nationalism, imperialism, constitutionalism, and monarchy.\nUpon his coronation, the 16-year-old King Farouk made a public radio address to the nation, the first time a sovereign of Egypt had ever spoken directly to his people in such a way:{\nAs Farouk was extremely popular with the Egyptian people, it was decided by the Prime Minister, Aly Maher, that Farouk should not return to Britain as that would be unpopular, though one of the regents, Prince Muhammad Ali, had wanted Farouk to keep trying to be admitted on a full-time basis to the Royal Military Academy as a means of getting him out of the country. Since under Egyptian law women could not inherit the throne, Farouk's cousin Prince Muhammad Ali was next in line to the throne. Prince Muhammad Ali was to spend the next 16 years scheming to depose Farouk so he could become king. Egypt was in the process of negotiating a treaty that would reduce some of the British privileges in Egypt and make the country more independent in exchange for keeping Egypt in the British sphere of influence. The ambitions of Benito Mussolini to dominate the Mediterranean led the Wafd\u2014traditionally the anti-British party\u2014to want to keep the British presence in Egypt, at least as long as Mussolini kept calling the Mediterranean \"Mare Nostrum\". For both the Wafd and the British, it was convenient to keep Farouk in Egypt so that when he signed the new Anglo-Egyptian treaty, it would not be seen as under duress as it would be if Farouk was living in Britain. Sir Miles Lampson believed he together with assorted other British officials like the king's tutor, Edward Ford, could mould Farouk into an Anglophile. Lampson's plans were derailed when it emerged that Farouk was more interested in duck-hunting than Ford's lectures and that the king had \"bragged\" he would \"have the hell\" with the British, saying they had humiliated him for long enough.\nThe fact that Farouk had dismissed all of the British servants employed by his father, while keeping the Italian servants, suggested he had inherited Fuad's Italophilia. Farouk especially resented Lampson's attempts to set himself up as a surrogate father, finding him impossibly patronising and rude, complaining that at one moment Lampson would address him as a king and the next moment would call him to his face a \"naughty boy\". Lampson was 55 when Farouk acceded to the throne and he never learned how to treat the teenage Farouk as an equal. The official was charmed by Egypt, which he regarded as a wondrous exotic land, but as his Arabic was not particularly good, his contacts with ordinary Egyptians were only on a superficial level. Lampson was fluent in French and his social contracts were almost entirely with the Egyptian elite. Lampson wrote in his diary about the death of King Fuad: \"Slippery customer though he was, he was an immense factor in the situation here and... we could always in the last resort get him to act in any particular line that we wished\". About Farouk, Lampson wrote he did not expect to have \"a young immature King on our hands. I frankly don't know quite how that problem is going to be handled\".\nFarouk was enamored of the glamorous royal lifestyle. Although he already had thousands of acres of land, dozens of palaces and hundreds of cars, the youthful king often traveled to Europe for grand shopping sprees, earning the ire of many of his subjects. It is said that he ate 600 oysters a week. His personal vehicle was a red 1947 Bentley Mark VI, with coachwork by Figoni et Falaschi; he dictated that, other than the military jeeps which made up the rest of his entourage, no other cars were to be painted red. In 1951, he bought the pear-shaped 94-carat Star of the East diamond and a fancy-coloured oval-cut diamond from jeweller Harry Winston.\nHe was most popular in his early years, and the nobility largely celebrated him. For example, during the accession of the young King Farouk, \"the Abaza family had solicited palace authorities to permit the royal train to stop briefly in their village so that the king could partake of refreshments offered in a large, magnificently ornamented tent the family had erected in the train station.\" The Chief Accountant to Farouk was Yadidya Israel, who was secretly working with the Free Officers movement that removed the King in 1952, as was the Abaza family's own Wagih Abaza, who later became governor of six governorates in post-Farouk Egypt.\nFarouk's accession initially was encouraging for the populace and nobility, due to his youth and Egyptian roots through his mother Nazli Sabri. Standing 6'0 tall and extremely handsome in his teenage years, Farouk was viewed as a sex symbol in his early years, making the cover of \"Time\" magazine as a leader to watch while \"Life\" magazine in article on him called the Abdeen Palace \"possibly the most magnificent royal place in the world\" and Farouk \"the very model of a young Muslim gentleman\". However, the situation was not the same with some Egyptian politicians and elected government officials, with whom Farouk quarreled frequently, despite their loyalty in principle to his throne. There was also the issue of the British influence in the Egyptian government, which Farouk viewed with disdain. Farouk's accession had changed the dynamic of Egyptian politics from being a struggle of an unpopular king vs. the popular Wafd party as it was under his father to that of a popular Wafd vs. an even more popular king. The Wafd Party, led by Nahas Pasha, had been the most popular party in Egypt since it had been founded in 1919, and the Wafd leaders felt threatened by Farouk's popularity with ordinary Egyptians. Right from the start of Farouk's reign, the Wafd\u2014who claimed to speak alone for Egypt's masses\u2014saw Farouk as a threat and Nahas Pasha worked constantly to clip the king's power, confirming the prejudices that Farouk had inherited from his father against the Wafd. When Nahas and the other Wafd leaders traveled to London to sign the Anglo-Egyptian treaty in August 1936, they stopped over in Switzerland to hold discussions with former Khedive Abbas II about how best to depose Farouk and put Abbas back on the throne.\nThe dominant figure in the Wafd was Makram Ebeid, the man widely considered to be the most intelligent Egyptian politician of the interwar era. Ebeid was a Coptic Christian, which made it unacceptable for him to be prime minister of Muslim majority Egypt, and so he exercised power via his protege Nahas, who was the official party leader. Leaders in the Wafd like Ali Maher, opposed to Ebeid and Nahas, looked to Farouk as a rival source of patronage and power. Both Ebeid and Nahas disliked Maher, regarding him as an intriguer and an opportunist, and found a further reason to dislike him even more when Maher became Farouk's favorite political adviser. The nationalistic Wafd Party was the most powerful political machine in Egypt, and when the Wafd was in power, it tended to be very corrupt and nepotistic. Those excluded from opportunities for corruption, like Maher Pasha, made much of the corruption, in particular the baleful influence of Nahas Pasha's dominating wife (who insisted on giving high government jobs to members of her family, no matter how unqualified they were). Though the Wafd Party had been founded in 1919 as the anti-British party, the fact that Nahas Pasha championed the 1936 treaty as the best way of keeping Mussolini from conquering Egypt as he had done Ethiopia, paradoxically led Lampson to favor Nahas and the Wafd as the most pro-British party, in turn leading opponents of the Wafd to attack them for \"selling out\" by signing a treaty which allowed the British to keep their garrisons in Egypt. As Farouk could not stand the overbearing Lampson, and saw the Wafd as his enemies, the king naturally aligned himself with the anti-Wafd factions and those who saw the treaty as a \"sell out\". Lampson personally favored deposing Farouk and putting his cousin Prince Muhammad Ali on the throne in order to keep the Wafd in power, but feared that a coup would destroy the popular legitimacy of Nahas.\nDespite the regency council, Farouk was determined to exercise his royal prerogatives. When Farouk asked for a new railroad station to be built outside of the Montazah palace, the council refused under the grounds that station was only used twice a year by the royal family, when they arrived at the Montazah palace to escape the summer heat in Cairo and when they returned to Cairo in the fall. Unwilling to take no for an answer, Farouk called out his servants and led them to demolish the station, forcing the regency council to approve building a new station. To counterbalance the Wafd, Farouk from the time he arrived back in Egypt started to use Islam as a political weapon, always attending the Friday prayers at the local mosques, donating to Islamic charities, and courting the Muslim Brotherhood, the only group capable of rivaling the Wafd in terms of the ability to mobilize the masses. Farouk was known in his early years as the \"pious king\" as unlike his predecessors he went out of his way to be seen as a devout Muslim. The Egyptian historian Laila Morsy wrote that Nahas never really tried to reach an understanding with the Palace, and treated Farouk as an enemy from the start, seeing him as a threat to the Wafd. The Wafd ran a powerful patronage machine in rural Egypt and the enthusiastic response of the \"fellaheen\" to the king as he threw gold coins at them during his tours of the countryside was viewed by Nahas as a major threat. Nahas sought to prevent the king from \"parading\" himself before the masses, claiming that the king's royal tours cost the government too much money, and as the Wafd was a secularist party, charged that Farouk's overt religiosity violated the constitution. However, the attacks by the secularist Wafd on Farouk for being too pious a Muslim estranged conservative Muslim opinion who rallied in defense of the \"pious king\". As the Coptic Christian minority tended to vote as a bloc for the Wafd and many prominent Wafd leaders like Ebeid were Copts, the Wafd was widely seen as the \"Coptic party\". The aggressive defense by Nahas of secularism as a core principle of Egyptian life and his attacks against the king as a danger for being a devout Muslim led to a backlash and the charge that secularism was merely a device for allowing the Coptic Christian minority to dominate Egypt at the expense of the Muslim Arab majority.\nSir Edward Ford, who served as the king's tutor, described him as a relaxed, gregarious and easy-going teenager whose first act upon meeting him in Alexandria was to take him swimming in the Mediterranean. However, Ford also described Farouk as incapable of learning and \"totally incapable of concentration\". Whenever Ford began a lesson, Farouk would immediately find a way to end it by insisting that he take Ford out for a drive to see the Egyptian countryside. In an interview in 1990, Ford described Farouk as: \"He was half a private schoolboy of nine or ten and half a sophisticated young man of twenty-three, able to sit next to a great man like Lord Rutherford and impress him a great deal, usually by bluffing. He did have a very good eye, a royal eye. In England, he was able to spot the most valuable rare book in the Trinity College library in Cambridge. It may have been pure luck. But it impressed everyone. And he spoke wonderful English and Arabic\". In turn, Farouk explained to Ford why upper-class Egyptian men were still using the titles left over from the Ottoman Empire such as pasha, bey and effendi, which Ford learned that a pasha was equivalent to being an aristocrat, a bey was equivalent to a title of knighthood and an effendi to being an esquire. Ford wrote in his notebook: \"A pasha may perhaps be defined as a person who looks important, a bey thinks himself important, an effendi hopes to be important\". When Farouk went on his tour of Upper Egypt in January 1937, going down the Nile on the royal yacht \"Kassed el Kheir\", Ford complained that Farouk never asked for a single lesson, as he was more interested in watching the latest films from Hollywood. Despite the fact that Upper Egypt was the poorest region in Egypt, various \"mudirs\" (governors) and sheikhs held camel races, gymnastic events, stick boxing matches, banquets and concerts in honor of the king, which led Ford to write of a \"record of unrivaled stardom, of which Greta Garbo might well be envious\".\nOn 29 June 1937, Farouk turned 17 under the Islamic lunar calendar, and since in the Islamic world a baby is considered to be one year old at the time of birth, by Muslim standards he was celebrating his 18th birthday. As he was considered 18, he thus attained his majority, and the Regency Council, which had irked Farouk so much, was dissolved. Farouk's coronation, held in Cairo, on 29 July 1937, outdid the coronation of George VI, which had just taken place that May, as Farouk held larger parades and fireworks displays than had taken place in London. For his coronation, Farouk reduced the fares on the Nile steamers and at least two million \"fellaheen\" (Egyptian peasants) took advantage of the price cut to attend his coronation in Cairo. Farouk's coronation speech implicitly criticized the land-owning Turco-Circassian elite that he himself was a part of, as Farouk declared: \"The poor are not responsible for their poverty but rather the wealthy. Give to the poor what they merit without their asking. A king is a good king when the poor of the land have the right to live, when the sick have the right to be healed, when the timid have the right to be tranquil and when the ignorant have the right to learn\". Farouk's coronation speech, which was unexpectedly poetic, was written by his tutor, the poet Ahmed Hassanein, who felt that the king should present himself as the friend of the \"fellaheen\" to undercut the populist Wafd Party. Further cementing Farouk's popularity was the announcement made on 24 August 1937, that he was engaged to Safinaz Zulficar, the daughter of an Alexandria judge. Farouk's decision to marry a commoner instead of a member of the Turco-Circassian aristocracy increased his popularity with the Egyptian people.\nThe marriage of the king and a commoner was presented to the world as matter of romantic love, but in fact the marriage had been arranged by Queen Nazli, who herself was a commoner and did not want her son to marry a princess from the Turco-Circassian elite who would outrank her. Queen Nazli had chosen Zulficar as her daughter-in-law because she was 15 years old and thus presumably could be molded, and came from an upper-middle-class family like herself (Zulficar's mother was a lady-in-waiting to Queen Nazli) and was fluent in French, the language of Egypt's elite. Zulficar's father refused to give permission for the marriage under the grounds that his daughter was 15 and too young to be married, and decided to take a vacation in Beirut. Unwilling to take no for an answer, Farouk phoned the police chief of Alexandria, who arrested Judge Zulficar as he was boarding the ship for Beirut, and the judge was taken to the Montaza Palace. At the Montaza palace, Farouk was waiting and bribed Judge Zulficar into granting permission for the marriage by making him into a pasha. At Salfinaz Zulficar's 16th birthday party, Farouk arrived in his Alfa Romeo automobile to propose marriage, and at the same time renamed her Farida because he believed names that started with F were lucky. (Safinaz is Persian for \"pure rose\" while Farida is Arabic for \"the only one\"; Farouk's decision to give his bride an Arabic name appealed to the masses). Farouk gave Farida a cheque for a sum in Egyptian pounds equivalent to $50,000 US dollars as a wedding dowry and a diamond ring worth just as much for the engagement. Outside of the Ras El Tin Palace, when the wedding was announced, 22 people were crushed to death and 140 badly injured when the crowd rushed forward to hear the news.\nIn the fall of 1937, Farouk dismissed the Wafd government headed by Prime Minister Mostafa El-Nahas and replaced him as Prime Minister with Mohamed Mahmoud Pasha. The immediate issue were Nahas's attempts to dismiss Farouk's \"chef de cabinet\" Ali Maher together with Farouk's Italian servants, but the more general issue was who would rule Egypt: the Crown or Parliament? As a number of ministers in the new government were pro-Italian at the same time that Mussolini was increasing the number of Italian troops in Libya, Farouk's move was seen as pro-Italian and anti-British. Lampson delivered what he called a \"little lecture\" to Farouk, reporting to London: \"It will be fatal if the boy [Farouk] comes to think he is invincible and can play any trick he likes. Personally I have always liked him and he certainly has a most remarkable intelligence and courage\u2014one begins to fear almost too much of the latter\". At a meeting at the Abdeen Palace in December 1937, where Lampson declared that London was opposed to the Mahmoud government, Lampson reported: \"I found him rather baffling to deal with\u2014in extraordinary good humour and apparently taking the whole thing rather flippantly whist at times relapsing into a very 'kingly' attitude\". Farouk told Lampson that he didn't care if the Wafd had a majority in Parliament, as he was the king and he wanted a prime minister who would obey him, not Parliament. Lampson ended the meeting by saying \"Quos deus vult perdere prius dementat\" (\"Those God wishes to destroy, he first makes mad\").\nOn 20 January 1938, Farouk married Farida in a sumptuous public event with Cairo lit up by floodlights and colored lights on the public buildings while boats on the Nile had likewise had colored lights, making the river seem a ribbon of light at night. Farida wore a wedding dress that Farouk had bought her, which was handmade in Paris and cost about $30,000 US dollars. The royal wedding made Farouk even more popular with the Egyptian people, and he dissolved parliament for elections in April 1938 with the full prestige and wealth of the Crown being used to support parties opposed to the Wafd. The prime minister, Nahas Pasha, used the familiar Wafd slogan \"The king reigns; he does not rule\", but the Wafd suffered a massive defeat in the election. In 1938, Farouk was approached by the Iranian ambassador with a message from Reza Khan, the Shah of Iran, asking that his sister be married to Mohammad Reza, the Crown Prince of Iran. When a group of Iranian emissaries arrived in Cairo bearing gifts from Reza Khan such as a \"diamond necklace, diamond brooch, diamond earrings\", Farouk was not impressed, taking the Iranian delegation on a tour of his five palaces to show them proper royal splendor and asked if there was anything comparable in Iran. Nonetheless, Farouk agreed in a joint press communique issued with Reza Khan on 26 May 1938, that Princess Fawzia would marry Crown Prince Mohammad Reza, who first learned that he was now engaged to Fawzia when he read the press release.\nFarouk broke with Muslim tradition by taking Queen Farida everywhere with him, and letting her go unveiled. On 17 November 1938, Farouk became a father when Farida gave birth to Princess Farial, a considerable disappointment as Farouk wanted a son, all the more because he knew his cousin, Prince Muhammad Ali, was scheming to take the throne. In March 1939, Farouk sent the royal yacht \"Mahroussa\" to Iran to pick up the Crown Prince. On 15 March 1939, Mohammad Reza married Fawzia in Cairo and afterwards Farouk took his brother-in-law on a tour of Egypt, showing him his five palaces, the Pyramids, Al-Azhar University and other sites in Egypt. In August 1939, Farouk appointed his favorite politician, Maher Pasha, prime minister.\nReign.\nWorld War II.\nEgypt remained neutral in World War II, but under heavy pressure from Lampson, Farouk broke diplomatic relations with Germany in September 1939. On 7 April 1940, Queen Farida gave birth to a second daughter, Princess Fawzia, which greatly upset Farouk. After Fawzia's birth, Farouk's marriage started to become strained as he wanted a son. In Egypt, a son was much more valued than daughters for the kingdom's legacy; according to Egyptian law at the time a daughter could not inherit the throne, and Farouk was becoming widely viewed as lacking in masculinity due to the absence of a son. Farouk consulted various doctors, who advised him to eat foods that were felt to increase sex drive, and Farouk became something of a bulimic, eating excessively and later becoming overweight. Suspicions that Queen Farida was having an affair with aristocrat Wahid Yussri imposed strains on the marriage.\nUnder the 1936 treaty, Britain had the right to defend Egypt from an invasion, which turned the Western Desert of Egypt into a battlefield when Italy declared war on Britain on 10 June 1940, and invaded Egypt. Under the 1936 treaty, the Egyptians were obligated to assist the British with logistical services, but Maher frustrated this by appointing corrupt bureaucrats to positions such as presidency of the Egyptian state railroad who demanded \"baksheesh\" (bribe) in exchange for co-operating. Owing to the strategic importance of Egypt, ultimately 2 million soldiers from Britain, Australia, India and New Zealand arrived in Egypt. Lampson was against Egypt declaring war on the Axis powers despite the Italian invasion of Egypt as having Egypt as a belligerent would mean Egypt would have the right to attend the peace conference once the Allies had won the war, and as Lampson put it, the Egyptians would make demands that would be \"embarrassing\" for the British at such a peace conference.\nFarouk was greatly upset in 1940 when he learned that his mother, Queen Nazli, whom he viewed as a rather chaste figure, was having an affair with his former tutor, Prince Ahmed Hassanein, who as a desert explorer, poet, Olympic athlete and aviator, was one of the most famous Egyptians alive. When Farouk caught Hassanein reading passages from the Koran to his mother in her bedroom, he pulled out a handgun and threatened to shoot them, saying \"you are disgracing the memory of my father, and if I end it by killing one of you, then God will forgive me, for it is according to our holy law as you both know\". Distracting Farouk from thoughts of matricide was a meeting on 17 June 1940, with Lampson who demanded that Farouk dismiss Maher as prime minister and General al-Misri as chief of staff of the Egyptian Army, saying both were pro-Axis. Lampson wrote to London: \"I repeated I hoped that he realized we were in deadly earnest. He said he knew that full well, and cryptically, that so was he\".\nOn 28 June 1940, Farouk dismissed Maher Pasha as prime minister, but refused to appoint Nahas Pasha as prime minister as Lampson wanted, saying that Nahas was full of \"Bolshevik schemes\". The new prime minister was Hassan Sabry, whom Lampson felt was acceptable, and despite his previous threats to kill him, Prince Hassanein was made \"chef de cabinet\". Prince Hassanein had been educated at Oxford University and unusually for an Egyptian, was an Anglophile, having fond memories of his time in England when he studied at Oxford. Lampson had come to detest Farouk by this time, and his favorite advice to London was \"the only thing to do is kick the boy out\". In November 1940, the Prime Minister Sabry died of a heart attack when delivering his opening speech to Parliament and was replaced with Hussein Serry Pasha. Farouk felt very lonely as a king, not having any real friends, made worse by the very public feud between Queen Farida and Queen Nazli as the former hated the latter for her attempts to dominate her. Farouk's best friend was Pulli, who was more of a \"man Friday\". Maher had made contacts on behalf of the king with General al-Misri, on \"sick leave\" since June 1940; with a group of anti-British officers in the Egyptian Army, and Hassan el Banna, the Supreme Guide of the Muslim Brotherhood, to discuss a possible anti-British uprising when the Axis broke through the British lines. Egypt together with the American South was one of the few places in the world suitable for growing cotton, a water-intensive and labor-intensive crop that was traditionally known as \"white gold\" owing to the high prices it fetched. World War II created a huge demand for cotton, and after the United States entered the war in late 1941, so many American men were called up for service with the armed forces that Egypt became the only source of cotton for the Allies. For those who owned farmland in Egypt on which cotton was grown, the Second World War was a time of prosperity as the high prices of cotton counteracted the effects of wartime inflation.\nThe Italians had only advanced within of Egypt before stopping at Sidi Barrani, and on 9 December 1940, the British launched an offensive that drove the Italians back into Libya. In response, in January 1941, German forces were dispatched to the Mediterranean to assist the Italians and on 12 February 1941, the Afrika Korps under the command of Erwin Rommel arrived in Libya. Starting on 31 March 1941, a Wehrmacht offensive drove the British out of Libya and into Egypt. As 95% of Egyptians live in the Nile river valley, the fighting in the Western Desert only affected the Bedouin nomads who lived in the desert. At the same time in 1941 that Rommel was inflicting a series of defeats on the British in the Western Desert, Farouk wrote to Adolf Hitler promising him that when the Wehrmacht entered the Nile river valley, he would bring Egypt into the war on the Axis side. The American historian Gerhard Weinberg wrote that the fact that Farouk wanted to see his country occupied by Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany was not a sign of great wisdom on his part, but rather because he never understood \"that Axis rule of Egypt was likely to be far more oppressive than British\".\nDuring the hardships of the Second World War, criticism was levelled at Farouk for his lavish lifestyle. His decision not to put out the lights at his palace in Alexandria when the city was blacked out because of German and Italian bombing was deemed particularly offensive by the Egyptian people. This was a large contrast to the British royal family back in England, who were well known to have an opposite reaction to the bombings near their home. Owing to the continuing British occupation of Egypt, many Egyptians, Farouk included, were positively disposed towards Germany and Italy, and despite the presence of British troops, Egypt remained officially neutral until the final year of the war. Consequently, Farouk's Italian servants were not interned, and there is an unconfirmed story that Farouk told British Ambassador Sir Miles Lampson (who had an Italian wife), \"I'll get rid of my Italians when you get rid of yours\". Many Italians in Egypt, mostly men, were interned in British concentration camps, such as the notorious camp Fayed, outside of Cairo. Treatment of these prisoners in those camps was extreme and physically excessively harsh, many losing inordinate amounts of body weight and contracting typhus. In January 1942, when Farouk was away on vacation, Lampson pressured Serry Pasha into breaking diplomatic relations with Vichy France. As the king was not consulted about the severing of ties with Vichy France, Farouk used this violation of the constitution as an excuse to dismiss Serry and announced he planned to appoint Maher as prime minister again. Serry knew that his government was likely to be defeated on a motion of no confidence when Parliament opened on 3 February 1942, and in the meantime demonstrations by students at Cairo University and Al-Azhar University had broken out, calling for a German victory.\nFollowing a ministerial crisis in February 1942, the British government, through its ambassador in Egypt, Sir Miles Lampson, pressed Farouk to have a Wafd or Wafd-coalition government replace Hussein Sirri Pasha's government. Lampson had Sir Walter Monckton flown in from London to draft an abdication decree for Farouk to sign as Monckton had drafted the abdication decree for Edward VIII and it was agreed that Prince Muhammad Ali would become the new king. Lampson wanted to depose Farouk, but General Robert Stone and Oliver Lyttleton both argued that if Farouk agreed to appoint Nahas Pasha prime minister that the public reaction to \"throwing the boy out for giving us at 9 p.m. the answer which we should have welcomed at 6 p.m.\" would be highly negative. Reluctantly, Lampson agreed that Farouk could stay if he agreed to make Nahas prime minister. Farouk asked his military how long the Egyptian Army could hold Cairo against the British and was told at most they could for two hours. On the night of 4 February 1942, soldiers surrounded Abdeen Palace in Cairo and Lampson presented Farouk with an ultimatum. While a battalion of infantry took up their positions around the palace with the roar of tanks could be heard in the distance, Lampson arrived at the Abdeen Palace in his Rolls-Royce together with General Stone. As the doors to Abdeen Palace were locked, one of the officers present used his revolver to shoot open the door and Lampson stormed in, demanding to see the king at once. Farouk initially started to sign the abdication degree that Lampson had placed on his desk, but Prince Hassanein, who was present as a sort of mediator, intervened and spoke to Farouk in Turkish, a language which he knew that Lampson did not speak. Unknown to Lampson, three of Farouk's Albanian bodyguards were hiding behind the curtains in his study with orders to shoot the ambassador if he should touch Farouk. Prince Hassanein's intervention had its effect, and Farouk turned to Lampson to say he was giving in. Farouk capitulated, and Nahhas formed a government shortly thereafter. However, the humiliation meted out to Farouk, and the actions of the Wafd in co-operating with the British and taking power, lost support for both the British and the Wafd among both civilians and, more importantly, the Egyptian military. At the time, the incident caused the Egyptian people to rally around their king, on 11 February 1942 (his birthday by Western standards), he received was loudly cheered by the crowd on Abdeen Square. General Stone wrote Farouk a letter of apology for the incident. Air Marshal William Sholto Douglas wrote that Lampson had made a huge error in \"treating King Farouk as if he were nothing but a naughty and rather silly boy... Farouk was naughty and he was still very young... but to my mind, and taking a hard-headed view, he was also the King of Egypt\".\nAfter the humiliation of the Abdeen Palace incident, Farouk lost interest in politics for the moment, and he abandoned himself to a lifestyle of hedonism as he became obsessed with \"collecting\" women by sleeping with them, having his closest friend, the Italian valet Antonio Pulli, bring in fair-skinned women from the dance halls and brothels of Cairo and Alexandria to his palaces for sex. Despite his great wealth, Farouk was a kleptomaniac who always took something valuable such as a painting or a piano from whatever member of the Egyptian elite he stayed with, as no one could say no to the king and if he indicated he wanted something, his subjects had to give it to him. When one of the daughters of the Ades family, one of the richest Jewish families in Egypt, rebuffed Farouk's advances, he arrived unannounced at the Ades family's estate on an island in the Nile with Pulli telling the Adeses that the king had come to hunt the gazelles. Rather than have the kleptomaniac Farouk stay at their estate and wipe out the gazelles on their island, the Adeses agreed that their 16-year-old daughter would go to the Abdeen palace to be courted by the king.\nIn April 1942, at a luncheon with Lampson and King George II of Greece, Farouk refused to speak to Lampson and told George that he would be wasting his time meeting the Wafd ministers as they were all \"ces canailles\" (\"these scoundrels\"). On 2 July 1942, Lampson visited the Abdeen Palace to tell Farouk that there was a real possibility of Axis forces taking Cairo and suggested that the king should flee to Khartoum if the Afrika Corps took Cairo. Farouk who had no intention of decamping to Khartoum simply walked out of the room. After the Battle of El Alamein, the Axis forces were driven out of Egypt and back into Libya, which caused Farouk to change his views over to a markedly pro-British direction. Air Marshal Douglas, one of the few British people whom Farouk was friends with, gave him the uniform of a RAF officer, which became the king's favorite uniform.\nFarouk had something of a mania for collecting things ranging from Coca-Cola bottles to European art to ancient Egyptian antiques. Farouk became addicted to eating and drinking soft-drinks, ordering his French chefs at the Abdeen palace to cook enormous meals of the finest French food, which he devoured and which caused him to become obese. Farouk came to be known as \"the king of the night\" owing to the amount of time he spent in the exclusive \"Auberge des Pyramides\" nightclub in Cairo, where he spent his time socializing, smoking cigars and drinking orangeade. Farouk also indulged in much childish behavior at the \"Auberge des Pyramides\" like throwing bread balls at the other patrons. Farouks's grandfather, Ismail the Magnificent, had rebuilt Cairo in the style of Paris and during Farouk's reign, Cairo was considered to be a glamorous city, the most Westernized and wealthy city in the Middle East. As a result, various celebrities from the West were constantly passing through Cairo and were invited to socialize with the king.Farouk also met various Allied leaders. South African Prime Minister Jan Christian Smuts called Farouk \"surprisingly intelligent\". U.S. Senator Richard Russell Jr., who represented Georgia, a cotton-growing state, found he had much in common with Farouk and stated he was \"an attractive, clear-eyed young man\u00a0... very much on the job\u00a0... well above the ordinary run of rulers\". The American financier and diplomat Winthrop W. Aldrich discovered that Farouk was very informed about the workings of the international gold market, saying the king had a sharp eye for business. Air Marshal Douglas wrote \"I began to genuinely like Farouk. There was no indication then there was anything that was vicious about him, although at times his flippancy became annoying. Another failing of his was that he appeared to be almost fanatically keen on acquiring great wealth\u00a0... he revealed all too clearly his shortsightedness in stating openly that one of his main interests in life was to increase that fortune. This led him into currying favor with the rich people in Egypt, as they did with him, at the expense of the common people, in whom he had little or no interest\". Douglas concluded that the king was \"an intelligent young man\u00a0... he was by no means the fool that he appeared to be through the stupid way in which he quite often behaved in public\". However, a meeting with the British prime minister Winston Churchill in August 1942 when Farouk stole his watch did not make the best impression; though Farouk later returned the watch, presenting his theft of Churchill's watch as merely a practical joke, saying he knew \"the English had a great sense of humor\". Farouk had pardoned a thief in exchange for teaching him how to be a pickpocket, a skill that Farouk used on Churchill, much to the latter's chagrin.\nIn the time honored fashion, the Wafd government headed by Nahas proved to be an extremely corrupt and Nahas is widely considered to be one of the most corrupt Egyptian prime ministers of all time. Nahas fell out with his patron, Makram Ebeid, and expelled him from the Wafd at the instigation of his wife. Ebeid retaliated with \"The Black Book\", a detailed expose published in the spring of 1943 listing 108 cases of major corruption involving Nahas and his wife. On 29 March 1943, Ebeid visited the Abdeen Palace to present Farouk with a copy of \"The Black Book\" and asked that he dismiss Nahas for corruption. Farouk attempted to use the furor caused by \"The Black Book\" as an excuse to dismiss the extremely unpopular Nahas, who had become Egypt's most hated man, but Lampson warned him via Prince Hassanein that he would be deposed if he dismissed his prime minister. Lampson in a dispatch to Sir Anthony Eden, who was once again Foreign Secretary, argued that Egypt needed political calm and to allow Farouk to dismiss Nahas would cause chaos as the latter would start \"ranting\" against the British. General Stone recommended that Lampson not be allowed to depose Farouk under the grounds that such a step was likely to cause anti-British rioting in Egypt which would require putting down, which Stone was opposed to on public relations grounds. At the same time, Farouk, notwithstanding his own frequent unfaithfulness, had become enraged when he learned that Queen Farida was having an affair with the British painter, Simon Elwes, who had to flee Egypt to escape. Lampson taunted Farouk when he learned that Queen Farida was pregnant again, saying he hoped she was bearing a son and that the boy was Farouk's.\nOne of Farouk's mistresses, Irene Guinle, who was his \"official mistress\" in the years 1941\u20131943, described him as something of an immature \"man-child\" having no interest in politics and given to childish behavior like making bread balls at restaurants \"to flip at the fancy people coming in and watch how they'd act when he hit the mark. How he roared with that laugh\". Guinle in an interview stated: \"Farouk never wrote a letter, never read a paper, never listened to music. His idea of culture was movies. He never even played cards until I made the mistake of buying him a 'shoe' and teaching him how to play \"chemin de fer\". He got hooked on that. Farouk was an insomniac. He had three telephones by his bed, which he would use to ring up his so-called friends at three in the morning and invite them to come over to his palace to play cards. No one could refuse the king\".\nThe British novelist Barbara Skelton replaced Guinle as the \"official mistress\" in 1943. Skelton called Farouk very immature and \"a complete philistine\", saying: \"He was very adolescent. He didn't have the stuff to be a great king, he was too childish. But he never lost his temper, he was incredibly sweet, with a good sense of humor\".\nIn November 1943, Farouk went driving with Pulli in his red Cadillac to Ismalia to see a yacht he just purchased when he was involved in an automobile incident when his attempt to bypass a British Army truck by speeding caused him to hit another car head-on. An attempt to place Farouk on a stretcher failed when the overweight king turned out to be too heavy, causing the stretcher to break under his weight. Farouk had suffered two broken ribs as a result of the car accident, but he liked being in a British Army hospital so much, flirting with the nurses, that he pretended to be injured far longer than what he really was. As a result, Farouk missed the Cairo Conference when the U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, the British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and the Chinese Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek all arrived in Cairo to discuss war plans against Japan for 1944, though he appeared to have no regrets, preferring to spend his time flirting with the nurses and buying them gifts that were worth more than their annual salaries. On 15 December 1943, Farouk was finally forced to end his convalescence when Farida gave birth to another daughter, Princess Fadia, which disappointed him, and caused him to lash out in anger against her for only giving him daughters. Reflecting a continuing interest in the Balkans, the region where his family came from, Farouk by 1943 hosted King Zog I of Albania, King Peter II of Yugoslavia and King George II of Greece, telling all three kings that he wanted Egypt to play a role in the Balkans after the war, as he was proud of his Albanian ancestry.\nIn late 1943, Farouk started a policy giving support to student and working men's association and in early 1944 paid a visit to Upper Egypt, when he donated money to victims of the malaria epidemic. In April 1944, Farouk attempted to sack Nahas as prime minister over the latter's response to the malaria epidemic in Upper Egypt. Reflecting the importance of controlling patronage in Egypt, Nahas Pasha had gone on a separate relief tour of Upper Egypt apart from the king and founded a relief organization, the Nahas Institute, in his own name instead of the king as was normal to treat the thousands sickened with malaria. Farouk told Lampson that \"there could not be two kings in Egypt\" and the \"semi-royal\" nature of Nahas's tour of Upper Egypt was an insult to him. Farouk attempted to soften the blow by announcing the new prime minister would be the well known Anglophile Prince Hassanein, but Lampson refused to accept him. Lampson attempted to have Farouk deposed again, sending off a telegram to Churchill advising him to take \"direct control\" of Egypt. Lampson once again threatened Farouk, who remained flippant and dismissive. When Prince Hassanein tried to persuade Lampson to accept the dismissal of the deeply corrupt Wafd government as an improvement, the ambassador was unmoved, leading the normally Anglophile Hassanein to say the Egyptians were getting tired of British influence in their internal affairs. By 1944, the withdrawal of much the British garrison in Egypt together with the view that to depose Farouk would make a nationalist martyr led to much of the British Foreign Office feeling that Lampson's constant plans to replace the king would do more harm than good. Lord Moyne, the junior British foreign minister in charge of Middle Eastern affairs, told Lampson that his plans to depose Farouk in 1944 would damage Britain's moral position in the world and force the British to send more troops to Egypt to put down the expected riots when the main concern was the Italian theater of operations. General Bernard Paget rejected Lampson's plans to depose Farouk as the Egyptian Army was loyal to him, and to depose the king would mean going to war against Egypt, which Paget called an unnecessary distraction.\nThe day before Farouk was tentatively due to be deposed, Prince Hassanein arrived at the British Embassy with a letter for Lampson saying: \"I am commanded by His Majesty to inform Your Excellency that he has decided to leave the present Government in Office for the time being\". As Nahas became unpopular, he sought to embrace Arab nationalism to rally support, having Egypt join the Arab League in October 1944 and speaking more and more about \"the Palestine question\". In October 1944, when Lampson went away for a vacation in South Africa, Farouk finally dismissed Nahas as prime minister on 8 October 1944, and replaced him with Ahmed Maher, the brother of Ali Maher. The dismissal of Nahas was seen by Lampson as a personal defeat, who complained in his diary that he would never have a politician \"in our pocket\" like him again, and was seen as a decisive turning point when Farouk had finally outwitted Lampson. But at the same time, Lampson admitted that Nahas by his corruption had become a liability, and that Britain could not continue to support a corrupt government in the long run, as the British people would not tolerate going to war with Egypt to keep someone like Nahas in office.\nOn 6 November 1944, Lord Moyne was assassinated in Cairo by two members of the extreme right-wing Zionist group, Lehi, better known as the Stern Gang. The two assassins, Eliyahu Bet-Zuri and Eliyahu Hakim, gunned down Lord Moyne and his chauffeur, but were then captured by the Cairo police. Afterwards, Bet-Zuri and Hakim were tried and sentenced to death by an Egyptian court. Farouk came under strong pressure from American Zionist groups to pardon the two assassins while Lampson pressured him not to pardon the assassins. For a time, Farouk escaped the matter by sailing on the royal yacht \"Mahroussa\" to Saudi Arabia to go on the \"haji\" to Mecca and meet King Ibn Saud. In March 1945, the assassins of Lord Moyne were hanged, and for the first time, Farouk was accused in the United States of being anti-Semitic.\nFarouk declared war on the Axis Powers, long after the fighting in Egypt's Western Desert had ceased. On 13 February 1945, Farouk met President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the United States on abroad the cruiser USS \"Quincy\", anchored in the Great Bitter Lake. Farouk seemed confused by the purpose of the meeting with Roosevelt, talking much about how after the war he hoped more American tourists would visit Egypt and Egyptian-American trade would increase. Though the meeting consisted mostly of pleasantries, Roosevelt did give Farouk the gift of a Douglas C-47 plane, to add to his airplane collection. After meeting Roosevelt, the king met Churchill who according to Lampson:told Farouk that he should take a definite line in regard to the improvement of the social conditions in Egypt. He ventured to affirm that nowhere in the world were the conditions of extreme wealth and extreme poverty so glaring. What an opportunity for a young Sovereign to come forward and champion the interests and living conditions of his people. Why not take from the rich Pashas some of their superabundant wealth and devote it to the improvement of the living conditions of the \"fellaheen\"?. Farouk was more interested in learning if Egypt would be allowed to join the new United Nations and learned from Churchill that only nations that were at war with the Axis powers would be allowed to join the United Nations, which would replace the League of Nations after the war.\nIn 1919, it had been a great humiliation for the Egyptians that Egypt had been excluded from the Paris Peace Conference that led to the Treaty of Versailles and the League of Nations, causing the revolution of 1919. Farouk was determined that this time that Egypt would be a founding member of the United Nations, which would show the world that the country was ending British influence in Egyptian affairs. On 24 February 1945, Prime Minister Maher had the Chamber of Deputies issue declarations of war against Germany and Japan, and as he was leaving the Chamber, he was assassinated by Mahmoud Isawi, a member of the pro-Axis Young Egypt Society. Isawi was shaking Maher's hand and then pulled out his handgun, shooting the prime minister three times while screaming that he had betrayed Egypt by declaring war on Germany and Japan. When Lampson arrived at the Koubbeh Palace to see Farouk, he wrote he was shocked instead to see instead \"it was the wicked Aly Maher who was receiving condolences\". As a result, Egypt attended the peace conference in San Francisco in April 1945 that founded the United Nations.\nThe new prime minister, Mahmoud El Nokrashy Pasha, demanded that the British finally keep the terms of the 1936 treaty by pulling out of the Nile river valley while university students rioted in Cairo demanding the British leave Egypt altogether. Lampson by 1945 was widely seen in Whitehall as a man with an unrealistic view of Anglo-Egyptian relations and only Lampson's friendship with Churchill kept him on as an ambassador in Cairo. The new Labour government that came into office in July 1945 wanted a new relationship with Egypt, and Farouk let it be known he wanted a new British ambassador. The new Labour Foreign Secretary, Ernest Bevin, a man of working-class origins, found the aristocratic Lampson to be a snob, and moreover Lampson's vehement disapproval of the Labour government's policy towards India further isolated him. For all these reasons, Bevin was well disposed to Farouk's entreaties to replace Lampson. Farouk had vaguely promised to carry out social reforms, a major concern in London as the wartime inflation had led to increases in support for the Egyptian Communist Party on the left and the Muslim Brotherhood on the right, and was willing to negotiate a new relationship with Britain. Moreover, once the war had ended, the Wafd had returned to its traditional anti-British political position, which led Whitehall to conclude that Farouk was London's best hope of keeping Egypt in the British sphere of influence. The Egyptian ambassador in London passed on messages from Farouk blaming Lampson all the problems in Anglo-Egyptian relations, and stated that Farouk would be willing to return to his father's policies of opposing the Wafd and of seeking British \"moral support\" after the war.\nDecline.\nEgypt ended the Second World War as the richest country in the Middle East, owing largely to the high prices of cotton. In 1945 in a reversal of the usual roles, Egypt was a creditor nation to the United Kingdom, with the British government owing Egypt \u00a3400 million. The stark income disparities of Egyptian society meant the wealth of Egypt was very unequally distributed with the kingdom having 500 millionaires while the \"fellaheen\" lived in extreme poverty. In 1945, a medical study showed that 80% of Egyptians suffered from bilharzia and ophthalmia, both diseases that were easily preventable and treatable. The authors of the study noted both bilharzia and ophthalmia were spread by waterborne parasitic worms, and the prevalence of both diseases could easily be eliminated in Egypt by providing people with safe sources of drinking water. The bumbling response of the Egyptian authorities to the cholera epidemic in 1947 that killed 80,000 people was an additional cause of criticism as cholera is caused by drinking water contaminated with feces, and the entire epidemic could have been avoided if only ordinary Egyptians had sources of clean drinking water. King Farouk had traditionally posed as the friend of the poor, but by 1945 such gestures that the king liked to engage in such as throwing gold coins at the \"fellaheen\" or dropping ping-pong balls from his plane that could be redeemed for candy were no longer felt to be sufficient. Increasingly, demands were being made that the king should engage in social reforms instead of theatrical gestures like handing out gold coins during royal visits, and as Farouk was unwilling to consider land reform or improving the water sanitation, his popularity began to decline. Farouk's social life also started to damage his image. The American journalist Norbert Schiller wrote \"Farouk was seen frequently womanizing at the hottest night spots in Cairo and Alexandria. In Egypt, the king's gallivanting was put under wraps by the palace censorship office, but abroad pictures of a fat balding king surrounded by Europe's social elite were splashed across the world's tabloids.\" Farouk's only act of self-restraint was that he refused to drink alcohol as however much his lifestyle departed from the one recommended by the Koran, he could not bring himself to break the Muslim prohibition on alcohol.\nFarouk's chief advisers in ruling Egypt starting in 1945 were his \"kitchen cabinet\" consisting of his right-hand man, Antonio Pulli together with the king's Lebanese press secretary Karim Thabet; Elias Andraous, an ethnic Greek from Alexandria whom Farouk valued for his business skills; and Edmond Galhan, a Lebanese arms dealer whose official title was \"general purveyor to the Royal Palaces\", but whose real job was to engage in black market activities for the king. Prince Hassanein warned Farouk against his \"kitchen cabinet\", saying all of them were greedy, unscrupulous men who abused the king's trust to enrich themselves, but Farouk disregarded his advice. In February 1946, Prince Hassanein was killed in an automobile accident, and a secret marriage contract between him and Queen Nazli was found that was dated 1937, which infuriated Farouk.\nAfter much lobbying on the part of Farouk, the new Labour government in London decided to replace Lampson with Sir Ronald Campbell as the British ambassador in Cairo, and on 9 March 1946, Lampson left Cairo, much to the king's glee. In May 1946, Farouk granted asylum to former king of Italy, Victor Emmanuel III, who had abdicated on 9 May 1946. Farouk was repaying a family debt as Victor Emmanuel's father, King Umberto I, had granted asylum to Farouk's grandfather, Ismail the Magnificent, in 1879, but as Victor Emmanuel had supported the Fascist regime, his arrival in Egypt did much damage to Farouk's image. In June 1946, Farouk granted asylum to Amin al-Husseini, the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, who escaped from France where he was being held on charges of being a war criminal, arriving in Egypt on a forged passport. Farouk did not care that al-Husseini was urgently wanted in Yugoslavia on charges of being a Nazi war criminal for his role in organizing the massacres of Bosnian Serbs and Jews. Farouk wanted the British to keep the 1936 agreement by pulling their troops out of Cairo and Alexandria, and felt having notoriously Anglophobic rabble-rousing Grand Mufti in Egypt would be a useful way of threatening them. However, the way that Farouk addressed al-Hussenini as the \"king of Jerusalem\" appeared to suggest that he envisioned the Grand Mufti as the future leader of a Palestinian state. Starting in June 1946, the British did finally pull out of the Nile river valley and henceforward the only place the British Army were stationed at in Egypt was at the gigantic base around the Suez Canal. In August 1946, the British pulled out of the Citadel in Cairo. By September 1946, the British pull-out from the Nile valley was complete. Farouk continued to press the British to leave Egypt altogether, but the question of who would control the Sudan led to the collapse of the talks in December 1946. Farouk considered the Sudan to be part of Egypt, and wanted the Anglo-Egyptian condominium over the Sudan to end at the same time that the British would pull out of Egypt, which the British were unwilling to accept.\nHaving the charismatic al-Husseini in Egypt had the effect of focusing attention on the Palestine issue, a matter which most Egyptians had previously ignored, all the more so when al-Husseini made an alliance with Hassan al-Banna, the Supreme Guide of the fundamentalist Muslim Brotherhood, which was rapidly becoming the most powerful mass movement in Egypt with over a million members. Farouk himself welcomed the Grand Mufti to royal receptions, and his speeches calling for \"jihad\" against Zionism did much to put the \"Palestine Question\" on the public agenda. Farouk himself was not personally anti-Semitic, having a Jewish mistress, the singer Lilianne Cohen, better known by her stage name Camelia, but given increasing discontent with the very stark income inequalities in Egypt, Farouk felt taking a militantly anti-Zionist line was the best way of distracting public attention. At the Royal Automobile Club in Cairo, Farouk engaged in all night gambling sessions with rich Egyptian Jews despite his professed anti-Zionism and often joked: \"Bring me my Zionist enemies so I can take their money!\" In December 1947, a demonstration organized by the Muslim Brotherhood in Cairo calling for Egyptian intervention in Palestine drew 100,000 people. In November 1947, when Britain announced it was terminating the Palestine Mandate in May 1948, a civil war erupted between the Jewish and Arab populations of Palestine, and the fighting was very extensively covered by the Egyptian media. The stories about atrocities, both real and imagined, against the Palestinians, served to greatly agitate the Egyptian people. Furthermore, there was a widespread belief in Egypt that once the British left Palestine and the Zionists proclaimed a new state to be called Israel, that the resulting war would be an easy \"march on Jerusalem\" lasting only a few days. In December 1947, a summit of the leaders of the Arab League was held in Cairo to discuss what to do when the Mandate of Palestine came to an end in May 1948. King Abdullah I of Jordan wanted all of Palestine for himself and dismissed Farouk as a pseudo-Arab who should not even be attending the summit, saying with reference to Farouk's Albanian ancestry: \"You do not make a gentleman out of a Balkan farmer's son simply by making him a king\".Reflecting the influence of King Ibn' Saud of Saudi Arabia who spoke in the same way, Farouk often described Zionism as a ploy by the Soviet Union to take over the Middle East, calling the Zionists Jewish \"communists\" from Eastern Europe who were working on Moscow's instructions to \"wreck\" the traditional order in the Middle East. Both Farouk and Ibn' Saud detested Abdullah, and both preferred that a Palestinian state headed by the Grand Mufti of Jerusalem be created rather than see Palestine annexed to Jordan or becoming a Jewish state. Farouk did not bother to tell the prime minister Mahmoud El Nokrashy Pasha about his decision for war with Israel, who only learned of his decision a few days before the war was due to start on 15 May 1948, from the Defense Minister and Chief of the General Staff. Farouk was so convinced that the war would be a victorious \"march on Jerusalem\" that he had already started planning the victory parade in Cairo before the war started. Farouk was described as \"like some boy playing with so many lead soldiers\" as he involved himself deeply in the military planning, personally deciding where his army would march when it invaded Palestine. As late as 13 May 1948, Norakshy Pasha was assuring foreign diplomats that Egypt would not attack Israel when it was expected to be proclaimed on 15 May, and Egypt's intervention in the war took most observers by surprise. In the diplomacy in the run-up to the war, Egypt was generally seen as a moderate state with Egyptian diplomats repeatedly saying that their country was opposed to a military solution to the \"Palestine Question\". Nokrashy in 1947 asked in private if it was possible for the United States to take over the Palestine Mandate when the British left, saying he did not want a war.\nIn May 1948, the prime minister Mahmoud El Nokrashy Pasha advised against going to war with Israel, saying the Egyptian Army was not ready for war. However, King Farouk overruled him, as he feared the growing popularity of the Muslim Brotherhood, which was clamoring for war with Israel. Farouk declared that Egypt would fight Israel as otherwise he feared the Muslim Brotherhood would overthrow him. The war with Israel ended in disaster with the Egyptian Army fighting very poorly and Edmond Galhan of the king's \"kitchen cabinet\" making a fortune by selling the Egyptian Army defective Italian Army rifles left over from World War II, a matter which greatly angered many Egyptian officers. Though the defective rifles were not the only reason why Egypt was defeated, many Egyptians came to be fixated on the issue, believing if it were not for Galhan, then Egypt would have been victorious. It was after being defeated by Israel that the Abdeen Palace incident of 1942 started to be viewed in Egypt as an abject, contemptible surrender, which showed Farouk's cowardice and general lack of leadership.\nThe Muslim Brotherhood, which had been so hawkish on war with Israel, turned its fury against the government in reaction to the defeats inflicted by Israel and in October 1948, a Brother killed the Cairo police chief, followed up by the governor of the Cairo province. On 17 November 1948, Farouk divorced the very popular Queen Farida which, coming in middle of the losing war with Israel, was a profound shock to the Egyptian people. On the same day, the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlevi, divorced Princess Fawzia. Farouk and Mohammad Reza had planned to divorce their wives on the same day to distract the media from giving too much attention to either of their stories. On 28 December 1948, Prime Minister Nokrashy Pasha was assassinated by a Brother disguised as a policeman. In January 1949, Egypt signed an armistice with Israel with the only gain being the Gaza Strip. In February 1949, the Supreme Guide of the Brotherhood, al-Banna, who called for Farouk's overthrow in response to the armistice with Israel, was shot by a Cairo policeman, and was taken to the hospital, where the police prevented him from receiving blood transfusions, causing his death later the same day. Shortly afterward, al-Hussenini left Egypt for Lebanon.In the meantime, Farouk spent his nights at the \"Auberge des Pyramides\" nightclub with Cohen or his latest mistress, the French singer Annie Berrier. At the same time, Farouk was engaged in a relationship with the American model Patricia \"Honeychilde\" Wilder, who stated in an interview that of all her lovers, he was the one who had the best sense of humour and made her laugh the most. In September 1949, when Jefferson Caffery arrived in Cairo as the new U.S. ambassador and met Farouk for the first time, the king told Caffery (who came from Louisiana) that just as the South had its blacks good only for picking cotton, so too did Egypt have its \"fellaheen\" likewise only good for picking cotton. Karim Thabet of the \"kitchen cabinet\", a man whom Caffery called a \"jackal\", convinced Farouk that the best way of renewing his popularity was to marry again, saying the Egyptian people loved royal weddings and to marry a commoner again would show his populist side. Caffery reported that the king had listed his requirements for his new bride that she be of the \"grande bourgeoise\" class, be at least 16 years old, be an only child, and be of Egyptian descent only. Thabet selected Narriman Sadek to be the new bride of the king, notwithstanding she was already engaged to Zaki Hashem, a PhD candidate in economics at Harvard University who was working in New York as a United Nations economist. After Farouk had made Sadek's father a bey, he broke off her engagement to Hashem who complained to the American press that the king had stolen his fianc\u00e9e and broken his heart. After Farouk announced his engagement to Sadek, he sent her off to Rome to be taught how to be a proper cultured lady to make her fit to be a queen. In January 1950, in a volte-face that stunned observers of Egyptian politics, Thabet arranged an alliance between the king and Nahas Pasha. Caffery reported to Washington:The proposal was that the King would receive Nahas in private audience prior to summoning a Wafd government and that if the King were not satisfied by his conversation with Nahas, Nahas gave his word of honor that he would retire from the leadership of the Wafd Party\u00a0... The King agreed to this proposal and was completely captivated by Nahas, who tactfully started the interview by swearing that his one desire in life was to kiss the King's hand and to remain always worthy in His Majesty's opinion of being allowed to repeat the performance. At this point Nahas went on his knees before the King who according to Thabet was so charmed that he assisted him to his feet with the words, \"Rise, Mr. Prime Minister\". Caffery reported in his cable to Washington that he was appalled that Nahas, whom Caffery called the stupidest and most corrupt politician in Egypt, was now prime minister. Caffery stated that Nahas was unqualified to be prime minister because of his \"completely total ignorance of the facts of life as they apply to the situation today\", giving the example: Most observers are willing to concede that Nahas knows of the existence of Korea, but I have found no one who would be willing to seriously contend that he is aware of the fact that Korea borders on Red China. His ignorance is as colossal as it is appalling\u00a0... At the time of my interview with Nahas he was totally unconscious of the subject which I was discussing. The only ray of light which penetrated was the fact that I wanted something from him. This prompted the street politician's response of \"aidez-nous et nous vous aiderons\". Caffery called Nahas a venal \"street politician\" whose only platform was the \"tried and true formula of 'Evacuation and Unity of the Nile Valley'\" and stated the only positive aspect of him as prime minister was that \"we can get anything which we want from him if we are willing to pay for it\". Nahas as prime minister proved to be as corrupt and venal as he was during his previous times in office, going on a rampage of rapacious looting of the public coffers to enrich himself and his even more greedy wife. The Korean War caused a shortfall in the American cotton production as young men were called up for national service, causing a cotton boom in Egypt. As the international prices for cotton rose, Egyptian landlords forced their tenant farmers to grow more cotton at the expense of food, leading to major food shortages and inflation in Egypt. In face of the corrupt Nahas government, the Egyptian people looked to their king for leadership who in the meantime had departed for France for a two-month-long bachelor party. Farouk's biographer, William Stadiem, wrote about how the king in 1950 \"went on the most excessively lavish, self-indulgent bachelor party in the annals of sybaritism.\nIn 1950, Farouk's fortune was estimated to be about \u00a350 million or about US$140 million, making him into one of the world's richest men, and a billionaire many times over in today's money. Farouk's wealth and his lifestyle made the centre of media attention all over the world. In August 1950, Farouk visited France to stay at the casino at Deauville for his bachelor party, leaving Alexandria on his yacht \"Fakr el Bihar\" with an Egyptian destroyer as an escort and landed at Marseille. Farouk together his entourage consisting of his \"kitchen cabinet\", 30 Albanian bodyguards, assorted Egyptian secretaries and doctors, Sudanese food tasters and various other followers traveled across the French countryside in a column of 7 Cadillacs surrounded by motorcycle-riding bodyguards and an airplane flying overhead with orders to land in case Farouk wanted to fly instead. Upon the king arriving in Deauville, a media circus began as hundreds of journalists from Europe and North America descended on Deauville to report on Farouk's every doing as he stayed at the Hotel du Golf with his entourage occupying 25 rooms. Journalists watched on as the corpulent king gorged himself on food, eating in one single meal dishes of \"sole \u00e0 cr\u00e8me\", \"c\u00f4te de veau \u00e0 la cr\u00e8me\", \"framboises \u00e0 la cr\u00e8me\", and \"champignons \u00e0 la cr\u00e8me\", each dish tasted in advance by Farouk's Sudanese food tasters. At his first night at the casino in Deauville, Farouk won 20 million francs (about $57,000 U.S. dollars) gambling at baccarat, and on his second night won 15 million francs. As Farouk spent extravagant sums of money during his visit to Deauville, staying at the casino every night until 5 am, he earned himself a reputation for flamboyant high living that never went away.\nFrom Deauville, Farouk went to Biarritz, where he stayed at the Hotel du Palais and resumed his friendship with the Duke of Windsor as the former King Edward VIII was now known. Farouk then crossed over to San Sebastian in Spain to attend a film festival with four \"of his ladies of the moment\" as the British ambassador to Spain called them. Farouk's next stop was Cannes, where he engaged on the night of 22 September in a $80,000 game of chemin de fer at the Palm Beach Casino with the Nawab of Palanpur, the Italian industrialist Gianni Agnelli, the Hollywood mogul Jack L. Warner and the British industrialist Myers \"Lucky Mickie\" Hyman. Hyman won the game and then promptly died of a heart-attack, leading to newspaper headlines such as \"Lucky Mickie Beats Farouk-and Dies!\" Finally, Farouk ended his bachelor party in San Remo in Italy where he purchased a number of Roman antiques at an auction to add to his collection and afterwards arrived in Alexandria in October 1950. Upon his return, Farouk received an anonymous public letter from the \"opposition\" which warned \"a revolt is near; that would not only destroy those who are unjust but would leave the country in a state of financial, moral and political bankruptcy\". The letter warned: Circumstances have placed in the palace certain officials who do not deserve that honor. These ill-advised and mishandle matters. Some of them have even come under suspicion that they are implicated in the arms scandal effecting our valiant army. The belief prevails that justice will be incapable of touching these officials, just as the belief has prevailed\u00a0... that Parliamentary government has become mere ink on paper. The world press describes us as a public that bears injustice slightly and says we do not know that we are being maltreated and driven like animals. God knows that our breasts are boiling with anger, and that only a little hope restrains us\u00a0... The country remembers the happy days when Your Majesty was the honest good shepherd. All the hopes of the country were concentrated on Your Majesty. No occasion passed when the country did not demonstrate its loyalty and sincerity to Your Majesty.\nTo distract the Egyptian people from anger at the vast expenses occurred by Farouk's two-month-long bachelor party, Farouk choose to go on the political offensive by demanding the British leave Egypt altogether. Prime Minister Nahas announced on the opening of the Parliament on 6 November 1950, that the government's chief priority for this term would be seeking the removal of all British forces from Egypt and the end of the Anglo-Egyptian condominium of the Sudan, asserting the Sudan was rightfully part of Egypt. About the corruption of Nahas, Farouk joked to Caffery about the original profession of Muhammad Ali the Great: \"Don't think I know nothing of business matters. Don't forget that the founder of my dynasty was a tobacco merchant\". To provide further distraction, on 11 February 1951, Farouk announced the date of his wedding to Narriman Sadek, whom he married in his usual lavish style on 6 May 1951. The Sudanese singer Hawa Al-Tagtaga sang at their wedding.\nHowever, whatever goodwill Farouk acquired by his wedding was lost by his three-month-long honeymoon in Europe, where both he and his new queen spent vast amounts of money while the king ate gargantuan amounts of food in the day during the holy month of Ramadan. In Turin, Farouk purchased from Fiat a $2 million US private train to ship back to Egypt complete with a TV, air-conditioning, 14 phones and alligator-trimmed furniture, which he took the press on during a trial run. At Cannes, Farouk played a 7-hour game of baccarat against the Hollywood mogul Darryl F. Zanuck and lost some $150, 000, a record sum. In Paris, Queen Narriman brought from Hollywood the dress designer, Marusia, to create a custom wardrobe for her. Throughout the honeymoon in France, Italy, and Switzerland, the royal couple were followed by \"paparazzi\", much to the king's vexation. The \"paparazzi\" took photos of him sunbathing by a pool with a bottle of Vichy in a champagne bucket, which he feared would be misconstrued by the \"Zionist papers\" that he was drinking alcohol. Caffery reported to Washington that a popular rumor had it because Farouk's wealth abroad was worth about $75 million US dollars, that he would not return to Egypt, leading to a \"precarious\" situation that might have led to a communist revolution, but that \"all sources agree the King still likes being king\". While Farouk was on his honeymoon in Europe, Nahas had passed a law forbidding farmers from growing wheat, which had lessened the food shortages and inflation, as he wanted to maximise cotton production. In Paris, Farouk told the Aga Khan that he was feeling depressed over his \"unnatural\" alliance with Nahas, saying he knew he was becoming unpopular and he would appoint a new prime minister when he returned. However, Nahas struck first by unilaterally abrogating the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian treaty in October 1951, making himself the hero of the hour.\nOn 17 October 1951, the Egyptian government got Parliamentary approval to cancel the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty. Nahas told Parliament: \"It was for Egypt that I signed the 1936 treaty and it is for Egypt that I call on you to abrogate it\". As a result, the British forces in the Suez Canal were considered enemy forces and King Farouk was declared \"King of Egypt and Sudan\". This title was not recognised by many countries, and Egypt entered diplomatic debates as well as internal political unrest. As the British refused to leave their base around the Suez Canal, the Egyptians cut off all food and water to the base, ordered a boycott of British goods, recalled all of the Egyptian workers on the base and began guerrilla attacks, turning the area around the Suez Canal into a war zone.\nIn December 1951, Farouk backed General Sirri Amer for the president of the Cairo Officers' Club, and in a surprise upset, Amer was defeated in the election by General Mohamed Naguib, which was the first public sign of military dissatisfaction with the king as the secret Free Officers group had issued pamphlets urging other officers to vote for Naguib under the slogan \"The Army says NO to Farouk\". Farouk invalidated the results of the election and ordered an investigation of the Free Officers. Queen Narriman gave birth to Crown Prince Fuad on 16 January 1952, finally giving Farouk a son. Farouk was so pleased that he made Dr. Magdi who delivered Fuad a pasha. On 24 January 1952, Egyptian guerrillas attacked the British base at the Suez Canal, during which the Egyptian Auxiliary Police were observed helping the guerrillas. In response, General George Erskine on 25 January had British tanks and infantry surround the auxiliary police station in Ismailia and gave the police an hour to surrender their arms under the grounds the police were arming the guerrillas. The police commander called the Interior Minister, Fouad Serageddin, Nahas's right-hand man, who was smoking cigars in his bath at the time, to ask what to do. Serageddin ordered the police to fight \"to the last man and the last bullet\". The resulting battle saw the police station leveled and 43 policemen killed together with 3 soldiers.\nThe Battle of Ismailia outraged Egypt and the next day, 26 January 1952, was \"Black Saturday\", as the riot was known, that saw much of downtown Cairo which Ismail the Magnificent had rebuilt in the style of Paris, burned down. Shepheard's Hotel, which long been a symbol of British power in Egypt, was burned down together with Groppi's, the most famous restaurant in Cairo, and Cicurel's, the most famous shopping centre. Serageddin ordered the police not to intervene during the Black Saturday riot, which saw 26 people killed and over 400 cinemas, cabarets, nightclubs, bars, restaurants and shops burned down in downtown Cairo. During the Black Saturday riot, Farouk was at the Abdeen Palace holding a luncheon attended by 600 guests to celebrate the birth of Fuad, and first became aware of the riot, when he noticed the black cloud of smoke rising up from downtown Cairo. Though Farouk ordered the Egyptian Army to put down the riot, it was too late and the fashionable and glamorous downtown Cairo built by his grandfather was destroyed that day. Farouk blamed the Wafd for the Black Saturday riot, and dismissed Nahas as prime minister the next day. Nahas and the rest of the Wafd leaders were so shocked by the fury of the \"Black Saturday\" riot that they meekly accepted Farouk's dismissal without protest.\nThe \"Black Saturday\" riot was the beginning of a crisis of legitimacy in Egypt's institutions, including the monarchy, as the riot had starkly shown that most Egyptians did not feel their political system represented them. The American historian Joel Gordon wrote that \"Black Saturday\" forced \"Egypt's political leaders to confront the severity of the crisis which the country faced\". For the next six months, Farouk frequently shuffled prime ministers in an attempt to quell widespread demands for reform. The sense of crisis was captured by the widespread call for \"salvation ministries\" and a \"just tyrant\" that would end corruption, secure the evacuation of the British from the canal zone, and institute social reforms. Each of the prime ministers in the period January\u2013July 1952 were judged by this criterion. The popular slogan was \"al-tathir qabl al-tahrir\" (\"purification before liberation\"), namely a leader who would make Egypt strong enough to force the British to leave. The Battle of Ismailia had shown that Egypt was too weak to militarily expel the British from the Canal zone, and the principal criticism of Farouk and Nahas was that they recklessly launched the \"popular struggle\" that Egypt could not hope to win. After the Battle of Ismailia, the feeling amongst the policial classes was that Egypt had to end the \"popular struggle\" and negotiate a British withdrawal, which underlined Egypt's weakness. Gordon called Farouk an unscrupulous leader with a \"shrewd ability for statecraft\" who could have posed as the \"just tyrant\" if it was not for his addiction to gluttony and partying. Sir Ralph Stevenson, the British ambassador, reported that \"where own amusement and distraction are concerned, the king is fighting a losing battle against the man\". Farouk's more responsible advisers like Hussein Serry Pasha together with Andraous of the \"kitchen cabinet\" tried their best to persuade the king to pose as the \"just tyrant\", but were constantly sabotaged by Pulli, Galhan and Thabet.\nNahas was replaced with Ali Maher who wanted to negotiate an exit agreement with the British and sought in turn to have the Wafd support his government to provide him with the necessary votes in parliament. One of Maher's first acts was an anti-inflation bill lowering the prices of basic staples and another was an anti-corruption bill, both of which were popular, but his unwillingness to prosecute the Wafd leaders for \"Black Saturday\" as Farouk wanted ensured his dismissal. On 2 March 1952, Maher was sacked and replaced with Ahmed Naguib el-Hilaly as prime minister. Hilaly had a reputation for incorruptibility and began a crackdown on corruption while having Serageddin arrested for charges of complicity in the \"Black Saturday\" riot. Hilaly also announced he was would pursue \"purification before liberation\", namely prosecute the Wafd leaders for corruption and \"Black Saturday\" before tackling the question of the British evacuation. In early May 1952, Farouk confessed to Caffery that Hilaly was his last hope as for once he did not have an alternative prime minister if he should have to sack him.\nThabet told Caffery that the prime minister's Fortunes Bill, which would require all past, present and future cabinet ministers to reveal the origins of their wealth would destroy the monarchy saying that by purging the Wafd a veritable Pandora's box would be open and Egypt would go through a Roman holiday of charges and counter-charges which could only result in the man-in-the-street becoming aware of the fact that he has been ruled by crooks of various colorations for at least the past ten years\u00a0... such an awareness could only result in a further deterioration of the King's reputation with the people for having held him responsible for the naming of such men to his Cabinets\u00a0... His conclusion was that Hilay Pasha must be discharged from office immediately. Owing to pressure from Thabet and rest of the \"kitchen cabinet\", Hilaly was sacked and replaced with Hussein Serry Pasha as prime minister on 1 July 1952. The popular rumour in Cairo had it that Ahmed 'Abbud, a Wafdist industrialist had paid a million Egyptian pound bribe to the king to sack Hilaly before he lost his monopoly on sugar production that he had bought from Nahas. Serry was well regarded, but his reputation as the \"king's man\" together with a genial, easy-going personality that made him unsuitable for the role of a \"just tyrant\" ensured that nobody took him seriously. Alone of the four prime ministers between January\u2013July 1952, Serry sensed rising discontent in the ranks of the Army officer corps. Thabet then issued a press release claiming that genealogists had discovered that Farouk was a direct descendant of Muhammad, a claim that caused widespread mockery. General Mohammad Naguib wrote: \"If there was any Arabic blood in Farouk's veins, it was so diluted that it couldn't possibly have been traced back to Mohammad and it was a sacrilege for anyone to have tried to do so\".\nFarouk was always very anti-communist, but by 1952, a conviction arose among American decision-makers that based on the way that things were going in Egypt, a communist revolution was inevitable unless the government started social reforms at once. Caffery reported to Washington that the Egyptian Communist Party was growing in popularity and it was the Egyptian Communists who were behind the \"Black Saturday\" riot. In what became known as Project FF (Fat Fucker), officers of the Central Intelligence Agency led by Kermit Roosevelt Jr. were in contact with Free Officers. The extent and importance of American assistance to the Free Officers has been hotly debated by historians with the historian P. J. Vatikiotis maintaining that various CIA officers in their memoirs such as Miles Copeland Jr. in his 1969 autobiography \"The Game of Nations\" vastly exaggerated their role assisting the Free Officers.\nFarouk is also reported as having said \"The whole world is in revolt. Soon there will be only five Kings left\u2014the King of England, the King of Spades, the King of Clubs, the King of Hearts, and the King of Diamonds.\"\nOverthrow.\nFarouk was widely condemned by his people for his corrupt and ineffectual governance, failure to expel foreign influence in Egypt's affairs, and the Egyptian army's failure in the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War to stop the expulsion of Palestinians by paramilitary Zionist forces and to prevent the creation of the state of Israel. Public discontent against Farouk rose to new levels, to the extent that the 1951 film \"Quo Vadis\" was banned in Egypt out of the fear the audiences would identify the fat Emperor Nero played by Peter Ustinov with Farouk. Farouk usually spent his summers in Alexandria to escape the summer heat in Cairo, and on the night of 20 July was gambling at the Royal Automobile Club when he received a phone call from Prime Minister Serry saying he had learned from a police spy that the Free Officers were planning to launch a coup sometime that summer. Serry also warned that Farouk's plans to appoint General Sirri Amer, a man deeply involved in the arms scandal, as War Minister would turn the officer corps against him; a plan that ultimately failed when even General Amer realised he was too unpopular with the officer corps to be an effective War Minister, causing him to refuse the appointment. When Farouk asked Serry to read out a list of who was involved in the conspiracy, he laughingly dismissed them as too junior to pose a threat, appointed his brother-in-law Ismail Chirine War Minister with orders to \"clean up\" the Army and returned to the Montaza Palace, unworried.\nThe appointment of Chirine as War Minister spurred the Free Officers into action, and on 22 July their leaders, General Muhammad Naguib and Colonel Gamal Abdel Nasser, decided on a coup the next day. Learning from one of his spies that the coup was due to begin tomorrow, at about 7 pm, Farouk ordered the arrest of all the Free Officers. Two Free Officers living in Alexandria were so convinced the coup would fail that the evening of 23 July that they went to the Montaza palace to confess and seek a royal pardon. Finally, on the night of 23 July 1952, the Free Officers, led by Naguib and Nasser, staged a military coup that launched the Egyptian revolution of 1952. The Free Officers, knowing that warrants had been issued for their arrest, launched the coup that night, storming the staff headquarters in Cairo, killing two and wounding two on the night of 23 July and by about 1:30 am, Cairo was under their control.\nIn Alexandria, Farouk appealed to Caffery for help, accusing the Free Officers of all being Communists. Despite the strained relations with Britain, Farouk also appealed to Britain to intervene; the \"Black Saturday\" riot had convinced the Churchill government that to intervene in Egypt would entail guerrilla warfare in the Nile river valley, which ruled out intervention. Ali Maher, who sided with the Free Officers and was appointed prime minister by them, arrived in Alexandria on 24 July to tell Farouk that the Free Officers wanted Naguib to be War Minister and the dismissal of his \"kitchen cabinet\". On 25 July, Farouk went with a machine gun by his side to the Ras El Tin Palace, driving his red Mercedes-Benz down the streets of Alexandria at high speed. The Ras El Tin Palace was located right by Alexandria harbor under the guns of the Egyptian Navy's warships, as the Navy had stayed loyal. Farouk had his loyal Sudanese Guard, which was 800 strong, build barricades around the palace. Late on the morning of 25 July, the palace was surrounded by troops loyal to the Free Officers, who attempted to storm it, only to be repulsed by the Sudanese Guard. Farouk, who was an expert marksman, used his hunting gun to kill four of the attackers himself as they sought to race across the palace grounds. After several hours of fighting, Caffery was able to arrange a ceasefire.\nOn the morning of 26 July 1952, Maher arrived at the Ras El Tin Palace to present Farouk with an ultimatum drafted by Naguib telling the king he must abdicate and leave Egypt by 6 pm the next day or else the troops loyal to the Free Officers would storm the palace and execute the king. By this time, tanks and artillery had arrived outside the palace, and Farouk agreed to abdicate. At about 12:30 pm, Farouk, in the presence of a Supreme Court justice and Caffery, nearly cried as he signed the instrument of abdication. At about 5:30 pm Farouk left the palace, was saluted by the Sudanese Guard, said farewell to his best friend Pulli who was not allowed to leave Egypt, and at the dock, boarded the royal yacht \"El Mahrousa\" to leave Egypt for the last time. The \"Mahrousa\" was the same yacht that had taken Ismail the Magnificent to Italy when he was deposed in 1879, which Farouk kept brooding about during his voyage to Naples. The Abaza family's Fouad Pasha Abaza, a businessman who held several official positions, notably sent the only message that King Farouk of Egypt received on the royal yacht as he was exiled from Egypt.\nFarouk was forced to abdicate and went into exile in Monaco and Italy, where he lived for the rest of his life, arriving in Naples on 29 July 1952. Immediately following his abdication, Farouk's baby son, Ahmed Fuad, was proclaimed King Fuad II, but for all intents and purposes Egypt was now governed by Naguib, Nasser, and the Free Officers. On 18 June 1953, the revolutionary government formally abolished the monarchy, ending 150 years of the Muhammad Ali dynasty's rule, and Egypt was declared a republic.\nConfiscated possessions.\nThe Egyptian government quickly moved to auction off the King's vast collection of trinkets and treasures, including his seven-piece bedroom suite that was inspired by Napoleon and Josephine's suite at the Ch\u00e2teau de Malmaison. Among the more famous of his possessions was one of the rare 1933 double eagle coins, though the coin disappeared before it could be returned to the United States. (It later reappeared in New York in 1996 and was eventually sold at auction for more than seven million dollars.) Farouk's obsession with collecting also ranged into diamonds, dogs, stamps, rubies, Faberg\u00e9 eggs, ancient Tibetan coins, medieval suits of armour, aspirin bottles, razor blades, paper clips and Geiger counters. At the Koubbeh Palace, it was discovered that Farouk had collected 2,000 silk shirts, 10,000 silk ties, 50 diamond-studded golden walking sticks and one autographed portrait of Adolf Hitler.\nThe 94-carat Star of the East diamond and another diamond bought from Harry Winston had not been paid for by the time of the King's overthrow in 1952; three years later an Egyptian government legal board entrusted with the disposal of the former royal assets, ruled in Winston's favour. Nevertheless, several years of litigation were needed before Winston was able to reclaim the Star of the East from a safe-deposit box in Switzerland.\nExile and death.\nFarouk fled Egypt in great haste, and his abandoned possessions\u2014including a huge collection of pornography\u2014became objects of curiosity and ridicule. On his exile from Egypt, Farouk settled first in Naples, and later in Rome. At his first press conference on 30 July 1952, on the island of Capri, Farouk took questions in English, French and Italian, maintaining he was now a poor man, though reporters noted he hired Carlo d'Emilio, a Rome lawyer known in Italy as the 'king of lawyers', to represent him. D'Emilo found Farouk the Villa Dusmet, a huge estate outside of Rome, which he rented and became his home. In October 1952, Farouk was indicted for treason in Egypt, though no extradition request was filed with the Italian government. In his exile, Farouk became known as the 'king of the night', as he spent his nights at Roman nightclubs in the company of various starlets who had come to Rome to work in either the Italian film industry and/or the Hollywood productions which were filmed in 1950s Italy because of the low lira. Despite his claims of poverty, Farouk had all of his children educated at the Institut Le Rosey in Switzerland, one of the most exclusive and expensive private schools in the world.\nOn 13 March 1953, the former Queen Narriman left Farouk to return to Egypt, where she filed for divorce in September 1953, citing his unfaithfulness as her reason. Farouk chose the Miss Naples of 1953, Irma Capece Minutolo, to be his last 'official' mistress. Her parents disapproved of their teenage daughter being courted by a much older, married man, but after Farouk offered a considerable sum of money, they consented to their daughter losing her virginity to him. One of Farouk's best friends during his Italian exile was the mobster Charles \"Lucky\" Luciano who had been deported to Italy, and Farouk 'bought' Luciano's mistress, the Swedish writer Birgitta Stenberg, to be his mistress. Farouk's relationship with Stenberg ended over his refusal to promote her up to 'official mistress' status as she wanted. Ultimately, Capece Minutolo objected to living in the Villa Dusmet, which she considered a gloomy and depressing estate, and Farouk moved into a luxury apartment on the Via Archimede in Rome. Shortly afterwards, Farouk fired one of his aides, Amin Fahim, for trying to seduce his 14-year-old daughter, Princess Ferial, whom he subsequently discovered had been working as a spy for Egypt.\nOn 29 April 1958, the United Arab Republic, a federation of Egypt and Syria, issued rulings revoking his citizenship. He was granted Monegasque citizenship in 1959 by his close friend Prince Rainier III. Farouk's daughter, Princess Ferial, recalled that in exile he was a loving father whose only rules for her as a teenager were that she never wear a dress that exposed any decolletage or dance to rock n' roll music, which he hated. In his last years, Farouk lived with Capece Minutolo, continued to visit nightclubs to gamble and socialise, and spent his days at the Caf\u00e9 de Paris on Rome's Via Veneto, drinking coffee, smoking cigars and talking to anybody who approached him. Farouk disapproved of the social changes of the 1960s, and often wished he could relive his youth in the 1930s.\nHe collapsed at the Ile de France restaurant in Rome after a midnight dinner of oysters and lamb, was rushed to San Camillo Hospital, and died immediately thereafter on 18 March 1965. While some claim he was poisoned by Egyptian Intelligence, no official autopsy was conducted on his body. His will stipulated that he be buried in the Al Rifa'i Mosque in Cairo, but the request was denied by the Egyptian government under Gamal Abdel Nasser, and he was buried in Italy. The funeral service held in Rome was attended by his mother, Nazli Sabri. King Faisal of Saudi Arabia stated he would be willing to have King Farouk buried in Saudi Arabia, upon which President Nasser said that the former monarch could be buried in Egypt, but not in Rifai' mosque. The body of King Farouk returned to Egypt on 31 March 1965, at night and was secretly buried in Hosh al-Basha, the Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt Burial Site in Imam Al-Shafi'i area. During Anwar El-Sadat's presidency, the remains of King Farouk were moved to Al-Rifa'i Mosque, where Muhammad Ali Pasha, the founder of the Egyptian dynasty, and the rest of his descendants are buried.\nMarriages and affairs.\nFarouk was married twice, with a claim of a third marriage. His first wife was Safinaz Zulficar (1921\u20131988), the daughter of Youssef Zulficar Pasha. Safinaz was renamed Farida upon her marriage. They were married in January 1938. The marriage was under a large amount of stress due to Queen Farida's inability to produce a male heir, which Farouk found essential to maintain his throne. After producing three daughters, the couple divorced in 1948.\nIn 1950, Farouk was smitten by a commoner named Narriman Sadek (1933\u20132005) and after courting, the two married in 1951. Sadek was eighteen years old when she married the king and many believed the attraction was due to Farouk's belief that she would give him the male heir he desired. He got what he wanted when Sadek gave birth to the future King Fuad II on 16 January 1952. However, months after the prince's birth the king and his queen were expelled from Egypt, and divorced in 1954.\nHe also had many affairs, among them, in 1950, British writer Barbara Skelton. In 1955 his eye fell on the Boston socialite-become-singer Pat Rainey. While in exile in Italy, Farouk met Irma Capece Minutolo, an opera singer, who became his companion. In 2005, she said she married the former King in 1957.\nHobbies.\nFarouk and Dick Powell were the only two known buyers of the Gaylord Gladiator automobile, with Farouk purchasing two of them.\nCoin collection.\nKing Farouk amassed one of the most famous coin collections in history which included an extremely rare American gold minted 1933 double eagle coin, two of three known 1835 half eagle proofs and (non-concurrently), two 1913 Liberty Head nickels.\nThe 1954 auction of the exiled King Farouk's coin collection was the biggest auction of the 20th century, The Egyptian government sold the collection, and London's Baldwin and Co. was commissioned to describe the coins.\nStyle and personality.\nThe ostentatious king's name is used to describe imitation Louis XV-style furniture known as \"Louis-Farouk\". The imperial French style furniture became fashionable among Egypt's upper classes during Farouk's reign so Egyptian artisans began to mass-produce it. The style uses ornate carving, is heavily gilded, and is covered in elaborate cloth. The style, or imitations thereof, remains widespread in Egypt. The originals such as Aubusson and Gobelin came directly from France and are not copied in Egypt.\nFarouk's eccentricities were exaggerated by later accounts. One apocryphal story tells how Farouk suffered from nightmares in which he was chased by a lion. He sought the advice of pro-Axis rector Mustafa al-Maraghi, who told him, \"You will not rest until you have shot a lion.\" Thereupon, Farouk shot two, at the Cairo zoo.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 1952, Farouk's former mistress, Barbara Skelton, published a novel entitled \"A Young Girl's Touch\" about a proper and prim young English woman named Melinda who has an affair with a grotesquely obese Middle Eastern monarch named King Yoyo who enjoys spanking her. Skelton later admitted \"A Young Girl's Touch\" was a \"roman \u00e0 clef\" with Melinda being herself and King Yoyo was King Farouk. Gore Vidal's 1953 pulp novel \"Thieves Fall Out\" is set against his overthrow. In 1954, the film \"Abdulla the Great\" was partially shot in Egypt in the Abdeen Palace and the Koubbeh Palace, and concerns the story of a fat and fabulously rich Middle Eastern king who lusts after a British model. The film was released in 1955. The film's producer, Gregory Ratoff, stated during the filming: \"If you ask me officially if it is about Farouk, I must tell you no! No!\" before going on to say the film was about a \"playboy monarch, a gambler, a money-crazed king with an enthusiasm for life and women\u00a0... if the world see Farouk in the character of the star, then we can do nothing about it\". Farouk's Italian lawyer, Carlo d'Emilio, reportedly threatened on behalf of Farouk to sue for libel if the character of \"Abdulla the Great\" was too much like Farouk.\nAgatha Christie's short story \"The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding\" involves the theft of a jewel from a fictional Eastern prince who is somewhat irresponsible and fond of a luxurious lifestyle. His name and origin are not given in the original story, but in the 1991 television adaptation in the series \"Agatha Christie's Poirot\" (where the story appears under its American title, \"The Theft of the Royal Ruby\"), the story is altered and the prince identified as Farouk (played by Tariq Alibai). This adaptation sees Farouk recovering a jewel to maintain his standing in his home country, eventually succeed his father Fuad I of Egypt to the throne, and curb the influence of the nationalist Wafd Party.\nEnglish science-fiction and fantasy author John Whitbourn published \"The Book of Farouk\", a fictional \"autobiography\" by Farouk, depicting him as a towering global statesman bestriding 20th-century history, and an incomparable erotic \"artiste\" besides. \"Nothing is True...: The First Book of Farouk\" was published in 2018, followed in 2019 by its concluding companion, \"And Everything is Permissible - The Second Book of Farouk\", covering the deposed king's sybaritic European exile, 1952\u20131965. The latter's title completes the former's citing of valedictory words attributed to Hassan-i Sabbah, 12th-century founder of the Order of Assassins.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52024", "revid": "38745438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52024", "title": "MIM-104 Patriot", "text": "American surface-to-air missile system since 1981\nThe MIM-104 Patriot is a mobile interceptor missile surface-to-air missile (SAM) system, the primary such system used by the United States Army and several allied states. It is manufactured by the U.S. defense contractor Raytheon and derives its name from the radar component of the weapon system. The AN/MPQ-53 at the heart of the system is known as the \"Phased Array Tracking Radar to Intercept on Target\", which is a backronym for \"Patriot\". In 1984, the Patriot system began to replace the Nike Hercules system as the U.S. Army's primary high to medium air defense (HIMAD) system and the MIM-23 Hawk system as the U.S. Army's medium tactical air defense system. In addition to defending against aircraft, Patriot is the U.S. Army's primary terminal-phase anti-ballistic missile (ABM) system. As of 2016[ [update]], the system is expected to stay fielded until at least 2040.\nPatriot uses an advanced aerial interceptor missile and high-performance radar systems. Patriot was developed at Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama, which had previously developed the Safeguard ABM system and its component Spartan and hypersonic Sprint missiles. The symbol for Patriot is a drawing of a Revolutionary War\u2013era minuteman.\nThe MIM-104 Patriot has been widely exported. Patriot was one of the first tactical systems in the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) to employ lethal autonomy in combat. The system saw poor performance in the 1991 Gulf War, without any confirmed interceptions of Iraqi Scud missiles, but made successful intercepts in the 2003 Iraq War. It has also been used by Saudi and Emirati forces in the Yemen conflict against Houthi missiles. In August 2014 batteries first downed UAVs when Israeli Air Defense Command engaged two Hamas drones during Operation Protective Edge. In September 2014, Patriot first shot down a crewed aircraft, when an Israeli battery intercepted a Syrian Air Force Sukhoi Su-24 . Since 2023, Patriot systems have been used by Ukraine in the Russo-Ukrainian war, downing Russian Su-34 and Su-35 fighters, Mi-8 helicopters, and Kinzhal ballistic missiles.\nIntroduction.\nPrior to the Patriot, Raytheon was involved in a number of surface to air missile programs, including FABMDS (Field Army Ballistic Missile Defense System), AADS-70 (Army Air-Defense System \u2013 1970) and SAM-D (Surface-to-Air Missile \u2013 Development). In 1975, the SAM-D missile successfully engaged a drone at the White Sands Missile Range. In 1976, it was renamed the PATRIOT Air Defense Missile System. The MIM-104 (Mobile Interceptor Missile 104) Patriot combined several new technologies, including the MPQ-53 passive electronically scanned array radar and track-via-missile guidance.\nFull-scale development of the system began in 1976 and it was deployed in 1984. Patriot was used initially as an anti-aircraft system. In 1988, it received an upgrade providing limited capability against tactical ballistic missiles (TBM), designated PAC-1 (Patriot Advanced Capability 1). The most recent upgrade by manufacturer Lockheed Martin, designated PAC-3, is a nearly total system redesign of the interceptor missiles, this time designed from the outset with the capability to engage and destroy tactical ballistic missiles. The Army plans to upgrade the Patriot system as part of the Integrated Air and Missile Defense system designed to tie into a broader air defense architecture using an Integrated Battle Command System (IBCS).\nPatriot equipment.\nThe Patriot system has four major operational functions: communications, command and control, radar surveillance, and missile guidance. The four functions combine to provide a coordinated, secure, integrated, mobile air defense system.\nThe Patriot system is modular and highly mobile. A battery-sized element can be installed in less than an hour. All components, consisting of the fire control section (radar set, engagement control station, antenna mast group, electric power plant) and launchers, are truck- or trailer-mounted. The radar set and launchers (with missiles) are mounted on M860 semi-trailers, which are towed by Oshkosh M983 HEMTTs.\nMissile reloading is accomplished using a M985 HEMTT truck with a Hiab crane on the back. This crane is larger than the standard Grove cranes found on regular M977 HEMTT and M985 HEMTT cargo body trucks. The crane truck, known as a Guided Missile Transporter (GMT), removes spent missile canisters from the launcher and replaces them with fresh missiles. Because the crane nearly doubles the height of the HEMTT when not stowed, crews informally refer to it as the \"scorpion tail\". A standard M977 HEMTT with a regular-sized crane is sometimes referred to as the Large Repair Parts Transporter (LRPT).\nThe heart of the Patriot battery is the fire control section, consisting of the AN/MPQ-53 or \u221265/65A Radar Set (RS), the AN/MSQ-104 or \u2212132 Engagement Control Station (ECS), the OE-349 Antenna Mast Group (AMG), and the EPP-III Electric Power Plant (EPP). The system's missiles are transported on and launched from either the M901 Launching Station (LS), which can carry up to four PAC-2 missiles; the M902 LS, with sixteen PAC-3 missiles; or the M903 LS, which can be configured to carry PAC-2, PAC-3, and MSE/SkyCeptor missiles in various combinations. A Patriot battalion is also equipped with the Information Coordination Central (ICC), a command station designed to coordinate the launches of a battalion and uplink Patriot to the JTIDS or MIDS network.\nAN/MPQ-53, -65 and -65A Radar Set.\nThe AN/MPQ-53/65 Radar Set is a passive electronically scanned array radar equipped with IFF, electronic counter-countermeasure (ECCM), and track-via-missile (TVM) guidance subsystems.\nThe AN/MPQ-53 Radar Set supports PAC-2 units, while the AN/MPQ-65 Radar Set supports PAC-2 and PAC-3 units. The main difference between these two radars is the addition of a second travelling-wave tube (TWT), which gives the \u221265 radar increased search, detection, and tracking capability. The radar antenna array consists of over 5,000 elements that \"deflect\" the radar beam many times per second.\nThe radar antenna array contains an IFF interrogator subsystem, a TVM array, and at least one \"sidelobe canceller\" (SLC), which is a small array designed to decrease interference that might affect the radar. Patriot's radar is somewhat unusual in that it is a \"detection-to-kill\" system, meaning that a single unit performs all search, identification, track, and engagement functions. Most other SAM systems, by contrast, require several different radars to perform all functions necessary to detect and engage targets.\nThe beam created by the Patriot's flat phased array radar is comparatively narrow and highly agile compared to that of a moving dish. This characteristic gives the radar the ability to detect small, fast targets like ballistic missiles, or low radar cross-section targets such as stealth aircraft or cruise missiles. The power and agility of Patriot's radar is also highly resistant to countermeasures, including ECM, radar jamming, and use of RWR equipment. Patriot is capable of quickly changing frequencies to resist jamming. However, the radar can suffer from \"blind spots.\"\nThe Army is planning upgrades to the Patriot system's radar components, including a new digital processor that replaces the one used since the system's introduction. In 2017, the Patriot got a new AN/MPQ-65A active electronically scanned array (AESA) radar that has greater range and sharper discrimination. The main gallium nitride (GaN)-based AESA array measures , is a bolt-on replacement for the current antenna, and is oriented toward the primary threat; two new rear panel arrays are a quarter the size of the main array and let the system look behind and to the sides, providing 360-degree coverage. The GaN AESA radar also has up to 50 percent less maintenance costs. Instead of shining a single transmitter through many lenses, the GaN array uses many smaller transmitters, each with its own control, increasing flexibility and allowing it to work even if some transmitters do not.\nIn October 2017, the Army announced Raytheon's Lower-Tier Air and Missile Defense System (LTAMDS) radar had been selected as the Patriot system's new radar. Unlike the previous radar which could only watch one part of the sky at a time primarily to detect ballistic missiles, the LTAMDS has 360-degree coverage to detect low flying and maneuvering drones and cruise missiles. The design has one large main array flanked by two smaller arrays, with the main panel still focused on high-altitude threats and the side panels, which are half the size with twice the power of the previous radar set, able to detect slower threats from considerable distance. Raytheon was awarded a US$million contract to build the first six radars to enter service in 2022.\nAN/MSQ-104 and -132 Engagement Control Station.\nThe AN/MSQ-104 or AN/MSQ-132 Engagement Control Station (ECS) is the nerve center of the Patriot firing battery, costing approximately US$million per unit. The ECS consists of a shelter mounted on the bed of an M927 5-Ton Cargo Truck or on the bed of a Light Medium Tactical Vehicle (LMTV) cargo truck. The main subcomponents of the ECS are the Weapons Control Computer (WCC), the Data Link Terminal (DLT), the UHF communications array, the Routing Logic Radio Interface Unit (RLRIU), and the two-person stations that serve as the system's human machine interface. The ECS is air conditioned, pressurized (to resist chemical/biological attack), and shielded against electromagnetic pulse (EMP) or other such electromagnetic interference. The ECS also contains several SINCGARS radios to facilitate voice communications.\nThe WCC is the main computer within the Patriot system. This computer controls the operator interface, calculates missile intercept algorithms, and provides limited fault diagnostics. It was designed as a 24-bit parallel militarized computer with fixed- and floating-point capability, organized in a multiprocessor configuration that operates at a maximum clock rate of 6 MHz. Compared to modern personal computers, this represents very limited processing power, so the computer has been upgraded several times during Patriot's service life. The latest variant fielded in 2013 has performance improved by several orders of magnitude.\nThe DLT connects the ECS to Patriot's Launching Stations. It uses either a SINCGARS radio or fiber optic cables to transmit encrypted data between the ECS and the launchers. Through the DLT, the system operators can remotely emplace, slew or stow launchers, perform diagnostics on launchers or missiles, and fire missiles.\nThe UHF communications array consists of three UHF radio \"stacks\" and their associated patching and encrypting equipment. These radios are connected to the antennas of the OE-349 Antenna Mast Group, which are used to create UHF \"shots\" between sister Patriot batteries and their associated ICC. This creates a secure, real-time data network (known as PADIL, Patriot Data Information Link) that allows the ICC to centralize control of its subordinate firing batteries.\nThe RLRIU functions as the primary router for all data coming into the ECS. The RLRIU gives a firing battery an address on the battalion data network, and sends/receives data from across the battalion. It also \"translates\" data coming from the WCC to the DLT, facilitating communication with the launchers.\nPatriot's crew stations are referred to as Manstation 1 and 3 (MS1 and MS3). These are the stations where Patriot operators interface with the system. The manstations consist of a monochrome (green and black) screen surrounded by various Switch Indicators. Each manstation also has a traditional QWERTY keyboard and isometric stick, a tiny joystick that functions much like a PC mouse. It is through these switch indicators and the Patriot user interface software that the system is operated. With newer upgrades, the operator's monochrome screen and physical switches have been replaced with two touchscreen LCDs and a standard keyboard/mouse at both stations.\nOE-349 Antenna Mast Group.\nThe OE-349 Antenna Mast Group (AMG) is mounted on an M927 5-Ton Cargo Truck. It includes four 4\u00a0kW antennas in two pairs on remotely controlled masts. Emplacement of the AMG can have no greater than a 0.5-degree roll and a 10-degree crossroll. The antennas can be controlled in azimuth, and the masts can be elevated up to above ground level. Mounted at the base of each pair of antennas are two high-power amplifiers associated with the antennas and the radios in the co-located shelter.\nIt is through these antennas that the ECS and ICC send their respective UHF \"shots\" to create the PADIL network. The polarity of each shot can be changed by adjusting the \"feedhorn\" to a vertical or horizontal position. This enables a greater chance of communication shots reaching their intended target when terrain obstacles may otherwise obscure the signal.\nEPP-III Electric Power Plant.\nThe EPP-III Diesel-Electric Power Plant (EPP) is the power source for the ECS and Radar. The EPP consists of two 150\u00a0kilowatt diesel engines with 400\u00a0hertz, 3-phase generators that are interconnected through the power distribution unit. The generators are mounted on a trailer or modified M977 HEMTT. Each EPP has two fuel tanks and a fuel distribution assembly with grounding equipment. Each diesel engine can operate for more than eight hours with a full fuel tank. The EPP delivers its power to the Radar and ECS through cables stored in reels alongside the generators. It powers the AMG via a cable routed through the ECS.\nM901/902/903 Launching Station.\nThe M90x Launching Stations are remotely operated, self-contained units. The ECS controls operation of the launchers through each launcher's DLT, via fiber optic or VHF (SINCGARS) data link.\nIntegral levelling equipment permits emplacement on slopes of up to 10 degrees. Each launcher is trainable in azimuth and elevates to a fixed, elevated launch position. Precise aiming of the launcher before launch is not necessary; thus, no extra lags are introduced into system reaction time. Each launcher is capable of providing detailed diagnostics to the ECS via the data link.\nThe launching station contains four major equipment subsystems: the launcher generator set, the launcher electronics module (LEM), the launcher mechanics assembly (LMA), and the launcher interconnection group (LIG). The generator set consists of a 15\u00a0kW, 400\u00a0Hz generator that powers the launcher. The LEM is used for the real-time implementation of launcher operations requested via data link from the ECS. The LMA physically erects and rotates the launcher's platform and its missiles. The LIG connects the missiles themselves to the launcher via the Launcher Missile Round Distributor (LMRD).\nPatriot guided missile.\nThe first fielded variant was the MIM-104A \"Standard\". It was optimized solely for engagements against aircraft and had very limited capability against ballistic missiles. It had a range of , and a speed in excess of Mach 2. The MIM-104B \"anti-standoff jammer\" (ASOJ) is a missile designed to seek out and destroy ECM emitters.\nThe MIM-104C PAC-2 missile was the first Patriot missile that was optimized for ballistic missile engagements. The GEM series of missiles (MIM-104D/E) are further refinements of the PAC-2 missile. The PAC-3 missile is a new interceptor, featuring a Ka band active radar seeker, employing \"hit-to-kill\" interception, in contrast to previous interceptors' method of exploding in the vicinity of the target, destroying it with shrapnel, and several other enhancements which dramatically increase its lethality against ballistic missiles. The specific information for these different kinds of missiles are discussed in the \"Variants\" section.\nThe first seven of these are in the larger PAC-2 configuration of a single missile per canister, of which four can be placed on a launcher. PAC-3 missile canisters contain four missiles, so that sixteen rounds can be placed on a launcher. The missile canister serves as both the shipping and storage container and the launch tube. Patriot missiles are referred to as \"certified rounds\" as they leave the factory, and additional maintenance is not necessary on the missile prior to it being launched.\nThe PAC-2 missile is long, weighs about , and is propelled by a solid-fueled rocket motor.\nPatriot missile design.\nThe PAC-2 family of missiles all have a fairly standard design, the only differences between the variants being certain internal components. They consist of (from front to rear) the radome, guidance section, warhead section, propulsion section, and control actuator section.\nThe radome is made of slip cast fused silica approximately thick, with a nickel alloy tip, and a composite base attachment ring bonded to the slip cast fused silica and protected by a molded silicone rubber ring. The radome provides an aerodynamic shape for the missile and microwave window and thermal protection for the RF seeker and electronic components.\nThe Patriot guidance section consists primarily of the modular digital airborne guidance system (MDAGS). The MDAGS consists of a modular midcourse package that performs all of the required guidance functions from launch through midcourse and a terminal guidance section. The TVM seeker is mounted on the guidance section, extending into the radome.\nThe seeker consists of an antenna mounted on an inertial platform, antenna control electronics, a receiver, and a transmitter. The Modular Midcourse Package (MMP), which is located in the forward portion of the warhead section, consists of the navigational electronics and a missile-borne computer that computes the guidance and autopilot algorithms and provides steering commands according to a resident computer program.\nThe warhead section, just aft of the guidance section, contains the proximity fuzed warhead, safety-and-arming device, fuzing circuits and antennas, link antenna switching circuits, auxiliary electronics, inertial sensor assembly, and signal data converter.\nThe propulsion section consists of the rocket motor, external heat shield, and two external conduits. The rocket motor includes the case, nozzle assembly, propellant, liner and insulation, pyrogen igniter, and propulsion arming and firing unit. The casing of the motor is an integral structural element of the missile airframe. It contains a conventional, casebonded solid rocket propellant.\nThe Control Actuator Section (CAS) is at the aft end of the missile. It receives commands from the missile autopilot and positions the fins. The missile fins steer and stabilize the missile in flight. A fin servo system positions the fins. The fin servo system consists of hydraulic actuators and valves and an electrohydraulic power supply. The electrohydraulic power consists of a battery, motor pump, oil reservoir, gas pressure bottle, and accumulator.\nVariants.\nMIM-104A.\nPatriot was first introduced with a single missile type: the MIM-104A. This was the initial \"Standard\" missile, still known as \"Standard\" today. In Patriot's early days, the system was used exclusively as an anti-aircraft weapon, with no capability against ballistic missiles. This was remedied during the late 1980s when Patriot received its first major system overhaul with the introduction of the Patriot Advanced Capability missile and concurrent system upgrades.\nMIM-104B (PAC-1).\nPatriot Advanced Capability (PAC-1), known today as the PAC-1 upgrade, was a software-only upgrade. The most significant aspects of this upgrade were changing the way the radar searched and the way the system defended its assets. Instead of searching low to the horizon, the top of the radar's search angle was lifted to near vertical (89 degrees) from the previous angle of 25 degrees. This was done as a counter to the steep parabolic trajectory of inbound ballistic missiles. The search beams of the radar were tightened, and while in \"TBM search mode\" the \"flash,\" or the speed at which these beams were shot out, was increased significantly.\nWhile this increased the radar's detection capability against the ballistic missile threat set, it decreased the system's effectiveness against traditional atmospheric targets, as it reduced the detection range of the radar as well as the number of \"flashes\" at the horizon. Because of this, it was necessary to retain the search functions for traditional atmospheric threats in a separate search program, which could be easily toggled by the operator based on the expected threat.\nThe ballistic missile defense capability changed the way Patriot defended targets. Instead of being used as a system to defend a significant area against enemy air attack, it was now used to defend much smaller \"point\" targets, which needed to lie within the system's TBM \"footprint\". The footprint is the area on the ground that Patriot can defend against inbound ballistic missiles.\nDuring the 1980s, Patriot was upgraded in relatively minor ways, mostly via its software. The most significant of these was a special upgrade to discriminate and intercept artillery rockets in the vein of the multiple rocket launcher, which was seen as a significant threat from North Korea. This feature has not been used in combat and has since been deleted from U.S. Army Patriot systems, though it remains in South Korean systems. Another upgrade the system saw was the introduction of another missile type, designated MIM-104B and called \"anti stand-off jammer\" (ASOJ) by the Army. This variant is designed to help Patriot engage and destroy ECM aircraft at standoff ranges. It works similar to an anti-radiation missile in that it flies a highly lofted trajectory and then locates, homes in on, and destroys the most significant emitter in an area designated by the operator.\nMIM-104C (PAC-2).\nDuring the late 1980s, tests began to indicate that, although Patriot was certainly capable of intercepting inbound ballistic missiles, it was questionable whether the MIM-104A/B missile was capable of destroying them reliably. This necessitated the introduction of the PAC-2 missile and system upgrade.\nFor the system, the PAC-2 upgrade was similar to the PAC-1 upgrade. Radar search algorithms were further optimized, and the beam protocol while in \"TBM search\" was further modified. PAC-2 saw Patriot's first major missile upgrade, with the introduction of the MIM-104C, or PAC-2 missile. This missile was optimized for ballistic missile engagements. Major changes to the PAC-2 missile were the size of the projectiles in its blast-fragmentation warhead, changed from around 2\u00a0grams to around 45\u00a0grams, and the timing of the pulse-Doppler radar fuze, which was optimized for high-speed engagements, though it retained its old algorithm for aircraft engagements if necessary.\nEngagement procedures were optimized, changing the method of fire the system used to engage ballistic missiles. Instead of launching two missiles in an almost simultaneous salvo, a brief delay between 3 and 4 seconds was added, in order to allow the second missile launched to discriminate a ballistic missile warhead in the aftermath of the explosion of the first.\nPAC-2 was first tested in 1987 and reached Army units in 1990, just in time for deployment to the Middle East for the Persian Gulf War. It was there that Patriot was first regarded as a successful ABM system and proof that ballistic missile defense was indeed possible. The complete study on its effectiveness remains classified.\nIn April 2013, Raytheon received U.S. Army approval for a second recertification, extending the operational life of the worldwide inventory of Patriot missiles from 30 to 45 years.\nMIM-104D (PAC-2/GEM).\nThere were more upgrades to PAC-2 systems throughout the 1990s and into the 21st century, mostly centering on software. The PAC-2 missiles were modified significantly\u2014four separate variants became known collectively as guidance enhanced missiles (GEM).\nThe main upgrade to the original GEM missile was a new, faster proximity fuzed warhead. Tests had indicated that the fuze on the original PAC-2 missiles were detonating their warheads too late when engaging ballistic missiles with an extremely steep ingress, and as such it was necessary to shorten this fuze delay. The GEM missile was given a new \"low noise\" seeker head designed to reduce interference in front of the missile's radar seeker, and a higher performance seeker designed to better detect low radar cross-section targets. The GEM was used extensively in Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF), during which air defense was highly successful.\nMIM-104E (PAC-2/GEM+).\nJust prior to OIF, it was decided to further upgrade the GEM and PAC-2 missiles. This upgrade program produced missiles known as the GEM-T and the GEM-C, the \"T\" designator referring to tactical ballistic missiles, and the \"C\" designator referring to cruise missiles. These missiles were both given a totally new nose section, which was designed specifically to be more effective against low altitude, low RCS targets like cruise missiles. The GEM-T was given a new fuze which was further optimized against ballistic missiles and a new low noise oscillator which increases the seeker's sensitivity to low radar cross-section targets. The GEM-C is the upgraded version of the GEM, and the GEM-T is the upgraded version of the PAC-2. The GEM+ entered service in November 2002.\nIn 2018, Raytheon upgraded the GEM-T guidance system with solid-state gallium nitride (GaN) transmitters. Domestic U.S. production of PAC-2 GEM-T missiles remains ongoing, with a contracted backlog of approximately 1,500 missiles and a near-term demand of an additional 1,000 missiles, while the company is producing roughly 20 missiles a month with plans to expand to 35 missiles a month by the end of 2027.\nAs of April 2024 a consortium of Patriot operators consisting of Germany, Romania, Spain, and the Netherlands had placed an order for 1,000 PAC-2 GEM-T missiles, with the bulk of production to take place in Germany in a purpose-built MBDA plant. On November 18, 2024 Boris Pistorius participated in a ground-breaking ceremony at the plant site in Schrobenhausen. \"The new facility will cover an area of approximately 6,000 square meters and create more than 300 new jobs. Construction is scheduled for completion in September 2026.\" General Christian Freuding maintained in July 2025 that the output of the plant would be \"under European control\".\nMIM-104F (PAC-3 CRI).\nThe PAC-3 upgrade is a significant upgrade to nearly every aspect of the system. It took place in three stages deployed in 1995, 1996 and 2000, and units were designated Configuration 1, 2, or 3.\nNew software update known as PDB 5 (PDB standing for \"post deployment build\") was released in 1999 with initial support for Configuration-3 ground units and PAC-3 missiles. The system itself saw another upgrade of its WCC, and the communication setup was given a complete overhaul. Due to this upgrade, PAC-3 operators can now see, transmit, and receive tracks on the Link 16 Command and Control (C2) network using a Class 2M Terminal or MIDS LVT Radio. This capability greatly increases the situational awareness of Patriot crews and other participants on the Link 16 network that are able to receive the Patriot local air picture.\nThe software can now conduct a tailored TBM search, optimizing radar resources for search in a particular sector known to have ballistic missile activity, and can support a \"keepout altitude\" to ensure ballistic missiles with chemical warheads or early release submunitions (ERS) are destroyed at a certain altitude. For Configuration 3 units, the Patriot radar was completely redesigned, adding another traveling wave tube (TWT) that increased the radar's search, detection, tracking, and discrimination abilities. The new radar is designated AN/MPQ-65. It is capable, among other things, of discriminating whether an aircraft is crewed and which of multiple reentering ballistic objects are carrying ordnance.\nThe PAC-3 upgrade carried with it a new missile design, nominally known as MIM-104F and called PAC-3 by the Army. First deployed in 1997, the PAC-3 missile evolved from the Strategic Defense Initiative's ERINT missile, and so it is dedicated almost entirely to the anti-ballistic missile mission. Due to miniaturization, a single canister can hold four PAC-3 missiles, as opposed to one PAC-2 missile per canister. The PAC-3 missile is more maneuverable than previous variants, due to 180 tiny pulse solid propellant rocket motors mounted in the forebody of the missile, called Attitude Control Motors, or ACMs, which serve to fine align the missile trajectory with its target to achieve hit-to-kill capability.\nThe most significant upgrade to the PAC-3 missile is the addition of a Ka band active radar seeker. This allows the missile to drop its uplink to the system and acquire its target itself in the terminal phase of its intercept, which improves the reaction time of the missile against a fast-moving ballistic missile target. The PAC-3 missile is accurate enough to select, target, and home in on the warhead portion of an inbound ballistic missile. The active radar gives the warhead a \"hit-to-kill\" (kinetic kill vehicle) capability that eliminates the need for a traditional proximity-fused warhead. The missile still has a small explosive warhead, called a \"lethality enhancer\", a warhead which launches 24 low-speed tungsten fragments in a radial direction to make the missile cross-section greater and enhance the kill probability. This greatly increases the lethality against ballistic missiles of all types.\nThe PAC-3 upgrade has effectively quintupled the \"footprint\" that a Patriot unit can defend against ballistic missiles of all types, and has considerably increased the system's lethality and effectiveness against ballistic missiles. It has increased the scope of ballistic missiles that Patriot can engage, which now includes several intermediate ranges. However, despite its increases in ballistic missile defense capabilities, the PAC-3 missile has a shorter range and a smaller explosive warhead compared to older Patriot missiles, making it a less capable interceptor of atmospheric aircraft and air-to-surface missiles. During initial production run, range was increased and other cost-reducing enhancements were incorporated to the PAC-3 missile, with the final variant renamed PAC-3 Cost Reduction Initiative (CRI).\nSince the PAC-3 ground units can control both M901 PAC-2 launchers and M902/M903 PAC-2/PAC-3 launchers, Patriot batteries employ a mix of PAC-3 hit-to-kill active missiles and PAC-2 GEM-T blast fragmentation warhead semi-active missiles to counter both ballistic missile and aircraft threats. While the PAC-2 is able to intercept targets up to an altitude of , the PAC-3 can destroy incoming missiles at an altitude of .\nLockheed Martin proposed an air-launched variant of the PAC-3 missile for use on the F-15C Eagle, the F-22 Raptor and the P-8A Poseidon.\nAccording to Lockheed Martin, PAC-3 CRI can be quad-packed into a VLS cell; though the Navy is considering the single-packed PAC-3 MSE version as its replacement for the SM-2 missile system, PAC-3 CRI is considered a potential follow-on project offering greater magazine depth as a tradeoff for decreased performance compared to PAC-3 MSE.\nPAC-3 MSE.\nLockheed Martin Missiles and Fire Control is the prime contractor on the PAC-3 Missile Segment Enhancement upgrade (MSE) to the Patriot air defense system which will make the missile more agile and extend its range by up to 50%.\nPatriot's PAC-3 MSE interceptor was selected as the primary interceptor for the new MEADS system when its design and development program began in 2004. MEADS is designed with plug-and-fight capabilities to support data exchange with external sensors and launchers through standardized open protocols for integrated air and missile defense (IAMD), so that MEADS elements can interoperate with allied forces on the move, attaching to and detaching from the battle management network as necessary. MEADS was scheduled to enter service alongside Patriot by 2014, with expectations that existing Patriot batteries will be gradually upgraded with MEADS technology in the long run. Because of economic conditions, in 2013 the U.S. chose to upgrade its Patriot systems instead of buying the MEADS system.\nThe PAC-3 Missile Segment upgrade consists of the PAC-3 MSE missile, a very agile hit-to-kill interceptor, the M903 Launching Station, a fire solution computer, and an Enhanced Launcher Electronics System (ELES). The PAC-3 Missile Segment Enhancement (MSE) interceptor increases altitude and range through a more powerful dual-pulse motor for added thrust, larger fins that collapse inside current launchers, and other structural modifications for more agility. The PAC-3 MSE is capable of intercepting longer-range theater ballistic missiles. The U.S. Army accepted the first PAC-3 MSE interceptors in October 2015, and Initial Operational Capability (IOC) was declared in August 2016.\nThe new M903 Launching System has a modular design capable of holding a total of 4 PAC-3 launching canisters (16 missiles), 12 PAC-3 MSE canisters (in 3 rows of 4), or 4 PAC-2 GEM canisters. It can mix different missiles, such as 6 PAC-3 MSE canisters (in 3 rows of 2) and either two PAC-3 canisters (8 missiles) or two PAC-2 canisters on the same launcher, down to combinations of a single PAC-2 canister, a single PAC-3 canister (4 missiles), 4 PAC-3 MSE canisters (in 2 rows of 2) or 2 PAC-3 MSE canisters in a single row. In December 2023 it was stated that production of Patriot interceptors was 550 a year and would be increased to 650 a year in 2024.\nIn February 2023, Lockheed Martin showcased integration of PAC-3 MSE missile with Mk 41 VLS used by Aegis BMD and Aegis Ashore. Lockheed announced it is spending $100 million to integrate the missile with the Aegis combat system and plans to test whether it can fire the missiles from a vertical launch system tied into Aegis's command-and-control technology and the SPY-1 radar in early 2024. In 2024, it was integrated with Aegis and launched from a Mark 70 Payload Delivery System VLS launcher at White Sands Missile Range. The PAC-3 MSE interceptor is viewed as a potential long-term replacement for the SM-2 interceptor due to its \"high agility\" and proven capabilities for \"counter-hypersonic, ballistic missile, and cruise missile defense in various tight envelopes\". According to Chris Mang, of Lockheed Martin's Missiles and Fire Control division, \"the missile\u2019s capabilities are only enhanced when it's put in a maritime context and paired with the Aegis system, which has a lot more power than the Army\u2019s radar systems.\" The PAC-3 MSE would fill the gap in engagement envelope at low altitudes and shorter ranges against maneuvering threats, where the SM-6 missile (which must first be boosted to high altitudes before diving down on it target) cannot easily engage; According to Mang, the PAC-3 MSE's miniaturized attitude control motors allow it to engage these targets at ranges under a kilometer. Though PAC-3 MSE is the primary contender for this replacement, PAC-3 CRI missiles are also capable of being fired from the same platforms and are considered a follow-on option if the US Navy shows interest; compared to PAC-3 MSE they provide greater magazine depth (due to quad-pack capability in a VLS cell vs. the MSE's single missile per cell) but are less performant.\nSkyCeptor (PAAC-4).\nIn August 2013, Raytheon and Rafael Advanced Defense Systems announced plans for Patriot Advanced Affordable Capability-4 (PAAC-4), which would integrate the Stunner interceptor from the jointly-funded David's Sling program with Patriot PAC-3 radars, launchers, and engagement control stations. The two-stage, multimode seeking Stunner would replace single-stage, radar-guided PAC-3 missiles produced by Lockheed Martin, providing improved operational performance at 20 percent of the $2\u00a0million unit cost of PAC-3 missiles. Israeli program officials have said that a previous teaming agreement between Raytheon and Rafael would allow the U.S. company to assume prime contractor status, and produce at least 60 percent of the Stunner missile in the United States.\nIn 2016 Raytheon announced that it had been authorized to bid SkyCeptor, a Stunner derivative, as part of its Polish Patriot bid. In March 2017 it was announced that Poland will acquire 8 Patriot batteries, with the majority of missiles deployed being SkyCeptors and only a small number of Patriot PAC-3 MSE missiles. Ultimately, Poland did not procure SkyCeptor missiles, ordering a new short-range air defence system based on CAMM and CAMM-ER missiles, integrated with Patriot batteries through the IBCS battle command system.\nElectromecanica Ploie\u0219ti, Romania, will start local production of SkyCeptor missile interceptors by 2026.\nUpgrades.\nPAC-3 system upgrades continue under the International Engineering Services Program (IESP) which includes all countries that rely on the Patriot for integrated air and missile defense - as of 2022, the United States of America, The Netherlands, Germany, Japan, Israel, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Taiwan, Greece, Spain, South Korea, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Romania, Sweden, Poland, Bahrain, and Switzerland.\nThe PDB 6 software update was released in 2004. This update allowed Configuration-3 to discriminate targets of all types, including anti-radiation missile carriers, helicopters, unmanned aerial vehicles, and cruise missiles.\nThe PDB 7 system upgrade was released in 2013. It improves radar search capabilities with a transition to digital signal processing, resulting in much better reliability and 30% longer range comparing to analog circuits. Processing power of the new command and control computer is higher by several orders of magnitude. Operator's monochrome CRT displays with hard-wired buttons were replaced by two color touchscreen LCD monitors.\nThe PAC-3 Missile Segment Enhancement (MSE) upgrade was fielded in 2015. It includes a new fin design and a more powerful rocket engine.\nIn 2017, the AN/MPQ-65 radar was upgraded with active electronically scanned array (AESA) solid-state gallium nitride (GaN) transmitters in place of conventional traveling-wave tubes with a passive array of transmitters. The new radar has been redesignated AN/MPQ-65A. It includes a bolt-on replacement antenna array and two smaller rear panel arrays which provide 360-degree coverage.\nDuring 2018\u20132023, Raytheon Company will further enhance the system under a modernization task order from the United States Army, resulting in Configuration-3+. The order includes five annual, indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity task order awards with a total contract ceiling of more than $2.3\u00a0billion, funded by Patriot partner states. The initial $235\u00a0million award was allocated in January 2018.\nThe PDB 8 upgrade released in 2018 includes redesigned fire control computers which support MSE capabilities, new weapons control computers with increased processing power, and software enhancements to radar search and target detection and identification which help reduce friendly fire incidents. The latest PDB 8.1 software started testing in 2019 and will reach operational status by 2023. It adds a revamped game-style GUI named \"Warfighter to Machine Interface\" (WMI) which employs 3D graphics to render the terrain and the airspace.\nFuture upgrades to the Patriot system will include the new Lower Tier Air and Missile Defense Sensor or LTAMDS with support for a Integrated Air and Missile Defense Battle Command System (IBCS) - which will integrate Patriot's LTAMDS, AN/MPQ-53 and AN/MPQ-65/65A radars with AN/MPQ-64 Sentinel and AN/TPS-80 G/ATOR, GhostEye MR (NASAMS), MFCR and SR from MEADS, AN/SPY-1 and AN/SPY-6 (Aegis BMD), AN/TPY-2 (THAAD and GMD) and AN/APG-81 (F-35 Lightning II) radars - and Mode 5 transponder interrogation in the identification friend or foe system. On February 7, 2025, Raytheon's LTAMDS radar successfully completed a live-fire test, detecting and tracking a high-speed cruise missile and guiding a PAC-2 GEM-T interceptor to neutralize the threat. As part of an ongoing U.S. Army test program, LTAMDS continues advancing toward full deployment, with strong international interest and a $2 billion contract to supply radars to the U.S. and Poland.\nPatriot battalion.\nIn the U.S. Army, the Patriot System is designed around the battalion echelon. A Patriot battalion consists of a headquarters battery, which includes the Patriot ICC and its operators, a maintenance company, and between four and six \"line batteries,\" which are the actual launching batteries that employ the Patriot systems. Each line battery consists of (nominally) six launchers and three or four platoons: Fire Control platoon, Launcher platoon, and a Headquarters/Maintenance platoon - either a single platoon or separated into two separate units, at the battery commander's discretion.\nThe Fire Control platoon is responsible for operating and maintaining the \"big 4,\" radar, the engagement control station, the antenna mast group, and the electric power plant. The launcher platoon operates and maintains the launchers. The Headquarters/Maintenance platoon(s) provide the battery with maintenance support and a headquarters section. The Patriot line battery is commanded by a captain and usually consists of between 70 and 90 soldiers. The Patriot battalion is commanded by a lieutenant colonel and can include as many as 600 soldiers.\nOnce deployed, the system requires a crew of only three individuals to operate. The Tactical Control Officer (TCO), usually a lieutenant, is responsible for the operation of the system. The TCO is assisted by the Tactical Control Assistant (TCA). Communications are handled by the third crewmember, the communications system specialist. A \"hot-crew\" composed of an NCOIC (usually a Sergeant) and one or more additional launcher crew members is on-hand to repair or refuel launching stations. A reload crew is on standby to replace spent canisters after missiles are launched. The ICC crew is similar to the ECS crew at the battery level, except its operators are designated as the Tactical Director (TD) and the Tactical Director Assistant (TDA).\nPatriot battalions prefer to operate in a centralized fashion, with the ICC controlling the launches of all of its subordinate launching batteries through the secure UHF PADIL communications network.\nThe dismounted Patriot ICC (D-PICC) is a set of equipment which is composed of the same hardware as that at battalion level, but which distributes command and control over the launching batteries, which allows the batteries to disperse over a wider geographic area, with no loss of command and control. D-PICC is deploying to Pacific Command first.\nU.S. Army Patriot battalions have been heavily deployed, and for years maintained the highest operational tempo across any units in the service with the longest deployments.\nOperation.\nEngaging a single aircraft.\nFollowing is the process a PAC-2 firing battery uses to engage a single target (an aircraft) with a single missile:\nEngaging a ballistic missile.\nFollowing is the process a PAC-3 firing battery uses to engage a single tactical ballistic missile with two PAC-3 missiles:\nOperational history.\nPersian Gulf War (1991).\nTrial by fire.\nPrior to the First Gulf War, ballistic missile defense was an unproven concept in war. During Operation Desert Storm, in addition to its anti-aircraft mission, the Patriot was assigned to shoot down incoming Iraqi Scud or Al Hussein short range ballistic missiles launched at Israel and Saudi Arabia. The first combat use of Patriot occurred January 18, 1991, when it engaged what was later found to be a computer glitch. There were actually no Scuds fired at Saudi Arabia on January 18. This incident was widely misreported as the first successful interception of an enemy ballistic missile in history.\nThroughout the war, Patriot missiles attempted engagement of over 40 hostile ballistic missiles. The success of these engagements, and in particular how many of them were real targets, is still controversial. Postwar video analysis of presumed interceptions by Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professor Theodore Postol suggests that no Scud was actually hit. This analysis is contested by Peter D. Zimmerman, who claimed that photographs of the fuselage of downed Scud missiles in Saudi Arabia demonstrated that the Scud missiles were fired into Saudi Arabia and were riddled with fragments from the lethality enhancer of Patriot Missiles.\nFailure at Dhahran.\nOn February 25, 1991, an Iraqi Al Hussein Scud missile hit the barracks in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, killing 28 soldiers from the U.S. Army's 14th Quartermaster Detachment.\nA government investigation revealed that the failed intercept at Dhahran had been caused by a software error in the system's handling of timestamps. The Patriot missile battery at Dhahran had been in operation for 100 hours, by which time the system's internal clock had drifted by one-third of a second. Due to the missile's speed this was equivalent to a miss distance of 600 meters.\nThe radar system had successfully detected the Scud and predicted where to look for it next. However, the timestamps of the two radar pulses being compared were converted to floating point differently: one correctly, the other introducing an error proportionate to the operation time so far (100 hours) caused by the truncation in a 24-bit fixed-point register. As a result, the difference between the pulses was wrong, so the system looked in the wrong part of the sky and found no target. With no target, the initial detection was assumed to be a spurious track and the missile was removed from the system. No interception was attempted, and the Scud impacted on a makeshift barracks in an Al Khobar warehouse, killing 28 soldiers, the first Americans to be killed from the Scuds that Iraq had launched against Saudi Arabia and Israel.\nTwo weeks earlier, on February 11, 1991, the Israelis had identified the problem and informed the U.S. Army and the PATRIOT Project Office, the software manufacturer. As a stopgap measure, the Israelis had recommended rebooting the system's computers regularly. The manufacturer supplied updated software to the Army on February 26.\nThere had previously been failures in the MIM-104 system at the Joint Defense Facility Nurrungar in Australia, which was charged with processing signals from satellite-based early launch detection systems.\nSuccess rate vs. accuracy.\nOn February 15, 1991, President George H. W. Bush traveled to Raytheon's Patriot manufacturing plant in Andover, Massachusetts, during the Gulf War. He declared, the \"Patriot is 41 for 42: 42 Scuds engaged, 41 intercepted!\" The President's claimed success rate was over 97% at that point in the war.\nOn April 7, 1992, Theodore Postol of MIT, and Reuven Pedatzur of Tel Aviv University testified before a House Committee claiming that, according to their independent analysis of video tapes, the Patriot system had a success rate of below 10%, and perhaps even a zero success rate.\nOn April 7, 1992, Charles A. Zraket of Harvard Kennedy School and Peter Zimmerman of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a think tank funded by the United States government and Raytheon, testified about the calculation of success rates and accuracy in Israel and Saudi Arabia and discounted many of the statements and methodologies in Postol's report. According to Zimmerman, it is important to note the difference in terms when analyzing the performance of the system during the war:\nIn accordance with the standard firing doctrine, on average four Patriots were launched at each incoming Scud\u00a0\u2013 in Saudi Arabia an average of three Patriots were fired. The large number of missiles fired suggests low confidence in individual missiles and that a higher rate of successful interceptions was achieved through brute force. For example, if a Patriot has a 50% individual success rate, two missiles will intercept 75% of the time, and three will intercept 87.5% of the time. Only one has to hit for a successful interception, but this does not mean that the other missiles would not also have hit.\nThe Iraqi redesign of the Scuds also played a role. Iraq had redesigned its Scuds by removing weight from the warhead to increase speed and range, but the changes weakened the missile and made it unstable during flight, creating a tendency for the Scud to break up during its descent from near space. This presented a larger number of targets as it was unclear which piece contained the warhead.\nAccording to the Zraket testimony, there was a lack of high quality photographic equipment necessary to record the interceptions of targets. Therefore, Patriot crews recorded each launch on standard-definition videotape, which was insufficient for detailed analysis. Damage assessment teams videotaped the Scud debris that was found on the ground. Crater analysis was then used to determine if the warhead was destroyed before the debris crashed or not. Part of the reason for the 30% improvement in success rate in Saudi Arabia compared to Israel is that the Patriot merely had to push the incoming Scud missiles away from military targets in the desert or disable the Scud's warhead in order to avoid casualties, while in Israel the Scuds were aimed directly at cities and civilian populations.\nThe Saudi Government also censored any reporting of Scud damage by the Saudi press. The Israeli Government did not institute the same type of censorship. Patriot's success rate in Israel was examined by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) who did not have a political reason to play up Patriot's success rate. The IDF counted any Scud that exploded on the ground, regardless of whether or not it was diverted, as a failure for the Patriot. Meanwhile, the U.S. Army, which had many reasons to support a high success rate for Patriot, examined the performance of Patriot in Saudi Arabia.\nBoth testimonies state that part of the problems stem from its original design as an anti-aircraft system. Patriot was designed with proximity fused warheads, which are designed to explode immediately prior to hitting a target spraying shrapnel out in a fan in front of the missile, either destroying or disabling the target. These missiles were fired at the target's center of mass. With aircraft this was fine, but considering the much higher speeds of tactical ballistic missiles, as well as the location of the warhead, usually in the nose, Patriot most often hit closer to the tail of the Scud due to the delay present in the proximity fused warhead, thus not destroying the missile's warhead and allowing it to fall to earth.\nIn response to the testimonies and other evidence, the staff of the House Government Operations Subcommittee on Legislation and National Security reported, \"The Patriot missile system was not the spectacular success in the Persian Gulf War that the American public was led to believe. There is little evidence to prove that the Patriot hit more than a few Scud missiles launched by Iraq during the Gulf War, and there are some doubts about even these engagements. The public and the United States Congress were misled by definitive statements of success issued by administration and Raytheon representatives during and after the war.\"\nUS-led invasion of Iraq (2003).\nPatriot was deployed to Iraq a second time in 2003, this time to provide air and missile defense for the forces conducting Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF). Patriot PAC-3, GEM, and GEM+ missiles both had a very high success rate, intercepting Al-Samoud 2 and Ababil-100 tactical ballistic missiles. No longer-range ballistic missiles were fired during that conflict. The systems were stationed in Kuwait and Iraq, and successfully destroyed a number of hostile surface-to-surface missiles using the new PAC-3 and guidance enhanced missiles.\nPatriot missile batteries were involved in three friendly fire incidents. On March 23, 2003, a Royal Air Force Tornado was shot down, killing both crew members, Flight Lieutenant Kevin Barry Main (pilot) and Flight Lieutenant David Rhys Williams (navigator/WSO). On March 24, 2003, a USAF F-16CJ Fighting Falcon fired a HARM anti-radiation missile at a Patriot missile battery after the Patriot's radar had locked onto and prepared to fire at the aircraft, causing the pilot to mistake it for an Iraqi surface-to-air missile system because the aircraft was in air combat operations and was on its way to a mission near Baghdad. The HARM destroyed the Patriot's radar system with no casualties. Afterwards the Patriot Radar was examined and continued to operate, but was replaced due to a chance that a fragment might have penetrated it and gone undetected.\nOn April 2, 2003, two PAC-3 missiles shot down a USN F/A-18 Hornet, killing U.S. Navy Lieutenant Nathan D. White of VFA-195, Carrier Air Wing Five.\nPost-2003 service in Iraq.\nA US Army Patriot battery in Erbil, Iraq shot down at least one Iranian ballistic missile during the 2024 Iranian strikes in Israel.\nService with Israel.\nThe Israeli Air Defense Command operated MIM-104D Patriot (PAC-2/GEM+) batteries with Israeli upgrades. The Israel Defense Forces' designation for the Patriot weapon system was \"Yahalom\" (, \"diamond\"). On April 30, 2024, the Israeli Air Force published an article stating that their Patriot batteries would be decommissioned in two months, being replaced by \"more advanced air systems\". According to \"The War Zone\", the Patriot was replaced by the David's Sling and Arrow systems. Following the announcement, Ukraine initiated talks on obtaining retired Israeli Patriot systems in April 2024. On January 28, 2025, a US defense official confirmed to the \"CNN\" that 90 ex-Israeli interceptors were transferred to Ukraine via the United States. Reportedly Kyiv will also receive components for the system, including radars, after being refurbished in the US.\nOperation Protective Edge (2014).\nDuring Operation Protective Edge, Patriot batteries of the Israeli Air Defense Command intercepted and destroyed two unmanned aerial vehicles launched by Hamas. The interception of a Hamas drone in July 2014, was the first time in the history of the Patriot system's use that it successfully intercepted an enemy aircraft.\nSyrian civil war (2014\u2013).\nIn Israeli service in the Syrian civil war, Patriot has primarily been active in drone and air defense, rather than a missile defense capacity. In August 2014, a Syrian unmanned aerial vehicle was shot down by an Israeli Air Defense Command MIM-104D Patriot missile near Quneitra, after it had penetrated the airspace over the Israeli-controlled Golan Heights. In September 2014, a Syrian Air Force Sukhoi Su-24 was shot down in similar circumstances. Since 2014, Israeli Patriots have missed several Syrian drones, including two misses in July 2016 and another in June 2018; as well as several successful shootdowns against Syrian drones in April 2017 July 11 and 13, 2018, as well as against a Hezbollah intelligence drone attempting to infiltrate Israel in September 2017 through the Golan. On July 24, 2018, an Israeli Patriot missile shot down a Syrian Sukhoi Su-22 fighter which had crossed into Israeli airspace.\nService with Saudi Arabia.\nPatriot has continued to see usage in Saudi Arabia against Houthi missile attacks. In June 2015, a Patriot battery was used to shoot down a Scud missile, fired at Saudi Arabia by Houthi rebels in response to the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen. Another Scud was fired at an electricity station in Jizan Province and intercepted by a Saudi Patriot in August 2015. Saudi Arabia claims that another long-range ballistic missile was fired toward Mecca and intercepted by a Saudi Patriot in October 2016. Houthi sources said that the missile's intended target was the air force base in King Abdulaziz International Airport in Jeddah, 65\u00a0km (40miles) north-west of Mecca. In March 2018, another missile, apparently fired from Yemen, was intercepted by a Patriot missile over Riyadh. Videos showed one interceptor exploded just after launch and another did a \"U turn\" midair toward Riyadh. During the Abqaiq\u2013Khurais attack in September 2019, the six battalions of Patriot missile defense systems owned by Saudi Arabia failed to protect its oil facilities from attacks by multiple drones and suspected cruise missiles. The United States removed two of its four Patriot antimissile batteries securing oil fields in Saudi Arabia in May 2020, following an easing of tensions with Iran. They were to be replaced by Saudi's own Patriot batteries. In February 2021, a Patriot battery intercepted a ballistic missile over Riyadh that was fired by Houthis as a Formula E race was held on the outskirts of the city in Diriyah, attended by Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman.\nService with the United Arab Emirates.\nAccording to Brigadier General Murad Turaiq, the commander of some of the Yemeni forces allied to the Saudi-led coalition currently fighting in Yemen, Patriot air defense systems deployed to Yemen by the United Arab Emirates (UAE) have successfully intercepted two ballistic missiles fired by Houthi forces. General Turaiq told the Abu Dhabi-based \"The National\" newspaper on November 14, 2015, that the first missile was shot down late the previous day in the Al-Gofainah area and a second was intercepted before it hit the building hosting the control centre for forces operating in Marib and Al-Baydah provinces. Airbus Defence and Space satellite imagery obtained by IHS Jane's showed two Patriot fire units, each with two launchers, deployed at the Safir airstrip in Marib province on October 1.\nTalisman Sabre Exercise.\nIn July 2021, the US Army used a battery of Patriot missiles in the Exercise Talisman Saber in the Shoalwater Bay Training Area in Queensland, Australia. The US Army test fired Patriot PAC-2 interceptor missiles and successfully intercepted target drones.\nService with Eastern Europe.\nPatriot sales and contributions to Poland and Ukraine.\nRussia's 2014 invasion of Crimea led to a \"sales burst\" for the Patriot system, with Romania, Poland, and Sweden signing onto the system between the start of the invasion and the wider invasion of Ukraine in 2022. In response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, on March 9, 2022, the U.S. European Command announced that it would send two Patriot air defense systems to Poland to \"proactively counter any potential threat to U.S. and Allied forces and NATO territory\". Poland asked Germany to transfer the Patriots to Ukraine. Germany declined. On December 19, Ukraine President Zelenskyy talked about negotiating personally with US President Biden over a potential transfer of Patriot missile systems. He said they offer \"a (better) distance, radius of reflection, protection\". Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba said that this was the most difficult diplomatic issue they had faced. One day later, the Biden administration announced it would be delivering another $1.85\u00a0billion in aid to Ukraine that would include a Patriot battery During a meeting with Zelenskyy in front of the press at the White House on December 21, Biden confirmed that the United States would send a Patriot battery to Ukraine, noting that it would take \"months\" to train the \"dozens\" of soldiers needed to operate the system, probably in Germany. Providing a Patriot missile system is seen as a symbol of Western engagement in the conflict, although its range is only local.\nOther nations subsequently announced plans to send their own Patriot batteries. On January 5, 2023, Germany announced that it would supply one Patriot battery to Ukraine as a part of their own military aid package. On January 17, 2023, the Netherlands announced it too will send one launcher, and added a second launcher on January 20. The Dutch government announced it will send launchers (Dutch: \"lanceerinrichtingen\") and missiles, not complete systems (a battery) which includes radars, etc. On April 19, a German government website announced that the country had delivered a Patriot system to Ukraine. A second Patriot battery was delivered on April 27 from the United States. On August 9, 2023, it was announced that Germany would provide an additional complete Patriot battery to Ukraine. The system was delivered on December 13 after the Ukrainian crew completed training in Germany.\nSo, during 2023, three Patriot batteries were delivered to Ukraine.\nPatriot operations in the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nPatriot has had a successful track record in Ukraine during the Russo-Ukrainian War, successfully intercepting a wide range of Russian weaponry and aircraft. It has shot down Russian aircraft like Su-34 fighters flying nearly 100 miles away, and intercepted missiles as far as 130 miles away, according to defense NGO reports. During October 2023, under a program called \"FrankenSAM\" Western and Soviet air defence technologies are being combined in Ukraine. One of three programs involves a Ukrainian radar guiding a Patriot missile. It has been tested and is expected to be operational by winter.\nAircraft interceptions - May 2023.\nOn May 13, 2023, a Patriot battery was allegedly used to destroy at least four (possibly five) aircraft belonging to a Russian strike package over Bryansk Oblast, Russia. Visually confirmed losses included a Su-34, Su-35, and two Mil Mi-8 helicopters. On May 19, U.S. defense officials and congressional staffers told CNN that a Patriot system had been used by the Ukrainian army to shoot down at least one Russian jet a few weeks before. The spokesman of the Ukrainian Air Force later confirmed the shoot down of a Russian Su-34, Su-35, two Mi-8MTPR EW helicopters, and an Mi-8 transport helicopter by the Patriot system.\nMissile defense.\nDuring a night time attack on the Kyiv region on May 4, 2023, Ukraine air defense claimed a hypersonic Kh-47M2 Kinzhal ballistic missile was shot down by a Patriot missile defence system. Yurii Ihnat, the spokesman for the Ukrainian Air Force, initially denied the claim of interception, but on May 6 it was finally confirmed by Commander of the UAF Mykola Oleschuk. Prior to this interception, intercepting a Kinzhal missile was only a \"theoretical\" capability. Unnamed US officials claimed the missile was aimed at the Patriot system which intercepted it, and that the Ukrainians fired multiple Patriot missiles at different angles to intercept the Kinzhal missile. A Pentagon spokesman later confirmed that Ukraine downed the Kinzhal missile.\nOn May 16, 2023, the Ukrainian Air Force claimed to have shot down eighteen missiles, including six Kh-47M2 Kinzhal missiles, and uncertain number of attack drones. The Russian Defense Ministry stated in response that six Kinzhal missiles hadn't even been fired, and furthermore claimed that a Patriot battery in Kyiv was destroyed by a Kinzhal missile, citing social media footage. U.S. officials confirmed that the Patriot system was damaged, but stated that the damage was \"minimal\" or \"insignificant\", the radar was intact and that the system could likely be repaired locally without needing to be moved out of Ukraine. The battery was returned to operational status after minor repairs. It has not yet been established whether the Patriot had been damaged by the fragments of the downed Russian missile or by a direct hit. The following day, U.S. officials told the New York Times that \"a Patriot system had been damaged in the attack but added that the Patriot remained operational against all threats,\" while Deputy Pentagon Spokeswoman Sabrina Singh announced that the Patriot system had been fixed, with assistance from the US. In contradiction to the U.S. announcement, the Russian Ministry of Defense claimed that the system's multifunctional radar station and five launchers were destroyed.\nAfter two missile attacks on May 29, 2023, Ukrainian President Zelenskyy announced that all missiles were intercepted and according to Ukrainian Air Force spokesman, Yuriy Ihnat, these were assumed to likely be Iskander-M ballistic missiles. Dashcam video captured the debris from an expended PAC-3 CRI missile falling in between passing vehicles.\nAccording to a report by the US Defense Intelligence Agency, Russia upgraded 9K720 Iskander and Kh-47M2 Kinzhal missiles with a terminal phase maneuvering capability in spring 2025 in order to bypass Ukraine's Patriot systems. A Financial Times article from October 2025 said, citing current and former Ukrainian and Western officials, that interception rates dropped from 37% in August to 6% in September, allowing Russia to seriously damage key military sites, four drone plants, and critical infrastructure ahead of the winter.\nLosses.\nOn March 9, 2024, video footage emerged showing the destruction of an Armed Forces of Ukraine convoy that allegedly contained at least two M901 Patriot missile launchers near the city of Pokrovsk in Donetsk Oblast. The convoy was reportedly struck by a Russian Iskander-M ballistic missile. The Armed Forces of Ukraine has not commented on the video.\nOn April 5, 2024, a damaged Ukrainian Patriot launcher was delivered to the United States. It is not yet known exactly where the launcher was damaged.\nAccording to Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, a Patriot radar was allegedly damaged in a Russian strike and deemed unrepairable by the manufacturer, but was repaired by military technical staff from the German Luftwaffe working sixteen hours a day from Monday to Saturday. The radar was transported back to Ukraine in July 2025 and by early August had been used in a successful intercept of a Russian strike.\nAccording to Oryx, on 24 September 2025 a Ukrainian AN/MPQ-53 Patriot radar site was destroyed in an Iskander strike.\nDemands on Patriot systems.\nIncluding the United States, 18 countries operate Patriot missile systems. Outside the US, only Japan's Mitsubishi Heavy Industries appears to build Patriot missiles, under licence from various US companies. This has led to a demand on the US Army. Patriot batteries are the most deployed units in the US Army by early 2021. Some units have had a 6-month deployment extended up to 15 months. The missile is currently being used in active service in Saudi Arabia. In active use by the IDF in the \"southern Negev desert\". The Patriot missile batteries are also seeing active service in Ukraine, where there are three batteries in service. To refill US stockpiles, Japan has modified its export rules to allow export of missiles to the United States. Previously only specific components could be exported now entire missiles can be exported. They cannot be sent directly to Ukraine, however they can backfill US stockpiles. Recent withdrawal of the missiles from the Middle East were done to help deal with a potential crisis in the Pacific. Likewise Germany has withdrawn its three Patriot units from Poland.\nNATO has announced a plan to purchase some 1000 Patriot missiles. A $5.5 billion contract has been awarded to Raytheon and MBDA to establish a new production facility in Germany. The U.S. is also ramping up production domestically. In 2018, Lockheed Martin was building 350 PAC-3 MSE missiles annually and was working to ramp up its production to 500 missiles a year prior to Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. In December 2023, Lockheed hit their production goal of 500 missiles per year, and is \"fully funded by the U.S. Army to build 550 missiles annually\" at its new 85,000 square-foot Camden, Arkansas facility. Lockheed has announced plans to ramp up production of PAC-3 MSE interceptors to 650 annually by 2027, though it notes this will be done through internal investment, having not received Army funding for the production increase. Lockheed also intends to increase export shipments for the missile, with six new international customers signing letters of approval in 2023. Aerojet Rocketdyne, which produces the PAC-3 MSE motor, opened a 51,000 square foot production facility next to Lockheed's Camden site in 2022, and has increased rocket motor production by 60% from 70,000 in 2021 to 115,000 in 2023 across all types including the PAC-3 MSE rocket motor.\nOn June 20, 2024, the US government is set to announce the suspension of all exports of Patriot missiles and systems \u201cuntil Ukraine has enough to defend itself from Russia\u2019s air attacks\u201d. This decision affects five countries who have agreed to the suspension. The Romanian government has announced that it will send a \u201cfull\u201d Patriot battery to Ukraine, provided that the US government \u201chelp(s) cover the gap\u201d.\nIn January 2025, 90 Patriot air defense interceptors were transferred from Israel to Ukraine by the United States. Axios reported that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu approved their transfer in September 2024. \nIn May 2025, US Secretary of State Marco Rubio told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee \"frankly, we don\u2019t have\" spare Patriot systems for Ukraine, and the US was encouraging NATO allies to donate Patriot missiles and systems from their stock.\nIn June 2025, the Foreign Ministry of Israel denied providing Patriot air defense systems to Ukraine, contradicting an earlier suggestion by its envoy in Kyiv that such a transfer had occurred. On September 27, 2025, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy confirmed that Israel had supplied Ukraine with a Patriot air defense battery, stating that the system was already installed and operational. Zelensky further announced that two additional Patriot batteries would be delivered by Israel in the fall of 2025. \nOperators.\nCurrent operators:\nCurrent.\nThe RJAF operates three or four Patriot missile batteries, acquired from Germany. Batteries are in operational deployment.\nIn August 2010, the US Defense Security Cooperation Agency announced that Kuwait had formally requested to buy 209 MIM-104E PAC-2 missiles. In August 2012, Kuwait purchased 60 MIM-104F PAC-3 missiles, along with four radars and 20 launchers.\nIn March 2018 the Ministry of National Defence signed a deal worth $4.75\u00a0billion for two Patriot Configuration 3+ batteries, to be delivered in 2022. The purchase included Northrop Grumman's Integrated Air and Missile Defense Battle Command System (IBCS) and four fire units equipped with four AN/MPQ-65 radars, 16 launchers, four Engagement Control Stations, six Engagement Operation Centers, 12 IFCN Relays and 208 PAC-3 MSE missiles. In December 2022 the first battery was delivered to Poland. In June 2023, the State Department approved a potential sale of additional IBCS-capable equipment valued at $15\u00a0billion, which included 12 LTAMDS (GhostEye) radars, 48 M903 launchers, and 644 PAC-3 MSE missiles. Finally, contracts for the purchase of six complete Patriot batteries with a training, service and logistics package were signed and approved by the Minister of National Defense Mariusz B\u0142aszczak on September 5, 2023, at the International Defense Industry Exhibition in Kielce, Poland. As of April 2025 Poland is manufacturing transport and launch containers for PAC-3 MSE. Lockheed Martin took delivery of the container from the Polish factory at Wojskowe Zak\u0142ady Lotnicze Nr 1 on April 17, 2025.\nIn November 2012, it was announced the export from the United States of 11 Patriot batteries (PAC-3 configuration), 246 MIM-104E GEM-T and 786 PAC-3 missiles and related equipment. Declared operational in November 2018.\nThe Romanian Air Force received its first system of Patriot surface-to-air missiles in September 2020, with the last three received by 2023.\nThe government of Romania signed in the agreement to purchase seven Patriot Configuration 3 units, complete with radars, a control station, antennas, launching stations, and power plants in November 2017. Included are 168 Patriot Advanced Capability \u2013 3 Missile Segment Enhancement (PAC-3 MSE) and 56 Patriot MIM-104E PAC-2 Guidance Enhanced Missile TBM (GEM-T) missiles. The agreement was valued at around $4\u00a0billion. Another three systems are to enter service with the Land Forces.\nSweden decided in competition with Aster 30 SAMP/T to request an offer for the Patriot system in November 2017 and in August 2018 an agreement was signed for four units and 12 launchers to form two battalions. No follow-up orders are to be made.\nThe initial cost for the project was estimated at approximately 10\u00a0billion SEK. However, the United States has since granted Sweden the option to purchase up to 300 air defense missiles for a maximum value of $3.2\u00a0billion. This figure, corresponded to 28\u00a0billion SEK as of July 2018. The system, known as \"Luftv\u00e4rnssystem 103\" (\"Anti-air system 103\") in Sweden, was delivered over the years 2021-2022.\nThe first Swedish troops were training on the system at Fort Sill in December 2018. The Swedish Defence Materiel Administration accepted the first deliveries in April 2021 and System Integration and Check Out was initiated by Swedish Armed Forces. The system was officially activated with the Swedish Armed forces in November 2021. The final unit was delivered in December 2022.\nUkraine currently has 10 Patriot batteries. Five batteries have been donated by Germany and another three by the United States. Israel and Romania has donated one battery each. Ukraine plans to purchase 27 more systems from the US manufacturers.\nIn 2014, the United Arab Emirates closed a deal worth nearly $4\u00a0billion with Lockheed Martin and Raytheon to buy and operate the latest development of the PAC-3 system, as well as 288 of Lockheed's PAC-3 missiles, and 216 GEM-T missiles. The deal was part of the development of a national defense system to protect the Emirates from air threats. In 2019, the United Arab Emirates Armed Forces purchased 452 Patriot Advanced Capability 3 (PAC-3) Missiles Segment Enhanced (MSE) and related equipment for an estimated cost of $2.728\u00a0billion.\nThe US Army operates a total of 1,106 Patriot launchers. In 2023, 480 were in service. It has donated three batteries to Ukraine.\nFormer.\nOperated 8 PAC-2/GEM+ \"Yahalom\" batteries. Replaced by the David's Sling and Arrow systems in 2024. In January 2025, a US defense official confirmed that about 90 interceptors along with one battery was sent to Ukraine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52025", "revid": "15946549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52025", "title": "Patriot missile system", "text": ""}
{"id": "52026", "revid": "1166834154", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52026", "title": "Anatosaurus", "text": ""}
{"id": "52027", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52027", "title": "Niagara River", "text": "River in New York, United States and Ontario, Canada\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Routemap/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Niagara River ( ) flows north from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario, forming part of the border between Ontario, Canada, to the west, and New York, United States, to the east. The origin of the river's name is debated. Iroquoian scholar Bruce Trigger suggests it is derived from a branch of the local Neutral Confederacy, referred to as the \"Niagagarega\" people on several late-17th-century French maps. George R. Stewart posits that it comes from an Iroquois town named \"Ongniaahra\", meaning \"point of land cut in two.\"\nThe river, occasionally described as a strait, is approximately long and includes the Niagara Falls. Over the past 12,000 years, the falls have moved roughly upstream from the leading edge of the Niagara Escarpment, creating a gorge below the falls. Today, the diversion of the river for electricity generation has significantly slowed the rate of erosion. The total elevation drop along the river is . The Niagara Gorge, downstream from the falls, includes the Niagara Whirlpool and additional rapids.\nPower plants on the river include the Sir Adam Beck Hydroelectric Generating Stations (built in 1922 and 1954) on the Canadian side, and the Robert Moses Niagara Power Plant (built in 1961) on the American side, collectively generating 4.4 gigawatts of electricity. The International Control Dam, constructed in 1954, regulates river flow. Ships on the Great Lakes use the Welland Canal, part of the St. Lawrence Seaway, on the Canadian side of the river, to bypass Niagara Falls.\nThe Niagara River features two large islands and several smaller ones. Grand Island and Navy Island, the two largest, are on the American and Canadian sides, respectively. Goat Island and the small Luna Island divide Niagara Falls into three sections: Horseshoe Falls, Bridal Veil Falls, and American Falls. Unity Island lies further upstream, adjacent to the city of Buffalo.\nThe Niagara River and its tributaries, Tonawanda Creek and the Welland River, formed part of the final section of the Erie Canal and Welland Canal. After leaving Lockport, the Erie Canal heads southwest into Tonawanda Creek. Upon entering the Niagara River, watercraft proceed south to the final lock, where a short canal section allows boats to bypass turbulent shoal water and enter Lake Erie. The Welland Canals used the Welland River to connect to the Niagara River south of the falls, enabling water traffic to safely re-enter the river and continue to Lake Erie.\nHistory.\nThe Niagara River and Falls have been known outside of North America since the late 17th century, when Father Louis Hennepin, a French explorer, first witnessed them. He wrote about his travels in \"A New Discovery of a Vast Country in America\" (1698).\nThe Niagara River was the site of the earliest recorded railway in America. It was an inclined wooden tramway built by John Montresor (1736\u20131799), a British military engineer, in 1764. Called \"The Cradles\" and \"The Old Lewiston Incline\", it featured loaded carts pulled up wooden rails by rope. It facilitated the movement of goods over the Niagara Escarpment in present-day Lewiston, New York.\nIn 1781, the Niagara Purchase was signed, involving a strip of land bordering the west bank of the Niagara River, connecting Lake Erie and Lake Ontario.\nSeveral battles occurred along the Niagara River, which was historically defended by Fort George (Canadian side) and Fort Niagara (American side) at the mouth of the river and Fort Erie (Canadian side) at the head of the river. These forts were important during the Seven Years' War (known as the French and Indian War in the United States) and the American Revolutionary War. The Battle of Queenston Heights took place near the river in the War of 1812.\nThe river was an important route to liberation before the American Civil War, as many African Americans escaping slavery on the Underground Railroad crossed it to find freedom in Canada. The Freedom Crossing Monument stands on the bank of the river in Lewiston to commemorate the courage of the escaping slaves and the local volunteers who helped them secretly cross the river.\nIn the 1880s, the Niagara River became the first waterway in the world harnessed for large-scale generation of hydroelectricity.\nOn the Canadian side of the river the provincial agency Niagara Parks Commission maintains all of the shoreline property, including Fort Erie, except the sites of Fort George (a National Historic Site maintained federally by Parks Canada), as a public greenspace and environmental heritage.\nOn the American side, the New York State Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation maintains several state parks adjacent to Niagara Falls and the Niagara River.\nToday, the river is the namesake of Niagara Herald Extraordinary at the Canadian Heraldic Authority.\nCities and settlements.\nCities and towns along the Niagara River include:\nPollution.\nThe Niagara River is listed as a Great Lakes Areas of Concern in The Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement between the United States and Canada.\nCrossings.\nThe Niagara River has a long history of both road and rail bridges spanning the river, both upstream and downstream of the Falls. This history includes numerous bridges that have fallen victim to the harsh conditions of the Niagara Gorge, such as landslides and icepacks.\nParks.\nThe following parks are located along the Niagara River:\nA Niagara River Greenway Plan is in progress in the United States.\nIslands.\nSeveral islands are located on the upper river upriver from the falls:\nMilitary posts.\nUnited States Coast Guard Fort Niagara Station was once a United States Army post. There are no Canadian Coast Guard posts along the river. Fort Mississauga, Fort George and Fort Erie are former British and Canadian military forts (last used 1953, 1965 and 1923 respectively) and are now parks. \nNavy Island Royal Naval Shipyard was used by the French Navy in the 18th century as a naval base and by the Royal Navy from 1763 as a small shipyard, and abandoned around 1818 after the ratification of the Rush\u2013Bagot Treaty in 1817.\nRoads.\nOn the Canadian side the Niagara Parkway travels along the River from Lake Ontario to Lake Erie.\n lines the river on the state side from Fort Niagara to Lewiston. on the state side only travels along the River from the Falls to Lewiston. The remaining river sections (with some interruptions) are covered by the , , and .\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52028", "revid": "1934512", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52028", "title": "Niagara Falls", "text": "Waterfalls between United States and Canada\nNiagara Falls is a group of three waterfalls at the southern end of Niagara Gorge, spanning the border between the province of Ontario in Canada and the state of New York in the United States. The largest of the three is Horseshoe Falls, which straddles the international border of the two countries. It is also known as the Canadian Falls. The smaller American Falls and Bridal Veil Falls lie within the United States. \nFormed by the Niagara River, which drains Lake Erie into Lake Ontario, the combined falls have the highest flow rate of any waterfall in North America that has a vertical drop of more than . During peak daytime tourist hours, more than of water goes over the crest of the falls every minute. \nBridal Veil Falls is separated from Horseshoe Falls by Goat Island and from American Falls by Luna Island, with both islands situated in New York. Horseshoe Falls is the most powerful waterfall in North America, as measured by flow rate. Niagara Falls is famed for its beauty and is a valuable source of hydroelectric power. \nBalancing recreational, commercial, and industrial uses has been a challenge for the stewards of the falls since the 19th century. Niagara Falls is northwest of Buffalo, New York, and southeast of Toronto, between the twin cities of Niagara Falls, Ontario, and Niagara Falls, New York. Niagara Falls was formed when glaciers receded at the end of the Wisconsin glaciation (the last ice age), and water from the newly formed Great Lakes carved a path over and through the Niagara Escarpment en route to the Atlantic Ocean.\nCharacteristics.\nThe larger and taller Horseshoe Falls is about high, while the American Falls varies between in drop because of giant boulders at its base. Horseshoe Falls is about wide, while the American Falls is wide. The distance between the American extremity of Niagara Falls and the Canadian extremity is .\nThe peak flow over Horseshoe Falls was recorded at . The average annual flow rate is . Since the flow is a direct function of the Lake Erie water elevation, it typically peaks in late spring or early summer. During the summer months, at least of water traverse the falls, some 90% of which goes over Horseshoe Falls, while the balance is diverted to hydroelectric facilities and then on to American Falls and Bridal Veil Falls. This is accomplished by employing a weir \u2013 the International Control Dam \u2013 with movable gates upstream from Horseshoe Falls. \nThe water flow is halved at night and during the low tourist season in winter months, and only attains a minimum flow of . Water diversion is regulated by the 1950 Niagara Treaty and is administered by the International Niagara Board of Control. The verdant green color of the water flowing over Niagara Falls is a byproduct of the estimated 60 tonnes/minute of dissolved salts and rock flour (very finely ground rock) generated by the erosive force of the Niagara River. \nThe Niagara River is an important bird area due to its impact on Bonaparte's gulls, ring-billed gulls, and herring gulls. Approximately 100,000 seagulls winter in the region, with it being common to spot 20,000 to 30,000 individuals daily between November and January. The river and waterfalls appeal to the birds due to their position on migratory routes, foraging potential, and unlikeliness to freeze over compared to other bodies of water.\nGeology.\nThe features that became the falls were created by the Wisconsin glaciation about 10,000 years ago. The retreat of the ice sheet left behind a large amount of meltwater (see Lake Algonquin, Lake Chicago, Glacial Lake Iroquois, and Champlain Sea) that filled up the basins that the glaciers had carved, thus creating the Great Lakes as we know them today. Scientists posit there is an old valley, St David's Buried Gorge, buried by glacial drift, at the approximate location of the present Welland Canal. \nWhen the ice melted, the upper Great Lakes emptied into the Niagara River, which followed the rearranged topography across the Niagara Escarpment. In time, the river cut a gorge through the north-facing cliff, or cuesta. Because of the interactions of three major rock formations, the rocky bed did not erode evenly. The caprock formation is composed of hard, erosion-resistant limestone and dolomite of the Lockport Formation (Middle Silurian). That hard layer of stone eroded more slowly than the underlying materials. Immediately below the caprock lies the weaker, softer, sloping Rochester Formation (Lower Silurian). This formation is composed mainly of shale, though it has some thin limestone layers. It also contains ancient fossils. In time, the river eroded the soft layer that supported the hard layers, undercutting the hard caprock, which gave way in great chunks. This process was repeated countless times, eventually carving out the falls. Submerged in the river in the lower valley, hidden from view, is the Queenston Formation (Upper Ordovician), which is composed of shales and fine sandstones. All three formations were laid down in an ancient sea, their differences of character deriving from changing conditions within that sea.\nAbout 10,900 years ago, the Niagara Falls was between present-day Queenston, Ontario, and Lewiston, New York, but erosion of the crest caused the falls to retreat approximately southward. The shape of Horseshoe Falls has changed through the process of erosion, evolving from a small arch to a horseshoe bend to the present day V-shape. Just upstream from the falls' current location, Goat Island splits the course of the Niagara River, resulting in the separation of Horseshoe Falls to the west from the American and Bridal Veil Falls to the east. Engineering has slowed erosion and recession.\nFuture of the falls.\nThe current rate of erosion is approximately per year, down from a historical average of per year. At this rate, in about 50,000 years Niagara Falls will have eroded the remaining to Lake Erie, and the falls will cease to exist.\nPreservation efforts.\nIn the 1870s, sightseers had limited access to Niagara Falls and often had to pay for a glimpse, and industrialization threatened to carve up Goat Island to further expand commercial development. Other industrial encroachments and lack of public access led to a conservation movement in the U.S. known as Free Niagara, led by such notables as Hudson River School artist Frederic Edwin Church, landscape designer Frederick Law Olmsted, and architect Henry Hobson Richardson. Church approached Lord Dufferin, governor-general of Canada, with a proposal for international discussions on the establishment of a public park.\nGoat Island was one of the inspirations for the American side of the effort. William Dorsheimer, moved by the scene from the island, brought Olmsted to Buffalo in 1868 to design a city park system, which helped promote Olmsted's career. In 1879, the New York state legislature commissioned Olmsted and James T. Gardner to survey the falls and to create the single most important document in the Niagara preservation movement, a \"Special Report on the preservation of Niagara Falls\". The report advocated for state purchase, restoration and preservation through public ownership of the scenic lands surrounding Niagara Falls. Restoring the former beauty of the falls was described in the report as a \"sacred obligation to mankind\". In 1883, New York Governor Grover Cleveland drafted legislation authorizing acquisition of lands for a state reservation at Niagara, and the Niagara Falls Association, a private citizens group founded in 1882, mounted a great letter-writing campaign and petition drive in support of the park. Professor Charles Eliot Norton and Olmsted were among the leaders of the public campaign, while New York Governor Alonzo Cornell opposed.\nPreservationists' efforts were rewarded on April 30, 1885, when Governor David B. Hill signed legislation creating the Niagara Reservation, New York's first state park. New York State began to purchase land from developers, under the charter of the Niagara Reservation State Park. In the same year, the province of Ontario established the Queen Victoria Niagara Falls Park for the same purpose. On the Canadian side, the Niagara Parks Commission governs land usage along the entire course of the Niagara River, from Lake Erie to Lake Ontario.\nIn 1887, Olmsted and Calvert Vaux issued a supplemental report detailing plans to restore the falls. Their intent was \"to restore and conserve the natural surroundings of the Falls of Niagara, rather than to attempt to add anything thereto\", and the report anticipated fundamental questions, such as how to provide access without destroying the beauty of the falls, and how to restore natural landscapes damaged by man. They planned a park with scenic roadways, paths and a few shelters designed to protect the landscape while allowing large numbers of visitors to enjoy the falls. Commemorative statues, shops, restaurants, and a 1959 glass and metal observation tower were added later. Preservationists continue to strive to strike a balance between Olmsted's idyllic vision and the realities of administering a popular scenic attraction.\nPreservation efforts continued well into the 20th century. J. Horace McFarland, the Sierra Club, and the Appalachian Mountain Club persuaded the United States Congress in 1906 to enact legislation to preserve the falls by regulating the waters of the Niagara River. The act sought, in cooperation with the Canadian government, to restrict diversion of water, and a treaty resulted in 1909 that limited the total amount of water diverted from the falls by both nations to approximately . That limitation remained in effect until 1950.\nErosion control efforts have always been of importance. Underwater weirs redirect the most damaging currents, and the top of the falls has been strengthened. In June 1969, a temporary rock and earth dam was constructed, completely diverting the Niagara River from American Falls for several months. During this time, two bodies were removed from under the falls, including a man who had been seen jumping over the falls, and the body of a woman, which was discovered once the falls dried. While Horseshoe Falls absorbed the extra flow, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers studied the riverbed and mechanically bolted and strengthened any faults they found; faults that would, if left untreated, have hastened the retreat of American Falls. A plan to remove the huge mound of talus deposited in 1954 was abandoned owing to cost, and in November 1969, the temporary dam was dynamited, restoring flow to American Falls. Even after these undertakings, Luna Island, the small piece of land between the American Falls and Bridal Veil Falls, remained off limits to the public for years owing to fears that it was unstable and could collapse into the gorge.\nCommercial interests have continued to encroach on the land surrounding the state park, including the construction of several tall buildings (most of them hotels) on the Canadian side. The result is a significant alteration and urbanization of the landscape. One study found that the tall buildings changed the breeze patterns and increased the number of mist days from 29 per year to 68 per year, but another study disputed this idea.\nIn 2013, New York State began an effort to renovate Three Sisters Islands located south of Goat Island. Funds were used from the re-licensing of the New York Power Authority hydroelectric plant downriver in Lewiston, New York, to rebuild walking paths on the Three Sisters Islands and to plant native vegetation on the islands. The state also renovated the area around Prospect Point at the brink of American Falls in the state park.\nName.\nTheories differ as to the origin of the name of the falls. The Native American word \"Ongiara\" means \"thundering water\"; \"The New York Times\" used this in 1925. According to Iroquoian scholar Bruce Trigger, \"Niagara\" is derived from the name given to a branch of the local native Neutral Confederacy, who are described as the \"Niagagarega\" people on several late-17th-century French maps of the area. According to George R. Stewart, it comes from the name of an Iroquois town called \"Onguiaahra\", meaning \"point of land cut in two\". In 1847, an Iroquois interpreter stated that the name came from \"Jaonniaka-re\", meaning \"noisy point or portage\". To Mohawks, the name refers to \"the neck\", pronounced \"onyara\"; the portage or neck of land between lakes Erie and Ontario \"onyara\". The modern Seneca name is Jo'sg\u00f6hsod\u00f6', meaning \"the cliffs are standing.\"\nHistory.\nMany figures have been suggested as the first to circulate a European eyewitness description of Niagara Falls. The Frenchman Samuel de Champlain visited the area as early as 1604 during his exploration of what is now Canada, and members of his party reported to him the spectacular waterfalls, which he described in his journals. The first description of the falls is credited to Belgian missionary Father Louis Hennepin in 1677, after travelling with the explorer Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, thus bringing the falls to the attention of Europeans. French Jesuit missionary Paul Ragueneau likely visited the falls some 35 years before Hennepin's visit while working among the Huron First Nation in Canada. Jean de Br\u00e9beuf also may have visited the falls, while spending time with the Neutral Nation. The Finland-Swedish naturalist Pehr Kalm explored the area in the early 18th century and is credited with the first scientific description of the falls. In 1762, Captain Thomas Davies, a British Army officer and artist, surveyed the area and painted the watercolor, \"An East View of the Great Cataract of Niagara\", the first eyewitness painting of the falls.\nDuring the 19th century, tourism became popular, and by the mid-century, it was the area's main industry. Theodosia Burr Alston (daughter of Vice President Aaron Burr) and her husband Joseph Alston were the first recorded couple to honeymoon there in 1801. Napoleon Bonaparte's brother J\u00e9r\u00f4me visited with his bride in the early 19th century. In 1825, British explorer John Franklin visited the falls while passing through New York en route to Cumberland House as part of his second Arctic expedition, calling them \"so justly celebrated as the first in the world for grandeur\".\nIn 1843, Frederick Douglass joined the American Anti-Slavery Society's \"One Hundred Conventions\" tour throughout New York and the midwest. Sometime on this tour, Douglass visited Niagara Falls and wrote a brief account of the experience: \"When I came into its awful presence, the power of description failed me, an irresistible power closed my lips.\" Being on the Canadian border, Niagara Falls was on one of the routes of the Underground Railroad. The falls were also a popular tourist attraction for Southern slaveowners, who would bring their enslaved workers on the trip. \"Many a time the trusted body-servant, or slave-girl, would leave master or mistress in the discharge of some errand, and never come back.\" This sometimes led to conflict. Early town father Peter Porter assisted slavecatchers in finding runaway slaves, even leading, in the case of runaway Solomon Moseby, to a riot in Niagara-on-the-Lake, Canada. Much of this history is memorialized in the Niagara Falls Underground Railroad Heritage Center. After the American Civil War, the New York Central Railroad publicized Niagara Falls as a focus of pleasure and honeymoon visits. After World War II, the auto industry, along with local tourism boards, began to promote Niagara honeymoons.\nIn about 1840, the English industrial chemist Hugh Lee Pattinson traveled to Canada, stopping at Niagara Falls long enough to make the earliest known photograph of the falls, a daguerreotype in the collection of Newcastle University. It was once believed that the small figure standing silhouetted with a top hat was added by an engraver working from imagination as well as the daguerreotype as his source, but the figure is clearly present in the photograph. Because of the very long exposure required, of ten minutes or more, the figure is assumed by Canada's Niagara Parks agency to be Pattinson. The image is left-right inverted and taken from the Canadian side. Pattinson made other photographs of Horseshoe Falls; these were then transferred to engravings to illustrate No\u00ebl Marie Paymal Lerebours' \"Excursions Daguerriennes\" (Paris, 1841\u20131864).\nOn August 6, 1918, an iron scow became stuck on the rocks above the falls. The two men on the scow were rescued, but the vessel remained trapped on rocks in the river, and is still visible there in a deteriorated state, although its position shifted by during a storm on October 31, 2019. Daredevil William \"Red\" Hill Sr. was particularly praised for his role in the rescue.\nAfter the First World War, tourism boomed as automobiles made getting to the falls much easier. The story of Niagara Falls in the 20th century is largely that of efforts to harness the energy of the falls for hydroelectric power, and to control the development on both sides that threaten the area's natural beauty. Before the late 20th century, the northeastern end of Horseshoe Falls was in the United States, flowing around the Terrapin Rocks, which were once connected to Goat Island by a series of bridges. In 1955, the area between the rocks and Goat Island was filled in, creating Terrapin Point. In the early 1980s, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers filled in more land and built diversion dams and retaining walls to force the water away from Terrapin Point. Altogether, of Horseshoe Falls were eliminated, including on the Canadian side. According to author Ginger Strand, the Horseshoe Falls is now entirely in Canada. Other sources say \"most of\" Horseshoe Falls is in Canada.\nThe only recorded freeze-up of the river and falls was caused by an ice jam on March 29, 1848. No water (or at best a trickle) fell for as much as 40 hours. Waterwheels stopped, and mills and factories shut down for having no power. In 1912, American Falls was completely frozen, but the other two falls kept flowing. Although the falls commonly ice up most winters, the river and the falls do not freeze completely. The years 1885, 1902, 1906, 1911, 1932, 1936, 2014, 2017 and 2019 are noted for partial freezing of the falls. A so-called ice bridge was common in certain years at the base of the falls and was used by people who wanted to cross the river before bridges had been built. During some winters, the ice sheet was as thick as , but that thickness has not occurred since 1954. The ice bridge of 1841 was said to be at least thick. On February 4, 1912, the ice bridge, which had formed on January 15 began breaking up while people were still on it. Many escaped, but three died during the event, later named the Ice Bridge Tragedy.\nBridge crossings.\nA number of bridges have spanned the Niagara River in the general vicinity of the falls. The first, not far from the whirlpool, was a suspension bridge above the gorge. It opened for use by the public in July 1848 and remained in use until 1855. A second bridge in the Upper Falls area was commissioned, with two levels or decks, one for use by the Great Western Railway. This Niagara Falls Suspension Bridge opened in 1855. It was used by conductors on the Underground Railroad to escort runaway slaves to Canada. In 1882, the Grand Trunk Railway took over control of the second deck after it absorbed the Great Western company. Significant structural improvements were made in the late 1870s and then in 1886; this bridge remained in use until 1897.\nBecause of the volume of traffic, the decision was made to construct a new arch bridge nearby, under and around the existing bridge. After it opened in September 1897, a decision was made to remove and scrap the railway suspension bridge. This new bridge was initially known as the Niagara Railway Arch, or Lower Steel Arch Bridge; it had two decks, the lower one used for carriages and the upper for trains. In 1937, it was renamed the Whirlpool Rapids Bridge and remains in use today. All of the structures built up to that time were referred to as Lower Niagara bridges and were some distance from the falls.\nThe first bridge in the so-called Upper Niagara area (closer to the falls) was a two-level suspension structure that opened in January 1869; it was destroyed during a severe storm in January 1889. The replacement was built quickly and opened in May 1889. In order to handle heavy traffic, a second bridge was commissioned, slightly closer to American Falls. This one was a steel bridge and opened to traffic in June 1897; it was known as the Upper Steel Arch Bridge but was often called the Honeymoon Bridge. The single level included a track for trolleys and space for carriages and pedestrians. The design led to the bridge being very close to the surface of the river and in January 1938, an ice jam twisted the steel frame of the bridge which later collapsed on January 27, 1938.\nAnother Lower Niagara bridge had been commissioned in 1883 by Cornelius Vanderbilt for use by railways at a location roughly approximately south of the Railway Suspension Bridge. This one was of an entirely different design; it was a cantilever bridge to provide greater strength. The Niagara Cantilever Bridge had two cantilevers which were joined by steel sections; it opened officially in December 1883, and improvements were made over the years for a stronger structure. As rail traffic was increasing, the Michigan Central Railroad company decided to build a new bridge in 1923, to be located between the Lower Steel Arch Bridge and the Cantilever Bridge. The Michigan Central Railway Bridge opened in February 1925 and remained in use until the early 21st century. The Cantilever Bridge was removed and scrapped after the new rail bridge opened. Nonetheless, it was inducted into the North America Railway Hall of Fame in 2006.\nThere was a lengthy dispute as to which agency should build the replacement for the Niagara Railway Arch, or Lower Steel Arch Bridge in the Upper Niagara area. When that was resolved, construction of a steel bridge commenced in February 1940. Named the Rainbow Bridge, and featuring two lanes for traffic separated by a barrier, it opened in November 1941 and remains in use today.\nIndustry and commerce.\nHydroelectric power.\nThe enormous energy of Niagara Falls has long been recognized as a potential source of power. The first known effort to harness the waters was in 1750, when Daniel Joncaire built a small canal above the falls to power his sawmill. Augustus and Peter Porter purchased this area and all of American Falls in 1805 from the New York state government, and enlarged the original canal to provide hydraulic power for their gristmill and tannery. In 1853, the Niagara Falls Hydraulic Power and Mining Company was chartered, which eventually constructed the canals that would be used to generate electricity. In 1881, under the leadership of Jacob F. Schoellkopf, the Niagara River's first hydroelectric generating station was built. The water fell and generated direct current electricity, which ran the machinery of local mills and lit up some of the village streets.\nThe Niagara Falls Power Company, a descendant of Schoellkopf's firm, formed the Cataract Company headed by Edward Dean Adams, with the intent of expanding Niagara Falls' power capacity. In 1890, a five-member International Niagara Commission headed by Sir William Thomson among other distinguished scientists deliberated on the expansion of Niagara hydroelectric capacity based on seventeen proposals but could not select any as the best combined project for hydraulic development and distribution. In 1893, Westinghouse Electric (which had built the smaller-scale Ames Hydroelectric Generating Plant near Ophir, Colorado, two years earlier) was hired to design a system to generate alternating current on Niagara Falls, and three years after that a large-scale AC power system was created (activated on August 26, 1895). The Adams Power Plant Transformer House remains as a landmark of the original system.\nBy 1896, financing from moguls including J. P. Morgan, John Jacob Astor IV, and the Vanderbilts had fueled the construction of giant underground conduits leading to turbines generating upwards of , sent as far as Buffalo, away. Some of the original designs for the power transmission plants were created by the Swiss firm Faesch &amp; Piccard, which also constructed the original waterwheels. Private companies on the Canadian side also began to harness the energy of the falls. The Government of Ontario eventually brought power transmission operations under public control in 1906, distributing Niagara's energy to various parts of the Canadian province.\nOther hydropower plants were being built along the Niagara River. But in 1956, disaster struck when the region's largest hydropower station was partially destroyed in a landslide. This drastically reduced power production and put tens of thousands of manufacturing jobs at stake. In 1957, Congress passed the Niagara Redevelopment Act, which granted the New York Power Authority the right to fully develop the United States' share of the Niagara River's hydroelectric potential.\nIn 1961, when the Niagara Falls hydroelectric project went online, it was the largest hydropower facility in the Western world. Today, Niagara is still the largest electricity producer in New York state, with a generating capacity of 2.4\u00a0GW. Up to of water is diverted from the Niagara River through conduits under the city of Niagara Falls to the Lewiston and Robert Moses power plants. Currently between 50% and 75% of the Niagara River's flow is diverted via four huge tunnels that arise far upstream from the waterfalls. The water then passes through hydroelectric turbines that supply power to nearby areas of Canada and the United States before returning to the river well past the falls. When electrical demand is low, the Lewiston units can operate as pumps to transport water from the lower bay back up to the plant's reservoir, allowing this water to be used again during the daytime when electricity use peaks. During peak electrical demand, the same Lewiston pumps are reversed and become generators.\nTo preserve Niagara Falls' natural beauty, a 1950 treaty signed by the U.S. and Canada limited water usage by the power plants. The treaty allows higher summertime diversion at night when tourists are fewer and during the winter months when there are even fewer tourists. This treaty, designed to ensure an \"unbroken curtain of water\" flowing over the falls, states that during daylight time during the tourist season (April 1 to October 31) there must be of water flowing over the falls, and during the night and off-tourist season there must be of water flowing over the falls. This treaty is monitored by the International Niagara Board of Control, using a NOAA gauging station above the falls. During winter, the Power Authority of New York works with Ontario Power Generation to prevent ice on the Niagara River from interfering with power production or causing flooding of shoreline property. One of their joint efforts is an ice boom, which prevents the buildup of ice, yet allows water to continue flowing downstream. In addition to minimum water volume, the crest of Horseshoe falls was reduced to maintain an uninterrupted \"curtain of water\".\nIn August 2005, Ontario Power Generation, which is responsible for the Sir Adam Beck stations, started a major civil engineering project, called the Niagara Tunnel Project, to increase power production by building a new diameter, water diversion tunnel. It was officially placed into service in March 2013, helping to increase the generating complex's nameplate capacity by 150\u00a0megawatts. It did so by tapping water from farther up the Niagara River than was possible with the preexisting arrangement. The tunnel provided new hydroelectricity for approximately 160,000 homes.\nTransport.\nShips can bypass Niagara Falls by means of the Welland Canal, which was improved and incorporated into the Saint Lawrence Seaway in the mid-1950s. While the seaway diverted water traffic from nearby Buffalo and led to the demise of its steel and grain mills, other industries in the Niagara River valley flourished with the help of the electric power produced by the river. However, since the 1970s the region has declined economically.\nThe cities of Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada, and Niagara Falls, New York, United States, are connected by two international bridges. The Rainbow Bridge, just downriver from the falls, affords the closest view of the falls and is open to non-commercial vehicle traffic and pedestrians. The Whirlpool Rapids Bridge lies north of the Rainbow Bridge and is the oldest bridge over the Niagara River. Nearby Niagara Falls International Airport and Buffalo Niagara International Airport were named after the waterfall, as were Niagara University, countless local businesses, and even an asteroid.\nOver the falls.\nJumps, plunges and walks.\nThe first recorded publicity stunt using the Falls was the wreck of the schooner \"Michigan\" in 1827. Local hotel owners acquired a former Lake Erie freighter, loaded it with animals and effigies of people, towed it to a spot above the falls and let it plunge over the brink. Admission of fifty cents was charged.\nIn October 1829, Sam Patch, who called himself \"the Yankee Leapster\", jumped from a high tower into the gorge below the falls and survived; this began a long tradition of daredevils trying to go over the falls. Englishman Captain Matthew Webb, the first man to swim the English Channel, drowned in 1883 trying to swim the rapids downriver from the falls.\nOn October 24, 1901, 63-year-old Michigan school teacher Annie Edson Taylor became the first person to go over the falls in a barrel as a publicity stunt; she survived, bleeding, but otherwise unharmed. Soon after exiting the barrel, she said, \"No one ought ever do that again.\" Days before Taylor's attempt, her domestic cat was sent over the falls in her barrel to test its strength. The cat survived the plunge unharmed and later posed with Taylor in photographs. Since Taylor's historic ride, over a dozen people have intentionally gone over the falls in or on a device, despite her advice. Some have survived unharmed, but others have drowned or been severely injured. Survivors face charges and stiff fines, as it is now illegal, on both sides of the border, to attempt to go over the falls. Charles Stephens, a 58-year-old barber from Bristol, England, went over the falls in a wooden barrel in July 1920 and was the first person to die in an endeavor of this type. Bobby Leach went over Horseshoe Falls in a crude steel barrel in 1911 and needed rescuing by William \"Red\" Hill Sr. Hill again came to the rescue of Leach following his failed attempt to swim the Niagara Gorge in 1920. In 1928, \"Smiling Jean\" Lussier tried an entirely different concept, going over the falls in a large rubber ball; he was successful and survived the ordeal.\nIn the \"Miracle at Niagara\", on July 9, 1960, Roger Woodward, a seven-year-old American boy, was swept over Horseshoe Falls after the boat in which he was cruising lost power; two tourists pulled his 17-year-old sister Deanne from the river only from the lip of the Horseshoe Falls at Goat Island. Minutes later, Woodward was plucked from the roiling plunge pool beneath Horseshoe Falls after grabbing a life ring thrown to him by the crew of the Maid of the Mist boat. The children's uncle, Jim Honeycutt, who had been steering the boat, was swept over the edge to his death.\nOn July 2, 1984, Canadian Karel Soucek from Hamilton, Ontario, plunged over Horseshoe Falls in a barrel with only minor injuries. Soucek was fined $500 for performing the stunt without a license. In 1985, he was fatally injured while attempting to re-create the Niagara drop at the Houston Astrodome. His aim was to climb into a barrel hoisted to the rafters of the Astrodome and to drop into a water tank on the floor. After his barrel released prematurely, it hit the side of the tank, and he died the next day from his injuries.\nIn August 1985, Steve Trotter, an aspiring stuntman from Rhode Island, became the youngest person ever (age 22) and the first American in 25 years to go over the falls in a barrel. Ten years later, Trotter went over the falls again, becoming the second person to go over the falls twice and survive. It was also the second \"duo\"; Lori Martin joined Trotter for the barrel ride over the falls. They survived the fall, but their barrel became stuck at the bottom of the falls, requiring a rescue.\nOn September 28, 1989, Niagara natives Peter DeBernardi and Jeffery James Petkovich became the first \"team\" to make it over the falls in a two-person barrel. The stunt was conceived by DeBenardi, who wanted to discourage youth from following in his path of addictive drug use. The pair emerged shortly after going over with minor injuries and were charged with performing an illegal stunt under the Niagara Parks Act.\nOn June 5, 1990, Jesse Sharp, a whitewater canoeist from Tennessee paddled over the falls in a closed deck canoe. He chose not to wear a helmet to make his face more visible for photographs of the event. He also did not wear a life vest because he believed it would hinder his escape from the hydraulics at the base of the falls. His boat flushed out of the falls, but his body was never found. On September 27, 1993, John \"David\" Munday, of Caistor Centre, Ontario, completed his second journey over the falls. On October 1, 1995, Robert Douglas \"Firecracker\" Overacker went over the falls on a Jet Ski to raise awareness for the homeless. His rocket-propelled parachute failed to open and he plunged to his death. Overacker's body was recovered before he was pronounced dead at Niagara General Hospital.\nKirk Jones of Canton, Michigan, became the first known person to survive a plunge over Horseshoe Falls without a flotation device on October 20, 2003. According to some reports, Jones had attempted to commit suicide, but he survived the fall with only battered ribs, scrapes, and bruises. Jones tried going over the falls again in 2017, using a large inflatable ball, but died in the process. Later reports revealed that Jones had arranged for a friend to shoot video clips of his stunt.\nOn March 11, 2009, a man survived an unprotected trip over Horseshoe Falls. When rescued from the river he suffered from severe hypothermia and a large wound to his head. His identity was never released. Eyewitnesses reported seeing the man intentionally enter the water. On May 21, 2012, an unidentified man became the fourth person to survive an unprotected trip over Horseshoe Falls. Eyewitness reports show he \"deliberately jumped\" into the Niagara River after climbing over a railing. On July 8, 2019, at roughly 4 am, officers responded to a report of a person in crisis at the brink of the Canadian side of the falls. Once officers got to the scene, the man climbed the retaining wall, jumped into the river and went over Horseshoe Falls. Authorities subsequently began to search the lower Niagara River basin, where the man was found alive but injured sitting on the rocks at the water's edge.\nTightrope walkers.\nTightrope walkers drew huge crowds to witness their exploits. Their wires ran across the gorge, near the current Rainbow Bridge, not over the waterfall. Jean Fran\u00e7ois \"Blondin\" Gravelet was the first to cross Niagara Gorge on June 30, 1859, and did so again eight times that year. His most difficult crossing occurred on August 14, when he carried his manager, Harry Colcord, on his back. His final crossing, on September 8, 1860, was witnessed by the Prince of Wales. Author Ginger Strand argues that these performances may have had symbolic meanings at the time relating to slavery and abolition.\nMaria Spelterini, a 23-year-old Italian was the first and only woman to cross the Niagara River gorge; she did so on a tightrope on July 8, 1876. She repeated the stunt several times during the same month. During one crossing she was blindfolded and during another, her ankles and wrists were handcuffed. On July 12, she crossed wearing peach baskets strapped to her feet.\nAmong the many competitors was Ontario's William Hunt, who billed himself as \"The Great Farini\"; his first crossing was in 1860. Farini competed with Blondin in performing outrageous stunts over the gorge. On August 8, 1864, however, an attempt failed and he needed to be rescued.\nOn June 15, 2012, high wire artist Nik Wallenda became the first person to walk across the falls area in 116 years, after receiving special permission from both governments. The full length of his tightrope was . Wallenda crossed near the brink of Horseshoe Falls, unlike walkers who had crossed farther downstream. According to Wallenda, it was the longest unsupported tightrope walk in history. He carried his passport on the trip and was required to present it upon arrival on the Canadian side of the falls.\nFish.\nAccording to river expert Wes Hill, 90% of fish that go over the falls survive.\nTourism.\nPeak visitor traffic occurs in the summertime, when Niagara Falls is both a daytime and evening attraction. From the Canadian side, floodlights illuminate both sides of the falls for several hours after dark (until midnight). The number of visitors in 2007 was expected to total 20\u00a0million, and by 2009 the annual rate was expected to top 28\u00a0million tourists.\nThe oldest and best known tourist attraction at Niagara Falls is the Maid of the Mist boat cruise, named for an alleged ancient Ongiara Indian mythical character, which has carried passengers into the rapids immediately below the falls since 1846. Cruise boats operate from boat docks on both sides of the falls, with the Maid of the Mist operating from the American side and Hornblower Cruises (originally Maid of the Mist until 2014) from the Canadian side. In 1996, Native American groups threatened to boycott the boat companies if they would not stop playing what they said was a fake story on their boats. The Maid of the Mist dropped the audio.\nFrom the U.S. side, American Falls can be viewed from walkways along Prospect Point Park, which also features the Prospect Point Observation Tower and a boat dock for the \"Maid of the Mist\". Goat Island offers more views of the falls and is accessible by foot and automobile traffic by bridge above American Falls. From Goat Island, the Cave of the Winds is accessible by elevator and leads hikers to a point beneath Bridal Veil Falls. Also on Goat Island are the Three Sisters Islands, the Power Portal where a statue of Nikola Tesla (the inventor whose patents for the AC induction motor and other devices for AC power transmission helped make the harnessing of the falls possible) can be seen, and a walking path that enables views of the rapids, the Niagara River, the gorge, and all of the falls. Most of these attractions lie within the Niagara Falls State Park.\nThe Niagara Scenic Trolley offers guided trips along American Falls and around Goat Island. Panoramic and aerial views of the falls can also be viewed by helicopter. The Niagara Gorge Discovery Center showcases the natural and local history of Niagara Falls and the Niagara Gorge. A casino and luxury hotel was opened in Niagara Falls, New York, by the Seneca Indian tribe. The Seneca Niagara Casino &amp; Hotel occupies the former Niagara Falls Convention Center. The new hotel is the first addition to the city's skyline since completion of the United Office Building in the 1920s.\nOn the Canadian side, Queen Victoria Park features manicured gardens, platforms offering views of American, Bridal Veil, and Horseshoe Falls, and underground walkways leading into observation rooms that yield the illusion of being within the falling waters. Along the Niagara River, the Niagara River Recreational Trail runs from Fort Erie to Fort George, and includes many historical sites from the War of 1812.\nThe observation deck of the nearby Skylon Tower offers the highest view of the falls, and in the opposite direction gives views as far as Toronto. Along with the Tower Hotel (built as the Seagrams Tower, later renamed the Heritage Tower, the Royal Inn Tower, the Royal Center Tower, the Panasonic Tower, the Minolta Tower, and most recently the Konica Minolta Tower before receiving its current name in 2010), it is one of two towers in Canada with a view of the falls. The Whirlpool Aero Car, built in 1916 from a design by Spanish engineer Leonardo Torres Quevedo, is a cable car that takes passengers over the Niagara Whirlpool on the Canadian side. The Journey Behind the Falls consists of an observation platform and series of tunnels near the bottom of the Horseshoe Falls on the Canadian side. There are two casinos on the Canadian side of Niagara Falls, the Niagara Fallsview Casino Resort and Casino Niagara.\nTouring by helicopter over the falls, from both the US and the Canadian side, was described by \"The New York Times\" as still popular a year after a serious crash. Although \"The New York Times\" had long before described attempting to tour the falls as \"bent on suicide\" and despite a number of fatal crashes, the \"as many as 100 eight-minute rides each day\" are hard to regulate; two countries and various government agencies would have to coordinate. These flights have been available \"since the early 1960s\".\nMedia.\nMovies and television.\nAlready a huge tourist attraction and favorite spot for honeymooners, Niagara Falls visits rose sharply in 1953 after the release of \"Niagara\", a movie starring Marilyn Monroe and Joseph Cotten. The 1956 animated short \"Niagara Fools\" featured Woody Woodpecker attempting to go over the falls in a barrel. The falls was a featured location in the major motion picture \"Superman II\" in 1980 and was the subject of a popular IMAX movie, \"\". Illusionist David Copperfield performed a trick in which he appeared to travel over Horseshoe Falls in 1990.\nThe falls, or more particularly, the tourist-supported complex near the falls, was the setting of the short-lived Canadian-shot U.S. television show \"Wonderfalls\" in early 2004. Location footage of the falls was shot in October 2006 to portray \"World's End\" of the movie \"\". Professional kayaker Rafa Ortiz's preparation to paddle over the falls in a kayak is documented in the 2015 film \"Chasing Niagara\".\nKevin McMahon's 1991 documentary film \"The Falls\" explored the place of Niagara Falls in the world's collective imagination, covering both positive and negative aspects of the culture around the falls.\nLiterature.\nThe Niagara Falls area features as the base camp for a German aerial invasion of the United States in the H. G. Wells novel \"The War in the Air\". Many poets have been inspired to write about the falls. Among them was the Cuban poet Jos\u00e9 Maria Heredia, who wrote the poem \"Niagara\". There are commemorative plaques on both sides of the falls recognizing the poem. In 1818, American poet John Neal published the poem \"Battle of Niagara\", which is considered the best poetic description of Niagara Falls up to that time. In 1835, as a poetical illustration to accompany a plate of the \u2014artist Thomas Allom, Letitia Elizabeth Landon imagines an Indian girl who, having saved the life of a captured young European man, takes him as her husband only to be later abandoned by him. In her despair she guides her canoe over the falls in dramatic fashion: \"Upright, within that slender boat, they saw the pale girl stand, her dark hair streaming far behind\u2014uprais'd her desperate hand.\"\nLydia Sigourney wrote two dramatic poems on the falls, \"Niagara\", in 1836 and again in her \"Scenes in my native Land\", \"Niagara\", in 1845. In 1848, the Rev. C. H. A. Bulkley, of Mount Morris, New York, published \"Niagara: A Poem\", a 132-page, 3,600 line blank verse poem presenting the wonders of the falls as \"the theme of a single poem.\"\nIn 1893, Mark Twain wrote a satirical sketch called \"The First Authentic Mention of Niagara Falls\", in which Adam and Eve are living at the Falls.\nMusic.\nComposer Ferde Grof\u00e9 was commissioned by the Niagara Falls Power Generation project in 1960 to compose the \"Niagara Falls Suite\" in honor of the completion of the first stage of hydroelectric work at the falls. In 1997, composer Michael Daugherty composed \"Niagara Falls\", a piece for concert band inspired by the falls.\nFine art.\nNiagara Falls was such an attraction to landscape artists that, writes John Howat, they were \"the most popular, the most often treated, and the tritest single item of subject matter to appear in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century European and American landscape painting\". Author Ginger Strand states that \"Every time there was an advance in picture-making, folks raced to the Falls to try it out.\" She cites engravings, chromolithographs, photographs, panoramas, camera obscuras, early movies, Cinerama, and IMAX technologies as examples.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52029", "revid": "12418561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52029", "title": "University College London", "text": "Public research university in London, England\nUniversity College London, which operates as UCL, is a public research university in London, England. It is a member institution of the federal University of London, and is the second-largest university in the United Kingdom by total enrolment and the largest by postgraduate enrolment. \nEstablished in 1826 as London University (although without university status or degree-awarding powers) by founders who were inspired by the radical ideas of Jeremy Bentham, UCL was the first university institution to be established in London, and the first in England to be entirely secular and to admit students regardless of their religion. It was also, in 1878, among the first university colleges to admit women alongside men, two years after University College, Bristol, had done so. Intended by its founders to be England's third university, politics forced it to accept the status of a college in 1836, when it received a royal charter and became one of the two founding colleges of the University of London, although it achieved \"de facto\" recognition as a university in the 1990s and formal university status in 2023. It has grown through mergers, including with the Institute of Ophthalmology (in 1995), the Institute of Neurology (in 1997), the Royal Free Hospital Medical School (in 1998), the Eastman Dental Institute (in 1999), the School of Slavonic and East European Studies (in 1999), the School of Pharmacy (in 2012) and the Institute of Education (in 2014).\nUCL has its main campus in the Bloomsbury and St Pancras areas of central London, with a number of institutes and teaching hospitals elsewhere in central London and has a second campus, UCL East, at Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in Stratford, East London. UCL is organised into 11 constituent faculties, within which there are over 100 departments, institutes and research centres. UCL operates several museums and collections in a wide range of fields, including the Petrie Museum of Egyptian Archaeology and the Grant Museum of Zoology and Comparative Anatomy, and administers the annual Orwell Prize in political writing. In 2023/24, UCL had a total income of \u00a32.03 billion, of which \u00a3538.8 million was from research grants and contracts. The university generates around \u00a310 billion annually for the UK economy, primarily through the spread of its research and knowledge (\u00a34 billion) and the impact of its own spending (\u00a33 billion).\nUCL is a member of numerous academic organisations, including the Russell Group and the League of European Research Universities, and is part of UCL Partners, the world's largest academic health science centre. It is considered part of the \"golden triangle\" of research-intensive universities in southeast England. UCL has publishing and commercial activities including UCL Press, UCL Business and UCL Consultants.\nUCL has many notable alumni, including the founder of Mauritius, the first prime minister of Japan and one of the co-discoverers of the structure of DNA. UCL academics discovered five of the naturally occurring noble gases, discovered hormones, invented the vacuum tube, and made several foundational advances in modern statistics. As of 2025, 33 Nobel Prize laureates and three Fields medallists have been affiliated with UCL as alumni or academic staff.\nHistory.\n1826 to 1836 \u2013 London University.\nUCL was founded on 11 February 1826 as an alternative to the Anglican universities of Oxford and Cambridge. It took the form of a joint stock company, with shares sold for \u00a3100 () to proprietors, under the name of \"London University\", although without legal recognition as a university or the associated right to award degrees. London University's first warden was Leonard Horner, who was the first scientist to head a British university.\nDespite the commonly held belief that the philosopher Jeremy Bentham was the founder of UCL, his direct involvement was limited to the purchase of share No. 633, at a cost of \u00a3100 paid in nine instalments between December 1826 and January 1830. In 1828, he did nominate a friend to sit on the council, and in 1827, attempted to have his disciple John Bowring appointed as the first professor of English or History, but on both occasions his candidates were unsuccessful. However, Bentham is commonly regarded as the \"spiritual father\" of UCL, as his ideas on education and society were influential with the institution's founders, particularly James Mill (1773\u20131836) and Henry Brougham (1778\u20131868).\nIn 1828, the chair of political economy at London University was created, with John Ramsay McCulloch as the first incumbent. In 1829, the university appointed the first professor of English in England, although the course concentrated on linguistics and the modern teaching of English \u2013 studying English literature \u2013 was introduced by King's College London in 1831. In 1830, London University founded the London University School, which would later become University College School. In 1833, the university appointed Alexander Maconochie, secretary to the Royal Geographical Society, as the first professor of geography in Britain. Classes in medicine began at the opening of the college in 1828, and in 1834 University College Hospital (originally North London Hospital) opened as a teaching hospital for these classes, which were organised into a faculty of medicine in 1836.\n1836 to 1900 \u2013 University College, London.\nAfter almost a decade of attempting to win recognition as a university and the right to award degrees, including an Address to the Crown from the House of Commons, the proprietors of London University accepted the government's proposal to establish the University of London as an independent examining body, accepting the status of a college for their institution. As a result, the proprietors of London University were incorporated by royal charter under the name \"University College, London\" on 28 November 1836. On the same day, the University of London was created by royal charter as a degree-awarding examining board for students from affiliated schools and colleges, with University College and King's College, London being named in the charter as the first two affiliates. The first students from UCL and King's matriculated as undergraduates in 1838 and the first degrees were awarded to students of the two colleges in 1839.\nThere had been an intention to establish a course in engineering at the college's opening but no professor was appointed until 1840 or 1841, after engineering courses had started at Durham University (1837) and King's College London (1838). The Slade School of Fine Art was founded as part of University College in 1871, following a bequest from Felix Slade.\nIn 1878, the University of London gained a supplemental charter making it the first British university to be allowed to award degrees to women. The same year, UCL admitted women to the faculties of Arts and Law and of Science, although women remained barred from the faculties of Engineering and of Medicine (with the exception of courses on public health and hygiene). UCL's admission of women in 1878 came almost three decades after Bedford College became the first institution to offer university-level education for women in Britain, and the establishment of the University of London's General Examination for Women in 1868.\nThe Ladies' Educational Association held classes for women from 1868, taught by professors from UCL but independently of the college. From 1871 to 1872 these were held inside the college building, although still independently of the college. From 1872, some professors, particularly Edward Poynter of the Slade, started to admit women to their classes. The full opening on the faculties of arts, science and law in 1878 came two years after the admission of women alongside men at the University of Bristol from its foundation (as University College Bristol) in 1876. The first woman to officially enrol in architecture at UCL was Gertrude Leverkus in 1915, although Ethel and Bessie Charles had been allowed to audit classes in the 1890s. Women were finally admitted to medical studies during the First World War in 1917, although limitations were placed on their numbers after the war ended.\nA new royal charter granted to the University of London in 1858 effectively removed the affiliation of colleges to the university. Dissatisfaction from the colleges and the desire for a \"teaching university\" in London led to royal commissions that reported in 1888 and 1892 and the reconstitution of the university under the University of London Act 1898.\n1900 to 1976 \u2013 University of London, University College.\nFollowing the University of London's reconstitution in 1909, transforming it from an examining board to a federal university with constituent \"schools\", UCL, became a school of the University of London. While most of the colleges that became schools of the university retained their autonomy, UCL chose to be merged into the university in 1907 under the University College London (Transfer) Act 1905 (5 Edw. 7. c. xci) and surrendered its legal independence in return for gaining a greater say in the running of the university. Its formal name became \"University of London, University College\", although for most informal and external purposes the name \"University College, London\" (or the initialism UCL) was still used. As of 2022,[ [update]] it remains listed as \"University of London: University College\" on US Federal Student Aid applications.\n1900 also saw the decision to appoint a salaried head of the college. The first incumbent was Carey Foster, who served as Principal (as the post was originally titled) from 1900 to 1904. He was succeeded by Gregory Foster (no relation), and in 1906 the title was changed to Provost to avoid confusion with the principal of the University of London. Gregory Foster remained in post until 1929. In 1906, the Cruciform Building was opened as the new home for University College Hospital. UCL opened the first department and chair of chemical engineering in the UK, funded by the Ramsay Memorial Fund, in 1923.\nIn 1904, Francis Galton donated \u00a31,000 to the University of London for a eugenics laboratory; this transferred to UCL in 1907 with Karl Pearson as its director. UCL apologised for its \"fundamental role in the development, propagation and legitimisation of eugenics\" in 2021.\nIn 1911, UCL received an anonymous donation of \u00a330,000 () for a building for its school of architecture. In 1919 the donor consented to being named as Herbert Bartlett and the school was renamed in his honour. \nUCL sustained considerable bomb damage during the Second World War, including the complete destruction of the Great Hall, the Carey Foster Physics Laboratory and the Ramsay Laboratory. Fires gutted the library and destroyed much of the main building, including the dome; it was not until 1954 that the main building was fully restored. The departments were dispersed across the country to Aberystwyth, Bangor, Gwynedd, Cambridge, Oxford, Rothamsted near Harpenden, Hertfordshire and Sheffield, with the administration at Stanstead Bury near Ware, Hertfordshire. The first UCL student newspaper, \"Pi\", was founded in 1946. The Institute of Jewish Studies relocated from Manchester to UCL in 1959. The Mullard Space Science Laboratory was established in 1967.\nIn 1973, Peter Kirstein's research group at UCL became one of only two international nodes on the ARPANET, later becoming part of SATNET. UCL's implementation of internetworking between the ARPANET and early British academic networks was the first international heterogeneous resource sharing network. UCL played a significant role in the very earliest experimental Internet work and adopted TCP/IP in 1982, ahead of the ARPANET.\nThe college's senior common room, the Housman Room, remained men-only until 1969. After two unsuccessful attempts, a motion was passed that ended segregation by sex at UCL. This was achieved by Brian Woledge (Fielden Professor of French at UCL from 1939 to 1971) and David Colquhoun, at that time a young lecturer in pharmacology.\n1976 to 2005 \u2013 University College London.\nIn 1976, a new charter restored UCL's legal independence, although still without the power to award its own degrees. Under this charter the college became formally known as \"University College London\". This name abandoned the comma used in its earlier name of \"University College, London\".\nIn 1993, a reorganisation of the University of London meant that UCL and other colleges gained direct access to government funding and the right to confer University of London degrees themselves. This led to UCL being regarded as a \"de facto\" university in its own right.\nMergers were a major feature of this period of UCL's history. In 1986, the college merged with the Institute of Archaeology. In 1988, UCL merged with the Institute of Laryngology &amp; Otology, the Institute of Orthopaedics, the Institute of Urology &amp; Nephrology and Middlesex Hospital Medical School. Middlesex and University College hospitals, together with the Elizabeth Garrett Anderson Hospital and the Hospital for Tropical Diseases, formed the University College London Hospitals NHS Trust in 1994.\nMergers continued in the 1990s, with the Institute of Child Health joining in 1995, the School of Podiatry in 1996 and the Institute of Neurology in 1997. In 1998, UCL merged with the Royal Free Hospital Medical School to create the Royal Free and University College Medical School (renamed the UCL Medical School in October 2008). In 1999, UCL merged with the School of Slavonic and East European Studies and the Eastman Dental Institute.\nProposals for a merger between UCL and Imperial College London were announced in 2002. The proposal provoked strong opposition from UCL teaching staff and students and the AUT union, which criticised \"the indecent haste and lack of consultation\", leading to its abandonment by UCL provost Sir Derek Roberts.\nFrom 2005.\nUCL was granted its own taught and research degree awarding powers in 2005, and all UCL students registered from 2007/08 qualified with UCL degrees. The same year, UCL adopted a new corporate branding under which the name University College London was replaced by the initialism UCL in all external communications.\nUCL established the UCL School of Energy &amp; Resources (later UCL Australia) in Adelaide, Australia, in 2008 as the first campus of a British university in the country. The school was based in the historic Torrens Building in Victoria Square. In 2011, the mining company BHP Billiton agreed to donate AU$10 million to UCL to fund the establishment of two energy institutes \u2013 the Energy Policy Institute, based in Adelaide, and the Institute for Sustainable Resources, based in London. UCL Australia closed in December 2017, with academic staff and student transferring to the University of South Australia. Since 2018, UCL and the University of South Australia have offered joint master's degrees in data science and in energy systems with study in Adelaide and London.\nIn 2011, UCL announced plans for a \u00a3500 million investment in its main Bloomsbury campus over 10 years, as well as the establishment of a new campus, UCL East, next to the Olympic Park in Stratford in the East End of London. In 2018, UCL opened \"UCL at Here East\", at the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, offering courses jointly between the Bartlett Faculty of the Built Environment and the Faculty of Engineering Sciences. The first undergraduate students, on a new Engineering and Architectural Design MEng, started in September 2018. One Pool Street, the first building on the UCL East campus, opened in November 2022. UCL East was officially opened, along with the Marshgate building that completed phase 1 of the development, in September 2023 by Olympic gold medalist and UCL alumna Christine Ohuruogu.\nUCL continued to grow through mergers with smaller colleges in the University of London. On 1 January 2012 the School of Pharmacy, University of London merged with UCL, becoming the UCL School of Pharmacy within the Faculty of Life Sciences. UCL and the Institute of Education formed a strategic alliance in October 2012, followed by a full merger in December 2014.\nUCL paid tens of thousands of pounds to settle ten sexual harassment claims against staff in the 2017/18 academic year, a rise from four cases the year before. Following pressure from victims, and after physicist Emma Chapman won the legal right to speak freely about her abuse at the university, UCL announced in 2018 that it would abandon non-disclosure settlements in settlements. In 2020, UCL became the first Russell Group university to ban romantic and sexual relationships between lecturers and their students.\nIt was discovered in 2018 that an annual eugenics conference, the London Conference on Intelligence, had been held at UCL, as an external paid event, between 2014 and 2017. An enquiry found that the organiser, an honorary lecturer, did not correctly follow the room booking procedure, including claiming that no controversial topics would be discussed, leaving the university unaware of the nature of the conference. Following the revelation, UCL announced in 2018 that it would launch an enquiry into the university's historical links with eugenics. This reported in 2020, but covered only historical eugenics and did not address the 2014\u201317 conferences, leading to a majority of the authors refusing to sign the final report. The Galton Lecture Theatre, Pearson Lecture Theatre and Pearson Building were all renamed in 2020, and in 2021 UCL apologised for its part in promoting eugenics during the first half of the 20th century. UCL was criticised (along with Oxford, Imperial and other London universities) in 2021 for accepting money from the Alexander Mosley Charitable Trust, established to hold the fortune left to Max Mosley by his father, British fascist leader Oswald Mosley. UCL received \u00a3500,000 to establish a forensic evidence interpretation laboratory.\nFollowing the passing of the University of London Act 2018, which allowed member institutions to become universities in their own right while remaining part of the University of London, UCL applied for university status in 2019. The application was approved by the Office for Students in 2022 and a supplemental charter was sealed on 17 April 2023, granting UCL university status.\nCampus and locations.\nBloomsbury.\nUCL is primarily based in the Bloomsbury area of the London Borough of Camden, in Central London. The main campus is located around Gower Street, with many other departments close by in Bloomsbury. Many health institutes are located close to associated hospitals, including the UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology and the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery in Queen Square, the UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, and the UCL Eastman Dental Institute and Eastman Dental Hospital.\nHistoric UCL buildings in Bloomsbury include the grade I listed UCL Main Building, including the original Wilkins building designed by William Wilkins, and, directly opposite on Gower Street, the early 20th century grade II listed Cruciform Building, the last major building designed by Alfred Waterhouse. Nearby are the grade II listed Kathleen Lonsdale Building, UCL's first purpose-built chemistry laboratory, and the grade II listed Rockefeller Building. Elsewhere in Bloomsbury is the 1970s grade II* Institute of Education building by Denys Lasdun and Partners. Much of the estate falls within the Bloomsbury Conservation Area, designated in 1968. Important contemporary buildings include the School of Slavonic and East European Studies building (RIBA Award winner 2006) and the Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuits and Behaviour building (LEAF Award for best fa\u00e7ade design and engineering and overall winner 2016).\nIn August 2024, UCL won a court case to regain control of part of its campus which had been occupied by pro-Gaza protesters since May.\nUCL East.\nUCL has a second campus, UCL East, at the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park in Stratford, east London. The first building, with three floors of teaching and research space as well as accommodation for 500 students in two towers, opened in 2022, and the second, with eight floors of teaching and research space, opened in 2023. A further four buildings are planned for construction in the 2030s. UCL also operates a campus within Here East, the former Olympic park media centre.\nOther sites.\nElsewhere in Central London are the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology adjacent to Moorfields Eye Hospital in Clerkenwell, the Royal Free Hospital and the Whittington Hospital campuses of the UCL Medical School, and a number of other associated teaching hospitals. The UCL School of Management is on levels 38 and 50 (penthouse) of One Canada Square in the financial district of Canary Wharf. The UCL Observatory is in Mill Hill and the Mullard Space Science Laboratory is based in Holmbury St Mary, Surrey. The UCL Athletics Ground is in Shenley, Hertfordshire.\nStudent housing.\nUCL owns 26 halls of residence with around 7,000 student beds. The university guarantees accommodation to single full-time first-year undergraduate students who have not previously lived in London while studying at a university, and who make a firm acceptance of a place and apply for accommodation by 10 June each year, and to single overseas first-year postgraduates at UCL who have not previously lived in London while studying at a university, and who make a firm acceptance of a place and apply for accommodation by 30 June each year. Accommodation is also guaranteed for students who are under 18 at the start of the academic year and for students who are care-leavers. There is only limited accommodation available in university halls for returning students and others who do not meet the criteria for a guaranteed place. UCL students are also eligible, as students of a member institution of the University of London, to apply for places in the University of London intercollegiate halls of residence.\nIn 2013, UCL's newly built New Hall student accommodation building on Caledonian Road, designed by Stephen George and Partners, was awarded the Carbuncle Cup and named the country's worst new building by \"Building Design\" magazine, with the comment \"this is a building that the jury struggled to see as remotely fit for human occupation\". Islington Council had originally turned down planning permission for the building, but this had been overturned on appeal. As it is classified as a hotel or guest house, it was exempt from many of the standards that cover residential buildings, such as having daylight in the rooms.\nThe UCL East development includes 532 student rooms in One Pool Street, which opened in 2022. Further accommodation will be available in the Marshgate building, expected to open in 2023, and at the second Pool Street site.\nEnvironmental initiatives.\nUCL's new Student Centre, which opened in 2019, was designed to be environmentally friendly and was one of only 320 buildings worldwide (at the time) to be certified \"outstanding\" by BREEAM. This certification requires innovation throughout the design, engineering and construction process, and places the Student Centre among the top 1% of non-domestic buildings in the UK for sustainability. The UCL Student Centre was a finalist at the Green Gown Awards in 2019.\nAlso in 2019, UCL launched a \"Strategy for Sustainable UCL 2019\u201324\", including three initiatives to promote sustainability. The \"Positive Climate\" initiative saw UCL pledge to have a 40% reduction in energy usage, all energy to come from renewables, and all UCL buildings to be carbon neutral by 2024, along with achieving net zero carbon emissions for UCL by 2030. The \"Positive Climate\" initiative was the winner in the \"2030 Climate Action\" category at the 2020 Green Gown Awards.\nA second initiative, \"The Loop\", promotes circular economy. UCL set a target of reducing waste per person by 20% between 2019 and 2024, while aiming for an 85% recycling rate and the elimination of single-use plastics on campus. The third initiative, \"Wild Bloomsbury\", promotes biodiversity. UCL set a target of creating of biodiverse green space on campus by 2024. The \"Strategy for a Sustainable UCL\" was a finalist in the \"Sustainable Institution of the Year\" category at the 2022 Green Gown Awards.\nUCL was ranked joint fifth globally for sustainability in the \"QS World University Rankings: Sustainability 2025\". In the national \"People and Planet University League\" for 2023/24, it was ranked 12th (1st class).\nOrganisation and administration.\nGovernance.\nThe two main bodies in UCL's governance structure are the council and the academic board, both of which are established by the royal charter and with powers defined by the statutes. There is also a University Management Committee, which is the executive committee responsible for the day-to-day operations of the institution. This comprises the President and Provost, the vice-presidents, the vice-provosts, the pro-provost of UCL East, the deans of the faculties, the chief financial officer, chief information officer, and chief people officer, the chief of staff, the general consul, the executive director of media and marketing, and the director of media relations.\nThe senior leadership team at UCL includes the visitor, a position in English charity law that oversees the operation of the institution. That there shall be a visitor of the college is specified by the royal charter, as is that the position is to be held by the Master of the Rolls, the second most senior judge in England and Wales.\nUCL's council comprises 20 members, of whom 11 are members external to UCL; seven are UCL academic staff, including the provost, three UCL professors and three non-professorial staff; and two are UCL students. The chair is appointed by council for a term not normally exceeding five years. The chair is \"ex officio\" chair of the honorary degrees and fellowships committee, nominations committee and remuneration and strategy committee. As of April 2023,[ [update]] the chair of the council is international businessman and UCL alumnus Victor Chu.\nThe academic board plays a role similar to the senate in other institutions. It is the senior academic body responsible for advising council on academic matters and also elects academic members to council. It is, however, a much larger body than the senates at many other universities, including all professors as well as elected representatives of other academic and non-academic staff.\nUCL's principal academic and administrative officer is the President and Provost, who is also UCL's designated \"accountable officer\" for reporting to the Office for Students on behalf of UCL. The provost is appointed by Council after consultation with the academic board, and is \"ex officio\" a member of council and chair of the academic board. Michael Spence has been president and provost since January 2021, when he succeeded Michael Arthur.\nVice-provosts are appointed by council on the recommendation of the provost or the academic board, to assist and advise the provost as required. The vice-provosts are members of the provost's senior management team. There are four vice-provosts (for education and student experience; health; research, innovation and global engagement; and faculties). There are also four vice-presidents, who are also members of the senior management team but whose role and manner of appointment is not specified in the statutes, for strategy, external engagement, advancement and operations.\nThe deans of UCL's faculties are appointed by the council and are members of the provost's senior management team. The deans' principal duties include advising the provost and vice-provosts on academic strategy, staffing matters and resources for academic departments within their faculty; overseeing curricula and programme management at faculty level; liaising with faculty tutors on undergraduate admissions and student academic matters; overseeing examination matters at faculty level; and co-ordinating faculty views on matters relating to education and information support.\nFaculties and departments.\nUCL's research and teaching is organised into eleven faculties, each of which contains a number of schools, departments and institutes. The establishment of faculties and academic departments is formally the responsibility of UCL's council, with advice from the academic board.\nThere are also academic units outside the faculty structure, namely:\nThe School of Slavonic and East European Studies remained autonomous until 2023. It was integrated into UCL Arts and Humanities faculty at the time with 193 staff; 559 undergraduate students; 57 taught postgraduate students; 29 research postgraduate students (2022/23).\nThere are additional staff employed outside the faculty structure in the university administration.\nFinances.\nIn the financial year ended 31 July 2024, UCL had a total income (excluding share of joint ventures) of \u00a32.03\u00a0billion (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a31.93\u00a0billion) and a total expenditure of \u00a31.47\u00a0billion (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a31.71\u00a0billion). Key sources of income included \u00a3538.8\u00a0million from research grants and contracts (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3526.7\u00a0million), \u00a3971.2\u00a0million from tuition fees and education contracts (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3929.3\u00a0million), \u00a3228.1\u00a0million from funding body grants (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a3236.7\u00a0million) and \u00a334.1\u00a0million from donations and endowments (2022/23 \u2013 \u00a331.5\u00a0million). At year end UCL had endowments of \u00a3174.8\u00a0million (31 July 2023 \u2013 \u00a3156.8\u00a0million) and total net assets of \u00a32.19\u00a0billion (31 July 2023 \u2013 \u00a31.61\u00a0million).\nA report by London Economics in 2022 found that UCL generates around \u00a310 billion annually for the UK economy. The largest contributor to this is through the spread of its research and knowledge, which is worth \u00a34 billion, with another \u00a33 billion being added by the impact of UCL's own spending. Other contributions come from encouraging graduates to create jobs and investment, and from nurturing company spin-offs and start-ups. The report found that in 2018\u201319, UCL had supported 234 graduate start-ups and 83 spinout companies, with a total turnover of \u00a3110 million and employing almost 3,000 people. The report also found that UCL's spending supported 19,000 jobs across the UK, with over 7,000 of these being outside London.\nTerms.\nThe UCL academic year is divided into three terms. For most departments, First Term runs from late September to mid-December, Second Term from mid-January to late March, and Third Term from late April to mid-June, with reading weeks in early November and mid-February. Certain courses at the medical school, the faculty of education and society, and the school of pharmacy operate on different terms.\nLogo and colours.\nWhile many universities use their logo for most communications and branding and a coat of arms only for specific ceremonial and official use, UCL exclusively uses a logo and has no coat of arms. The present logo was adopted as part of a rebranding exercise in August 2005. Prior to that date, a different logo was used, in which the letters UCL were incorporated into a stylised representation of the Wilkins Building portico.\nA pseudo-heraldic \"UCL crest\" \u2013 a purple shield depicting a raised bent arm dressed in armour between two gold laurel branches holding a green upturned open wreath, with the college motto on a blue celeste ribbon beneath the laurel branches \u2013 can be found on the internet. A version of this badge (not on a shield) appears to have been used by UCL Union from shortly after its foundation in 1893. However, the badge has never been the subject of an official grant of arms, and departs from several of the rules and conventions of heraldry. It is not an official logo, although modified forms are used by some by sports teams and societies. The official Team UCL logo, used (with variants) by many sports teams, uses a shield divided into the colours of purple (lower) and blue celeste (upper), but none of the other elements (laurels, wreaths, armoured arm, motto) are present; the only graphic is a depiction of the UCL portico. Students' Union UCL requests teams not to modify this logo, but this is widely ignored.\nUCL's motto, \"Cuncti adsint meritaeque expectent praemia palmae\" is a quotation from Virgil's \"Aeneid\", and translates into English as \"Let all come who by merit deserve the most reward\".\nUCL's traditional sporting and academic colours are purple and blue celeste. UCL uses a palette of 25 colours (including the two traditional colours) in its visual identity; the logo can be used in many different combinations of these colours.\nMemberships, affiliations and partnerships.\nUCL is a member institution of the federal University of London and was one of the two colleges affiliated from the university's founding in 1836 (the other being King's College London). UCL was a founding member of the Russell Group, an association of 24 British research universities established in 1994, and is regarded as forming part of the 'golden triangle', an unofficial term for the research-intensive universities located in the southern English cities of Cambridge, London and Oxford\nUCL has been a member of the League of European Research Universities since January 2006. UCL is also a member of the Association of Commonwealth Universities, the European University Association, the global U7+ Alliance and the US Universities Research Association, and has a major collaboration with Yale University, the Yale UCL Collaborative. It also has partnerships with universities in Australia, Canada, China, India, Japan, Singapore and Thailand.\nUCL formed the Science and Engineering South engineering and physical sciences research alliance with the universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Southampton and Imperial College London in May 2013. It was also one of the founding members of the Alan Turing Institute, the UK's national institute for data sciences and artificial intelligence, in 2015, with the universities of Cambridge, Edinburgh, Oxford and Warwick.\nUCL is a partner in UCLPartners, an academic health science centre, along with multiple NHS trusts, integrated care systems, research and innovation partners, and other universities. UCL is a partner with the National Institute for Health Research, the University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and UCLPartners in the UCLH Biomedical Research Centre. UCL is also a university partner of the Francis Crick Institute, a major biomedical research centre in London.\nUCL offers dual degrees and joint degrees with other universities and institutions, including the University of Cologne, Columbia University, the University of Hong Kong, Imperial College London (ending 2023) and New York University.\nUCL is the sponsor of the UCL Academy, a secondary school in the London Borough of Camden. The school opened in September 2012 and was the first in the UK to have a university as sole sponsor. UCL also has a strategic partnership with Newham Collegiate Sixth Form Centre.\nAcademic profile.\nResearch.\nIn 2023/24, UCL had an income from research grants and contracts of \u00a3538.8 million, making up 26.6% of all revenue. The largest sources of research income were research council grants (\u00a3175.9 million) and British charities (\u00a3154.2 million). A further \u00a3164 million of recurrent research funding was allocated to UCL by Research England, making up 8% of income.\nUCL submitted 3,432 staff (3,177 FTEs) across 32 units of assessment (areas of research) to the 2021 Research Excellence Framework (REF) assessment. 58% of submitted research was rated 4* ('world leading'), the sixth highest in the REF, and a further 34% as 3* ('internationally excellent'). Overall, UCL was ranked second for both research power and market share by both \"Times Higher Education\" and \"Research Professional News\", and sixth on research quality (GPA) by \"Times Higher Education\". UCL submitted more units of assessment to the 2021 REF than any other university. However, UCL's market share (based on the funding formula) declined from 6.23% following the 2014 REF to 5.34%, despite the overall improvement, reflecting increases in research quality across the sector.\nResearch centres.\nUCL operates a large number of disciplinary-specific research centres in partnership with other research institutions and private enterprises. Notable examples include:\nPublishing and commercialisation.\nIn 2020/21, UCL had an income of \u00a37.3 million from intellectual property and \u00a325.2 million from the sale of shares in spin-off companies. As of 2020/21, UCL had the second largest patent portfolio of any UK university (after Oxford) with 2,391 patents. It granted the third largest number of intellectual property licences (after Oxford and the University of East Anglia), with 2,235.\nUCL Business is a technology transfer company which is wholly owned by UCL. It has three main activities: licensing technologies, creating spin-out companies, and project management. UCL Business supports spin-out companies in areas including discovery disclosure, commercialisation, business plan development, contractual advice, incubation support, recruitment of management teams and identification of investors. In the area of licensing technoloiges, the company provides commercial, legal and administrative advice to help companies broker licensing agreements. UCL Business also provides UCL departments and institutes with project management services for single or multi-party collaborative industry projects. The company transferred \u00a311 million of royalty income to UCL in 2023/24 (2022/23: \u00a33.1 million).\nLaunched in 2015, UCL Press is a new university press wholly owned by UCL. It was the first fully open access university press in the UK, and publishes monographs, textbooks and other academic books in a wide range of academic areas which are available to download for free, in addition to a number of journals. As of December 2024, UCL Press had had more than 13 million downloads of its open access books and journal articles in 242 countries and territories worldwide. More than 10 million of these were for its open access books. UCL Consultants is an academic consultancy services company which is wholly owned by UCL, which provides four main service offerings: Academic Consultancy, Bespoke Short Courses, Testing &amp; Analysis and Expert Witness.\nLibraries.\nThe UCL library system comprises 18 libraries located across the Bloomsbury and UCL East campuses. The libraries contain a total of over 2 million books. The largest library is the UCL Main Library, which is located in the UCL Main Building and contains collections relating to the arts and humanities, economics, history, law and public policy. The second largest library is the UCL Science Library, which is located in the DMS Watson Building on Malet Place and contains collections relating to anthropology, engineering, geography, life sciences, management and the mathematical and physical sciences. The Cruciform Hub contains books and periodicals in the subjects of clinical medicine and medical science. It holds the combined collections of the former Boldero and Clinical Sciences libraries which developed within the Middlesex Hospital, University College Hospital and Royal Free &amp; University College Medical Schools up until their merger in 2005.\nOther libraries include the UCL Bartlett Library (architecture and town planning), the UCL Eastman Dental Institute Library (oral health sciences), the UCL Institute of Archaeology Library (archaeology and egyptology), the UCL Institute of Education's Newsam Library (education and related areas of social science), the UCL Institute of Neurology Rockefeller Medical Library (neurosurgery and neuroscience), the Joint Moorfields Eye Hospital &amp; the UCL Institute of Ophthalmology Library (biomedicine, medicine, nursing, ophthalmology and visual science), the UCL Language &amp; Speech Science Library (audiology, communication disorders, linguistics &amp; phonetics, special education, speech &amp; language therapy and voice) and the UCL School of Slavonic and East European Studies Library (the economics, geography, history, languages, literature and politics of Eastern Europe). The newest library is the UCL East Library, currently located in the Learning Hub on the first floor of One Pool Street. Uniquely among UCL libraries, it offers a 'click and collect' service allowing books from any UCL library to be delivered to UCL East rather than having to be picked up from the library that holds them. It is expected to relocate to the new Marshgate building when that opens in September 2023.\nUCL staff and students have full access to the main libraries of the University of London \u2013 the Senate House Library and the libraries of the institutes of the School of Advanced Study \u2013 which are located close to the main UCL campus in Bloomsbury. These libraries contain over 3.7\u00a0million books and focus on the arts, humanities and social sciences. The British Library, which contains around 14 million books, is also located close to the main UCL campus and all UCL students and staff can apply for reference access.\nUCL's open access institutional repository, UCL Discovery, and UCL Press, UCL's open access academic press are managed by UCL Library Services.\nSpecial collections.\nUCL's Special Collections contains UCL's collection of historical or culturally significant works. It holds over 150,000 rare books, including 179 incunabula, as well as over 600 collections of archives and manuscripts. The incunabula include a 1477 edition of Dante's \"Divine Comedy\", and a 1493 edition of the \"Nuremberg Chronicle\" donated by Jeremy Bentham.\nUCL's most significant works are housed in three strong rooms. The special collection includes first editions of Isaac Newton's \"Principia\", Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" and James Joyce's \"Ulysses\".\nMuseums.\nUCL is responsible for several museums and collections in a wide range of fields across the arts and sciences, including:\nReputation and rankings.\nUCL is ranked as one of the top fifteen universities in all three of the main UK university league tables. These place more emphasis on teaching and student experience than global rankings, using criteria such as teaching quality and learning resources, entry standards, employment prospects, research quality and dropout rates. It went through a dip in rankings in the mid 2010s, particularly in \"The Guardian University Guide\", but returned to that publication's top ten in the 2022 rankings, when its ninth position was its best result since 2014.\nIn the 2023 \"Complete University Guide\" subject tables, UCL was ranked in the top ten in 34 subjects out of 42 offered (81%). It was ranked top for American studies, linguistics, speech and language therapy, and architecture.\nIn the 2023 \"Guardian University Guide\" subject tables, UCL is ranked top in construction, surveying and planning. It was ranked in the top ten for 21 of 31 subjects offered (68%).\nUCL is ranked top in the 2023 \"Times/Sunday Times Good University Guide\" for American studies, building, information systems and management, liberal arts, and town and country planning. It is ranked in the top ten for 31 of 44 subjects offered (70%). The 2023 \"Good University Guide\" also ranked UCL 98th in their social inclusion ranking (covering England and Wales). UCL was named University of the Year in the \"Times/Sunday Times Good University Guide\" for 2024.\nAnalysis by the Department for Education in 2018, found that UCL had an impact on earnings of graduates five years after graduation of +15.5% for women (7th highest impact) and +16.2% for men (10th highest impact) compared to average graduates with similar background characteristics (prior attainment, socio-economic status, etc.) and subject choice.\nUCL has been consistently ranked in the top 25 of the three major global rankings published over 2013 to 2022, including being in the top ten of the \"QS World University Rankings\" over the whole of that period.\nIn the 2025 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", UCL was ranked 14th in the world, having been placed between 15th and 21st in the rankings from 2013 to 2024.\nIn the 2023 \"QS World University Rankings\" (published 2022), UCL was ranked 8th in the world. It has ranked between 4th and 10th in the 2014 to 2024 league tables.\nIn the \"Times Higher Education\" World University Rankings 2023 (published 2022), UCL was ranked 22nd in the world, having ranked between 14th and 22nd in the 2014 to 2023 tables. In the \"Times Higher Education\" World Reputation Rankings 2022, UCL was ranked 25th, while in the \"Times Higher Education\" Impact Rankings 2022 it was ranked 101\u2013200.\nIn the 2024\u20132025 \"USNWR's Best Global Universities\", UCL was ranked joint 7th in the world.\nAdmissions.\nAdmission to UCL is highly selective with an average entry tariff for 2020\u201321 of 189 UCAS points (approximately equivalent to AAAB at A-level), the 9th highest in the country. According to a Freedom of Information request response, UCL's offer rate for 2021 admission was 36.1% at undergraduate level and 23.5% at postgraduate level across all applicants.\nInternational students have made up the majority of main-scheme applicants to UCL since 2015 and the majority of acceptances since 2017. The ratio of main-scheme applicants to acceptances in 2022 was 10.3 for UK applicants and 9.9 for international applicants. Within the UK, UCL is a local recruiter, with 47.4% of 2022 UK admissions coming from the London region and a further 28.1% from the adjacent East of England and South East regions.\nOf UCL's young UK domiciled undergraduates, 32.7% were privately educated in 2019\u201320, the eighth highest proportion amongst mainstream British universities.\nUndergraduate law applicants are required to take the National Admissions Test for Law and undergraduate medical applicants are required to take the BioMedical Admissions Test. Applicants for European Social and Political Studies are required to take the Thinking Skills Assessment (TSA) should they be selected for an assessment day. Medicine, pharmacy and English also interview undergraduate applicants prior to making an offer of admission.\nWidening access.\nUCL runs a contextual offer scheme called Access UCL, whereby eligible applicants can receive conditional offers for courses at UCL that have lower requirements than the standard conditional offers for those courses. Eligibility for Access UCL can be through an applicant living in a deprived areas or an area with low participation in higher education, through having spent time in care, though being a young adult carer, or through being estranged from their family. Applicants must have attended a state school, unless they have spent time in care. Mature applicants are assessed on the same criteria, and are additionally not eligible if they have completed or are on the final year of an undergraduate degree. While the scheme enables applicants from disadvantaged backgrounds to receive contextual offers, it does not guarantee that an offer will be made. Contextual offers vary by course. For example, a contextual offer for the law LLB reduces the requirement from A*AA to BBB at A level, but for the physics MSci from A*AA to AAB.\nUCL also runs week-long UCL Summer Schools for high-achieving students from disadvantaged backgrounds in partnership with the Sutton Trust. These give participants the opportunity to explore London, to develop skills in their chosen subject, to improve their university applications through personal statement workshops and talks by admissions tutors, and to take part in social activities.\nIn 2023, UCL launched an integrated engineering foundation year programme based at UCL East for disadvantaged students who do not meet the standard entry requirements for the Faculty of Engineering's undergraduate degrees. Candidates must have attended UK state schools for A levels or equivalent (unless they have experienced forced displacement) and have experienced specific socioeconomic or personal circumstances such as time in care, estrangement, forced displacement, or receipt of free school meals. The programme's academic entry requirements are based on UCAS Tariff points rather than letter grades.\nThe university runs intensive one-year foundation courses, called Undergraduate Preparatory Certificates, in either sciences or humanities, for international students who do not meet the university's requirements for admission.\nFor UK domiciled young full-time undergraduate entrants in 2020/21, 67.6% came from state schools, significantly below the location-adjusted benchmark of 74.5%, and 4.3% came from low participation neighbourhoods, not significantly different from the location-adjusted benchmark of 4.0%. For UK-domiciled undergraduate entrants in 2022/23, UCAS data shows no significant difference in offer rate with ethnicity or gender. Applicants from the 20% of neighbourhoods with the lowest rates of participation in higher education receive offers at a rate 4.9% higher than would be expected based on their subject choice and predicted grades alone, a statistically significant difference, accounting for 6.3% of all offers. The offer rate for applicants from the 20% of neighbourhoods with the lowest rates of participation in higher education is not significantly different from that expected, with applicants from those neighbourhoods accounting for 48.9% of all offers.\nStudent life.\nStudents' union.\nFounded in 1893, Students' Union UCL, formerly the UCL Union, is one of the oldest students' unions in England, although postdating the Liverpool Guild of Students which formed a student representative council in 1892. Students' Union UCL operates both as the representative voice for UCL students, and as a provider of a wide range of services. It is democratically controlled through General Meetings and referendums, and is run by elected student officers. The union also supports a range of services, including numerous clubs and societies, sports facilities, an advice service, and a number of bars, cafes and shops.\nAs of 2021,[ [update]] there are over 250 clubs and societies under the umbrella of the UCL Union. These include: UCL Snowsports (one of the largest sports society at UCL, responsible for organising the annual UCL ski trip), Pi Media (responsible for \"Pi Magazine\" and \"Pi Newspaper\", UCL's official student publications), the Debating Society (established 1829), and the UCL Union Film Society, with past members including Christopher Nolan.\nFaith.\nFrom its foundation the college has been deliberately secular; the initial justification for this was that it would enable students of different Christian traditions (specifically Roman Catholics, Anglicans and Nonconformists) to study alongside each other without conflict. In order to cater to people of all faiths, UCL opened a prayer room (with attached ablution facilities) and a silent meditation room in the student centre in February 2019, and there is a quiet contemplation room behind 16\u201326 Gordon Square. There is also a Christian chaplain (who also serves as interfaith advisor) and there are student societies for most major religions.\nSport.\nThe union runs over 70 sports clubs, including the UCL Cricket Club (Men's and Women's), UCL Boat Club (Men's and Women's clubs), UCL Running, Athletics and Cross Country Club, Polo, and UCL Rugby Club (Men's and Women's), as well as RUMS sports clubs for medical students (from Royal Free, University College and Middlesex, the three medical schools that merged into UCL).\nUCL clubs compete in inter-university fixtures in the British Universities and Colleges Sport (BUCS) competition in a range of sports, including athletics, basketball, cricket, fencing, football, hockey, netball, rugby union and tennis. In the 2021/22 season, UCL finished in 16th position in the final BUCS rankings.\nUCL sports facilities include a fitness centre at the main UCL campus in Bloomsbury and a athletics ground in Shenley, Hertfordshire, part of which is used as the Watford Football Club Training Ground. It also exercises effective control over Somers Town Community Sports Centre, with the power to appoint five of the nine trustees. The sports centre includes a six-court sports hall, as well as an activity/dance studio and an all-weather outdoor multi-use games area.\nMascot.\nThe UCL mascot was Phineas MacLino, or Phineas, a wooden tobacconist's sign of a kilted Jacobite Highlander stolen from outside a shop in Tottenham Court Road during the celebrations of the relief of Ladysmith, part of the Second Boer War, in March 1900. In 1922, Phineas was stolen by students from King's, marking the start of 'mascotry', leading to an hour-long battle and the eventual return of Phineas. In 1993, the students' union's centenary year, Phineas was placed in the third floor bar of 25 Gordon Street and the bar named after him. In 2019, the students' union voted to remove the mascot from the bar due to its links to imperialism and British colonialism.\nRivalry with King's College London.\nUCL has a long-running, mostly friendly rivalry with King's College London, but there were frequent clashes in the interwar period which have historically been known as \"rags\". UCL students have been referred to by students from King's as the \"Godless Scum of Gower Street\", in reference to a comment made at the founding of King's, which was based on Christian principles. UCL students in turn referred to King's as \"Strand Polytechnic\".\nIn 1922 Phineas, the UCL mascot was kidnapped by King's students, leading to a pitched battle in the King's College quad as UCL students recovered their mascot. Shortly after this, King's adopted their own mascot \u2013 initially a large papier-m\u00e2ch\u00e9 beer bottle, soon replaced by Reggie the Lion. During the 1927 rag, Reggie was captured by UCL students and his body filled with rotten apples. During the same year, an attempt by King's students to capture Phineas led to the \"Battle of Gower Street\", caught on camera by British Path\u00e9. On another occasion, Reggie was castrated by UCL students.\nKing's students stole the embalmed head of Jeremy Bentham in October 1975, only returning it after UCL paid a ransom to charity. The head is now kept in the UCL vaults.\nStudent campaigns.\nIn 1956, UCL students organised a silent march progressing against the Soviet oppression of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Around 1,300 students from across institutions in London matches from the Royal Albert Hall to the Soviet Embassy. There were active Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and anti-apartheid students groups at UCL in the 1960s and a pioneering GaySoc group that helped drive the National Union of Students gay rights campaign in the 1970s. 1977 saw a student occupation of administrative offices and the Slade School in protest against government cuts to higher education.\nIn 2010, protests by students and staff led UCL to promise to pay a living wage to all UCL staff. As part of the protests against the UK government's plans to increase student fees, around 200 students occupied the Jeremy Bentham Room and part of the Slade School of Fine Art for over two weeks during November and December 2010. The university successfully obtained a court order to evict the students but stated that it did not intend to enforce the order if possible.\nThe late 2010s saw student campaigns around the cost of university-run accommodation. In 2016, over 1000 students took part in a rent strike in protest against high rents and poor conditions. Organisers said they had won over \u00a31 million in rent cuts, freezes and grants from UCL in the settlement that ended the strike. Another rent strike in 2017 lead to UCL pledging around \u00a31.4 million in bursaries and rent freezes, mostly in the form of accommodation bursaries for less well-off students totalling \u00a3600,000 per year for the 2017/18 and 2018/19 academic years. Another rent strike was held at two halls of residence in the third term of the 2017/18 academic year due to complaints over conditions at those halls.\nIn 2018, Aliza Ayaz, then a first year student founded the university\u2019s first environment student campaign by setting up the Climate Action Society. The student society led pressure on the university to divest from fossil fuels and make the announcement publicly.\nIn 2024, students protesting against the Gaza war set up an encampment in the campus, emulating the 2024 pro-Palestinian protests that took place across universities in the United States. The UCL encampment followed similar movements by students in other UK universities, such as the University of Leeds and the University of Bristol. On 15 November 2024, students protested the visit of Czech Foreign Minister Jan Lipavsk\u00fd, criticising the Czech government's support for Israel.\nStudent body.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021/22 academic year, UCL had a total of 46,830 students, of whom 23,800 were undergraduates (11,000 UK, 12,800 international), 16,910 were taught postgraduates (8,160 UK, 8,745 international) and 6,120 were research postgraduates (3,520 UK, 2,600 international). In that year, UCL had the second-largest total number of students of any university in the United Kingdom (after the Open University) and the largest number of postgraduate students; however, in terms of UK undergraduates it was 68th by size. It had been the UK university with the highest number of international students every year since 2014/15.\nIn 2021/22, 87% of UCL's students were full-time and 13% part-time, although among undergraduates only 3% were part-time. The student body was split 60.8% female, 39.1% male and 0.1% other gender identity. 24,145 UCL students (52%) were from outside the UK, of whom 15,795 were from Asia, 4,400 from the European Union, 1,440 from North America, 890 from elsewhere in Europe, 790 from the Middle East, 370 from Africa, 310 from South America, and 155 from Australasia; 45% of overseas students at UCL \u2013 10,785 \u2013 came from China. Additionally, UCL had 895 students studying wholly overseas in 2021/22 (10 undergraduate, 785 taught postgraduate and 80 research postgraduate) that are not included in the count of the student population.\nFor UK domiciled students, UCL's student body in 2021/22 was 52.9% white, 26.4% Asian, 7.6% mixed, 6.4% black and 4.6% other, compared to an average across London institutions of 47.8% white, 22.2% Asian, 6.7% mixed, 15.5% black and 4.9% other. Over the whole student body, 12.5% had a known disability, compared to 15.8% across all institutions.\nDiversity.\nUCL holds an institutional silver Athena SWAN award. It gained its first institutional award (bronze) in 2006 and was promoted to silver in 2015. As of November 2021,[ [update]] 21 departments across UCL hold bronze awards, 17 hold silver awards and three hold gold awards. UCL also holds an institutional bronze Race Equality Charter award, which it first gained in 2015.\nUCL was formerly a member of Stonewall Diversity Champions scheme, promoting LGBT+ equality. It left in February 2020 as a cost-cutting measure and then controversially decided in late 2021 not to rejoin, against the advice of its equality diversity and inclusion committee, following a vote of the academic board that expressed fears that membership of the scheme could inhibit academic freedom. The decision not to rejoin was strongly opposed by staff and student LGBT+ groups at UCL and by the students' union.\nNotable people.\nUCL alumni include Francis Crick (co-discoverer of the structure of DNA), Lord Herschell (Lord Chancellor of Great Britain), William Stanley Jevons (an early pioneer of modern economics), Charles K. Kao (\"Godfather of broadband\") and Joseph Lister (pioneer in the use of antiseptics in surgery). Notable former staff include Hugh Gaitskell (leader of the Labour Party 1955\u201363), Otto Hahn (pioneer of nuclear chemistry, discoverer of nuclear fusion and Nobel laureate), Peter Higgs (proposer of the Higgs mechanism, which predicted the existence of the Higgs boson, and Nobel laureate), A. E. Housman (classical scholar and poet, who wrote \"A Shropshire Lad\" while a professor at UCL), Sir William Ramsay (discoverer of all of the naturally occurring noble gases) and Klaus Roth (mathematician and Field's Medal winner).\nNobel Prizes have been awarded to 33 UCL academics (including visiting academics) and alumni (16 in Physiology or Medicine, eight in Chemistry, six in Physics, two in Economic Sciences and one in Literature) as well as three Fields Medals in Mathematics.\nIn the 19th century, UCL operated as a college, with many students taking individual lecture courses rather than studying for degrees. These included well-known alumni such as Mahatma Gandhi, who took English classes with Henry Morley in 1888\u201389, and John Stuart Mill, who attended lectures on jurisprudence by John Austin. In the 20th century, Jomo Kenyatta (considered the \"Founding Father\" of Kenya), took courses on English and phonetics at UCL while working as a linguistic informant in the phonetics department.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52031", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52031", "title": "Unicameral", "text": ""}
{"id": "52033", "revid": "49836368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52033", "title": "Mathematical optimization", "text": "Study of mathematical algorithms for optimization problems\nMathematical optimization (alternatively spelled \"optimisation\") or mathematical programming is the selection of a best element, with regard to some criteria, from some set of available alternatives. It is generally divided into two subfields: discrete optimization and continuous optimization. Optimization problems arise in all quantitative disciplines from computer science and engineering to operations research and economics, and the development of solution methods has been of interest in mathematics for centuries.\nIn the more general approach, an optimization problem consists of maximizing or minimizing a real function by systematically choosing input values from within an allowed set and computing the value of the function. The generalization of optimization theory and techniques to other formulations constitutes a large area of applied mathematics.\nOptimization problems.\nOptimization problems can be divided into two categories, depending on whether the variables are continuous or discrete: \nAn optimization problem can be represented in the following way:\n\"Given:\" a function formula_1 from some set A to the real numbers\n\"Sought:\" an element x0 \u2208 \"A\" such that \"f\"(x0) \u2264 \"f\"(x) for all x \u2208 \"A\" (\"minimization\") or such that \"f\"(x0) \u2265 \"f\"(x) for all x \u2208 \"A\" (\"maximization\").\nSuch a formulation is called an optimization problem or a mathematical programming problem (a term not directly related to computer programming, but still in use for example in linear programming \u2013 see History below). Many real-world and theoretical problems may be modeled in this general framework.\nSince the following is valid:\nformula_2 \nit suffices to solve only minimization problems. However, the opposite perspective of considering only maximization problems would be valid, too.\nProblems formulated using this technique in the fields of physics may refer to the technique as \"energy minimization\", speaking of the value of the function f as representing the energy of the system being modeled. In machine learning, it is always necessary to continuously evaluate the quality of a data model by using a cost function where a minimum implies a set of possibly optimal parameters with an optimal (lowest) error.\nTypically, A is some subset of the Euclidean space formula_3, often specified by a set of \"constraints\", equalities or inequalities that the members of A have to satisfy. The domain A of f is called the \"search space\" or the \"choice set\", while the elements of A are called \"candidate solutions\" or \"feasible solutions\".\nThe function f is variously called an \"objective function\", \"criterion function\", \"loss function\", \"cost function\" (minimization), \"utility function\" or \"fitness function\" (maximization), or, in certain fields, an \"energy function\" or \"energy functional\". A feasible solution that minimizes (or maximizes) the objective function is called an \"optimal solution\".\nIn mathematics, conventional optimization problems are usually stated in terms of minimization.\nA \"local minimum\" x* is defined as an element for which there exists some \"\u03b4\" &gt; 0 such that\nformula_4\nthe expression \"f\"(x*) \u2264 \"f\"(x) holds;\nthat is to say, on some region around x* all of the function values are greater than or equal to the value at that element. \nLocal maxima are defined similarly.\nWhile a local minimum is at least as good as any nearby elements, a global minimum is at least as good as every feasible element.\nGenerally, unless the objective function is convex in a minimization problem, there may be several local minima.\nIn a convex problem, if there is a local minimum that is interior (not on the edge of the set of feasible elements), it is also the global minimum, but a nonconvex problem may have more than one local minimum not all of which need be global minima.\nA large number of algorithms proposed for solving the nonconvex problems \u2013 including the majority of commercially available solvers \u2013 are not capable of making a distinction between locally optimal solutions and globally optimal solutions, and will treat the former as actual solutions to the original problem. Global optimization is the branch of applied mathematics and numerical analysis that is concerned with the development of deterministic algorithms that are capable of guaranteeing convergence in finite time to the actual optimal solution of a nonconvex problem.\nNotation.\nOptimization problems are often expressed with special notation. Here are some examples:\nMinimum and maximum value of a function.\nConsider the following notation:\nformula_5\nThis denotes the minimum value of the objective function \"x\"2 + 1, when choosing x from the set of real numbers formula_6. The minimum value in this case is 1, occurring at \"x\" = 0.\nSimilarly, the notation\nformula_7\nasks for the maximum value of the objective function 2\"x\", where x may be any real number. In this case, there is no such maximum as the objective function is unbounded, so the answer is \"infinity\" or \"undefined\".\nOptimal input arguments.\nConsider the following notation:\nformula_8\nor equivalently\nformula_9\nThis represents the value (or values) of the argument x in the interval (\u2212\u221e,\u22121] that minimizes (or minimize) the objective function \"x\"2 + 1 (the actual minimum value of that function is not what the problem asks for). In this case, the answer is \"x\" \n \u22121, since \"x\" \n 0 is infeasible, that is, it does not belong to the feasible set.\nSimilarly,\nformula_10\nor equivalently\nformula_11\nrepresents the {\"x\", \"y\"} pair (or pairs) that maximizes (or maximize) the value of the objective function \"x\" cos \"y\", with the added constraint that x lie in the interval [\u22125,5] (again, the actual maximum value of the expression does not matter). In this case, the solutions are the pairs of the form {5, 2\"k\"\u03c0} and {\u22125, (2\"k\" + 1)\u03c0}, where k ranges over all integers.\nOperators arg min and arg max are sometimes also written as argmin and argmax, and stand for \"argument of the minimum\" and \"argument of the maximum\".\nHistory.\nFermat and Lagrange found calculus-based formulae for identifying optima, while Newton and Gauss proposed iterative methods for moving towards an optimum.\nThe term \"linear programming\" for certain optimization cases was due to George\u00a0B. Dantzig, although much of the theory had been introduced by Leonid Kantorovich in 1939. (\"Programming\" in this context does not refer to computer programming, but comes from the use of \"program\" by the United States military to refer to proposed training and logistics schedules, which were the problems Dantzig studied at that time.) Dantzig published the Simplex algorithm in 1947, and also John von Neumann and other researchers worked on the theoretical aspects of linear programming (like the theory of duality) around the same time.\nOther notable researchers in mathematical optimization include the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMajor subfields.\nIn a number of subfields, the techniques are designed primarily for optimization in dynamic contexts (that is, decision making over time):\nMulti-objective optimization.\nAdding more than one objective to an optimization problem adds complexity. For example, to optimize a structural design, one would desire a design that is both light and rigid. When two objectives conflict, a trade-off must be created. There may be one lightest design, one stiffest design, and an infinite number of designs that are some compromise of weight and rigidity. The set of trade-off designs that improve upon one criterion at the expense of another is known as the Pareto set. The curve created plotting weight against stiffness of the best designs is known as the Pareto frontier.\nA design is judged to be \"Pareto optimal\" (equivalently, \"Pareto efficient\" or in the Pareto set) if it is not dominated by any other design: If it is worse than another design in some respects and no better in any respect, then it is dominated and is not Pareto optimal.\nThe choice among \"Pareto optimal\" solutions to determine the \"favorite solution\" is delegated to the decision maker. In other words, defining the problem as multi-objective optimization signals that some information is missing: desirable objectives are given but combinations of them are not rated relative to each other. In some cases, the missing information can be derived by interactive sessions with the decision maker.\nMulti-objective optimization problems have been generalized further into vector optimization problems where the (partial) ordering is no longer given by the Pareto ordering.\nMulti-modal or global optimization.\nOptimization problems are often multi-modal; that is, they possess multiple good solutions. They could all be globally good (same cost function value) or there could be a mix of globally good and locally good solutions. Obtaining all (or at least some of) the multiple solutions is the goal of a multi-modal optimizer.\nClassical optimization techniques due to their iterative approach do not perform satisfactorily when they are used to obtain multiple solutions, since it is not guaranteed that different solutions will be obtained even with different starting points in multiple runs of the algorithm.\nCommon approaches to global optimization problems, where multiple local extrema may be present include evolutionary algorithms, Bayesian optimization and simulated annealing.\nClassification of critical points and extrema.\nFeasibility problem.\nThe \"satisfiability problem\", also called the \"feasibility problem\", is just the problem of finding any feasible solution at all without regard to objective value. This can be regarded as the special case of mathematical optimization where the objective value is the same for every solution, and thus any solution is optimal.\nMany optimization algorithms need to start from a feasible point. One way to obtain such a point is to relax the feasibility conditions using a slack variable; with enough slack, any starting point is feasible. Then, minimize that slack variable until the slack is null or negative.\nExistence.\nThe extreme value theorem of Karl Weierstrass states that a continuous real-valued function on a compact set attains its maximum and minimum value. More generally, a lower semi-continuous function on a compact set attains its minimum; an upper semi-continuous function on a compact set attains its maximum point or view.\nNecessary conditions for optimality.\nOne of Fermat's theorems states that optima of unconstrained problems are found at stationary points, where the first derivative or the gradient of the objective function is zero (see first derivative test). More generally, they may be found at critical points, where the first derivative or gradient of the objective function is zero or is undefined, or on the boundary of the choice set. An equation (or set of equations) stating that the first derivative(s) equal(s) zero at an interior optimum is called a 'first-order condition' or a set of first-order conditions.\nOptima of equality-constrained problems can be found by the Lagrange multiplier method. The optima of problems with equality and/or inequality constraints can be found using the 'Karush\u2013Kuhn\u2013Tucker conditions'.\nSufficient conditions for optimality.\nWhile the first derivative test identifies points that might be extrema, this test does not distinguish a point that is a minimum from one that is a maximum or one that is neither. When the objective function is twice differentiable, these cases can be distinguished by checking the second derivative or the matrix of second derivatives (called the Hessian matrix) in unconstrained problems, or the matrix of second derivatives of the objective function and the constraints called the bordered Hessian in constrained problems. The conditions that distinguish maxima, or minima, from other stationary points are called 'second-order conditions' (see 'Second derivative test'). If a candidate solution satisfies the first-order conditions, then the satisfaction of the second-order conditions as well is sufficient to establish at least local optimality.\nSensitivity and continuity of optima.\nThe envelope theorem describes how the value of an optimal solution changes when an underlying parameter changes. The process of computing this change is called comparative statics.\nThe maximum theorem of Claude Berge (1963) describes the continuity of an optimal solution as a function of underlying parameters.\nCalculus of optimization.\nFor unconstrained problems with twice-differentiable functions, some critical points can be found by finding the points where the gradient of the objective function is zero (that is, the stationary points). More generally, a zero subgradient certifies that a local minimum has been found for minimization problems with convex functions and other locally Lipschitz functions, which meet in loss function minimization of the neural network. The positive-negative momentum estimation lets to avoid the local minimum and converges at the objective function global minimum.\nFurther, critical points can be classified using the definiteness of the Hessian matrix: If the Hessian is \"positive\" definite at a critical point, then the point is a local minimum; if the Hessian matrix is negative definite, then the point is a local maximum; finally, if indefinite, then the point is some kind of saddle point.\nConstrained problems can often be transformed into unconstrained problems with the help of Lagrange multipliers. Lagrangian relaxation can also provide approximate solutions to difficult constrained problems.\nWhen the objective function is a convex function, then any local minimum will also be a global minimum. There exist efficient numerical techniques for minimizing convex functions, such as interior-point methods.\nGlobal convergence.\nMore generally, if the objective function is not a quadratic function, then many optimization methods use other methods to ensure that some subsequence of iterations converges to an optimal solution. The first and still popular method for ensuring convergence relies on line searches, which optimize a function along one dimension. A second and increasingly popular method for ensuring convergence uses trust regions. Both line searches and trust regions are used in modern methods of non-differentiable optimization. Usually, a global optimizer is much slower than advanced local optimizers (such as BFGS), so often an efficient global optimizer can be constructed by starting the local optimizer from different starting points.\nComputational optimization techniques.\nTo solve problems, researchers may use algorithms that terminate in a finite number of steps, or iterative methods that converge to a solution (on some specified class of problems), or heuristics that may provide approximate solutions to some problems (although their iterates need not converge).\nIterative methods.\nThe iterative methods used to solve problems of nonlinear programming differ according to whether they evaluate Hessians, gradients, or only function values. While evaluating Hessians (H) and gradients (G) improves the rate of convergence, for functions for which these quantities exist and vary sufficiently smoothly, such evaluations increase the computational complexity (or computational cost) of each iteration. In some cases, the computational complexity may be excessively high.\nOne major criterion for optimizers is just the number of required function evaluations as this often is already a large computational effort, usually much more effort than within the optimizer itself, which mainly has to operate over the N variables. The derivatives provide detailed information for such optimizers, but are even harder to calculate, e.g. approximating the gradient takes at least N+1 function evaluations. For approximations of the 2nd derivatives (collected in the Hessian matrix), the number of function evaluations is in the order of N\u00b2. Newton's method requires the 2nd-order derivatives, so for each iteration, the number of function calls is in the order of N\u00b2, but for a simpler pure gradient optimizer it is only N. However, gradient optimizers need usually more iterations than Newton's algorithm. Which one is best with respect to the number of function calls depends on the problem itself.\nHeuristics.\nBesides (finitely terminating) algorithms and (convergent) iterative methods, there are heuristics. A heuristic is any algorithm which is not guaranteed (mathematically) to find the solution, but which is nevertheless useful in certain practical situations. List of some well-known heuristics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nApplications.\nMechanics.\nProblems in rigid body dynamics (in particular articulated rigid body dynamics) often require mathematical programming techniques, since you can view rigid body dynamics as attempting to solve an ordinary differential equation on a constraint manifold; the constraints are various nonlinear geometric constraints such as \"these two points must always coincide\", \"this surface must not penetrate any other\", or \"this point must always lie somewhere on this curve\". Also, the problem of computing contact forces can be done by solving a linear complementarity problem, which can also be viewed as a QP (quadratic programming) problem.\nMany design problems can also be expressed as optimization programs. This application is called design optimization. One subset is the engineering optimization, and another recent and growing subset of this field is multidisciplinary design optimization, which, while useful in many problems, has in particular been applied to aerospace engineering problems.\nThis approach may be applied in cosmology and astrophysics.\nEconomics and finance.\nEconomics is closely enough linked to optimization of agents that an influential definition relatedly describes economics \"qua\" science as the \"study of human behavior as a relationship between ends and scarce means\" with alternative uses. Modern optimization theory includes traditional optimization theory but also overlaps with game theory and the study of economic equilibria. The \"Journal of Economic Literature\" codes classify mathematical programming, optimization techniques, and related topics under .\nIn microeconomics, the utility maximization problem and its dual problem, the expenditure minimization problem, are economic optimization problems. Insofar as they behave consistently, consumers are assumed to maximize their utility, while firms are usually assumed to maximize their profit. Also, agents are often modeled as being risk-averse, thereby preferring to avoid risk. Asset prices are also modeled using optimization theory, though the underlying mathematics relies on optimizing stochastic processes rather than on static optimization. International trade theory also uses optimization to explain trade patterns between nations. The optimization of portfolios is an example of multi-objective optimization in economics.\nSince the 1970s, economists have modeled dynamic decisions over time using control theory. For example, dynamic search models are used to study labor-market behavior. A crucial distinction is between deterministic and stochastic models. Macroeconomists build dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models that describe the dynamics of the whole economy as the result of the interdependent optimizing decisions of workers, consumers, investors, and governments.\nElectrical engineering.\nSome common applications of optimization techniques in electrical engineering include active filter design, stray field reduction in superconducting magnetic energy storage systems, space mapping design of microwave structures, handset antennas, electromagnetics-based design. Electromagnetically validated design optimization of microwave components and antennas has made extensive use of an appropriate physics-based or empirical surrogate model and space mapping methodologies since the discovery of space mapping in 1993. Optimization techniques are also used in power-flow analysis.\nCivil engineering.\nOptimization has been widely used in civil engineering. Construction management and transportation engineering are among the main branches of civil engineering that heavily rely on optimization. The most common civil engineering problems that are solved by optimization are cut and fill of roads, life-cycle analysis of structures and infrastructures, resource leveling, water resource allocation, traffic management and schedule optimization.\nOperations research.\nAnother field that uses optimization techniques extensively is operations research. Operations research also uses stochastic modeling and simulation to support improved decision-making. Increasingly, operations research uses stochastic programming to model dynamic decisions that adapt to events; such problems can be solved with large-scale optimization and stochastic optimization methods.\nControl engineering.\nMathematical optimization is used in much modern controller design. High-level controllers such as model predictive control (MPC) or real-time optimization (RTO) employ mathematical optimization. These algorithms run online and repeatedly determine values for decision variables, such as choke openings in a process plant, by iteratively solving a mathematical optimization problem including constraints and a model of the system to be controlled.\nGeophysics.\nOptimization techniques are regularly used in geophysical parameter estimation problems. Given a set of geophysical measurements, e.g. seismic recordings, it is common to solve for the physical properties and geometrical shapes of the underlying rocks and fluids. The majority of problems in geophysics are nonlinear with both deterministic and stochastic methods being widely used.\nMolecular modeling.\nNonlinear optimization methods are widely used in conformational analysis.\nComputational systems biology.\nOptimization techniques are used in many facets of computational systems biology such as model building, optimal experimental design, metabolic engineering, and synthetic biology. Linear programming has been applied to calculate the maximal possible yields of fermentation products, and to infer gene regulatory networks from multiple microarray datasets as well as transcriptional regulatory networks from high-throughput data. Nonlinear programming has been used to analyze energy metabolism and has been applied to metabolic engineering and parameter estimation in biochemical pathways.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52034", "revid": "1320266545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52034", "title": "James Ussher", "text": "17th-century Anglican Archbishop of Armagh\nJames Ussher (or Usher; 4 January 1581\u00a0\u2013 21 March 1656) was the Church of Ireland Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of All Ireland between 1625 and 1656. He was a prolific Irish scholar and church leader, who today is most famous for his identification of the genuine letters of the church father, Ignatius of Antioch, and for his chronology that sought to establish the time and date of the creation as \"the entrance of the night preceding the 23rd day of October ... the year before Christ 4004\"; that is, around 6 pm on 22 October 4004 BC, per the proleptic Julian calendar.\nEducation.\nUssher was born in Dublin to a well-to-do family. His maternal grandfather, James Stanihurst, had been speaker of the Irish parliament. Ussher's father, Arland Ussher, was a clerk in chancery who married Stanihurst's daughter, Margaret (by his first wife Anne Fitzsimon), who was reportedly a Roman Catholic.\nUssher's younger and only surviving brother, Ambrose, became a distinguished scholar of Arabic and Hebrew. According to his chaplain and biographer, Nicholas Bernard, the elder brother was taught to read by two blind, spinster aunts. A gifted polyglot, he entered Dublin Free School and then the newly founded (1591) Trinity College Dublin on 9 January 1594, at the age of thirteen (not an unusual age at the time). He had received his Bachelor of Arts degree by 1598 and was a fellow and MA by 1600 (though Bernard claims he did not gain his MA till 1601). In May 1602, he was ordained in the Trinity College Chapel as a deacon in the Protestant, established, Church of Ireland (and possibly priest on the same day, while Martin Gorst says that he became a priest on 20 December 1601) by his uncle \nUssher went on to become Chancellor of St Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin in 1605 and Prebend of Finglas. He became Professor of Theological Controversies at Trinity College and a Bachelor of Divinity in 1607, Doctor of Divinity in 1612, and then Vice-Chancellor in 1615 and vice-provost in 1616. In 1613, he married Phoebe, daughter of a previous Vice-Provost, Luke Challoner, and published his first work. In 1615, he was closely involved with the drawing up of the first confession of faith of the Church of Ireland, the Irish Articles of Religion.\nEarly life and career.\nJames was born in the parish of St. Nicholas, to Arland Ussher (1545\u20131598) and Margaret Ussher (n\u00e9e Stanihurst) (1547\u20131601). It is recorded in Alfred Webb's, \"A Compendium of Irish Biography\" (1878) that his father, a clerk in the court of Chancery, was said to have been descended from one, Neville, who came over (to Ireland) with King John in the capacity of usher and had changed his name to that of his office. James was taught to read by two aunts who had been blind from infancy, to whom he ever afterward looked back with affection and respect. From eight to thirteen years of age he attended the school kept by Fullerton and Hamilton, private emissaries of James VI of Scotland, sent to keep up his influence in Ireland, in view of the prospect of his succeeding to the throne of England and Ireland.\"\nJames's abilities, diligence, and loving disposition from youth are described as \"attracting the esteem of all with whom he came in contact.\" He became one of the first and leading scholars of Trinity College, Dublin (opened 1593).\nIn the beginning of 1614 he married his cousin, Phoebe, daughter of his maternal uncle Dr Lucas Challanor. Webb tells how Phoebe had been enjoined by her father's will, bequeathing her a considerable property, not to marry any other than Dr. Usher, \"should he propose himself.\" https://\n1619 Ussher travelled to England, where he remained for two years.\nHis and Phoebe's only child was Elizabeth Ussher (1619\u201393), who married Sir Timothy Tyrrell, of Oakley, Buckinghamshire. She was the mother of James Tyrrell.\nDr. Ussher became prominent after meeting James I. In 1621 James I nominated Ussher Bishop of Meath. He became a national figure in Ireland, becoming Privy Councillor in 1623 and an increasingly substantial scholar. A noted collector of Irish manuscripts, he made them available for research to fellow scholars such as his friend, Sir James Ware.\nFrom 1623 until 1626 he was again in England and was excused from his episcopal duties to study church history. He was nominated Primate of All Ireland and Archbishop of Armagh in 1625 and succeeded Christopher Hampton, who had succeeded Ussher's uncle Henry twelve years earlier.\nPrimate of All Ireland.\nAfter his consecration in 1626, Ussher found himself in turbulent political times. Tension was rising between England and Spain. To secure Ireland Charles I offered Irish Catholics a series of concessions, including religious toleration, known as The Graces, in exchange for money for the upkeep of the army. Ussher was a convinced Calvinist. He was dismayed that Papists might obtain power. He called a secret meeting of the Irish bishops in his house in November 1626, the result being the \"Judgement of the Arch-Bishops and Bishops of Ireland\". This begins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The religion of the papists is superstitious and idolatrous; their faith and doctrine erroneous and heretical; their church in respect of both, apostatical; to give them, therefore, a toleration, or to consent that they may freely exercise their religion, and profess their faith and doctrine, is a grievous sin.\nThe Judgement was not published until it was read out at the end of a series of sermons against the Graces given at Dublin in April 1627. Following Thomas Wentworth's attainder in April 1641, King Charles and the Privy Council of England instructed the Irish Lords Justices on 3 May 1641 to publish the required Bills to enact the Graces. However, the law reforms were not properly implemented before the rebellion in late 1641.\nDuring a four-year interregnum between Lord Deputies from 1629 on, there was an increase in efforts to impose religious conformity on Ireland. In 1633, Ussher wrote to the new Archbishop of Canterbury, William Laud, in an effort to gain support for the imposition of recusancy fines on Irish Catholics. Thomas Wentworth, who arrived as the new Lord Deputy in Ireland in 1633, deflected the pressure for conformity by stating that firstly, the Church of Ireland itself would have to be properly resourced, and he set about its re-endowment. He settled the long-running primacy dispute between the sees of Armagh and Dublin in Armagh's favour. The two clashed on the subject of the theatre: Ussher had the usual Puritan antipathy to the stage, whereas Wentworth was a keen theatre-goer: against Ussher's opposition, he oversaw the foundation of Ireland's first theatre, the Werburgh Street Theatre.\nUssher soon found himself at odds with the rise of Arminianism and Wentworth and Laud's desire for conformity between the Church of England and the more Calvinistic Church of Ireland. Ussher resisted this pressure at a convocation in 1634, ensuring that the English Articles of Religion were adopted as well as the Irish articles, not instead of them, and that the Irish canons had to be redrafted based on the English ones rather than replaced by them. Theologically, he was a Calvinist although on the matter of the atonement he was (somewhat privately) a hypothetical universalist. His most significant influence in this regard was John Davenant, later an English delegate to the Synod of Dort, who managed to significantly soften that Synod's teaching regarding limited atonement.\nIn 1633, Ussher had supported the appointment of Archbishop Laud as Chancellor of the University of Dublin. He had hoped that Laud would help to impose order on what was, Ussher accepted, a somewhat mismanaged institution. Laud did that, rewriting the charter and statutes to limit the authority of the fellows, and ensure that the appointment of the provost was under royal control. In 1634, he imposed on the college an Arminian provost, William Chappell, whose theological views, and peremptory style of government, were antithetical to everything for which Ussher stood. By 1635, it was apparent that Ussher had lost control of the church to John Bramhall, Bishop of Derry, in everyday matters and to Laud in matters of policy.\nWilliam M. Abbott, Associate Professor of History at Fairfield University, argues that he was an effective and politically important bishop and archbishop. The \"Oxford Dictionary of National Biography\" notes that he was reactive and sought conciliation rather than confrontation. The story that he successfully opposed attempts to reintroduce the Irish language for use in church services by William Bedell, the Bishop of Kilmore, has been refuted.\nUssher certainly preferred to be a scholar when he could be. He engaged in extensive disputations with Roman Catholic theologians, and even as a student he challenged a Jesuit relative, Henry Fitzsimon (Ussher's mother was Catholic), to dispute publicly the identification of the Pope with the Antichrist. Ussher had an obsession with \"Jesuits disguised as\" Covenanters in Scotland, highwaymen when he was robbed, non-conformists in England, it was a remarkable list. However, Ussher also wrote extensively on theology, patristics and ecclesiastical history, and these subjects gradually displaced his anti-Catholic work. After Convocation in 1634, Ussher left Dublin for his episcopal residence at Drogheda, where he concentrated on his archdiocese and his research. In 1631, he produced a new edition of a work first published in 1622, his \"Discourse on the Religion Anciently Professed by the Irish\", a ground-breaking study of the early Irish church, which sought to demonstrate how it differed from Rome and was, instead, much closer to the later Protestant church. This was to prove highly influential, establishing the idea that the Church of Ireland was the true successor of the early Celtic church.\nIn 1639, he published the most substantial history of Christianity in Britain to that date, \"Britannicarum ecclesiarum antiquitates\"\u00a0\u2013 the antiquities of the British churches. It was an astonishing achievement in one respect\u00a0\u2013 in gathering together so many previously unpublished manuscript sources. Ussher was very reluctant to arrive at firm judgements as to the sources' authenticity\u00a0\u2013 hence his devotion of a whole chapter to the imaginative but invented stories of King Lucius and the creation of a Christian episcopate in Britain.\nWars of the Three Kingdoms.\nIn 1640, Ussher left Ireland for England for what turned out to be the last time. In the years before the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, his reputation as a scholar and his moderate Calvinism meant that his opinion was sought by both King and Parliament. After Ussher lost his home and income through the Irish uprising of 1641, Parliament voted him a pension of \u00a3400 while the King awarded him the income and property of the vacant See of Carlisle.\nDespite their occasional differences, he remained a loyal friend to Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford, and when the latter was sentenced to death by Parliament, pleaded with the King not to allow the execution of the verdict: unlike some of his episcopal colleagues, he insisted that the King was absolutely bound in conscience by his promise to Strafford that whatever happened his life would be spared. The King did not take his advice, but clearly afterwards regretted not doing so, as is shown by his reference on the scaffold to Strafford's death as \"that unjust sentence which I suffered to take effect\".\nIn early 1641 Ussher developed a mediatory position on church government, which sought to bridge the gap between the Laudians, who believed in an episcopalian church hierarchy (bishops), and the Presbyterians, who wanted to abolish episcopacy entirely. His proposals, not published until 1656, after his death, as The Reduction of Episcopacy, proposed a compromise where bishops operated in a Presbyterian synodal system, were initially designed to support a rapprochement between Charles and the parliamentarian leadership in 1641, but were rejected by the King. They did, however, have an afterlife, being published in England and Scotland well into the eighteenth century. In all, he wrote or edited five books relating to episcopacy.\nAs the middle ground between King and Parliament vanished in 1641\u20131642, Ussher was forced, reluctantly, to choose between his Calvinist allies in parliament and his instinctive loyalty to the monarchy. Eventually, in January 1642 (having asked parliament's permission), he moved to Oxford, a royalist stronghold. Though Charles severely tested Ussher's loyalty by negotiating with the Catholic Irish, the Primate remained committed to the royal cause, though as the king's fortunes waned Ussher had to move on to Bristol, Cardiff, and then to St Donat's.\nIn June 1646, he returned to London under the protection of his friend, Elizabeth, Dowager Countess of Peterborough, in whose houses he stayed from then on. He was deprived of the See of Carlisle by Parliament on 9 October 1646, as the English episcopacy was abolished for the duration of the Commonwealth and the Protectorate. He became a preacher at Lincoln's Inn early in 1647, and despite his royalist loyalties was protected by his friends in Parliament. He watched the execution of Charles I from the roof of the Countess of Peterborough's home in London but fainted before the axe fell.\nScholarship on Ignatius.\nUssher wrote two treatises on the epistles of Ignatius of Antioch while doing his work on church hierarchy. They were scholarly achievements that modern experts largely concur with. In Ussher's time, the only collection of Ignatius's writing easily available was the Long Recension, a set of 16 epistles. Ussher closely examined it and found problems that had gone uncommented on for centuries: differences in tone, theology, and apparent anachronistic references to theological disputes and structures that did not exist during Ignatius's time. Additionally, medieval authors commenting on Ignatius did not appear to be reading the same letters of the Long Recension. Ussher researched and found a shorter set, usually called the Middle Recension, and argued that only the letters contained in it were authentically Ignatius's. The unknown compiler of the Long Recension edited Ignatius's work and included some of his own, and seems to have had Arian tendencies. He published this Latin edition of the genuine Ignatian works in 1644. The only major difference between Ussher's stance and modern scholars is that Ussher thought that the Epistle of Ignatius to Polycarp was also inauthentic; most modern scholars believe it to be a genuine production of Ignatius, however.\nChronology.\nUssher now concentrated on his research and writing and returned to the study of chronology and the Church Fathers. After a 1647 work on the origin of the Creeds, Ussher published a treatise on the calendar in 1648. This was a warm-up for his most famous work, the \"Annales veteris testamenti, a prima mundi origine deducti\" (\"Annals of the Old Testament, deduced from the first origins of the world\"), which appeared in 1650, and its continuation, \"Annalium pars posterior\", published in 1654. In this work, he calculated the date of the Creation to have been nightfall on 22 October 4004 BC. (Other scholars, such as the Cambridge academic John Lightfoot, calculated their own dates for the Creation.) The time of the Ussher chronology is frequently misquoted as being 9 a.m., noon or 9 p.m. on 23 October. See the related article on the chronology for a discussion of its claims and methodology.\nWhile calculating the date of the Creation is today considered a fringe activity, in Ussher's time such a calculation was still regarded as an important task, one also attempted by many Post-Reformation scholars, such as Joseph Justus Scaliger and Isaac Newton. Ussher's work is now used to support Young Earth Creationism, which holds that the universe was created thousands of years ago (rather than billions). \nUssher's chronology represented a considerable feat of scholarship: it demanded great depth of learning in what was then known of ancient history, including the rise of the Persians, Greeks and Romans, as well as expertise in the Bible, biblical languages, astronomy, ancient calendars and chronology. Ussher's account of historical events for which he had multiple sources other than the Bible is usually in close agreement with modern accounts\u00a0\u2013 for example, he placed the death of Alexander in 323 BC and that of Julius Caesar in 44 BC. Ussher's last biblical co-ordinate was the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar II, and beyond this point, he had to rely on other considerations. Faced with inconsistent texts of the Torah, each with a different number of years between the Genesis flood narrative and Creation, Ussher chose the Masoretic version, which claims an unbroken history of careful transcription stretching back centuries\u00a0\u2013 but his choice was confirmed for him by the fact that it placed Creation exactly four thousand years before 4 BC, the generally accepted date for the Nativity of Jesus; moreover, he calculated that Solomon's Temple was completed in the year 3000 from creation, so that there were exactly 1,000 years from the temple to Jesus, who was thought to be the 'fulfilment' of the Temple.\nDeath.\nIn 1655, Ussher published his last book, \"De Graeca Septuaginta Interpretum Versione\", the first serious examination of the Septuagint, discussing its accuracy as compared with the Hebrew text of the Old Testament. In 1656, he went to stay in the Countess of Peterborough's house in Reigate, Surrey. On 19 March, he felt a sharp pain in his side after supper and took to his bed. His symptoms seem to have been those of a severe internal haemorrhage. Two days later he died, aged 75. His last words were reported as: \"O Lord, forgive me, especially my sins of omission\". His body was embalmed and was to have been buried in Reigate, but at Oliver Cromwell's insistence he was given a state funeral on 17 April and was buried in the chapel of St Erasmus in Westminster Abbey.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52035", "revid": "50966195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52035", "title": "Motion compensation", "text": "Video compression technique, used to efficiently predict and generate video frames\nMotion compensation in computing is an algorithmic technique used to predict a frame in a video given the previous and/or future frames by accounting for motion of the camera and/or objects in the video. It is employed in the encoding of video data for video compression, for example in the generation of MPEG-2 files. Motion compensation describes a picture in terms of the transformation of a reference picture to the current picture. The reference picture may be previous in time or even from the future. When images can be accurately synthesized from previously transmitted/stored images, the compression efficiency can be improved.\nMotion compensation is one of the two key video compression techniques used in video coding standards, along with the discrete cosine transform (DCT). Most video coding standards, such as the H.26x and MPEG formats, typically use motion-compensated DCT hybrid coding, known as block motion compensation (BMC) or motion-compensated DCT (MC DCT).\nFunctionality.\nMotion compensation exploits the fact that, often, for many frames of a movie, the only difference between one frame and another is the result of either the camera moving or an object in the frame moving. In reference to a video file, this means much of the information that represents one frame will be the same as the information used in the next frame.\nUsing motion compensation, a video stream will contain some full (reference) frames; then the only information stored for the frames in between would be the information needed to transform the previous frame into the next frame.\nIllustrated example.\nThe following is a simplistic illustrated explanation of how motion compensation works. Two successive frames were captured from the movie \"Elephants Dream\". As can be seen from the images, the bottom (motion compensated) difference between two frames contains significantly less detail than the prior images, and thus compresses much better than the rest.\nMPEG.\nIn MPEG, images are predicted from previous frames (P frames) or bidirectionally from previous and future frames (B frames). B frames are more complex because the image sequence must be transmitted and stored out of order so that the future frame is available to generate the B frames.\nAfter predicting frames using motion compensation, the coder finds the residual, which is then compressed and transmitted.\nGlobal motion compensation.\nIn global motion compensation, the motion model basically reflects camera motions such as:\nIt works best for still scenes without moving objects.\nThere are several advantages of global motion compensation:\nMPEG-4 ASP supports global motion compensation with three reference points, although some implementations can only make use of one. A single reference point only allows for translational motion which for its relatively large performance cost provides little advantage over block based motion compensation.\nMoving objects within a frame are not sufficiently represented by global motion compensation.\nThus, local motion estimation is also needed.\nMotion-compensated DCT.\nBlock motion compensation.\nBlock motion compensation (BMC), also known as motion-compensated discrete cosine transform (MC DCT), is the most widely used motion compensation technique. In BMC, the frames are partitioned in blocks of pixels (e.g. macro-blocks of 16\u00d716 pixels in MPEG).\nEach block is predicted from a block of equal size in the reference frame.\nThe blocks are not transformed in any way apart from being shifted to the position of the predicted block.\nThis shift is represented by a \"motion vector\".\nTo exploit the redundancy between neighboring block vectors, (e.g. for a single moving object covered by multiple blocks) it is common to encode only the difference between the current and previous motion vector in the bit-stream. The result of this differentiating process is mathematically equivalent to a global motion compensation capable of panning.\nFurther down the encoding pipeline, an entropy coder will take advantage of the resulting statistical distribution of the motion vectors around the zero vector to reduce the output size.\nIt is possible to shift a block by a non-integer number of pixels, which is called \"sub-pixel precision\".\nThe in-between pixels are generated by interpolating neighboring pixels. Commonly, half-pixel or quarter pixel precision (Qpel, used by H.264 and MPEG-4/ASP) is used. The computational expense of sub-pixel precision is much higher due to the extra processing required for interpolation and on the encoder side, a much greater number of potential source blocks to be evaluated.\nThe main disadvantage of block motion compensation is that it introduces discontinuities at the block borders (blocking artifacts).\nThese artifacts appear in the form of sharp horizontal and vertical edges which are easily spotted by the human eye and produce false edges and ringing effects (large coefficients in high frequency sub-bands) due to quantization of coefficients of the Fourier-related transform used for transform coding of the residual frames\nBlock motion compensation divides up the \"current\" frame into non-overlapping blocks, and the motion compensation vector tells where those blocks come \"from\"\n(a common misconception is that the \"previous frame\" is divided up into non-overlapping blocks, and the motion compensation vectors tell where those blocks move \"to\").\nThe source blocks typically overlap in the source frame.\nSome video compression algorithms assemble the current frame out of pieces of several different previously transmitted frames.\nFrames can also be predicted from future frames.\nThe future frames then need to be encoded before the predicted frames and thus, the encoding order does not necessarily match the real frame order.\nSuch frames are usually predicted from two directions, i.e. from the I- or P-frames that immediately precede or follow the predicted frame.\nThese bidirectionally predicted frames are called \"B-frames\".\nA coding scheme could, for instance, be IBBPBBPBBPBB.\nFurther, the use of triangular tiles has also been proposed for motion compensation. Under this scheme, the frame is tiled with triangles, and the next frame is generated by performing an affine transformation on these triangles. Only the affine transformations are recorded/transmitted. This is capable of dealing with zooming, rotation, translation etc.\nVariable block-size motion compensation.\nVariable block-size motion compensation (VBSMC) is the use of BMC with the ability for the encoder to dynamically select the size of the blocks. When coding video, the use of larger blocks can reduce the number of bits needed to represent the motion vectors, while the use of smaller blocks can result in a smaller amount of prediction residual information to encode. Other areas of work have examined the use of variable-shape feature metrics, beyond block boundaries, from which interframe vectors can be calculated. Older designs such as H.261 and MPEG-1 video typically use a fixed block size, while newer ones such as H.263, MPEG-4 Part 2, H.264/MPEG-4 AVC, and VC-1 give the encoder the ability to dynamically choose what block size will be used to represent the motion.\nOverlapped block motion compensation.\nOverlapped block motion compensation (OBMC) is a good solution to these problems because it not only increases prediction accuracy but also avoids blocking artifacts. When using OBMC,\nblocks are typically twice as big in each dimension and overlap quadrant-wise with all 8 neighbouring blocks.\nThus, each pixel belongs to 4 blocks. In such a scheme, there are 4 predictions for each pixel which are summed up to a weighted mean.\nFor this purpose, blocks are associated with a window function that has the property that the sum of 4 overlapped windows is equal to 1 everywhere.\nStudies of methods for reducing the complexity of OBMC have shown that the contribution to the window function is smallest for the diagonally-adjacent block. Reducing the weight for this contribution to zero and increasing the other weights by an equal amount leads to a substantial reduction in complexity without a large penalty in quality. In such a scheme, each pixel then belongs to 3 blocks rather than 4, and rather than using 8 neighboring blocks, only 4 are used for each block to be compensated. Such a scheme is found in the H.263 Annex F Advanced Prediction mode\nQuarter Pixel (QPel) and Half Pixel motion compensation.\nIn motion compensation, quarter or half samples are actually interpolated sub-samples caused by fractional motion vectors. Based on the vectors and full-samples, the sub-samples can be calculated by using bicubic or bilinear 2-D filtering. See subclause 8.4.2.2 \"Fractional sample interpolation process\" of the H.264 standard.\n3D image coding techniques.\nMotion compensation is utilized in stereoscopic video coding.\nIn video, \"time\" is often considered as the third dimension. Still, image coding techniques can be expanded to an extra dimension.\nJPEG 2000 uses wavelets, and these can also be used to encode motion without gaps between blocks in an adaptive way. Fractional pixel affine transformations lead to bleeding between adjacent pixels. If no higher internal resolution is used the delta images mostly fight against the image smearing out. The delta image can also be encoded as wavelets, so that the borders of the adaptive blocks match.\n2D+Delta Encoding techniques utilize H.264 and MPEG-2 compatible coding and can use motion compensation to compress between stereoscopic images.\nHistory.\nA precursor to the concept of motion compensation dates back to 1929, when R.D. Kell in Britain proposed the concept of transmitting only the portions of an analog video scene that changed from frame-to-frame. In 1959, the concept of inter-frame motion compensation was proposed by NHK researchers Y. Taki, M. Hatori and S. Tanaka, who proposed predictive inter-frame video coding in the temporal dimension.\nMotion-compensated DCT.\nPractical motion-compensated video compression emerged with the development of motion-compensated DCT (MC DCT) coding, also called block motion compensation (BMC) or DCT motion compensation. This is a hybrid coding algorithm, which combines two key data compression techniques: discrete cosine transform (DCT) coding in the spatial dimension, and predictive motion compensation in the temporal dimension. DCT coding is a lossy block compression transform coding technique that was first proposed by Nasir Ahmed, who initially intended it for image compression, in 1972.\nIn 1974, Ali Habibi at the University of Southern California introduced hybrid coding, which combines predictive coding with transform coding. However, his algorithm was initially limited to intra-frame coding in the spatial dimension. In 1975, John A. Roese and Guner S. Robinson extended Habibi's hybrid coding algorithm to the temporal dimension, using transform coding in the spatial dimension and predictive coding in the temporal dimension, developing inter-frame motion-compensated hybrid coding. For the spatial transform coding, they experimented with the DCT and the fast Fourier transform (FFT), developing inter-frame hybrid coders for both, and found that the DCT is the most efficient due to its reduced complexity, capable of compressing image data down to 0.25-bit per pixel for a videotelephone scene with image quality comparable to an intra-frame coder requiring 2-bit per pixel.\nIn 1977, Wen-Hsiung Chen developed a fast DCT algorithm with C.H. Smith and S.C. Fralick. In 1979, Anil K. Jain and Jaswant R. Jain further developed motion-compensated DCT video compression, also called block motion compensation. This led to Chen developing a practical video compression algorithm, called motion-compensated DCT or adaptive scene coding, in 1981. Motion-compensated DCT later became the standard coding technique for video compression from the late 1980s onwards.\nThe first digital video coding standard was H.120, developed by the CCITT (now ITU-T) in 1984. H.120 used motion-compensated DPCM coding, which was inefficient for video coding, and H.120 was thus impractical due to low performance. The H.261 standard was developed in 1988 based on motion-compensated DCT compression, and it was the first practical video coding standard. Since then, motion-compensated DCT compression has been adopted by all the major video coding standards (including the H.26x and MPEG formats) that followed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52036", "revid": "24902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52036", "title": "Istria", "text": "Peninsula on the Adriatic Sea\nIstria ( ; Croatian and Slovene: ; Italian and Venetian: ; ; Istro-Romanian: ; ; ) is the largest peninsula within the Adriatic Sea. Located at the top of the Adriatic between the Gulf of Trieste and the Kvarner Gulf, the peninsula is shared by three countries: Croatia, Slovenia, and Italy, 90% of its area being part of Croatia. Most of Croatian Istria is part of Istria County.\nGeography.\nThe geographical features of Istria include the U\u010dka/Monte Maggiore mountain range, which is the highest portion of the \u0106i\u0107arija/Cicceria mountain range; the rivers Dragonja/Dragogna, Mirna/Quieto, Pazin\u010dica, and Ra\u0161a; and the Lim/Canale di Leme bay and valley. Istria lies in three countries: Croatia, Slovenia and Italy. By far the largest portion (90%) lies in Croatia. \"Croatian Istria\" is divided into two counties, the larger being Istria County in western Croatia. Important towns in Istria County include Pula/Pola, Pore\u010d/Parenzo, Rovinj/Rovigno, Pazin/Pisino, Labin/Albona, Umag/Umago, Motovun/Montona, Buzet/Pinguente, and Buje/Buie. Smaller towns in Istria County include Vi\u0161njan/Visignano, Ro\u010d/Rozzo, and Hum/Colmo.\nThe northwestern part of Istria lies in Slovenia: it is known as Slovenian Istria, and includes the coastal municipalities of Piran/Pirano, Izola/Isola, and Koper/Capodistria. It also includes the Karstic municipality of Hrpelje-Kozina/Erpelle-Cosina.\nNorthwards of Slovenian Istria, there is a tiny portion of the peninsula that lies in Italy. This smallest portion of Istria consists of the \"comunes\" of Muggia/Milje and San Dorligo della Valle/Dolina with Santa Croce (Trieste) lying farthest to the north.\nThe ancient region of \"Histria\" extended over a much wider area, including the whole Karst Plateau with the southern edges of the Vipava Valley/Vipacco Valley, the southwestern portions of modern Inner Carniola with Postojna/Postumia and Ilirska Bistrica/Bisterza, and the Italian Province of Trieste, but not the Liburnian coast which was already part of Illyricum.\nName.\nThe name Istria (\u1f38\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03af\u03b1) is derived from the river Ister (\u1f3c\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2) (modern Danube), because the Greeks erroneously believed, early in their travels around the Mediterranean, that a branch of the Danube flowed into the Adriatic Sea in that area. In addition, the Greeks called the inhabitants of the area Histri (\u1f3c\u03c3\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03b9); if this was their native name, it may have initially led the Greeks to assume a connection with the river Ister.\nHistory.\nFrom prehistory to Roman times.\nThe Histri () tribes, which Strabo refers to as living in the region and who are credited as being the builders of the hillfort settlements (castellieri), are classified in some sources as a \"Venetic\" Illyrian tribe with certain linguistic differences from other Illyrians. The Romans described the Histri as a fierce tribe of pirates, protected by the difficult navigation of their rocky coasts. It took two military campaigns for the Romans to finally subdue them in 177 BC. The region was then called together with the Venetian part the X. Roman Region of \"Venetia et Histria\", the ancient definition of the northeastern border of Italy. Dante Alighieri refers to it as well, the eastern border of Italy per ancient definition is the river \"Arsia\". The eastern side of this river was settled by people whose culture was different from Histrians. Earlier influence of the Iapodes was attested there, while at some time between the 4th and 1st century BC the Liburnians extended their territory and it became a part of Liburnia. On the northern side, Histria extended much further north and included the Italian city of Trieste.\nSome scholars speculate that the names Histri and Istria are related to the Latin name Hister, or Danube (especially its lower course). Ancient folktales reported \u2014inaccurately\u2014 that the Danube split in two or \"bifurcated\" and came to the sea near Trieste as well as at the Black Sea. The story of the \"bifurcation of the Danube\" is part of the Argonaut legend. There is also a suspected link (but no historical documentation in support of it) to the commune of Istria in Constan\u021ba, Romania which is named after the ancient city Histria, named after River Hister.\nIn the Early Middle Ages, Istria was conquered and occupied by the Goths. Ostrogoth coins were found in Istria, as well as the remains of some buildings. South of Pore\u010d there are the remains of the church of Sv. Petar, erected in the 5th century (with a baptistery added later), which reportedly served the Arian eastern Goths ruling Istria. Most notably, the Goths used Istrian stone to build their best known monument, the Mausoleum of Theodoric in Ravenna. In the following centuries, the peninsula was attacked and conquered by the Lombards, often in conjunction with the Slavs, such as in 601. However, the extent to which the Lombards occupied Istria is a matter of debate. After the Goths, Istria became part of the Exarchate of Ravenna. Gulfaris, who served the Byzantines but was of Lombard descent, is reported as its dux in 599.\nPope Gregory I in 600 wrote to bishop of Salona Maximus in which he expresses concern about arrival of the Slavs, \"Et quidem de Sclavorum gente, quae vobis valde imminet, et affligor vehementer et conturbor. Affligor in his quae jam in vobis patior; conturbor, quia per Istriae aditum jam ad Italiam intrare coeperunt\" (And as for the people of the Slavs who are really approaching you, I am very depressed and confused. I am depressed because I sympathize with you, confused because they over the Istria began to enter the Italy). Some ancient reporters, including Pope Gregory, who were unaware of the importance of the Avars in the Balkans, used the terms \"Slavs\" to refer to the Avars or the Avaro-Slavs.\nAfter the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the region was pillaged by the Goths, the Eastern Roman Empire, and the Avars.\nMiddle Ages.\nThe first Avaro-Slavic invasion of Istria was recorded in 599. Another major incursion occurred around 600\u2013602, in which all of Istria was devastated with fire and rapine. This was followed by the 611 invasion, the most devastating for the peninsula. It remains unclear when and how the first Slavic settlement occurred. Traces of early Slavic incursions and settlement are scarce. A few Avar findings have been discovered on the Istrian territory, chiefly around Nesactium. By 642 the Slavs were settled in the peninsula, as indicated by the mission of an abbot Martin, sent by Pope John IV to rescue captives held by the pagans in Istria and Dalmatia.\nAfter the barbaric invasions, the western part of Istria was annexed to the Lombard Kingdom in 751, and then annexed to the Frankish kingdom by Pepin of Italy in 789. In 804, the Placitum of Riziano was held in the Parish of Ri\u017ean (), which was a meeting between the representatives of Istrian towns and castles and the deputies of Charlemagne and his son Pepin. The report about this judicial diet illustrates the changes accompanying the transfer of power from the Eastern Roman Empire to the Carolingian Empire and the discontent of the local residents.\nAfterwards it was successively controlled by the dukes of Carantania, Merania, Bavaria and by the patriarch of Aquileia, before it became the territory of the Republic of Venice in 1267. The medieval Croatian kingdom held only the far eastern part of Istria (the border was near the river Ra\u0161a), but they lost it to the Holy Roman Empire in the late 11th century.\nVenetian era.\nUnder Pietro II Candiano, who was Doge of Venice between 932 and 939, Istrian cities signed an act of devotion to the Venetian rule. On Ascension Day in 1000, a powerful fleet sailed from Venice to resolve the problem of the Narentine pirates. The fleet visited all the Istrian and Dalmatian cities, whose citizens, exhausted by the wars between the Croatian king Svetislav and his brother Cresimir, swore an oath of fidelity to Venice. In 1145, the cities of Pula, Koper and Izola rose against the Republic of Venice but were defeated, and were since further controlled by Venice. During the 13th century, the Patriarchate's rule weakened and the towns kept surrendering to Venice \u2013 Pore\u010d in 1267, Umag in 1269, Novigrad in 1270, Sveti Lovre\u010d in 1271, Motovun in 1278, Kopar in 1279, and Piran and Rovinj in 1283. Venice gradually dominated the whole coastal area of western Istria and the area to Plomin on the eastern part of the peninsula. The wealthier coastal towns cultivated increasingly strong economic relationships with Venice and by 1348 were eventually incorporated into its territory, while their inland counterparts fell under the sway of the weaker Patriarchate of Aquileia, which became part of the Habsburg Empire in 1374.\nOn 15 February 1267, Parenzo was formally incorporated with the Venetian state. Other coastal towns followed shortly thereafter. Bajamonte Tiepolo was sent away from Venice in 1310, to start a new life in Istria after his downfall. A description of the 16th-century Istria with a precise map was prepared by the Italian geographer Pietro Coppo. A copy of the map inscribed in stone can now be seen in the Pietro Coppo Park in the center of the town of Izola in southwestern Slovenia.\nDuring the history of the coexistence of Slavic and Roman communities in Istria, the Slavs mostly lived in the interior, while the coast was Roman.\nHabsburg Monarchy (1797\u20131805).\nThe Inner part of Istria around Mitterburg (Pazin) had been part of the Holy Roman Empire for centuries, and more specifically part of the domains of the Austrian Habsburgs since the 14th century. In 1797, with the Treaty of Campo Formio, the Venetian parts of the peninsula also passed to the Habsburg monarchy which became the Austrian Empire in 1804.\nNapoleonic era (1805\u20131814).\nThe French victory of 1809 compelled Austria to cede a portion of its South Slav lands to France. Napoleon combined Istria, Carniola, western Carinthia, Gorica (Gorizia), Trieste and parts of Croatia, Dalmatia, and Dubrovnik to form the Illyrian Provinces. The Code Napol\u00e9on was introduced, and roads and schools were constructed. Local citizens were given administrative posts, and native languages were used to conduct official business. This sparked the Illyrian Movement for the cultural and linguistic unification of South Slavic lands. From the Middle Ages to the 19th century, Italian and Slavic communities in Istria had lived peacefully side by side because they did not know the national identification, given that they generically defined themselves as \"Istrians\" of \"Romance\" or \"Slavic\" culture.\nAustrian Empire (1814\u20131918).\nAfter this seven-year period, the Austrian Empire regained Istria, which became part of the constituent Kingdom of Illyria. This kingdom was broken up in 1849, after which Istria formed part of Austrian Littoral, also known as the \"K\u00fcstenland\", which also included the city of Trieste and the Princely County of Gorizia and Gradisca until 1918. At that time the borders of Istria included part of what is now Italian Venezia-Giulia and parts of modern-day Slovenia and Croatia, but not the city of Trieste.\nMany Istrian Italians looked with sympathy towards the Risorgimento movement that fought for the unification of Italy. However, after the Third Italian War of Independence (1866), when the Veneto and Friuli regions were ceded by the Austrians to the newly formed Kingdom Italy, Istria remained part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, together with other Italian-speaking areas on the eastern Adriatic. This triggered the gradual rise of Italian irredentism among many Italians in Istria, who demanded the unification of Istria with Italy. The Italians in Istria supported the Italian Risorgimento: as a consequence, the Austrians saw the Italians as enemies and favored the Slav communities of Istria, fostering the nascent nationalism of Slovenes and Croats.\nDuring the meeting of the Council of Ministers of 12 November 1866, Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria outlined a wide-ranging project aimed at the Germanization or Slavization of the areas of the empire with an Italian presence:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;His Majesty expressed the precise order that action be taken decisively against the influence of the Italian elements still present in some regions of the Crown and, appropriately occupying the posts of public, judicial, masters employees as well as with the influence of the press, work in South Tyrol, Dalmatia and Littoral for the Germanization and Slavization of these territories according to the circumstances, with energy and without any regard. His Majesty calls the central offices to the strong duty to proceed in this way to what has been established.\u2014\u200a\nItaly (1919\u20131947).\nAlthough a member of the Central Powers, Italy remained neutral at the start of WWI, and soon launched secret negotiations with the Triple Entente, bargaining to participate in the war on its side, in exchange for significant territorial gains. To get Italy to join the war, the secret 1915 Treaty of London the Entente promised Italy Istria and parts of Dalmatia, South Tyrol, the Greek Dodecanese Islands, parts of Albania and Turkey, plus more territory for Italy's North Africa colonies.\nAfter the war, Italy annexed Istria. Istria's political and economic importance declined under Italian rule, and after the fascist takeover of Italy in 1922 the Italian government began a campaign of forced Italianization. In 1926, the use of Slavic languages in schools and government was banned, even Slavic family names were Italianized to suit the fascist authorities. Slavic newspapers and libraries were closed, all Slavic cultural, sporting, business and political associations were banned. As a result, 100,000 Slavic-speakers left Italian-annexed areas in an exodus, moving mostly to Yugoslavia.\nThe organization TIGR, founded in 1927 by young Slovene liberal nationalists from Gorizia region and Trieste and regarded as the first armed antifascist resistance group in Europe soon penetrated into Slovene and Croatian-speaking parts of Istria.\nIn World War II, Istria became a battleground of competing ethnic and political groups. Istrian nationalist groups which were pro-fascist and pro-Allied and Yugoslav-supported pro-communist groups fought with each other and the Italian army. After the German defeat in 1945, Yugoslav partisans gained the upper hand and began a violent purge of real or suspected opponents in an \"orgy of revenge\".\nSFR Yugoslavia (1947\u20131991).\nAfter the end of World War II, Istria was ceded to Yugoslavia, except for a small part in the northwest corner that formed Zone B of the provisionally independent Free Territory of Trieste; Zone B was under Yugoslav administration and after the \"de facto\" dissolution of the Free Territory in 1954 it was also incorporated into Yugoslavia. Only the small town of Muggia, near Trieste, being part of Zone A remained with Italy.\nThe events of the period are visible in Pula. The city, located on the southernmost tip of the Istrian peninsula, had an Istrian Italian majority. Between December 1946 and September 1947, a large proportion of the city's inhabitants were forced to emigrate to Italy. Most of them left in the immediate aftermath of the signing of the Paris Peace Treaty on February 10, 1947 which granted Pula and the greater part of Istria to Yugoslavia.\nAfter the breakup of Yugoslavia (after 1991).\nThe division of Istria between Croatia and Slovenia runs on the former republic borders, which were not precisely defined in the former Yugoslavia. Various points of contention remain unresolved between the two countries regarding the precise line of the border.\nIt became an international boundary with the independence of both countries from Yugoslavia in 1991. Since Croatia's first multi-party elections in 1990, the Istrian regionalist party Istrian Democratic Assembly (IDS-DDI, \"Istarski demokratski sabor\" or \"Dieta democratica istriana\") has consistently received a majority of the vote and maintained through the 1990s a position often contrary to the government in Zagreb, led by the then nationalistic party Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ, \"Hrvatska demokratska zajednica\"), with regards to decentralization in Croatia and certain facets of regional autonomy.\nHowever, that changed in 2000 when the IDS formed with five other parties a left-centre coalition government, led by the Social Democratic Party of Croatia (SDP, \"Socijaldemokratska Partija Hrvatske\"). After the reformed HDZ won the Croatian parliamentary elections in late 2003 and formed a minority government, the IDS has cooperated with the state government on many projects, both local (in Istria County) and national. Since Slovenia's accession to the European Union and the Schengen Area, customs and immigration checks have been abolished at the Italian-Slovenian border.\nDemographic history.\nThe region has traditionally been ethnically mixed. Under Austrian rule in the 19th century it included a large population of Italians, Croats, and Slovenes as well as some Istro-Romanians, Serbs, and Montenegrins; however, official statistics in those times did not show those nationalities as they do today.\nThe Croatian word for the Istrians is \"Istrani\", or \"Istrijani\", the latter being in the local Chakavian dialect. The term \"Istrani\" is also used in Slovenia. The Italian word for the Istrians is \"Istriani\" and today the Italian minority is organized in many towns. The Istrian county in Croatia is bilingual, as are large parts of Slovenian Istria. Every citizen has the right to speak either Italian or Croatian (Slovene in Slovenian Istria and Italian in the town of Koper/Capodistria, Piran/Pirano, Portoro\u017e/Portorose, and Izola/Isola d'Istria) in public administration or in court. Furthermore, Istria is a supranational European Region that includes Italian, Slovenian and Croatian Istria.\nThe 2001 population census in Croatia counted 23 languages spoken by the people of Istria. In 2021 Census show that 76.40% are Croats, Italians were 5.01%, 2.96% were Serbs, 2.48% Bosniaks, 1.05% were Albanians, while regionally declared were 5.13%.\nThe data for Slovenian Istria is not as neatly organized, but the 2002 Slovenian census indicates that the four Istrian municipalities (Izola/Isola d'Istria, Piran/Pirano, Koper/Capodistria, Ankaran/Ancarano) had a total of 56,482 Slovenes, 6,426 Croats, and 2,800 Italians.\nThe small town of Peroj has had a unique history which exemplifies the multi-ethnic complexity of the history of the region, as do some villages on both sides of the U\u010dka that are still identified with the Istro-Romanian people which the UNESCO Redbook of Endangered Languages calls \"the smallest ethnic group in Europe\".\nEthnicity.\nWhile nationalization processes were still underway, in 19th century Istria the west side of the peninsula had a majority of Italian language and Romance verniculars speakers, while Croatian language was spoken by the majority in the central and eastern regions and on the islands, and Slovene in the north. Italian language was the official language in the territories of the former Venetian Republic, which encouraged many Istrians to identify as Italians, in spite of their mother tongue and ethnic origins. Bilingual people, present in many areas, could identify with either group. Croatian urban culture started developing and coming out of marginalization and social illegitimacy in the second half of the century. Middle class people now identified themselves as Croats and Slavs more explicitly, escaping the Italian stereotype of them being peasants or inferior. All major political parties at the time had a strong national orientation, and the society gradually bifurcated. Istrian Italian intellectual elites opposed Croatian national evolution, and until the middle of the 20th century hoped for their assimilation.\nA limited tension with the Austrian state did not stop the rise of the use of the Italian language, in the second part of the 19th century, when the population of predominantly Italian-speaking towns in Istria had a significant rise: in the part of Istria that eventually became part of Croatia, the first Austrian census from 1846 found 34 thousand Italian speakers, alongside 120 thousand Croatian speakers (in the Austrian censuses, the ethnic composition of the population was not surveyed, only the main \"language of use\" of a person). By 1910, the proportion changed significantly: there were 108 thousand Italian speakers and 134 thousand Croatian speakers. Vanni D'Alessio notes (2008), the Austrian surveys of the language of use \"overestimated the diffusion of the socially dominant languages of the empire... The capacity of assimilation of the Italian language suggests that amongst those who declared themselves Italian speakers in Istria, there were people whose mother tongue was different.\" D'Alessio notes even members of the Austrian state bureaucracy and the members of their families with the German mother tongue tended to use Italian, after living in Istrian small towns long enough. The Poles, Czechs and Slovenes and Croats tended to join the \"Slav\" social group.\nDiscussions about Istrian ethnicity often use the words \"Italian\", \"Croatian\", and \"Slovene\" to describe the character of the Istrian people. However these terms are best understood as \"national affiliations\" that may exist in combination with or independently of linguistic, cultural and historical attributes. In the Istrian context, for example, the word \"Italian\" can just as easily refer to autochthonous speakers of the Venetian language whose antecedents in the region extend before the inception of the Venetian Republic or to the Istriot language the oldest spoken language in Istria, dated back to the Romans, today spoken in the southwest of Istria. It can also refer to Istrian Croats who adopted the veneer of Italian culture as they moved from rural to urban areas, or from the farms into the bourgeoisie.\nSimilarly, national powers claim Istrian Croats according to local language, so that speakers of \u010cakavian and \u0160tokavian dialects of Croatian are considered to be Croatians while speakers of other dialects may be considered to be Slovene. As with other regions, the local dialects of the Croatian communities vary greatly across close distances. The Istrian Croatian and Italian vernaculars had both developed for many generations before being divided as they are today. This meant that Croats/Slovenes on the one side and Venetians/other Italians on the other side yielded to each other culturally while simultaneously distancing themselves from members of their ethnic groups living farther away.\nAnother important Istrian community are the Istro-Romanians in the south and north of the U\u010dka mountain range of Istria. A small Albanian community, which until the late 19th century spoke the Istrian Albanian dialect is also present in the peninsula.\nAustro-Hungarian census.\nAccording to Austro-Hungarian censuses, which recorded language instead of ethnicity, the composition of Istria (i.e. the Habsburg Margraviate of Istria) was as follows (in thousands):\nCulture and identity.\nIstrian identity, also known as Istrianity, Istrianism or Istrianness, is the regionalist identity developed by the inhabitants of the part of Istria located in Croatia. Istria is the biggest peninsula in the Adriatic Sea and a multiethnic region divided between Croatia, Italy and Slovenia. Italians and Slovenes live in both the Italian and Slovene parts (which make up 1% and 9% of the territory of Istria, respectively), while in the Croatian part (90% of the region), there are Croats, Italians, Istro-Romanians and Istriot-speakers, as well as some non-native minorities. Most of Croatian Istria is located in the Istria County of the country. Istria is the region of Croatia where regionalist sentiment is the strongest.\nIn the 2011 Croatian census, 25,203 people of the Istria County, constituting 12% of its population, declared themselves to be Istrian before any other nationality, making it the most abundant one in the county after Croatian. People also declared an Istrian identity in the Primorje-Gorski Kotar County, the county where the rest of Croatian Istria is located, therefore making the number of people declaring an Istrian identity in Croatia a total of 25,409. Most of these people in these counties were ethnic Croats, but there were also Istro-Romanians declaring themselves as Istrian. Later, the 2021 Croatian census saw a decrease on Istrian self-designation, as 10,025 inhabitants of the Istria County used it.\nIt has been proposed that Istria gain greater autonomy within a more decentralized Croatia. Examples of supporters of this include several members of the Istrian Democratic Assembly (IDS), such as its former president Boris Mileti\u0107 or the IDS deputy Emil Daus.\nCuisine.\nThe cuisine of Istria is reminiscent of Italian cuisine, although influences are seen on both sides: Italian cuisine includes some dishes that Istrian Italians brought with them following the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus, such as \"scampi alla busara\", \"brudet\", cured ham, and Istrian jota. Dishes like gnocchi (\"njoki\") or risotto (\"ri\u017eot\") are likely of Italian origin, while the flat bread focaccia (\"poga\u010da\") is a shared heritage of the Mediterranean.\nThe Istrian stew (; ; ) is a soup made with beans and sauerkraut or sour turnip, potatoes, bacon, and spare ribs, known in the northern Adriatic regions. Under the name \"jota,\" it is typical and especially popular in Trieste and its province (where it is considered to be the prime example of Triestine food), in the Istrian peninsula, in the province of Gorizia, in the whole Slovenian Littoral, in the Rijeka area, and in Friuli, especially in some of its peripheral areas (the highland region of Carnia, the Torre and Natisone river valleys, or Slavia Veneta).\nMajor towns and municipalities of Istria.\nThis list includes towns and municipalities of Istria with populations estimated to be higher than 8,000 people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52038", "revid": "10044298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52038", "title": "Stellar astronomy", "text": "Study of stars and stellar evolution"}
{"id": "52039", "revid": "6675779", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52039", "title": "Cylinder (disambiguation)", "text": "A cylinder is a basic curvilinear geometric shape.\nCylinder may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52040", "revid": "3784107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52040", "title": "Oldsmobile", "text": "Defunct entry-level luxury division of General Motors\nOldsmobile (formally the Oldsmobile Division of General Motors) was a brand of American automobiles, produced for most of its existence by General Motors. Originally established as \"Olds Motor Vehicle Company\" by Ransom E. Olds in 1897, it produced over 35 million vehicles, including at least 14 million built at its Lansing, Michigan, factory alone.\nDuring its time as a division of General Motors, Oldsmobile slotted into the middle of GM's five passenger car divisions (above Chevrolet and Pontiac, but below Buick and Cadillac). It was also noted for several groundbreaking technologies and designs.\nOldsmobile's sales peaked at over one million annually from 1983 to 1986, but by the 1990s the division faced growing competition from premium import brands, and sales steadily declined. When it shut down in 2004, Oldsmobile was the oldest surviving American automobile brand, and one of the oldest in the world. Buick, founded in 1899, was a long-standing counterpart to Oldsmobile (both sold entry/mid-level luxury cars) and succeeded Olds as the oldest American carmaker still operating.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nOldsmobiles were first manufactured by the Olds Motor Vehicle Company in Lansing, Michigan, a company founded by Ransom E. Olds in 1897. In 1901 (the same year that Horace and John Dodge won a contract to produce transmissions for the Olds company), the company produced 635 cars, making it the first high-volume gasoline-powered automobile manufacturer (electric car manufacturers such as Columbia Electric and steam-powered car manufacturers such as Locomobile had higher volumes a few years earlier).\nOldsmobile became the top-selling car company in the United States from 1903 to 1904. Ransom Olds left the company in 1904 because of a dispute with sales manager Frederic L. Smith, who was questioning production techniques and wanted Mr. Olds to certify that each car that left the plant was free from defects. Mr. Smith then set up an experimental engineering shop without Mr. Olds' knowledge or consent, causing Mr. Olds to leave in 1904 and form the REO Motor Car Company. This was similar to the situation Henry Ford experienced when he was forced out of the company he founded (the Henry Ford Company) before starting the Ford Motor Company in 1903.\nThe 1902 to 1907 Oldsmobile Model R \"Curved Dash\" was the first mass-produced car, made on a progressive moving automotive assembly line, an invention which is often incorrectly credited to Henry Ford and the Ford Motor Company. Ford was the first to manufacture cars on a \"continuously\" moving and \"synchronized\" assembly line starting in 1913, five years into Model T production. Olds' moving assembly line was manually progressed, meaning that the vehicle being assembled was manually pushed to the next workstation after the assigned assembly was performed at the previous station. This differed from hand-making vehicles in the past where various workers would work on one car until it was completed, which was labor- and time-intensive.\nAfter Ransom Olds merged Olds Motor Vehicle Co. with the Olds Gas Engine Works in 1899, the newly formed entity was known as Olds Motor Works. The company moved to a new plant in Detroit, located at the corner of East Jefferson Avenue and MacArthur Bridge.\nBy March 1901, Olds Motor Works had a whole line of models ready for mass production. However, that month the factory caught fire and burned to the ground, destroying nearly all of the prototypes that were inside. The only car that survived the fire was a Curved Dash prototype, which was wheeled out of the factory by two workers as they escaped the burning building.\nWhile the factory was being rebuilt using insurance funds, many subcontractors were used to keep production going, including Henry M. Leland for engine production and the Dodge Brothers. Olds was a strong competitor to other independent companies Buick and Cadillac before they became divisions of General Motors between 1908 and 1909. Later after Mr. Olds left the company, Oldsmobile production was moved back to Lansing.\nOfficially, the cars were called \"Olds automobiles\", but were colloquially referred to as \"Oldsmobiles\". It was this moniker, as applied especially to the Curved Dash Olds, that was popularized in the lyrics and title of the 1905 hit song \"In My Merry Oldsmobile\". The last Oldsmobile Curved Dash was made in 1907. General Motors purchased the company on November 12, 1908. When GM assumed operations, platform sharing began with Buick products and Oldsmobile shared platforms were identified with the prefix \"Series\" followed by a number, while models developed by pre-GM engineers were identified with the prefix \"Model\" followed by a letter. Early on, Oldsmobile was a competitor of Hudson, as some former engineers of Oldsmobile took positions with Hudson.\n1910s.\nThe 1910 Limited Touring Series 23 was an early, ambitious high point for the company. Riding atop 42-inch (1067\u00a0mm) wheels, and equipped with factory \"white\" tires, the Limited was the prestige model in Oldsmobile's two model lineup, with the smaller Oldsmobile Autocrat Series 32 having 36-inch wheels.\nThe Limited retailed for US$4,600, ($ in 2024 dollars ) an amount greater than the price of a new basic three-bedroom house. Buyers received goatskin upholstery, a 60\u00a0hp (45\u00a0kW) 707\u00a0CID (11.6\u00a0L) T-head straight-six engine, Bosch Magneto starter, running boards and room for five. Options included a speedometer, clock, and full glass windshield. A limousine version was priced at $5,800 ($ in 2024 dollars ). While Oldsmobile only sold 725 Limiteds in its three years of production, the car is best remembered for winning a race against the famed 20th Century Limited train, an event immortalized in the painting \"Setting the Pace\" by William Hardner Foster.\nThe Limited was at the time considered technologically advanced and cutting edge, if on the expensive side, but it established the division's reputation for innovation. The Oldsmobile Series 40 was offered in 1912 and was considerably more affordable and smaller, and later the company released the Oldsmobile Light Eight. In 1916, Oldsmobile offered a Northway-designed flathead V8 engine until 1923, while Buick remained with their division's exclusive overhead valve straight-six engine until 1930.\nBeginning in 1910, bodywork was supplied by Fisher Body, a longstanding tradition that led to the company being eventually merged into GM in later years.\n1920s.\nIn 1926, the Oldsmobile Six came in five body styles, and ushered in a new GM bodystyle platform called the \"GM B platform\", shared with Buick products.\nIn 1929, as part of General Motors' companion make program, Oldsmobile introduced the higher standard Viking brand, marketed through the Oldsmobile dealer network. Viking was already discontinued at the end of the 1930 model year although an additional 353 cars were marketed as 1931 models.\n1930s.\nIn the 1930s, Oldsmobile produced two body styles of automobile, the Series F (straight-6 cylinder) and the longer Series L (straight-8 cylinder). In 1933 The \"Oldsmobile Program\" appeared on CBS radio for two years which was a new advertising approach to sell products and services.\nIn 1937, Oldsmobile was a pioneer in introducing a four-speed semi-automatic transmission called the \"Automatic Safety Transmission\", although this accessory was actually built by Buick, which would offer it in its own cars in 1938. This transmission features a conventional clutch pedal, which the driver presses before selecting either \"low\" or \"high\" range. In \"low\", the car shifts between first and second gears. In \"high\", the car shifts among first, third and fourth gears.\n1940s.\nFor the 1940 model, Oldsmobile was the first auto manufacturer to offer a fully automatic transmission, called the \"Hydramatic\", which features four forward speeds. It has a gas pedal and a brake\u00a0\u2013 no clutch pedal. The gear selector is on the steering column.\nStarting in 1941 and continuing through 1999, Oldsmobile used a two-digit model designation. As originally implemented, the first digit signifies the body size while the second represents the number of cylinders. Body sizes were 6, 7, 8, and 9, and straight six- and straight eight-cylinder engines were offered. Thus, Oldsmobiles were named \"66\" through \"98\".\nUntil January 1, 1942, the Division was still known by the still official name of Olds Motor Works, when it was changed to the collective name the cars were known as, \"Oldsmobiles\". Thus, the division was officially christened the Oldsmobile Division of General Motors.\nThe last pre-war Oldsmobile rolled off the assembly line on February 5, 1942. During World War II, Oldsmobile produced numerous kinds of material for the war effort, including large-caliber guns and shells. Production resumed on October 15, 1945, with a warmed-over 1942 model serving as the offering for 1946.\nOldsmobile once again was a pioneer when, for the 1949 model, the Rocket engine was introduced, which used an overhead valve V8 design rather than the flathead \"straight-eight\" design which prevailed at the time. The overhead valve was originally exclusive to Buick as they invented the technology and offered it on all of their products. This engine produced far more power than the other engines that were popular during that era, and found favor with hot-rodders and stock car racers. The basic design, with a few minor changes, endured until Oldsmobile redesigned its V8 engines in the mid-1960s.\n1950s.\nOldsmobile entered the 1950s following a divisional image campaign centered on its 'Rocket' engines and the Space Race, and its cars' appearance followed suit. Oldsmobile's Rocket V8 engine was the leader in performance; its cars were generally considered the fastest on the market; and by the mid-1950s their styling was among the first to offer a wide, \"open maw\" grille, suggestive of fighter jet propulsion. From 1948 to 1957, Oldsmobile adopted a ringed-globe emblem depicting North America to stress what marketers felt was its universal appeal. Starting in 1958, the grille logo changed again to reflect the rocket image, that was used throughout the late 1950s, the make used twin jet pod-styled taillights as a nod to its \"Rocket\" theme. Oldsmobile was among the first of General Motors' divisions to receive a true hardtop in 1950 called the \"Holiday coupe\" (Buick's version was called the \"Riviera\", and Cadillac's was called the \"Coupe De Ville\"), and it was also among the first divisions (along with Buick and Cadillac) to receive a wraparound windshield, a trend that eventually all American makes would share at sometime between 1953 and 1964. New for 1954 on 98 coupes and convertibles (Starfire) would be front and rear \"sweep cut\" fender styling, which would not show up on a Chevrolet until 1956 and not until 1957 on a Pontiac. 1953 models changed to a 12 volt electrical system that made starting easier.\nIn the 1950s the nomenclature changed again, and trim levels also received names that were then mated with the model numbers. This resulted in the Oldsmobile 88 emerging as base Dynamic 88 and the highline Super 88. Other full-size model names included the \"Holiday\" used on hardtops, and \"Fiesta\" used on its station wagons. When the 88 was retired in 1999 (with a Fiftieth Anniversary Edition), its length of service was the longest model name used on American cars after the Chrysler New Yorker. Mid-1955 also saw the introduction of the four-door Holiday pillarless hardtop, the industry's first (along with Buick).\nGeneral Motors' styling as a whole lost its frontrunner status in 1957 when Chrysler introduced Virgil Exner's \"forward look\" designs. When compared side to side, Oldsmobile looked dated next to its price-point competitors DeSoto and Mercury. Compounding the problem for Oldsmobile and Buick was a styling mistake which GM called the \"StratoRoof\", which was reminiscent of the \"greenhouse\" canopy used on the Convair B-36 Peacemaker high altitude bomber. Both makes had models which contained the heavily framed rear window, but Detroit had been working with large curved backlights for almost a decade. Consumers disliked the roof and its blind spots, forcing GM to rush a redesign into production on some of its models. Oldsmobile's only off year in the 1950s was 1958. The nation was beginning to feel the results of its first significant post-war recession, and US automobile sales were down for the model year. Oldsmobile, Buick and Cadillac received a heavy-handed makeover of the 1957 GM designs. The Oldsmobile that emerged in 1958 bore little resemblance to the design of its forerunners; instead the car emerged as a large, over-decorated \"chromemobile\" which many felt had overly ostentatious styling.\nUp front, all 1958 Oldsmobile's received one of General Motors' heavily styled front facias and quad-headlights. Streaking back from the edge of the headlights was a broad belt consisting of two strips of chrome on regular 88s, three strips on Super 88s, and three strips (top and bottom thin, inside thick) on 98s that ended in a point at mid-body. The bottom of the rear fender featured a thick stamping of a half tube that pointed forward, atop which was a chrome assembly of four horizontal chrome speed-lines that terminated into a vertical bar. The tail of the car featured massive vertical chrome taillight housings. Two chrome stars were fitted to the trunklid.\nFord styling consultant Alex Tremulis (designer of the 1948 Tucker sedan) mocked the 1958 Oldsmobile by drawing cartoons of the car, and placing musical notes in the rear trim assembly. Another Detroit stylist employed by Ford bought a used 1958 Oldsmobile in the early 1960s, driving it daily to work. He detached and rearranged the \"Oldsmobile\" lettering above the grille to spell out \"slobmodel\" as a reminder to himself and co-workers of what \"bad\" auto design meant to their business.\nIn 1959, Oldsmobile models were completely redesigned with a rocket motif from front to rear, as the top of the front fenders had a chrome rocket, while the body-length fins were shaped as rocket exhausts which culminated in a fin-top taillight (concave on the 98 models while convex on the 88 models). The 1959 models also offered several roof treatments, such as the pillared sedan with a fastback rear window and the Holiday SportSedan, which was a flat-roofed pillarless hardtop with wraparound front and rear glass. The 1959 models were marketed as \"the linear look\", and also featured a bar-graph speedometer which showed a green indicator through , then changed to orange until , then was red above that until the highest speed read by the speedometer, . Power windows were available on the 98 models, as were two-speed electric windshield wipers with electrically powered windshield washers. The 88 still relied on vacuum-operated windshield wipers without a washer feature. 1959 Oldsmobiles were offered with \"Autronic Eye\" (a dashboard-mounted automatic headlight dimmer) as well as factory-installed air conditioning and power-operated front bench seat as available options. The 1959 body style was continued through the 1960 model year, but the fins were toned down for 1960 and the taillights were moved to the bottom of the fenders.\n1960s.\nNotable achievements for Oldsmobile in the 1960s included the introduction of the first turbocharged engine and a factory water injection system in 1962 (the Turbo Jetfire), the first modern front-wheel drive car produced in the United States (the 1966 Toronado), the Vista Cruiser station wagon (noted for its roof glass), and the upscale 442 muscle car. Olds briefly used the names \"Jetstar 88\" (1964\u20131966) and Delmont 88 (1967\u20131968) on its least expensive full-size models in the 1960s. In 1968 the split grille appearance was introduced and remained a traditional feature until production ended in 2004.\nNotable models for the 1960s:\n1970s\u20131980s.\nThe 1970s and 1980s were good years for the Oldsmobile division; sales soared (reaching an all-time high of 1,066,122 in 1985) based on popular designs, positive reviews from critics, and perceived quality and reliability, with the Cutlass series becoming North America's top-selling car by 1976. By this time, Olds had displaced Pontiac and Plymouth as the third best-selling brand in the U.S. behind Chevrolet and Ford. In the late 1970s and again in the mid-1980s, model-year production topped one million units, something only Chevrolet and Ford had achieved.\nThe very popularity of Oldsmobile's cars created a problem for the division in the late 1970s, however. At that time, each General Motors division produced its own V8 engines, and in 1977, Oldsmobile, Chevrolet, Pontiac, and Buick each produced a unique 350-cubic-inch displacement V8. It was during the 1977 model year that demand exceeded production capacity for the Oldsmobile V8 and as a result, Oldsmobile began equipping most full-size Delta 88 models (those with Federal emissions specifications) with the Chevrolet 350 engine instead. Although it was widely debated whether there was a difference in quality or performance between the two engines, there was no question that the engines were different from one another. Many customers were loyal Oldsmobile buyers who specifically wanted the Rocket V8, and did not discover that their vehicle had the Chevrolet engine until they performed maintenance and discovered that purchased parts did not fit. This became a public relations nightmare for GM.\nFollowing this debacle, disclaimers stating that \"Oldsmobiles are equipped with engines produced by various GM divisions\" were tacked onto advertisements and sales literature; all other GM divisions followed suit. In addition, GM quickly stopped associating engines with particular divisions and to this day, all GM engines are produced by \"GM Powertrain\" (GMPT) and are called GM \"Corporate\" engines instead of GM \"Division\" engines. Although it was the popularity of the Oldsmobile division vehicles that prompted this change, declining sales of V8 engines would have made this change inevitable as all but the Chevrolet version of the 350-cubic-inch engine were eventually discontinued.\nOldsmobile also introduced a 5.7L (350 cu-in) V8 diesel engine option on its Custom Cruiser, Delta 88 and 98 models in 1978; and a smaller 4.3L (260 cu-in) displacement V8 diesel on the 1979 Cutlass Salon and Cutlass Supreme/Cutlass Calais models. These were largely based on corresponding gasoline engines but with heavier duty cast blocks, redesigned heads and fast glow plugs; and on the 5.7L, oversized cranks, main bearings and wrist pins. There were several problems with these engines, including water and corrosion in the injectors (no water separator in the fuel line); paraffin clogging of fuel lines and filters in cold weather; reduced lubrication in the heads due to undersized oil galleys; head bolt failures; and the use of aluminum rockers and stanchions in the 4.3L V8 engines. While the 5.7L was also offered on various Buick, Cadillac, Chevrolet, GMC, and Pontiac models, it was eventually discontinued by all divisions in 1985. V6 diesels of 4.3L displacement were also offered between 1982 and 1985. In 1988 the then all-new 1988 Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme Pace car was the first production car with heads up display.\nNotable models:\n1990s.\nAfter the tremendous success of the 1970s and 1980s, things changed quickly for Oldsmobile, and by the early 1990s the brand had lost its place in the market (as annual sales had fallen from a record high of 1,066,122 in 1985 to just 402,936 in 1993), squeezed between other GM divisions, and with competition from new upscale import makes Acura, Infiniti and Lexus. GM continued to use Oldsmobile sporadically to showcase futuristic designs and as a \"guinea pig\" for testing new technology, with Oldsmobile offering the Toronado Trofeo, which included a visual instrument system with a calendar, datebook, climate controls and several prototypes built in conjunction with Avis with an early satellite-based navigation system. For 1995, Oldsmobile introduced the Aurora, which would be the inspiration for the design of its cars from the mid-1990s onward. The introduction of the Aurora marked as General Motors' catalyst to reposition Oldsmobile as an upscale import fighter. Accordingly, Oldsmobile received a new logo based on the familiar \"rocket\" theme. Also in 1995 Oldsmobile introduced the first satellite navigation system available in the United States, the Guidestar on the 1995 Oldsmobile 88. Nearly all the existing model names were gradually phased out: the Cutlass Calais in 1991, the Toronado and Custom Cruiser in 1992, the Ninety-Eight and Ciera (formerly Cutlass Ciera) in 1996, Cutlass Supreme in 1997, and finally the Eighty-Eight and Cutlass (which had only been around since '97) in 1999. They were replaced with newer, more modern models with designs inspired by the Aurora.\nRedesigned and new models introduced from 1990 to 2004:\n2000s.\nIn spite of Oldsmobile's critical successes since the mid-1990s, a reported shortfall in sales and overall profitability prompted General Motors to announce in December 2000 its plans to shut down the Oldsmobile organization. That announcement was officially revealed two days after Oldsmobile distributed the Bravada SUV \u2013 which became another critical hit for the division but turned out to be the final new model for the Oldsmobile brand.\nThe phaseout was conducted on the following schedule:\nThe last 500 Aleros, Auroras, Bravadas, Silhouettes and Intrigues produced received special Oldsmobile heritage emblems and markings which signified 'Final 500'. All featured a unique Dark Cherry Metallic paint scheme. Auroras and Intrigues would be accompanied by special Final 500 literature. However, only the Intrigue, Aurora, Bravada, and Alero had all Final 500 models built; the Silhouette only had 360 built as a result of the plant running out of production capacity due to fleet order obligations for minivans on the same assembly line. The Oldsmobile division's last completed production car was an Alero GLS 4-door sedan, which was signed by all of the Olds assembly line workers. It was on display at the R. E. Olds Transportation Museum located in Lansing, Michigan until GM's bankruptcy, when it retook possession of the car. It was then located at the GM Heritage Center in Sterling Heights, Michigan. In December 2017, the car headed to New York where it was auctioned off at a dealer-only auction for $42,000 to a Florida dealer. Also sold at the auction were a 1999 Cutlass and a 1996 Ciera.\nFirsts.\nDuring the 107 years of Oldsmobile's existence, it was known for being a guinea pig for new technologies and firsts.\nOldsmobile Administration Building.\nThe 200,000 square-foot Oldsmobile Administration Building, also known as Building 70, was completed in 1966 to accommodate the company's major administration departments. Located at 920 Townsend Avenue, at what is currently the GM Lansing Grand River Assembly plant, the project was constructed by Michigan contractor Utley-James, with architectural design contracted by GMAC.\nThe headquarters accommodated about 900 employees in a Modern design with exterior marble and curtain walls reminiscent of the General Motors Technical Center. Approach walkways integrated snow melting units, and the design incorporated interior and exterior artwork. The building has two prominent interconnected towers in the northeast corner: a six-level north wing and a four-level south wing. The building's two-story lobby featured a sunken visitor waiting area, a place to display a current Oldsmobile, and a reception area, 'floating' within a water pool.\nOldsmobile commissioned two prominent sculptures by noted sculptor Samuel Cashwan, who had previously served on the General Motors Styling Staff. The exterior Cashwan sculpture, titled \"Open Cage\", previously located outside the Admin Building's primary entrance, was donated in 2006, to be placed at the entrance to the R.E. Olds Transportation Museum. The east wall of the penthouse featured the brand's name, spaced out letter by letter\u00a0\u2013 signage which was removed in 2006 and subsequently also gifted to the Lansing R.E. Olds Transportation Museum. By 1996, the company's remaining employees relocated to Detroit's Renaissance Center.\nToday, the Oldsmobile Administration Building continues to sit abandoned, and the entire property is fenced off. The towers have been used as a makeshift billboard, initially to promote the Cadillac ATS, and currently promotes the now-discontinued Cadillac CTS.\nProduction.\nModels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nConcept.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExport markets.\nCanada.\nIn Canada, the range was limited, with the Oldsmobile Silhouette and Oldsmobile Bravada being unavailable to Canadian consumers until much later in their production life.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, all Oldsmobile models were sold under the Chevrolet brand.\nEurope.\nFor the European market, the Oldsmobile Silhouette was sold between 1994 and 1997 as the Pontiac Trans Sport by replacing the Oldsmobile badging with Pontiac badging, along with Pontiac wheels. Sales in Europe were good for an American import, but did not represent enough volume to make a distinct model economically feasible for the European market. Its successors were both the Chevrolet Trans Sport (second generation Pontiac Trans Sport rebadged as a Chevrolet) (LWB), and the Opel/Vauxhall Sintra (SWB).\nThe Oldsmobile Alero was sold in select countries in Europe (and Israel) between 1999 and 2001 as the Chevrolet Alero, and was only available as a 4-door sedan. The car still featured its Oldsmobile badges even though sold under the Chevrolet brand, but since most European consumers would not recognize the badging, Chevrolet badges were added to the grille and rear fascia for the 2000 model year. The Alero featured Chevrolet emblems throughout its entire run in Israel. The Alero was replaced in Europe and Israel by the GM Daewoo-sourced Chevrolet Evanda/Epica.\nMarketing themes.\nEarly on in its history, Olds enjoyed a public relations boost from the 1905 hit song \"In My Merry Oldsmobile\". The same theme\u00a0\u2013 a fast, powerful Olds car helping the driver romance the opposite sex\u00a0\u2013 was updated in the 1950s with the iconic hit \"Rocket 88\".\nThe strong public relations efforts by GM in the 1950s was epitomized in the Motorama, a \"one company\" auto show extravaganza. Millions of Americans attended, in a spirit not unlike a \"mini-World's Fair\". Every GM division had a \"Dream Car\". Oldsmobile's dream/concept car was called \"The Golden Rocket\".\nThe Dr. Oldsmobile theme was one of Oldsmobile's most successful marketing campaigns in the early '70s, it involved fictional characters created to promote the popular 442 muscle car. 'Dr. Oldsmobile' was a tall lean professor type who wore a white lab coat. His assistants included 'Elephant Engine Ernie' who represented the big block 455 Rocket engine. 'Shifty Sidney' was a character who could be seen swiftly shifting his hand using a Hurst shifter.\n'Wind Tunnel Waldo' had slicked back hair that appeared to be constantly wind blown. He represented Oldsmobile's wind tunnel testing. Another character included 'Hy Spy' who had his ear to the ground as he checked out the competition.\nA public relations campaign in the late 1980s proclaimed that this was \"not your father's Oldsmobile.\" The company produced a series of television ads during this time; said ads featured the offspring of various celebrities, and sometimes the celebrity in question. These ads included:\nIronically, some fans of the brand say that the declining sales were in fact caused by \"The New Generation of Oldsmobile\" campaign, as the largest market for Oldsmobiles was the population whose parents had, in fact, owned Oldsmobiles and that by going away from the traditional vehicles that Oldsmobile's brand was built upon, lost many loyal buyers and put the brand on a collision course with Pontiac and Buick, which led to internal cannibalization and a downfall from which it could never recover. Oldsmobile's final major ad campaign had the slogan \"Start Something\" in a last-ditch effort to market to younger buyers at the turn of the millennium.\nMotorsport.\nNASCAR.\nOldsmobile is especially known for its competition in NASCAR. Beginning with the Rocket 88, Oldsmobile proved heavily competitive in stock car racing. In the Sixties, the Rocket 88 was replaced by the 442. Eventually, the Cutlass would lead Oldsmobile into the Eighties before GM reduced its entries to Chevrolet and Pontiac in the Nineties. It was the restyled body of the Cutlass Supreme that (along with the Chevrolet Monte Carlo, Buick Regal, and Pontiac Grand Prix) ushered in the downsized cars into NASCAR cup competition. While the Cutlass looked almost identical to the Buick Regal (which scored 35+ victories in the 1981 thru 1985 seasons), the Cutlass (like the Dodge Mirada) didn't take one checkered flag, and many teams moved away from it in 1983 to the Regal, Grand Prix, and restyled Monte Carlo SS. This was a rude awakening to Oldsmobile, which was getting used to wins on the NASCAR circuit. The body style of the 1988 to 1992 Cutlass proved to be a winner for NASCAR competition and it visited the victory circle 13 times between 1989 and 1992, when Oldsmobile ended its racing program.\nIMSA GT.\nIn the IMSA GT Championship, Oldsmobile would provide power for IMSA GT Prototypes alongside Chevrolet and Buick. The Cutlass was used in IMSA GTO along with other vehicles also being used in Trans Am and NASCAR. The Aurora bodystyle was utilised in the IMSA WSC era series in the mid 1990's in the GTS-1 class to develop the Northstar V8 engine which was later used in IRL racing.\nIndyCar.\nOldsmobile was an engine supplier in the IndyCar Series along with Infiniti between 1997 and 2001, when General Motors switched the brand used in the then-Indy Racing League to Chevrolet.\nTrans Am Series.\nThe Cutlass was used in the Trans Am Series during the 1980s. Many vehicles also being used in NASCAR at the time were used in Trans Am and IMSA GTO.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52041", "revid": "50907060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52041", "title": "Miracle", "text": "Event not explicable by natural or scientific laws\nA miracle is an event that is inexplicable by natural or scientific laws and accordingly gets attributed to some supernatural or preternatural cause. Various religions often attribute a phenomenon characterized as miraculous to the actions of a supernatural being, (especially) a deity, a miracle worker, a saint, or a religious leader.\nInformally, English-speakers often use the word \"miracle\" to characterise any beneficial event that is statistically unlikely but not contrary to the laws of nature, such as surviving a natural disaster, or simply a \"wonderful\" occurrence, regardless of likelihood (e.g. \"the miracle of childbirth\"). Some coincidences may be seen as miracles.\nA true miracle would, by definition, be a non-natural phenomenon, leading many writers to dismiss miracles as physically impossible (that is, requiring violation of established laws of physics within their domain of validity) or impossible to confirm by their nature (because all possible physical mechanisms can never be ruled out). The former position is expressed (for instance) by Thomas Jefferson, and the latter by David Hume. Theologians typically say that, with divine providence, God or Allah regularly works through nature yet, as a creator, may work without, above, or against it as well.\nDefinitions.\nThe word \"miracle\" is usually used to describe any beneficial event considered physically impossible or otherwise inexplicable by natural means. Theologically, however, there are more specific definitions. Wayne Grudem defines a miracle as \"a less common kind of God's activity in which he arouses people's awe and wonder and bears witness to himself\". A deistic perspective of God's relation to the world defines a miracle as a direct intervention of God into the world.\nNaturalistic explanations.\nA miracle may be false information or simply a fictional story, rather than something that truly happened. A miracle experience may be due to cognitive errors (e.g. overthinking, jumping to conclusions) or psychological errors (e.g. hallucinations) of witnesses. Use of some drugs such as psychedelics (e.g. ecstasy) may produce similar effects to religious experiences.\nLaw of truly large numbers.\nStatistically improbable events are sometimes called miracles. For instance, when three classmates coincidentally meet in a different country decades after having left school, they may consider this \"miraculous\". However, a colossal number of events happen every moment on Earth; thus, extremely unlikely coincidences also happen every moment. Events considered \"impossible\" are therefore not so\u00a0\u2013 they are just increasingly rare and dependent on the number of individual events. British mathematician J. E. Littlewood suggested that individuals should statistically expect one-in-a-million events to happen to them at the rate of about one per month. By his definition, seemingly miraculous events are actually commonplace.\nSupernatural explanations.\nA miracle is a phenomenon claimed to be unexplained by known laws of nature. The criteria for classifying an event as a miracle vary. Often a religious text, such as the Bible or Quran, states that a miracle occurred, and believers may accept this as fact.\nPhilosophical explanations.\nAristotelian and Neo-Aristotelian.\nThe Aristotelian view of God has God as pure actuality and considers him as the prime mover doing only what a perfect being can do, think. Jewish neo-Aristotelian philosophers who are still influential today include Maimonides, Samuel ben Judah ibn Tibbon, and Gersonides. Directly or indirectly, their views are still prevalent in much of the religious Jewish community. \nBaruch Spinoza.\nIn his \"Tractatus Theologico-Politicus\", the philosopher Spinoza claims that miracles are merely lawlike events of whose causes we are ignorant. We should not treat them as having no cause or as having a cause immediately available. Rather the miracle is for combating the ignorance it entails, like a political project.\nDavid Hume.\nAccording to the philosopher David Hume, a miracle is \"a transgression of a law of nature by a particular volition of the Deity, or by the interposition of some invisible agent\". From this premise, the crux of his argument is this: \"No testimony is sufficient to establish a miracle, unless the testimony be of such a kind, that its falsehood would be more miraculous, than the fact which it endeavours to establish.\" By Hume's definition, a miracle directly contradicts our regular experience of how the universe works. As miracles are single events, the evidence for them is always limited and we experience them rarely. On the basis of experience and evidence, the probability that miracle occurred is always less than the probability that it did not occur. As it is rational to believe what is more probable, we are not supposed to have a good reason to believe that a miracle occurred.\nFriedrich Schleiermacher.\nAccording to the Christian theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher \"every event, even the most natural and usual, becomes a miracle as soon as the religious view of it can be the dominant\".\nS\u00f8ren Kierkegaard.\nThe philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard, following Hume and Johann Georg Hamann, a Humean scholar, agrees with Hume's definition of a miracle as a transgression of a law of nature, but Kierkegaard, writing as his pseudonym \"Johannes Climacus\", regards any historical reports to be less than certain, including historical reports of miracles, as all historical knowledge is always doubtful and open to approximation.\nJames Keller.\nJames Keller states that the \"claim that God has worked a miracle implies that God has singled out certain persons for some benefit which many others do not receive implies that God is unfair\".\nReligious views.\nAccording to a 2011 poll by the Pew Research Center, more than 90 percent of evangelical Christians believe miracles still take place. While Christians see God as sometimes intervening in human activities, Muslims see Allah as a direct cause of all events. \"God's overwhelming closeness makes it easy for Muslims to admit the miraculous in the world.\"\nBuddhism.\nThe \"Haedong Kosung-jon\" of Korea (Biographies of High Monks) records that King Beopheung of Silla had desired to promulgate Buddhism as the state religion. However, officials in his court opposed him. In the fourteenth year of his reign, Beopheung's \"Grand Secretary\", Ichadon, devised a strategy to overcome court opposition. Ichadon schemed with the king, convincing him to make a proclamation granting Buddhism official state sanction using the royal seal. Ichadon told the king to deny having made such a proclamation when the opposing officials received it and demanded an explanation. Instead, Ichadon would confess and accept the punishment of execution, for what would quickly be seen as a forgery. Ichadon prophesied to the king that at his execution a wonderful miracle would convince the opposing court faction of Buddhism's power. Ichadon's scheme went as planned, and the opposing officials took the bait. According to legend when Ichadon was executed on the 15th day of the 9th month in 527, his prophecy was fulfilled; the earth shook, the sun was darkened, beautiful flowers rained from the sky, his severed head flew to the sacred Geumgang mountains, and milk instead of blood sprayed 100 feet in the air from his beheaded corpse. The omen was accepted by the opposing court officials as a manifestation of heaven's approval, and Buddhism was made the state religion in 527 CE.\nThe \"Honch\u014d Hokke Reigenki\" (c. 1040) of Japan contains a collection of Buddhist miracle stories.\nMiracles play an important role in the veneration of Buddhist relics in Southern Asia. Thus, Somawathie Stupa in Sri Lanka is an increasingly popular site of pilgrimage and tourist destination thanks to multiple reports about miraculous rays of light, apparitions and modern legends, which often have been fixed in photographs and movies.\nChristianity.\nThe gospels record three sorts of miracles performed by Jesus: exorcisms, cures, and natural wonders. In the Gospel of John, the miracles are referred to as \"signs\" and the emphasis is on God demonstrating his underlying normal activity in remarkable ways. In the New Testament, the greatest miracle is the resurrection of Jesus, the event central to Christian faith.\nJesus explains in the New Testament that miracles are performed by faith in God. \"If you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, 'move from here to there' and it will move.\" (Gospel of Matthew 17:20). After Jesus returned to heaven, the Book of Acts records the disciples of Jesus praying to God to grant that miracles be done in his name for the purpose of convincing onlookers that he is alive. (Acts 4:29\u201331).\nOther passages mention false prophets who will be able to perform miracles to deceive \"if possible, even the elect of Christ\" (Matthew 24:24). 2 Thessalonians 2:9 says, \"And then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His coming: Even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved.\" Revelation 13:13,14 says, \"And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the beast; saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword, and did live.\" Revelation 16:14 says, \"For they are the spirits of devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God Almighty.\" Revelation 19:20 says, \"And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceived them that had received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his image. These both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.\" These passages indicate that signs, wonders, and miracles are not necessarily committed by God. These miracles not committed by God are labeled as false(pseudo) miracles though which could mean that they are deceptive in nature and are not the same as the true miracles committed by God.\nIn early Christianity, miracles were the most often attested motivations for conversions of pagans; pagan Romans took the existence of miracles for granted; Christian texts reporting them offered miracles as divine proof of the Christian God's unique claim to authority: \"of all worships, the Christian best and most particularly advertised its miracles by driving out of spirits and laying on of hands\". The Gospel of John is structured around miraculous \"signs\": The success of the Apostles, according to the church historian Eusebius of Caesarea, lay in their miracles: \"though laymen in their language\", he asserted, \"they drew courage from divine, miraculous powers\". The conversion of Constantine by a miraculous sign in heaven is a prominent fourth-century example.\nSince the Age of Enlightenment, miracles have often needed to be rationalized: C.S. Lewis, Norman Geisler, William Lane Craig, and other 20th-century Christians have argued that miracles are reasonable and plausible. For example, Lewis said that a miracle is something that comes totally out of the blue. If for thousands of years a woman can become pregnant only by sexual intercourse with a man, then if she were to become pregnant without a man, it would be a miracle. Others argue that Jesus's healing miracles dealt with conversion and somatization disorders, could manifest as blindness, paralysis etc. In a Mediterranean context, healing was also defined as restoring a person's social standing. Some diseases, like leprosy, caused immense social stigma.\nThere have been numerous claims of miracles by people of most Christian denominations, including but not limited to faith healings and exorcisms. Miracle reports are especially prevalent in Roman Catholicism and Pentecostal or Charismatic churches.\nCatholic Church.\nThe Catholic Church believes miracles are works of God, either directly, or through the prayers and intercessions of a specific saint or saints. There is usually a specific purpose connected to a miracle, e.g. the conversion of a person or persons to the Catholic faith or the construction of a church desired by God. The church says that it tries to be very cautious to approve the validity of putative miracles. The Catholic Church also says that it maintains particularly stringent requirements in validating the miracle's authenticity. The process is overseen by the Congregation for the Causes of Saints.\nThe Catholic Church has listed several events as miracles, some of them occurring in modern times. Before a person can be accepted as a saint, they must be posthumously confirmed to have performed two miracles. In the procedure of beatification of Pope John Paul II, who died in 2005, the Vatican announced on 14 January 2011 that Pope Benedict XVI had declared that the recovery of Marie Simon-Pierre from Parkinson's disease was a miracle.\nAmong the more notable miracles approved by the church are several Eucharistic miracles wherein the sacramental species of bread and wine attain the accidents of human flesh and blood. Prominent examples are the Miracle of Lanciano and of Santar\u00e9m.\nAccording to 17th century documents, a young Spanish man's leg was miraculously restored to him in 1640 after having been amputated two and a half years earlier.\nAnother miracle approved by the church is the Miracle of the Sun, which is said to have occurred near F\u00e1tima, Portugal on October 13, 1917. According to witnesses, between 70,000 and 100,000 people, who were gathered at a cove near F\u00e1tima, witnessed the sunlight dim and change colors, and the Sun spin, dance about in the sky, and appear to plummet towards Earth, radiating great heat in the process. After the ten-minute event, the ground and the people's clothing, which had been drenched by a previous rainstorm, were both dry.\nVelankanni (Mary) can be traced to the mid-16th century and is attributed to three miracles: the apparition of Mary and the Christ Child to a slumbering shepherd boy, the curing of a lame buttermilk vendor, and the rescue of Portuguese sailors from a violent sea storm.\nIn addition to these, the Catholic Church attributes miraculous causes to many otherwise inexplicable phenomena on a case-by-case basis. Only after all other possible explanations have been asserted to be inadequate will the church assume \"divine intervention\" and declare the miracle worthy of veneration by their followers. The church does not, however, enjoin belief in any extra-Scriptural miracle as an article of faith or as necessary for salvation.\nThomas Aquinas, a prominent Doctor of the Church, divided miracles into three types in his \"Summa contra Gentiles\":Things that are at times divinely accomplished, apart from the generally established order in things, are customarily called miracles; for we admire with some astonishment a certain event when we observe the effect but do not know its cause. And since one and the same cause is at times known to some people and unknown to others, the result is that of several who see an effect at the same time, some are moved to admiring astonishment, while others are not. For instance, the astronomer is not astonished when he sees an eclipse of the sun, for he knows its cause, but the person who is ignorant of this science must be amazed, for he ignores the cause. And so, a certain event is wondrous to one person, but not so to another. So, a thing that has a completely hidden cause is wondrous in an unqualified way, and this the name, miracle, suggests; namely, what is of itself filled with admirable wonder, not simply in relation to one person or another. Now, absolutely speaking, the cause hidden from every man is God. In fact, we proved above that no man in the present state of life can grasp His essence intellectually. Therefore, those things must properly be called miraculous which are done by divine power apart from the order generally followed in things.\nNow, there are various degrees and orders of these miracles. Indeed, the highest rank among miracles is held by those events in which something is done by God which nature never could do. For example, that two bodies should be coincident; that the sun reverse its course, or stand still; that the sea open up and offer a way through which people may pass. And even among these an order may be observed. For the greater the things that God does are, and the more they are removed from the capacity of nature, the greater the miracle is. Thus, it is more miraculous for the sun to reverse its course than for the sea to be divided.\nThen, the second degree among miracles is held by those events in which God does something which nature can do, but not in this order. It is a work of nature for an animal to live, to see, and to walk; but for it to live after death, to see after becoming blind, to walk after paralysis of the limbs, this nature cannot do\u2014but God at times does such works miraculously. Even among this degree of miracles a gradation is evident, according as what is done is more removed from the capacity of nature.\nNow, the third degree of miracles occurs when God does what is usually done by the working of nature, but without the operation of the principles of nature. For example, a person may be cured by divine power from a fever which could be cured naturally, and it may rain independently of the working of the principles of nature.\nEvangelicalism.\nFor a majority of Evangelical Christians, biblicism ensures that the miracles described in the Bible are still relevant and may be present in the life of the believer. Healings, academic or professional successes, the birth of a child after several attempts, the end of an addiction, etc., would be tangible examples of God's intervention with the faith and prayer, by the Holy Spirit. In the 1980s, the neo-charismatic movement re-emphasized miracles and faith healing. In certain churches, a special place is thus reserved for faith healings with laying on of hands during worship services or for campaigns evangelization. Faith healing or divine healing is considered to be an inheritance of Jesus acquired by his death and resurrection.\nHinduism.\nIn Hinduism, miracles are focused on episodes of liberation of the spirit. A key example is the revelation of Krishna to Arjuna, wherein Krishna persuades Arjuna to rejoin the battle against his cousins by briefly and miraculously giving Arjuna the power to see the true scope of the Universe, and its sustainment within Krishna, which requires divine vision. This is a typical situation in Hindu mythology wherein \"wondrous acts are performed for the purpose of bringing spiritual liberation to those who witness or read about them\".\nHindu sages have criticized both expectation and reliance on miracles as cheats, situations where people have sought to earn a benefit without doing the work necessary to merit it. Miracles continue to be occasionally reported in the practice of Hinduism, with an example of a miracle modernly reported in Hinduism being the Hindu milk miracle of September 1995, with additional occurrences in 2006 and 2010, wherein statues of certain Hindu deities were seen to drink milk offered to them. The scientific explanation for the incident, attested by Indian academics, was that the material was wicked from the offering bowls by capillary action.\nIslam.\nIn the Quran, a miracle can be defined as a supernatural intervention in the life of human beings. According to this definition, miracles are present \"in a threefold sense: in sacred history, in connection with Muhammad himself and in relation to revelation\". The Quran does not use the technical Arabic word for miracle (\"Mu\u02bfd\u0332j\u0332iza\") literally meaning \"that by means of which [the Prophet] confounds, overwhelms, his opponents\". It rather uses the term 'Ayah' (literally meaning sign). The term \"Ayah\" is used in the Quran in the above-mentioned threefold sense: it refers to the \"verses\" of the Quran (believed to be the divine speech in human language; presented by Muhammad as his chief miracle); as well as to miracles of it and the signs (particularly those of creation).\nTo defend the possibility of miracles and God's omnipotence against the encroachment of the independent secondary causes, some medieval Muslim theologians such as Al-Ghazali rejected the idea of cause and effect in essence, but accepted it as something that facilitates humankind's investigation and comprehension of natural processes. They argued that the nature was composed of uniform atoms that were \"re-created\" at every instant by God. Thus, if the soil was to fall, God would have to create and re-create the accident of heaviness for as long as the soil was to fall. For Muslim theologians, the laws of nature were only the customary sequence of apparent causes: customs of God.\nSufi biographical literature records claims of miraculous accounts of men and women. The miraculous prowess of the Sufi holy men includes \"firasa\" (clairvoyance), the ability to disappear from sight, and to become completely invisible. The holy men reportedly tame wild beasts and traverse long distances in a very short time span. They could also produce food and rain in seasons of drought, heal the sick and help barren women conceive.\nJudaism.\nDescriptions of miracles (Hebrew \"Ness, \u05e0\u05e1\") appear in the Tanakh. Examples include prophets, such as Elijah who performed miracles like the raising of a widow's dead son (1 Kings 17:17\u201324) and Elisha whose miracles include multiplying the poor widow's jar of oil (2 Kings 4:1\u20137) and restoring to life the son of the woman of Shunem (2 Kings 4:18\u201337). The Torah describes many miracles related to Moses during his time as a prophet and the Exodus of the Israelites. Parting the Red Sea, and facilitating the Plagues of Egypt are among the most famous.\nDuring the first century BCE, a variety of religious movements and splinter groups developed amongst the Jews in Judea. A number of individuals claimed to be miracle workers in the tradition of Moses, Elijah, and Elisha, the Jewish prophets. The Talmud provides some examples of such Jewish miracle workers, one of whom is Honi HaM'agel, who was famous for his ability to successfully pray for rain.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There are people who obscure all miracles by explaining them in terms of the laws of nature. When these heretics who do not believe in miracles disappear and faith increases in the world, then the Mashiach will come. For the essence of the Redemption primarily depends on this \u2013 that is, on faith\u2014\u200a\nMost Chasidic communities are rife with tales of miracles that follow a \"yechidut\", a spiritual audience with a \"tzadik\": barren women become pregnant, cancer tumors shrink, wayward children become pious. Many Hasidim claim that miracles can take place in merit of partaking of the \"shirayim\" (the leftovers from the rebbe's meal), such as miraculous healing or blessings of wealth or piety.\nCriticism.\nThomas Paine, one of the Founding Fathers of the American Revolution, wrote, \"All the tales of miracles, with which the Old and New Testament are filled, are fit only for impostors to preach and fools to believe.\"\nThomas Jefferson, principal author of the Declaration of Independence of the United States, edited a version of the Bible in which he removed sections of the New Testament containing supernatural aspects as well as perceived misinterpretations he believed had been added by the Four Evangelists. Jefferson wrote, \"The establishment of the innocent and genuine character of this benevolent moralist, and the rescuing it from the imputation of imposture, which has resulted from artificial systems, [footnote: e.g. The virgin birth of Jesus, his deification, the creation of the world by him, his miraculous powers, his resurrection and visible ascension, his corporeal presence in the Eucharist, the Trinity; original sin, atonement, regeneration, election, orders of Hierarchy, etc. \u2014T.J.] invented by ultra-Christian sects, unauthorized by a single word ever uttered by him, is a most desirable object, and one to which Priestley has successfully devoted his labors and learning.\"\nAmerican Revolutionary War patriot Ethan Allen wrote, \"In those parts of the world where learning and science have prevailed, miracles have ceased; but in those parts of it as are barbarous and ignorant, miracles are still in vogue.\"\nRobert Ingersoll wrote, \"Not 20 people were convinced by the reported miracles of Christ, and yet people of the nineteenth century were coolly asked to be convinced on hearsay by miracles which those who are supposed to have seen them refused to credit.\"\nElbert Hubbard, American writer, publisher, artist, and philosopher, wrote, \"A miracle is an event described by those to whom it was told by people who did not see it.\"\nBiologist Richard Dawkins has criticised the belief in miracles as a subversion of Occam's razor.\nMathematician Charles Hermite, in a discourse upon the world of mathematical truths and the physical world, stated that, \"The synthesis of the two is revealed partially in the marvellous correspondence between abstract mathematics on the one hand and all the branches of physics on the other.\"\nBaden Powell, an English mathematician and Church of England priest, stated that if God is a lawgiver, then a \"miracle\" would break the lawful edicts that had been issued at Creation. Therefore, a belief in miracles would be entirely atheistic.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52042", "revid": "753665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52042", "title": "Eric Idle", "text": "English comedian, actor and writer (born 1943)\nEric Idle (born 29 March 1943) is an English actor, comedian, songwriter, musician, screenwriter and playwright. He was a member of the British comedy group Monty Python and the parody rock band the Rutles. Idle studied English at Pembroke College, Cambridge, and joined Cambridge University Footlights. He has received a Grammy Award as well as nominations for two Tony Awards.\nIdle reached stardom in the 1970s when he co-created and acted in the Python sketch comedy series \"Flying Circus\" (1969\u20131974) and the films \"Holy Grail\" (1975), \"Life of Brian\", (1979) and \"The Meaning of Life\" (1983) with Graham Chapman, John Cleese, Terry Gilliam, Terry Jones, and Michael Palin. Known for his elaborate wordplay and musical numbers, Idle composed and performed many of the songs featured in Python projects, including \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\". \nAfter \"Flying Circus\" ended, Idle created another sketch show \"Rutland Weekend Television\" (1975\u20131976), and hosted \"Saturday Night Live\" four times (1976\u20131979). He also acted in films such as \"National Lampoon's European Vacation\" (1985), ' (1986), \"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen\" (1988), \"Nuns on the Run\" (1990), \"Splitting Heirs\" (1993), \"Casper\" (1995), \"The Wind in the Willows\" (1996), ' (1997), \"Ella Enchanted\" (2004), and \"Shrek the Third\" (2007).\nIdle made his Broadway debut with his adaptation of \"Holy Grail\" into the musical, \"Spamalot\" (2005), which was a critical and commercial success earning the Tony Award for Best Musical, and Grammy Award for Best Musical Theater Album. He also wrote \"Not the Messiah\" (2009) and performed at the London 2012 Olympic Games closing ceremony.\nEarly life and education.\nEric Idle was born on 29 March 1943 in Harton Hospital, in South Shields. His mother, Norah Barron Sanderson, was a nurse, and his father, Ernest Idle, served in the Royal Air Force during the Second World War, only to be killed in a road accident while hitchhiking home for Christmas in December 1945. Idle said his mother \"disappeared for a while into depression\" and consequently he was brought up by his grandmother in Swinton, Lancashire. Idle spent part of his childhood in Wallasey, Cheshire, and attended St George's Primary School. \nHis mother had difficulty coping with a full-time job and bringing up a child, so when Idle was seven, she enrolled him in the Royal Wolverhampton School as a boarder. At that time the school was a charitable foundation dedicated to the education and maintenance of children who had lost one or both parents. Idle said: \"It was a physically abusive, bullying, harsh environment for a kid to grow up in. I got used to dealing with groups of boys and getting on with life in unpleasant circumstances and being smart and funny and subversive at the expense of authority. Perfect training for Python.\"\nIdle has stated that the two things that made his life at school bearable were listening to Radio Luxembourg under the bedclothes and watching the local football team, Wolverhampton Wanderers. He disliked other sports, and would sneak out of school every Thursday afternoon to the local cinema. He was eventually caught watching the film \"BUtterfield 8\" (rated as suitable for audiences of age 16 and over under the contemporary film certificates) and stripped of his prefecture, though by that time he was head boy. Idle had already refused to be senior boy in the school cadet force, as he supported the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and had participated in the yearly Aldermaston March. He says there was little to do at the school, and boredom drove him to study hard and consequently secured a place at Cambridge University.\nCareer.\nPre-Python career (1965\u20131969).\nIdle attended Pembroke College, Cambridge, where he studied English. At Pembroke, he was invited to join the prestigious Cambridge University Footlights Club by the president of the Footlights Club, Tim Brooke-Taylor, and Footlights Club member Bill Oddie.\nIdle started at Cambridge only a year after future fellow-Pythons Graham Chapman and John Cleese. He became Footlights President in 1965 and was the first to allow women to join the club. He starred in the television comedy series \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" co-starring his future Python castmates Terry Jones and Michael Palin. Terry Gilliam provided animations for the show. The show's cast included comic actors David Jason and Denise Coffey. Idle also appeared as guest in some episodes of the television series \"At Last the 1948 Show\", which featured Cleese and Chapman in its principal cast.\nMonty Python (1969\u20131983).\nIdle wrote for Python mostly by himself, at his own pace, although he sometimes found it difficult to present material to the others and make it seem funny without the back-up support of a partner. The other Pythons usually worked in teams and Cleese admitted that this was slightly unfair\u00a0\u2013 when the Pythons voted on which sketches should appear in a show, \"he (Idle) only got one vote\". However, he also says that Idle was an independent person and worked best on his own. Idle himself admitted this was sometimes difficult: \"You had to convince five others. And they were not the most un-egotistical of writers, either.\" He occasionally wrote with Cleese.\nIdle's work in Python is often characterised by an obsession with language and communication: many of his characters have verbal peculiarities, such as the man who speaks in anagrams, the man who says words in the wrong order, and the butcher who alternates between rudeness and politeness every time he speaks. A number of his sketches involve extended monologues (for example the customer in the \"Travel Agency\" sketch who won't stop talking about his unpleasant experiences with holidays), and he would frequently spoof the unnatural language and speech patterns of television presenters. Idle is said to be the master of insincere characters, from the David Frost-esque Timmy Williams, to small-time crook Stig O'Tracy, who tries to deny the fact that organised crime master Dinsdale Piranha nailed his head to the floor.\nThe second-youngest member of the Pythons, Idle was closest in spirit to the teenagers who made up much of Python's fanbase. Python sketches dealing most with contemporary obsessions like pop music, sexual permissiveness and recreational drugs are usually Idle's work, often characterised by double entendre, sexual references, and other \"naughty\" subject matter\u00a0\u2013 most famously demonstrated in \"Nudge Nudge\". Idle originally wrote \"Nudge, Nudge\" for Ronnie Barker, but it was rejected because there was 'no joke in the words'.\nA talented guitarist, Idle composed many of the group's most famous musical numbers, most notably \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\", the closing number of \"Life of Brian\", which has grown to become a Python signature tune. He was responsible for the \"Galaxy Song\" from \"The Meaning of Life\" and \"Eric the Half-a-Bee\", a whimsical tune that first appeared on the \"Previous Record\" album.\nPost-Python career (since 1973).\nAfter the success of Python in the early 1970s, all six members pursued solo projects. Idle's first solo work was his own BBC Radio One show, \"Radio Five\" (pre-dating the real Radio Five station by 18 years). This ran for two seasons from 1973 to 1974 and involved Idle performing sketches and links to records, playing nearly all the multi-tracked parts himself.\nOn television, Idle created and wrote \"Rutland Weekend Television\" (RWT), a sketch show on BBC2 with music by Neil Innes. RWT was 'Britain's smallest television network'. The name was a parody of London Weekend Television, the independent television franchise contractor that provided Londoners with their ITV services at weekends; Rutland had been England's smallest county, but had recently been 'abolished' in an administrative shake-up. To make the joke complete, the programme went out on a weekday. Other regular performers were David Battley, Henry Woolf, Gwen Taylor and Terence Bayler. George Harrison made a guest appearance on one episode.\nA legacy of RWT was the creation, with Innes, of the Rutles, an affectionate parody of the Beatles. The band became a popular phenomenon, especially in the U.S. where Idle was appearing on \"Saturday Night Live\"\u00a0\u2013 fans would send in Beatles LPs with their sleeves altered to show the Rutles. In 1978, the Rutles' mockumentary film \"All You Need Is Cash\", a collaboration between Python members and \"Saturday Night Live\", was aired on NBC television, written by Idle, with music by Innes. Idle appeared in the film as \"Dirk McQuickly\" (the Paul McCartney-styled character of the group), as well as the main commentator, while Innes appeared as \"Ron Nasty\" (the band's stand-in for John Lennon). Actors appearing in the film included \"Saturday Night Live\"'s John Belushi, Bill Murray and Gilda Radner, as well as fellow Python Michael Palin, and also real musicians of the 1960s such as former Beatle George Harrison, as well as Mick Jagger and Paul Simon. Idle wrote and directed the Rutles comeback in 2008 for a live show \"Rutlemania!\" to celebrate the 30th anniversary. The performances took place in Los Angeles and New York City with a Beatles tribute band.\nIn 1986, Idle provided the voice of Wreck-Gar, the leader of the Junkions (a race of robots built out of junk that can only speak in film catchphrases and advertising slogans) in \"\". In 1987, he took part in the English National Opera production of the Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera \"The Mikado\", in which he appeared in the role of the Lord High Executioner, Ko-Ko; a performance of it was taped by Thames Television for broadcast, directed by John Michael Phillips, and subsequently released on DVD by A&amp;E. In 1989, he appeared in the U.S. comedy television series \"Nearly Departed\", about a ghost who haunts the family inhabiting his former home; the series lasted for six episodes as a summer replacement series.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Idle has always, it seemed, been happy to have been a Python, happy to talk about Python, happy to revisit the group's glory days. Even though he has gone on to his own work \u2013 dozens of films, plays, TV shows, albums, books and screenplays \u2013 he is perhaps the most active standard-bearer for the group. It was Idle who toured extensively in 2000 and 2003, performing Python songs with a band and back-up singers. He went on the road with the \"Eric Idle Exploits Monty Python Tour\", then with the \"Greedy Bastard Tour\", which was documented extensively on the Python website he launched in 1996.\"\n\u2014Dave Eggers in \"The Guardian\", September 2006.\nIdle received good critical notices appearing in projects written and directed by others\u00a0\u2013 such as Terry Gilliam's \"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen\" (1989), alongside Robbie Coltrane in \"Nuns on the Run\" (1990) and in \"Casper\" (1995). He also played Ratty in Terry Jones' version of \"The Wind in the Willows\" (1996). However, his own creative projects\u00a0\u2013 such as the film \"Splitting Heirs\" (1993), a comedy he wrote, starred in and executive-produced\u00a0\u2013 were mostly unsuccessful with critics and audiences.\nIn 1994, Idle appeared as Dr. Nigel Channing, chairman of the Imagination Institute and host of an 'Inventor of the Year' awards show in the three-dimensional film \"Honey, I Shrunk the Audience!\", which was an attraction at the Imagination Pavilion at Walt Disney World's Epcot from 1994 until 2010 and at Disneyland from 1998 until 2010. The film also stars Rick Moranis and other members of the cast of the 1989 feature film \"Honey, I Shrunk the Kids\". In 1999, he reprised the role in the short-lived second incarnation of the Journey into Imagination ride at Epcot, replacing Figment and Dreamfinder as the host. Due to an outcry from Disney fans, the attraction was reworked in 2001, reintroducing Figment into the ride while also retaining Idle's role as Nigel Channing. Idle is also writer and star of the 3-D film \"Pirates\u00a0\u2013 4D\" for Busch Entertainment Corporation.\nIn 1995, Idle appeared in \"Casper\" opposite Cathy Moriarty and voiced Rincewind the \"Wizzard\" in a computer adventure game based on Terry Pratchett's \"Discworld\" novels. In 1996, he reprised his role as Rincewind for the game's sequel, and composed and sang its theme song, \"That's Death\". In 1998, Idle appeared in the lead role in the poorly received film \"Burn Hollywood Burn\". That same year, he also provided the voice of Devon, one of the heads of a two-headed dragon, with Don Rickles as the other head Cornwall, in the Warner Bros. animated film \"Quest for Camelot\", and as Slyly, the albino Arctic fox in \".\nIn later years Idle provided voice work for animation, such as in \", in which he voiced Dr. Vosknocker. He has made four appearances on \"The Simpsons\" as documentarian Declan Desmond. Idle provided the voice of Merlin the magician in the DreamWorks animated film \"Shrek the Third\" (2007) with his former Python co-star John Cleese, who voiced King Harold. He also narrated the audiobook version of \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\" by Roald Dahl.\nIn late 2003, Idle began a performing tour of several American and Canadian cities entitled \"The Greedy Bastard Tour\". The stage performances consisted largely of music from Monty Python episodes and films, along with some original post-Python material. In 2005, Idle released \"The Greedy Bastard Diary\", a book detailing the things the cast and crew encountered during the three-month tour.\nIn 2004, Idle created \"Spamalot\", a musical comedy based on the 1975 film \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\". The medieval production tells the story of King Arthur and his Knights of the Round Table as they journey on their quest for the Holy Grail. \"Spamalot\" features a book and lyrics by Idle, music by Idle and John Du Prez, direction by Mike Nichols, and choreography by Casey Nicholaw.\nIdle's play \"What About Dick?\" was given a staged reading at two public performances at the Ricardo Montalb\u00e1n Theatre in Hollywood on 10\u201311 November 2007. The cast included Idle, Billy Connolly, Tim Curry, Eddie Izzard, Jane Leeves, Emily Mortimer, Jim Piddock and Tracey Ullman. The play returned on 26\u201329 April 2012 in the Orpheum Theatre, most of the cast returning except Emily Mortimer, who was replaced by Sophie Winkleman. Russell Brand also joined the cast. The play was made available for digital download on 13 November 2012.\nIdle performed at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony at the Olympic Stadium in London on 12 August, singing \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\". He was the creator and director of the live show \"Monty Python Live (mostly)\u00a0\u2013 One down, Five to go\", which was performed at the O2 Arena, London, between 1 and 20 July 2014.\nIn December 2016, Idle was the writer and co-presenter of \"The Entire Universe\", a \"comedy and musical extravaganza with the help of Warwick Davis, Noel Fielding, Hannah Waddingham and Robin Ince, alongside a chorus of singers and dancers\", broadcast by BBC Two.\nIn 2020, it was announced that Idle would adapt his script for \"Spamalot\" into a feature film for Paramount Pictures, with Nicholaw directing and Dan Jinks producing.\nIn 2022, Idle competed in season eight of \"The Masked Singer\" as \"Hedgehog\". He did a cover of the Beatles' \"Love Me Do\" with help from the USC Trojan Marching Band. When eliminated in the first episode alongside William Shatner as \"Knight\" and Chris Kirkpatrick as \"Hummingbird\", Idle mentioned to Nick Cannon that he had to get approval from Paul McCartney to do \"Love Me Do\" for a competition, in exchange for telling McCartney what the competition was so that he can avoid it. In addition, Idle did an unmasked performance of \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" from \"Life of Brian\".\nIn February 2024, Idle made headlines in the UK after revealing that he was still working at the age of 80 for financial reasons, saying \"Python is a disaster. I never dreamed that at this age the income streams would tail off so disastrously\", but also \"I don't mind not being wealthy. I prefer being funny\". In July 2025, he told \"NME\" in an interview that his relationship with the other Pythons was \"poor to terrible\", adding that \"they don't talk to me. I haven't seen them for 10 years so it doesn't really matter. Apparently they say rude and nasty things but I don't read them.\" His first solo UK tour since 1973 was organised for later that year.\nOther credits.\nWriting.\nIdle has written several books, both fiction and non-fiction. His novels are \"Hello Sailor\" and \"The Road to Mars\". In 1976, he produced a spin-off book to \"Rutland Weekend Television\", titled \"The Rutland Dirty Weekend Book\". In 1982, he wrote a West End farce \"Pass the Butler\", starring Willie Rushton. During his Greedy Bastard Tour of 2003, he wrote the diaries that would be made into \"The Greedy Bastard Diary: A Comic Tour of America\", published in February 2005. \nIdle also wrote the book and co-wrote the music and lyrics for the musical \"Monty Python's Spamalot\", based on the film \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\". It premiered in Chicago before moving to Broadway, where it received the Tony Award for Best Musical of the 2004\u201305 season. Idle won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics. \nIn a 2005 poll to find \"The Comedians' Comedian\" (UK), he was voted 21 in the top 50 greatest comedy acts ever by fellow comedians and comedy insiders.\nSongwriting.\nIdle is a songwriter with about 150 songs to his credit. He composed and performed many of Pythons' most famous comic pieces, including \"Eric the Half-a-Bee\", \"The Philosophers' Song\", \"Galaxy Song\", \"Penis Song\" and, probably his most recognised hit, \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\", which was written for the closing scene of the Monty Python film \"Life of Brian\", and sung from the crosses during the mass crucifixion. The song has since been covered by Harry Nilsson, Bruce Cockburn, Art Garfunkel, and Green Day. Idle, his fellow Pythons and assorted family and friends performed the song at Graham Chapman's memorial service. Idle performed the song at the closing ceremony of the London 2012 Olympic Games on 12 August 2012 and as the farewell song of the last show of the Python's reunion at the O2 arena, 20 July 2014.\nAs Ko-Ko in the 1987 English National Opera production of \"The Mikado\", Idle wrote his own 'Little List' on \"\". In 1989, Idle co-wrote and sang the theme tune to the popular British sitcom \"One Foot in the Grave\" and although the series became immensely popular, the song did poorly in the charts. \nWhen \"Always Look on the Bright Side of Life\" was adopted as a football chant in the late 1980s, Idle's then neighbour Gary Lineker suggested Idle re-record and release the popular track. With help from BBC Radio 1 breakfast show host Simon Mayo, who gave the song regular airplay and also used the chorus within a jingle, it became a hit, some 12 years after the song's original appearance in \"Life of Brian\", reaching number 3 in the UK charts and landing Idle a set on \"Top of the Pops\" in October 1991. The following month Idle, accompanied by opera singer Ann Howard, sang the song at the Royal Variety Performance. He recorded a special version for Mayo's own use on air (\"Come on Simon, get another song on now; why don't you put on a nice Cliff Richard record?\") and changed the line \"life's a piece of shit\" to \"life's a piece of spit\" in order to get daytime airplay on radio.\nIn 2004, Idle recorded a protest song of sorts, the \"FCC Song\", in which he lambasts the U.S. FCC for fining him $5,000 for saying \"fuck\" on national radio. The song contains 14 uses of the word.\nIn the same year, the musical comedy \"Spamalot\" debuted in Chicago; it opened in New York's Shubert Theatre on 14 February 2005. Idle wrote the lyrics and book for \"Spamalot\", collaborating with John Du Prez on much of the music. The original 2005 Broadway theatre production was nominated for 14 Tony Awards and won three: Best Musical, Best Performance by a Featured Actress in a Musical (Sara Ramirez), and Best Direction of a Musical (Mike Nichols). \nIn 2006 he wrote, produced and performed the song \"Really Nice Day\" for the movie \"The Wild\". \nIn June 2007, \"Not the Messiah,\" a comic oratorio by Idle and Du Prez. premiered at the inaugural Luminato arts festival in Toronto. Idle performed live during this 50-minute oratorio, along with the Toronto Symphony Orchestra and members of the Toronto Mendelssohn Choir. Du Prez was also present. Shannon Mercer, Jean Stilwell, Christopher Sieber, and Theodore Baerg sang the principal parts. The American premiere was at Caramoor (Westchester County, New York) on 1 July 2007. Soloists were the same as in the Toronto performance, but the accompanying chorus was made up of members of New York City's Collegiate Chorale. The show was revised and expanded for a tour of Australia and New Zealand in 2007, including two sell-out nights at the Sydney Opera House. A tour during the summer of 2008 included performances with the National Symphony Orchestra at Wolf Trap National Park for the Performing Arts, the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles, and the Delaware Symphony Orchestra at the Mann Center for the Performing Arts in Philadelphia.\nIdle contributed a cover of Buddy Holly's \"Raining in My Heart\" for the tribute album \"\", released 6 September 2011. He also wrote and sang a variant of the \"Galaxy Song\" for Professor Brian Cox's show \"Wonders of Life\", as well as the new theme for Cox's radio show \"The Infinite Monkey Cage\".\nPersonal life.\nIdle has been married twice. His first marriage was in 1969 to actress Lyn Ashley, with whom he had one son before their divorce in 1975. He met Tania Kosevich, a former model, in 1977 and they married in 1981. They had a daughter. From 1995 they lived in a five-bedroom, mansion in the Hollywood Hills, which they sold in 2023 owing to financial difficulty. Idle has held permanent residency in the United States since about 1997. During and because of Donald Trump's second presidency, Idle was strongly critical of Trump in a question-and-answer session, saying, after permanent residents (and citizens) were deported after criticising the Trump presidency, \"I'd be proud to be thrown out because I'd be in very select company. The last English comedian to be thrown out of America for political reasons was Charlie Chaplin.\"\nIdle is a first cousin of Canadian conductor Peter Oundjian. David Bowie made Idle godfather to his son, film director Duncan Jones.\nIdle is an atheist, but does not like using the term and is quoted as saying \"I don't like that word, it implies that there's a God not to believe in.\"\nIn 2019, Idle was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. He was diagnosed early and underwent successful surgery to remove the tumour, needing no further treatment after this procedure.\nAs of 2024, Idle lived in Los Angeles, US.\nIn 2025, he said that he did not watch comedy and watched very little, mainly Netflix thrillers. \"I don't go to the movies because they're very boring and for 12-year-olds. I don't watch news and I don't read newspapers.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52043", "revid": "8524693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52043", "title": "The Greens (France)", "text": "The Greens ( , LV; also \"Les Verts, Conf\u00e9d\u00e9ration \u00e9cologiste \u2013 Parti \u00e9cologiste\", VEC) was a left-wing to centre-left green-ecologist political party in France. The Greens had been in existence since 1984, but their spiritual roots could be traced as far back as Ren\u00e9 Dumont's candidacy for the presidency in 1974. On 13 November 2010, The Greens merged with Europe Ecology to become Europe Ecology \u2013 The Greens.\nHistory.\nEarly years.\nSince 1974, the environmentalist movement has been a permanent feature of the French political scene, contesting every election: municipal, national &amp; European.\nIn the years following Dumont's challenge for the presidency, and prior to the formal confirmation of les Verts as political party, environmentalists contested elections under such banners as \"Ecology 78\", \"Ecology Europe\" and \"Ecology Today\". When, in 1982, \"the Ecologist Party\" merged with \"the Ecologist Confederation\", les Verts were born. Under the ideological guidance of Antoine Waechter, the party in 1986 signalled a break with the traditional divide in French politics, declaring that environmental politics could not be \"married\" to either the left or the right (which gave rise to its famous slogan \"ni droite, ni gauche\" \u2013 \"neither right, nor left\"). Antoine Waechter ran in the 1988 presidential elections, capturing 1,150,000 ballots (or 3.8%) in the first round of voting. But the major breakthrough came the following year when \u2013 again under the leadership of Waechter \u2013 the Greens polled 10.6% in the European parliamentary elections.\nHowever, the party faced with another ecologist party: Ecology Generation led by Brice Lalonde, environment minister of President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand and allied with the Socialist Party (PS). In this, if the ecologist parties benefited from the electoral decline of the PS in the beginning of the 1990s, the Greens competed for the leadership of the French ecologist movement. In the 1992 regional elections, the Greens obtained 6.8% of votes and the presidency of Nord-Pas-de-Calais region. The next year, it scored 4.1% in the legislative election while all of the ecologist votes represented 11%. But, without political allies in the second round, they failed to gain a parliamentary seat.\nParticipation in government.\nWaechter's influence was called into question in 1994 when the Greens decided to break with his policy of non-alignment, instead deciding to adopt a markedly left-wing stance. The move prompted Waechter to leave the Greens. He went on to found the Independent Ecological Movement. In the following presidential election of 1995, Dominique Voynet polled a modest 3.8% but, in due to the marginalisation of Ecology Generation, the Greens captured the leadership into the family of the French political ecology.\nComponent of Plural Left coalition, the Greens obtained for the first time a parliamentary representation in 1997. Dominique Voynet was to lead the party into government for the first time, joining Lionel Jospin's Socialist Party (PS) and the Communist Party (PCF). Voynet was rewarded with the cabinet position of Minister for the Environment and Regional Planning, before being replaced by Yves Cochet in 2001.\nDaniel Cohn-Bendit (or \"Danny the Red\"), a leader of the 1968 student uprising, spearheaded the party's 1999 European campaign, obtaining 9.7% of votes cast, enough to return seven deputies to Strasbourg.\nAlain Lipietz was first selected to represent the Greens in the 2002 presidential elections but his public outings proved awkward and he was soon replaced by No\u00ebl Mam\u00e8re who had initially lost the primary elections. Mam\u00e8re's 5.25% represents the strongest Green challenge for the presidency to date. However, the legislative elections were a major disappointment: with just 4.51% of votes cast nationally, the Greens\u2019 representation fell from six to just three deputies (out of a total of 577) in the National Assembly.\nOpposition and merger.\nFollowing the return to opposition benches in 2002, Gilles Lemaire assumed the position of national secretary. His tenure is marked by a period of internal strife in the party. Lemaire was in turn replaced by Yann Wehrling, who seemingly united a majority of the membership under a text outlining the future direction that the party hoped to pursue. He was succeeded by C\u00e9cile Duflot in 2006, who was the party's youngest National Secretary at the age of 31. She announced her resignation in May 2012 after being appointed to the new cabinet appointed by President Fran\u00e7ois Hollande.\nLes Verts had six MEPs elected in the 2004 European Election with 8.43% of the vote.\nIn the hugely divisive 2005 referendum on the European Constitution, the Greens campaigned for a Yes vote.\nIn the 2007 French presidential election, les Verts nominated Dominique Voynet. Her low score of 1.57% in the first round was the party's worst electoral result, and the French ecologist's worst showing since Ren\u00e9 Dumont in the 1974. The party refused an electoral deal with the Socialists for the June legislative election. However, the three Green incumbents, No\u00ebl Mam\u00e8re, Yves Cochet, and Martine Billard had no PS opposition in their respective constituencies. While the Green's vote share was down from 2002, it won a fourth seat in Nantes where Fran\u00e7ois de Rugy defeated a conservative UMP incumbent. The Greens now had four seats in the Assembly and sat with the PCF in the Democratic and Republican Left group.\nIn the 2009 European Parliament election, the party was an integral part of the Europe \u00c9cologie coalition, led by Daniel Cohn-Bendit, which gained 8 seats for a total of 14 on a 16.3% of the vote. Since November 2010, it merged with the coalition to become Europe Ecology \u2013 The Greens.\nThe Skandrani Affair.\nOne of the party's co-founders, Ginette Skandrani, had long attracted criticism due to her involvement with Holocaust deniers.\nThe Stephen Roth Institute criticized the Green Party in 2004, calling its record \"tainted by abortive attempts to expel from within its ranks notorious anti-Jewish activist Ginette Skandrani herself ethnically Jewish who has close contacts with Holocaust deniers.\"\nOther critics, such as Roger Cukierman of the Representative Council of French Jewish Institutions did not attack the party as a whole, but rather its anti-Zionist wing, claiming that it promoted a \"brown-green alliance\".\nIn June 2005, the Greens voted to permanently expel Skandrani. Among the reasons for her definitive expulsion were her participation in the holocaust-denial website \"AAARGH\" (Association des anciens amateurs de r\u00e9cits de guerres et d'holocaustes). Patrick Farbiaz, a Green leader involved in her expulsion, argued that \"although she has not written [anti-Semitic texts] herself, she looks like a kingpen of holocaust deniers and avowed antisemites\".\nThe party had previously expelled another co-founder (in 1991), Jean Bri\u00e8re, for signing a text addressing the alleged \"war-causing role\" of Israel and \"the zionist lobby in the Gulf War.\"\nCall to lift sanctions against Cypriot Turks.\nGreen MEP Helene Flautre has attracted controversy by calling for the lifting of sanctions against Turkish Cypriots imposed by the United Nations.\nYouth wing.\nThe youth branch of the Greens, founded in Strasbourg in 2001, is called \"Les Jeunes Verts \u2013 la Souris verte\" (Young Greens \u2013 the Green mouse). It has been part of the Federation of Young European Greens since 2006.\nFactions.\nMost internal divisions within the party concern the party's political position (neither right nor left, or left-wing) and electoral strategy (alliance with the PS or the far-left parties).\nThe party's final leadership, led by C\u00e9cile Duflot, and including Dominique Voynet, Yves Cochet and No\u00ebl Mam\u00e8re were positioned between the two aforementioned factions.\nElected officials.\nThe Greens held 41 town halls, the largest city being Montreuil (Seine-Saint-Denis). Other cities held by the Greens include Wattwiller, B\u00e8gles and M\u00e8ze. The party also claims 168 regional councillors and 14 general councillors (plus 9 Parisian councillors).\nPopular support and electoral record.\nThe Greens were strong electorally in urban areas, specifically in the Greater Paris area, Brittany and western France, parts of the Rh\u00f4ne-Alpes region and Alsace. In the 2009 European elections, the Greens won their best result outside of Corsica, where their result was due to the support of the Party of the Corsican Nation (PNC), in the city of Paris (27.41%), Haute-Savoie (20.26%), Dr\u00f4me (21.75%), Is\u00e8re (21.64%), Hauts-de-Seine (20.74%), Ille-et-Vilaine (20.59%), and Loire-Atlantique (20.16%). It also did very well in large, wealthy urban centres such as Rennes or Grenoble. It does more poorly in rural areas, notably areas where its rival, CPNT, is strong. It also did poorly in industrial or poorer urban areas; for example it won only 9.33% in the Pas-de-Calais, a department formerly dominated by coal mining, in 2009.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52046", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52046", "title": "Nobel Prize in chemistry", "text": ""}
{"id": "52047", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52047", "title": "Nobel Prize in medicine", "text": ""}
{"id": "52051", "revid": "39494085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52051", "title": "Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac", "text": "French chemist and physicist (1778\u20131850)\nJoseph Louis Gay-Lussac ( , ; ; 6 December 1778\u00a0\u2013 9 May 1850) was a French chemist and physicist. He is known mostly for his discovery that water is made of two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen by volume (with Alexander von Humboldt), for two laws related to gases, and for his work on alcohol\u2013water mixtures, which led to the degrees Gay-Lussac used to measure alcoholic beverages in many countries.\nBiography.\nGay-Lussac was born at Saint-L\u00e9onard-de-Noblat in the present-day department of Haute-Vienne.\nHis father, Anthony Gay, son of a doctor, was a lawyer and prosecutor and worked as a judge in Noblat Bridge. Father of two sons and three daughters, he owned much of the Lussac village and began to add the name of this hamlet to his name, following a custom of the Ancien R\u00e9gime. Towards the year 1803, father and son formally adopted the name Gay-Lussac. During the Revolution, under the Law of Suspects, his father, former king's attorney, was imprisoned in Saint L\u00e9onard from 1793 to 1794.\nGay-Lussac received his early education at the hands of the Catholic Abbey of Bourdeix. In the care of the Abbot of Dumonteil, he began his education in Paris, finally entering the \u00c9cole Polytechnique in 1798.\nThree years later, Gay-Lussac transferred to the \u00c9cole des Ponts et Chauss\u00e9es, and shortly afterward was assigned to C. L. Berthollet as his assistant. In 1804 he was appointed r\u00e9p\u00e9titeur (demonstrator) to Antoine Fran\u00e7ois Fourcroy at the \u00c9cole Polytechnique, whom he succeeded in 1809 as professor of chemistry. From 1809 to 1832, he was also the professor of physics at the Sorbonne, a post which he only resigned for the chair of chemistry at the Jardin des Plantes. In 1821, he was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. In 1831 he was elected to represent Haute-Vienne in the chamber of deputies, and in 1839 he entered the chamber of peers. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1832.\nGay-Lussac married Genevi\u00e8ve-Marie-Joseph Rojot in 1809. He had first met her when she worked as a linen draper's shop assistant; he noticed she was studying a chemistry textbook under the counter, which led to their acquaintance. The couple had five children, of whom the eldest (Jules) became a student of Justus Liebig in Giessen. Some publications by Jules are mistaken as his father's today since they share the same first initial (J. Gay-Lussac).\nGay-Lussac had a reputation as one of the greatest European scientists of his day, well justified by his innumerable discoveries in both chemistry and physics. The restored royalty made him a Peer of France, although he worked politically with the anti-clerical party. He was closely associated with Fran\u00e7ois Arago.\nGay-Lussac died in Paris, and his grave is there at P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery. His name is one of the 72 names inscribed on the Eiffel Tower.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52052", "revid": "45595768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52052", "title": "Mainland Southeast Asia", "text": "Continental portion of Southeast Asia\nMainland Southeast Asia (historically known as Indochina and the Indochinese Peninsula) is the continental portion of Southeast Asia. It lies east of the Indian subcontinent and south of Mainland China and is bordered by the Indian Ocean to the west and the Pacific Ocean to the east. It includes the countries of Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam as well as Peninsular Malaysia.\nThe term \"Indochina\" (originally \"Indo-China\") was coined in the early nineteenth century, emphasizing the historical cultural influence of Indian and Chinese civilizations on the region. The term was later adopted as the name of the colony of French Indochina (present-day Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam). Today, the term \"Mainland Southeast Asia\" is more commonly used, in contrast to Maritime Southeast Asia for the island groups off the coast of the peninsula.\nTerminology.\nIn Indian sources, the earliest name connected with Southeast Asia is \"Y\u0101vadv\u012bpa\". Another possible early name of mainland Southeast Asia was \"Suvar\u1e47abh\u016bmi\" (\"land of gold\"), a toponym, that appears in many ancient Indian literary sources and Buddhist texts, but which, along with \"Suvar\u1e47adv\u012bpa\" (\"island\" or \"peninsula of gold\"), are also thought to refer to insular Southeast Asia.\nThe origins of the name Indo-China are usually attributed jointly to the Danish-French geographer Conrad Malte-Brun, who referred to the area as in 1804, and the Scottish linguist John Leyden, who used the term \"Indo-Chinese\" to describe the area's inhabitants and their languages in 1808. Scholarly opinions at the time regarding China's and India's historical influence over the area were conflicting, and the term was itself controversial\u2014Malte-Brun himself later argued against its use in a later edition of his \"Universal Geography\", reasoning that it overemphasized Chinese influence, and suggested \"Chin-India\" instead. Nevertheless, \"Indo-China\" had already gained traction and soon supplanted alternative terms such as \"Further India\" and the \"Peninsula beyond the Ganges\". Later, however, as the French established the colony of French Indochina (covering present-day Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam), use of the term became more restricted to the French colony, and today the area is usually referred to as Mainland Southeast Asia.\nBiogeography.\nIn biogeography, the Indochinese bioregion is a major region in the Indomalayan realm, and also a phytogeographical floristic region in the Oriental Paleotropical Kingdom. It includes the native flora and fauna of all the countries above. The adjacent Malesian Region covers the Maritime Southeast Asian countries, and straddles the Indomalayan and Australasian realms.\nGeography.\nThe Indochinese Peninsula projects southward from the Asian continent proper. It contains several mountain ranges extending from the Tibetan Plateau in the north, interspersed with lowlands largely drained by three major river systems running in a north\u2013south direction: the Irrawaddy (Myanmar), the Chao Phraya (in Thailand), and the Mekong (flowing through Northeastern Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam). To the south it forms the Malay Peninsula, located on which are Southern Thailand and Peninsular Malaysia; the latter is variably considered part of Mainland Southeast Asia or separately as part of Maritime Southeast Asia. Most of it has a tropical climate except for subtropical places such as Northern Vietnam.\nCulture.\nMainland Southeast Asia contrasts with Maritime Southeast Asia, mainly through the division of largely land-based lifestyles in Indochina and the sea-based lifestyles of the Indonesian archipelago and Philippine archipelago, as well as the dividing line between the Austroasiatic, Tai\u2013Kadai, and Sino-Tibetan languages (spoken in Mainland Southeast Asia) and the Austronesian languages (spoken in Maritime Southeast Asia). The languages of the mainland form the Mainland Southeast Asia linguistic area: although belonging to several independent language families, they have converged over the course of history and share a number of typological similarities.\nThe countries of mainland Southeast Asia received cultural influence from both India and China to varying degrees. Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar and Thailand are all influenced by Indian culture, only Vietnam is influenced by Chinese culture but still has minor influences from India, largely via the Champa civilization that Vietnam conquered during its southward expansion.\nOverall, Mainland Southeast Asia is predominantly Buddhist with minority Muslim and Hindu populations.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52053", "revid": "15536200", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52053", "title": "French Indochina", "text": "1887\u20131954 French territories in Southeast Asia\nFrench Indochina (previously spelled as French Indo-China), officially known as the Indochinese Union and after 1941 as the Indochinese Federation, was a group of French dependent territories in Southeast Asia from 1887 to 1954. It was initially a federation of French colonies (1887\u20131949), later a confederation of French associated states (1949\u20131954). It comprised Cambodia, Laos (from 1899), Guangzhouwan (1898\u20131945), Cochinchina, and Vietnamese regions of Tonkin and Annam. It was established in 1887 and was dissolved in 1954. In 1949, Vietnam was reunited and it regained Cochinchina. Its capitals were Hanoi (1902\u20131945) and Saigon (1887\u20131902, 1945\u20131954).\nThe Second French Empire colonized Cochinchina in 1862 and established a protectorate in Cambodia in 1863. After the French Third Republic took over northern Vietnam through the Tonkin campaign, the various protectorates were consolidated into one union in 1887. Two more entities were incorporated into the union: the Laotian protectorate and the Chinese territory of Guangzhouwan. The French exploited the resources in the region during their rule, while also contributing to improvements of the health and education system in the region. Deep divides remained between the native population and the colonists, leading to sporadic rebellions by the former. \nAfter the Fall of France during World War II, the colony was administered by the Vichy government and was under Japanese occupation until 9 March 1945, when the Japanese army overthrew the colonial regime. They established puppet states including the Empire of Vietnam. After the Japanese surrender, the communist Viet Minh led by Ho Chi Minh declared Vietnam's independence. France sought to restore control with the help of the British in the war in southern Vietnam (1945\u20131946), which led to all-out Vietnamese resistance in the First Indochina War.\nIn 1945, France returned Guangzhouwan to China. To counter the Viet Minh and as part of decolonization, France, working with Vietnamese nationalists, formed the anti-communist State of Vietnam as an associated state within the French Union in 1949. This led to Cochinchina returning to Vietnam in June. Laos and Cambodia also became French associated states the same year. French efforts to retake Indochina were unsuccessful, culminating in defeat at the Battle of \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7. On 22 October and 9 November 1953, Laos and Cambodia gained independence, as did Vietnam with the Geneva Accords of 21 July 1954, ending French Indochina.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nEarly French encounters.\nFrench\u2013Vietnamese contacts can be traced to 1658 when Jesuit missionaries Joseph Francis Tissanier and Pierre Jacques Albier arrived in Vietnam. Around this time, Vietnam had only just begun its \"Nam ti\u1ebfn\" (\"Southward\"), the occupation of the Mekong Delta, a territory being part of the Khmer Empire and to a lesser extent, the kingdom of Champa which they had defeated in 1471.\nEuropean involvement in Vietnam was confined to trade during the 18th century, as the remarkably successful work of the missionaries continued. In 1787, Pierre Pigneau de Behaine, a French Catholic priest, petitioned the French government and organised French military volunteers to aid Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1nh in retaking lands his family lost to the T\u00e2y S\u01a1n. Pigneau died in Vietnam but his troops fought on until 1802 in the French assistance to Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1nh.\n19th century.\nFrench conquest of Cochinchina.\nThe French colonial empire was heavily involved in Vietnam in the 19th century; often French intervention was undertaken in order to protect the work of the Paris Foreign Missions Society in the country. For its part, the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty increasingly saw Catholic missionaries as a political threat; courtesans, for example, an influential faction in the dynastic system, feared for their status in a society influenced by an insistence on monogamy.\nA brief period of unification under the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty ended in 1858 with French military intervention. Under the pretext of protesting the persecution and expulsion of Catholic missionaries, and following Charles de Montigny's failure to secure concessions, Napoleon III ordered Admiral Charles Rigault de Genouilly to attack Tourane (present day Da Nang).\nFourteen French gunships, 3,300 men including 300 Filipino soldiers provided by the Spanish attacked the port of causing significant damage and occupying the city. After fighting the Vietnamese for three months and finding himself unable to progress further in land, de Genouilly sought and received approval of an alternative attack on Saigon.\nSailing to southern Vietnam, de Genouilly captured the poorly defended city of Saigon on 17 February 1859. Once again, however, de Genouilly and his forces were unable to seize territory outside of the defensive perimeter of the city. De Genouilly was criticised for his actions and was replaced by Admiral Page in November 1859 with instructions to obtain a treaty protecting the Catholic faith in Vietnam while refraining from making territorial gains.\nPeace negotiations proved unsuccessful and the fighting in Saigon continued. Ultimately in 1861, the French brought additional forces to bear in the Saigon campaign, advanced out of the city and began to capture cities in the Mekong Delta. On 5 June 1862, the Vietnamese conceded and signed the Treaty of Saigon whereby they agreed to legalize the free practice of the Catholic religion; to open trade in the Mekong Delta and at three ports at the mouth of the Red River in northern Vietnam; to cede the provinces of Bi\u00ean H\u00f2a, Gia \u0110\u1ecbnh and \u0110\u1ecbnh T\u01b0\u1eddng along with the islands of Poulo Condore to France; and to pay reparations equivalent to one million dollars.\nIn 1864 the aforementioned three provinces ceded to France were formally constituted as the French colony of Cochinchina. Then in 1867, French Admiral Pierre de la Grandi\u00e8re forced the Vietnamese to surrender three additional provinces, Ch\u00e2u \u0110\u1ed1c, H\u00e0 Ti\u00ean and V\u0129nh Long. With these three additions all of southern Vietnam and the Mekong Delta fell under French control.\nEstablishment and early administration.\nIn 1863, the Cambodian king Norodom had requested the establishment of a French protectorate over his country. In 1867, Siam (modern Thailand) renounced suzerainty over Cambodia and officially recognised the 1863 French protectorate on Cambodia, in exchange for the control of Battambang and Siem Reap provinces which officially became part of Thailand. (These provinces would be ceded back to Cambodia by a border treaty between France and Siam in 1906).\nFrance obtained control over northern Vietnam following its victory over China in the Sino-French War (1884\u201385). French Indochina was formed on 17 October 1887 from Annam, Tonkin, Cochinchina (which together form modern Vietnam) and the Kingdom of Cambodia; Laos was added after the Franco-Siamese crisis of 1893.\nThe federation lasted until 21 July 1954. In the four protectorates, the French formally left the local rulers in power, who were the emperors of Vietnam, kings of Cambodia, and kings of Luang Prabang, but in fact gathered all powers in their hands, the local rulers acting only as figureheads.\nJapanese women called Karayuki-san migrated or were trafficked to cities like Hanoi, Haiphong and Saigon in colonial French Indochina in the late 19th century to work as prostitutes and provide sexual services to French soldiers who were occupying Vietnam. Since the French viewed Japanese women as clean, they were highly popular. Images of the Japanese prostitutes in Vietnam were put on French postcards by French photographers. The Japanese government tried to hide the existences of these Japanese prostitutes who went abroad and did not mention them in books on history.\nBeginning in the 1880s there was a rise of an explicitly anti-Catholic French administration in French Indochina. The administration would try to reduce Catholic missionary influence in French Indochinese society, as opposed to the earlier decades where missionaries played an important role in both administration and society in French Cochinchina.\nFrom 1 January 1898, the French directly took over the right to collect all taxes in the protectorate of Annam and to allocate salaries to the Emperor of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty and its mandarins. In a notice dated 24 August 1898, the Resident-Superior of Annam wrote: \"From now on, in the Kingdom of Annam there are no longer two governments, but only one\" (meaning that the French government completely took over the administration).\nEarly Vietnamese rebellions.\nWhile the French were trying to establish control over Cambodia, a large scale Vietnamese insurgency \u2013 the C\u1ea7n V\u01b0\u01a1ng movement \u2013 started to take shape, aiming to expel the French and install the boy emperor H\u00e0m Nghi as the leader of an independent Vietnam. Between 1885 and 1889, insurgents, led by Phan \u0110\u00ecnh Ph\u00f9ng, Phan Chu Trinh, Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u, Tr\u1ea7n Qu\u00fd C\u00e1p and Hu\u1ef3nh Th\u00fac Kh\u00e1ng, targeted Vietnamese Christians as there were very few French soldiers to overcome, which led to a massacre of around 40,000 Christians. The rebellion was eventually brought down by a French military intervention, in addition to its lack of unity in the movement.\nNationalist sentiments intensified in Vietnam, especially during and after World War I, but all the uprisings and tentative efforts failed to obtain sufficient concessions from the French.\nFranco-Siamese crisis (1893).\nTerritorial conflict in the Indochinese peninsula for the expansion of French Indochina led to the Franco-Siamese crisis of 1893. In 1893 the French authorities in Indochina used border disputes, followed by the Paknam naval incident, to provoke a crisis. French gunboats appeared at Bangkok, and demanded the cession of Lao territories east of the Mekong River.\nKing Chulalongkorn appealed to the British, but the British minister told the king to settle on whatever terms he could get, and he had no choice but to comply. Britain's only gesture was an agreement with France guaranteeing the integrity of the rest of Siam. In exchange, Siam had to give up its claim to the Thai-speaking Shan region of north-eastern Burma to the British, and cede Laos to France.\n20th century.\nFurther encroachments on Siam (1904\u20131907).\nThe French continued to pressure Siam, and in 1902 they manufactured another crisis. This time Siam had to concede French control of territory on the west bank of the Mekong opposite Luang Prabang and around Champasak in southern Laos, as well as western Cambodia. France also occupied the western part of Chantaburi.\nIn 1904, to get back Chantaburi, Siam had to give Trat and Koh Kong to French Indochina. Trat became part of Thailand again on 23 March 1907 in exchange for many areas east of the Mekong like Battambang, Siem Reap and Sisophon.\nIn the 1930s, Siam engaged France in a series of talks concerning the repatriation of Siamese provinces held by the French. In 1938, under the Front Populaire administration in Paris, France had agreed to repatriate Angkor Wat, Angkor Thom, Siem Reap, Siem Pang, and the associated provinces (approximately 13) to Siam. Meanwhile, Siam took over control of those areas, in anticipation of the upcoming treaty. Signatories from each country were dispatched to Tokyo to sign the treaty repatriating the lost provinces.\nAnti-French revolts in the early 20th century.\nAlthough during the early 20th century calm was supposed to reign as the French had \"pacified\" the region, constant uprisings contesting French rule characterised French Indochina this period. \"There is ample evidence of the rural populations' involvement in revolts against authority during the first 50 years of the French colonial presence in Cambodia.\" The French \"S\u00fbret\u00e9\" was worried about the Japanese victory during the Russo-Japanese War and its lasting impression on the East as it was considered to be the first victory of \"a yellow people over the white\", as well as the fall of the Manchu-led Qing dynasty to the Xinhai Revolution which established the Republic of China. These events all had significant influence on nationalist sentiments in the territories of French Indochina.\nThe early 20th century saw a number of secret societies launch rebellions in Cochinchina, the Peace and Duty Society (Nghia Hoa Doan Hoi) was introduced to the region by the Minh H\u01b0\u01a1ng refugees following the Manchu conquest of China and the Vietnamese Heaven and Earth Society (\u5929\u5730\u6703, \"Thi\u00ean \u0110\u1ecba H\u1ed9i\"). The Peace and Duty Society was also active supporting anti-Qing insurgents in China.\nThe majority of the traditional mandarin elites would continue to operate under the French protectorate being loyal to their new rulers, but as early period of the \"Ph\u00e1p thu\u1ed9c\" saw an influx of French enterprises significant changes to the social order of the day inspired new forms of resistance against French rule that differed from the earlier \"C\u1ea7n V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" Movement. The new social circumstances in French Indochina were brought about by the establishment of industrial companies by the French such as the \"Union commerciale indochinoise\", the \"Est Asiatique fran\u00e7ais\" shipping company, the \"Chemin de fer fran\u00e7ais de l'Indochine et du Yunan\" railway company, as well as the various coal exploitation companies operating in Tonkin, these modern companies were accompanied by an influx of French tea, coffee, and rubber plantation magnates.\nFollowing the defeat of the Nguy\u1ec5n loyalist \"C\u1ea7n V\u01b0\u01a1ng\" Movement a new generation of anti-French resistance emerged, rather than being rooted in the traditional mandarin elites the new anti-French resistance leaders of the early 20th century were more influenced by international events and revolutions abroad to inspire their resistance and the issue of modernisation. Some Vietnamese revolutionaries like Phan Ch\u00e2u Trinh traveled to the Western World (\"\u0110i T\u00e2y\") to obtain the \"keys\" to modernity and hope to bring these back to Vietnam. While others like the revolutionary leader Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u made the \"Journey to the East\" (\"\u0110\u00f4ng Du\") to the Japanese Empire which they saw as the other role-model of modernisation for Vietnam to follow. The \"\u0110\u00f4ng Du\" school of revoluties was supported by Prince C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3, a direct descendant of the Gia Long Emperor. Prince C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3 hoped that by financing hundreds of young ambitious Vietnamese people to go get educated in Japan that this would contribute to the liberation of his country from French domination.\nThe \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\" was founded in 1904 by Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u and Prince C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3. The group in a broader sense was also considered a Modernisation Movement. This new group of people consisted only of a few hundred people, with most of its members being either students or nationalists. Notable members of the society included Gilbert Tr\u1ea7n Ch\u00e1nh Chi\u00eau. The members of the \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\" would establish a network of commercial enterprises to both gain capital to finance their activities and to hide their true intentions. A number of other anti-French organisations would support the \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\" such as the Peace and Duty Society and the Heaven and Earth Society.\nThe Tonkin Free School (\"\u0110\u00f4ng Kinh Ngh\u0129a Th\u1ee5c\"), which was created in Hanoi in 1907 by the supporters of both Phan Ch\u00e2u Trinh and Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u was closed in the year of its founding by the French authorities because it was perceived as being anti-French. The Tonkin Free School stemmed from the movement of the same name, which aimed to modernise Vietnamese society by abandoning Confucianism and adopting new ideas from both the Western world and Japan. In particular, it promoted the Vietnamese version of the Latin script for writing Vietnamese in place of classical Chinese by publishing educational materials and newspapers using this script, as a new vehicle of instruction. The schools offered free courses to anyone who wanted to learn about the modern spirit. The teachers at the school at 59 H\u00e0ng \u0110\u00e0n included Ph\u1ea1m Duy T\u1ed1n.\nin the years prior to World War I the French arrested thousands of people with some being sentenced to death and others being imprisoned at the Poulo Condore jail island (C\u00f4n S\u01a1n Island). Because of this C\u00f4n S\u01a1n Island would become the best school for political prisoners, nationalists, and communists, as they were gathered together in large, common cells which allowed them to exchange their ideas.\nIn March 1908, mass demonstrations took place in Annam and Tonkin demanding a reduction of the high taxes.\nIn June 1908, the Hanoi Poison Plot took place where a group of Tonkinese indigenous \"tirailleurs\" attempted to poison the entire French colonial army's garrison in the Citadel of Hanoi. The aim of the plot was to neutralise the French garrison and make way for Commander \u0110\u1ec1 Th\u00e1m's rebel army to capture the city of Hanoi. The plot was disclosed, and then was suppressed by the French. In response the French proclaimed martial law. The French accused Phan Ch\u00e2u Trinh and Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u of the plot, Phan Ch\u00e2u Trinh was sent to Poulo Condor, and Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u fled to Japan and thence, in the year 1910, he went to China. In the years 1912 and 1913 Vietnamese nationalists organised attacks in Tonkin and Cochinchina.\nUsing diplomatic pressure the French persuaded the Japanese to banish the \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\" in 1909 from its shores causing them to seek refuge in Qing China, here they would join the ranks of Sun Yat-Sen's Tongmenghui. While places like Guangdong, Guangxi, and Yunnan were earlier in the French sphere of influence in China, these places would now become hosts of anti-French revolutionary activities due to their borders with Tonkin and Laos, being the primary places of operation for both Chinese and Vietnamese revolutionaries. This allowed for members of the \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\" to perform border raids on both Tonkin and Laos from their bases in China.\nIn March 1913 the mystic millenarist cult leader Phan X\u00edch Long organised an independence demonstration in Cholon which was attended by 600 peasants dressed in white robes. Phan X\u00edch Long claimed descent of the deposed H\u00e0m Nghi Emperor and the Ming dynasty's emperor and declared himself to be the \"Emperor of the Ming Dynasty\".\nThe year 1913 also saw the \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i's\" second insurrection campaign, this campaign resulted in the society's members murdering two French Hanoi police officers, attacks on both militia and the military, and the execution of a number of Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty mandarins that were accused of working together with the French government. Another revolt also broke out in Cochinchina in 1913 where prisons and administrative hubs were attacked by crowds of hundreds of peasants using sticks and swords to fight the French, as the French were armed with firearms a large number of protesters ended up dying by gunshot wounds causing the protests to break up ending the revolt.\nDuring the early 20th century the French protectorate over Cambodia was challenged by rebels, just before it saw three separate revolts during the early reign of King Norodom, who had little authority outside Phnom Penh.\nDuring the early 20th century Laos was considered to be the most \"docile\" territory as it saw relatively few uprisings. The French attributed this to them being more stable rulers than the Siamese who had ruled over them for a century before the establishment of the French protectorate. Both the traditional elite and the Laotian peasantry seemed largely content with French rule during this period. Despite this, sporadic revolts occurred in Laos during the late 19th century and early 20th century. During the late 19th century Southern Laos saw upland minority communities rising up in revolt, these were led by Bac My and Ong Ma on the Bolaven Plateau, who demanded the restoration of the \"old order\" and led an armed insurrection against the French until as late as 1936. The Holy Man's Rebellion erupted in 1901 and was not suppressed until 1907. It was a \"major rebellion by local Lao Theung tribes (the Alak, Nyaheun, and Laven) against French domination\". Though there is not extensive literature on these particular revolutionary revolts in the Bolaven Plateau, one can see that the native communities desired to rid the region of the extensive and overpowering influence of their colonisers.\nIntroduction of French education.\nOn 16 May 1906 the governor-general of French Indochina Jean Baptiste Paul Beau issued a decree establishing the Councils for the Improvement of Indigenous Education. These organisations would oversee the French policies surrounding the education of the indigenous population of French Indochina to \"study educational issues related to each place separately\".\nAccording to researcher Nguy\u1ec5n \u0110\u1eafc Xu\u00e2n, in 1907, the imperial court of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty sent Cao Xu\u00e2n D\u1ee5c and Hu\u1ef3nh C\u00f4n, the \"Th\u01b0\u1ee3ng th\u01b0\" of the \"H\u1ed9 B\u1ed9\", to French Cochinchina to \"hold a conference on education\" (\"b\u00e0n ngh\u1ecb h\u1ecdc ch\u00ednh\") with the French authorities on the future of the Annamese education system. This meeting was also recorded in the work \"Ho\u00e0ng Vi\u1ec7t Gi\u00e1p T\u00fd ni\u00ean bi\u1ec3u\" written by Nguy\u1ec5n B\u00e1 Tr\u00e1c. The creation of a ministry of education was orchestrated by the French to reform the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty's educational system to match French ambitions in the region more. As explained by the Resident-Superior of Annam Ernest Fernand L\u00e9vecque \"Its creation is to better suit the times as more opportunities to study\" opened up in the South to which this new ministry was best suited to help this transition.\nWhile the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty's Ministry of Education was nominally a part of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty's administrative apparatus, actual control was in the hands of the French \"Council for the Improvement of Indigenous Education in Annam\", which dictated its policies. All work done by the ministry was according to the plans and the command of the French \"Director of Education of Annam\". The French administration in Annam continuously revised the curriculum to be taught in order to fit the French system.\nWorld War I.\nThe French entry into World War I saw thousands of volunteers, primarily from the French protectorates of Annam and Tonkin, enlist for service in Europe, around &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;7\u20448 of all French Indochinese serving in Europe were Annamese and Tonkinese volunteers. This period also saw a number of uprisings in Tonkin and Cochinchina. French Indochina contributed significantly to the French war effort in terms of funds, products and human resources.\nPrior to World War I the population of French Indochina stood at around 16,395,000 in 1913 with 14,165,000 being Vietnamese (Tonkinese, Annamese and Cochinchinese), 1,600,000 Cambodians, and 630,000 Laotians. These 16.4 million subjects were ruled over by only around 18,000 French civilians, militaries, and civil servants.\nDuring this period governor-general of French Indochina Albert Sarraut promised a new policy of association and a \"Franco-Annamese Collaboration\" (French: \"Collaboration franco-annamite\"; Vietnamese: \"Ph\u00e1p-Vi\u1ec7t \u0110\u1ec1 hu\u1ec1\") for the wartime contribution by the French Indochinese to their colonial masters. However, beside some liberal reforms, the French administration actually increased economic exploitation and ruthless repression of nationalist movements which rapidly resulted in a disappointment of the promises made by Sarraut.\nDuring the early days of the war around 6 million Frenchmen were drafted causing a severe labour shortage in France. In response, the Undersecretary of State for Artillery and Munitions proposed to hire women, European immigrants, and French colonial subjects, these people were later followed with Chinese immigrants. From 1915 onwards, the French war effort's manpower needs started to rise significantly. Initially the French maintained a racial hierarchy where they believed in \"martial races\" making the early recruitment fall onus primarily on North Africa and French West Africa, but soon the need for additional manpower forced the French to recruit men from the Far East and Madagascar. Almost 100,000 Vietnamese were conscripts and went to Europe to fight and serve on the French battlefront, or work as labourers. Vietnamese troops also served in the Balkans and the Middle Eastern front. This exceptional human mobility offered the French Indochinese, mostly Vietnamese, the unique opportunity of directly access to social life and political debates that were occurring in contemporary France and this resulted in their aspirations to become \"masters of their own destiny\" to increase. Exposed to new political ideals and returning to a colonial occupation of their own country (by a ruler that many of them had fought and died for), resulted in some sour attitudes. Many of these troops sought out and joined the Vietnamese nationalist movement focused on overthrowing the French.\nIn 1925, communist and anti-French activist Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1i Qu\u1ed1c (later known as H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh) wrote \"taken in chains, confined in a school compound... Most of them will never again see the sun of their country\" and a number of historians like Joseph Buttinger and Martin Murray, treated his statement by Nguy\u1ec5n \u00c1i Qu\u1ed1c as an article of faith and believed that the Vietnamese men who participated in World War I were \"forcibly recruited\" by means of \"terrorism\", later historians would claim that the recruitment enterprise employed during this period was only \"ostensibly voluntary\". While there is some truth to these claims, the vast majority of the men who volunteered for service in Europe were indeed volunteers. Among the motivations of volunteering were both personal and economic ambitions, some French Indochinese volunteers wished to see what the world looked like \"beyond the bamboo hedges in their villages\" while others preferred the money and the opportunity to see what France actually looks like. Their service would expose them to the brutality of modern warfare and many would change their perception about many social norms and beliefs at home because of their experiences abroad.\nOf the 93,000 French Indochinese soldiers and workers who came to Europe, most were from the poorest parts of Annam and Tonkin, which had been badly hit by famine and cholera, a smaller number (1,150) of French Indochinese soldiers and workers came from Cambodia. In Northeast France around 44,000 Vietnamese troops served in direct combat functions at both the Battle of the Vosges and the Battle of Verdun. French Indochinese battalions were also used in various logistics functions such as serving as drivers to transport soldiers to the front lines, stretcher bearers (\"brancardiers\"), or road crews. Vietnamese soldiers were also used to \"sanitise\" battle fields at the end of the war, where they would perform these duties in the middle of the cold European winters without being provided with warm clothes, in order to let the (White) French soldiers return to their homes earlier.\nThe financial expenses of the 93,000 French Indochinese labourers and soldiers sent to France during the war \u2013 salaries, pensions, family allocations, the levy in kind (mostly rice), and even the functioning of the Indochinese hospital \u2013 were entirely financed from the budget of French Indochina itself and not from France.\nOne of the effects of World War I on French Indochinese society was the introduction of a vibrant political press both in French and in the indigenous languages that led to the political radicalisation of a new generation of nationalists. Because most of the indigenous people that served in France and the rest of Europe during the War were Vietnamese these social and political developments affected the Vietnamese more. Because French Cochinchina was a direct French colony it enjoyed favourable legislation concerning the press which fostered a public sphere of oppositional political activism. Although these developments occurred throughout French Indochina they were more strongly felt in Cochinchina due to its more open society.\nThe French Indochinese in Europe experienced much more egalitarian social relations which were strongly contrasted with the racial hierarchy they experienced at home. In France the French Indochinese serving often engaged in comradery with the French and many had romantic relationships with French women, the latter being unthinkable in their home countries.\nDuring this period, the French protectorates of Annam and Tonkin were initially ruled by the Emperor Duy T\u00e2n. However, in 1916, the Duy T\u00e2n Emperor was accused by the French of calling for his subjects to resist French rule and after his deposition he and his father were exiled to the island of \"La R\u00e9union\" in the Indian Ocean. Thereafter, the Kh\u1ea3i \u0110\u1ecbnh Emperor became the new monarch of Annam and Tonkin and he closely collaborated with the French administration. At the same time Cambodia was ruled by King Sisowath who was crowned in 1904 and cooperated closely with the French administration in his territory. King Sisowath attended the colonial exhibition in Marseille in 1906 and was the King at the time of the retrocession of the provinces of Battambang and Siem Reap to Cambodia by the Siamese in April 1907. During the reign of King Sisowath there was \"an inexorable increase in French control\" and the French residents gained executive authority to issue royal decrees, appoint officials, and collect taxes. The French protectorate of Laos at the time was ruled by King Sisavang Vong, who was crowned king in 1904. King Sisavang Vong was trained at the Lyc\u00e9e Chasseloup-Laubat in Saigon and at the Colonial School in Paris. In 1914, the French built a new palace in Luang Prabang for him, and a new agreement with the French administration signed in 1917 allowed him only formal signs of royal power with actual power over Laos being in the hands of the French.\nThe Great War presented a number of opportunities for the indigenous French Indochinese people serving in the West that didn't exist before, notably for some individuals to obtain levels of education that were simply unattainable at home by acquiring more advanced technical and professional skills. For example Dr. Nguy\u1ec5n Xu\u00e2n Mai, who in 1910 became one of the first indigenous auxiliaries to graduate the Hanoi medical school, hoped to gain his PhD in France so he enlisted to fight in the war. In 1921 he would acquire his doctorate and he became one of the first Vietnamese doctors to enjoy the same rights as his French colleagues.\nWhile World War I saw a number of new economic sectors develop in French Indochina, namely rubber plantations, mines, and other forms of agriculture, these were all French owned and the local trade to the great export-import houses was in the hands of the Overseas Chinese communities. Only a handful of Vietnamese landlords, moneylenders, and middlemen benefitted from the new economic opportunities that arose during this period as the colonial economy of exportation was designed to enrich the French at the expense of the indigenous population. During this same period the average livelihood of the indigenous peasantry was drastically decreased due to both direct taxation and indirect taxes the French used to finance ambitious public works programmes constructed using the \"corv\u00e9e\" system.\nPrior to the year 1914, the \"mise en valeur\" (development and improvement) of French Indochina was primarily financed by European French public loans, French private capital, and higher taxes on the local populations. But during the war French Indochina became completely responsible both for financing itself and the people they sent to Europe to fight in the war as investment funds from Metropolitan France completely stopped. This meant that taxation increased, more rice was being exported, and the locals purchased war bonds. French Indochina provided a Metropolitan France with large financial aid; between 1915 and 1920 of the 600,000,000 francs that France received from its colonial empire 367,000,000 francs were sent by French Indochina. Though historian Patrice Morlat places the initial financial contribution of French Indochina at 381,000,000 gold francs (valued at 997,000,000 euros in 2017), roughly 60% of all financial contributions Metropolitan France received from its colonial empire (excluding Algeria). Morlat further noted that French Indochina supplied 340,000 tonnes of raw materials to France during the course of the war, which amounted to 34% of all raw supplies that Metropolitan France received from its colonies. The shipping of these materials was threatened by the presence of German submarines.\nWorld War I also saw the colonial government of Cochinchina authorising the creation of Vietnamese-language newspapers in 1916, this was done to secure popular support for the war effort, the colonial authorities hoped that this would create a loyal indigenous group of politically active people. The Cochinchinese colonial government offered financial support to these loyalist newspapers, but kept close control on the contents written in them to ensure a prevailing pro-French narrative. The editors of these newspapers were often \"retours de France\" (people back from France) and were kept under close surveillance as they often had connections to anti-French dissidents and activists. Among these newspapers was \"La Tribune indig\u00e8ne\" (The Indigenous Forum) launched in 1917 by the agronomist B\u00f9i Quang Chi\u00eau working together with the lawyer D\u01b0\u01a1ng V\u0103n Gi\u00e1o and journalist Nguy\u1ec5n Phan Long. Afterwards they created \"La Tribune indochinoise\" (The Indochinese Forum) and in 1919 these three men would found the Indochinese Constitutionalist Party in Saigon. Because of these activities the French \"Sur\u00eat\u00e9\" regarded their nationalism as dangerous.\nThe French invoked a supposed \"German connection\" between the Vietnamese revolutionaries and the German Empire, alleging that Hong Kong, Bangkok, and Beijing were the sight of German agents hoping to help the Vietnamese revolutionaries as they shared the same goal, namely to defeat the French.\nWorld War I also saw a number of rebellions throughout French Indochina, in 1914 3 major uprisings happened throughout Vietnam, followed by a number of revolts in Cochinchina. From 1914 to 1917 members of the Tai Lue people led by Prince Phra Ong Kham (Chao Fa) of Muang Sing organised a long anti-French campaign, Hmong independence movements in Laos also challenged French rule in the country. 1914 also saw bands of Yunnanese revolutionaries invade French Indochina, who crossed the border and started attacking French military posts parading Chinese Republican flags, these rebels were later joined by various Laotian ethnic minorities (Lao, Kha and Black Tai). The joint Yunnanese and Laotian ethnic minority rebels spread misinformation claiming that \"Paris has been crushed by the German Army\" to make the French seem weaker. The motivations of this revolt are disputed as contemporary French colonial officials attributed it to Chinese opium smugglers, while the Canadian historian Geoffrey C. Gunn thinks that it was a political revolt. In February 1916 in Cochinchina supporters of Phan X\u00edch Long marched on the Saigonese penitentiary where he was held demanding his release, this coincided with other uprisings in the Mekong Delta. The mandarin Tr\u1ea7n Cao V\u0103n engaged with he Duy T\u00e2n Emperor to try and stage a large rebellion in Annam in 1916, but their conspiracy was discovered and foiled by the French. In 1916 the Kingdom of Cambodia saw a 3 month uprising organised by between 30,000 and 100,000 peasants against both the mandatory \"corv\u00e9e\" and the increased taxes, Australian historian Milton Osborne refers to this uprising as \"The 1916 Affair\", the circumstances leading up to this large revolt were directly caused by the war. 30 August 1917 saw the beginning of the Th\u00e1i Nguy\u00ean uprising, which lasted until 1918.\nThe large amount of uprisings and rebellions that occurred during the war would inspire the creation of a political security apparatus that was used to find and arrest political dissidents in the post-war period.\nRelations with Japan during World War I.\nOn 27 August 1914, Japan officially entered the war on the side of the allies (also known as the Entente Powers), Japan invaded and took the German colony of Tsingtao and the rest of the Kiautschou Bay Leased Territory. In November 1914 Japan supplanted the German sphere of influence in southern China with its own political and economic influence, putting it in direct competition with French Indochina. Even though the Japanese openly supported a number of anti-French secessionist movements, such as Prince C\u01b0\u1eddng \u0110\u1ec3's \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\", the French situation in Europe was bad enough for prime minister Georges Clemenceau to ask the Japanese for their help.\nThe war situation in Europe was so bad that in 1914, the French considered exchanging French Indochina with Japan for both financial and military support, but this idea was quickly abandoned.\nClemenceau asked the Empire of Japan to aid them with the transportation of the \"travailleurs et tirailleurs indochinois\" to Europe and by sending its own forces to help fight in Europe. Clemenceau also wanted Japan to help by intervening in Siberia to fight the Bolshevik forces during the Russian Civil War to prevent the loss of the many French-Russian loans, which were important for the French post-war economy.\nIn 1918, the idea of selling French Indochina to Japan was raised again and, like the first time that it was proposed, it was abandoned again.\nBoth during and after the war the economic relations between France and Japan strengthened as Japan became a creditor of France following the latter's financial difficulties which came as a result of the war.\nExpansion of the security apparatus.\nAs Sarraut was determined to secure French rule over the country he created a strong political surveillance apparatus that functioned throughout French Indochina. He centralised all local police forces and developed an intelligence service, these policies would lead to the creation of the \"S\u00fbret\u00e9 g\u00e9n\u00e9rale indochinoise\", which sought to monitor and police anti-French activities both inside and outside of French Indochina.\nFrench security was expanded because of fears of German involvement with their enemies in the Far East, Gaston Ernest Li\u00e9bert, the French consul in Hong Kong and a major player for the intelligence services coordinated by the political affairs bureau of French Indochina, noted that Vietnamese revolutionaries and Germany both shared the same interest (the defeat of the French). Li\u00e9bert argued that French Indochinese who rebelled should be treated according or as traitors to France. Another reason for the expansion of the security state was that the French feared that such a large expulsion of French soldiers to fight against the Germans would inspire a general uprising similar to what the British experienced in Egypt.\nIn April 1916 the administrator of civil services at the Political Affairs Bureau in Hanoi launched two voluminous reports that went into great detail about the parallel histories of what he referred to as the \"Annamese Revolutionary Party\" (how he called the \"Duy T\u00e2n H\u1ed9i\") and of the secret societies of French Cochinchina. These two reports proved to be very important to the Political Affairs Bureau as they would trigger a full-scale reform of the organisation making it into an umbrella organisation. The reform policies were enacted to help control the narrative around French rule through policing and surveillance. The colonial police forces were connected with \"the general control of Indochinese workers and riflemen\" (\"Contr\u00f4le g\u00e9n\u00e9ral des travailleurs et tirailleurs indochinois\"), a political police force, as the military presence was reduced to allocate more soldiers to the home front. In Metropolitan France these nascent surveillance organisations were put in charge of policing the 100,000 French Indochinese present to help fight the Central Powers.\nBoth domestically and internationally, the French Indochinese police maintained a sizeable network of informants, countries where they operated included not only Metropolitan France, but also neighbouring countries like China and Siam as well as Japan, which was a common refuge for Vietnamese nationalists. The French Indochinese police often got foreign authorities to arrest anti-French activists, e.g. Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u who was hiding in China since 1909 was arrested there in 1917. Phan B\u1ed9i Ch\u00e2u admitted to being in contact with German and Austro-Hungarian ministers, noting that the Germans and Austro-Hungarians promised his revolutionary activities financial support in the form of 10,000 Siamese ticals (approximately 55,000 euros in 2017). Phan would later be arrested abroad again in 1925, when he arrived in Shanghai on what he thought was a short trip on behalf of his movement. He was to meet with H\u1ed3 Ch\u00ed Minh, who at that time used the name L\u00fd Th\u1ee5y, one of H\u1ed3's many aliases. H\u1ed3 had invited Phan to come to Canton to discuss matters of common interest. H\u1ed3 was in Canton at the Soviet Embassy, purportedly as a Soviet citizen working as a secretary, translator, and interpreter. In exchange for money, H\u1ed3 allegedly informed the French police of Phan's imminent arrival. Phan was arrested by French agents and transported back to Hanoi.\nFollowing the communist victory in the October Revolution the security apparatus of French Indochina was strengthened to fight the \"Bolshevik danger\" in the colonies. While the \"S\u00fbret\u00e9 g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\" was created during World War I, in 1922 it was expanded to become a better instrument to surveil and repress any potential Bolshevik elements, first in Metropolitan France and later in French Indochina. The activities of the \"S\u00fbret\u00e9 g\u00e9n\u00e9rale indochinoise\" were managed by the newly created Department of Political Affairs. The \"S\u00fbret\u00e9 g\u00e9n\u00e9rale indochinoise\" would be used as the paramount tool to gather intelligence of subversive elements within French Indochinese society and to conduct large-scale union-wide registration by the colonial police forces of suspects and convicts.\nThe increase in surveillance and repression was accompanied with a propaganda campaign aimed to convince the indigenous populations of the \"enlightenment\" of French colonialism. Both the indigenous peasantry and the elites had to be won over by being told of the many \"advantages of colonialism\". The Political Affairs Bureau assembled a umber of Vietnamese elites belonging to the indigenous intelligentsia through the French School of the Far East to aid in the pro-French propaganda effort.\nWhile the French hoped to isolate political dissidents by locking them up in prisons, these prisons would ironically turn into \"schools\" for nationalism and Communism as concentrating a large number of political enemies together would allow them to communicate with each other, which contributed to the growth of Communism within French Indochina.\n1920s.\nAs French Indochina was supposed to be a self-financed \"colonie d'exploitation \u00e9conomique\" (colony of economic exploitation) most of its budget during this period was financed through revenue collection, taxes on the local populations, and consumption quotas for monopolised goods such as opium, salt, and alcohol. In 1920 44% of the French Indochinese government budget came from opium, salt, and alcohol alone.\nDuring the 1920s France allowed more Vietnamese to enter Metropolitan France for both studying and work purposes. Both legal and illegal immigrants entered France from French Indochina working various types of jobs, such as sailors, photographers, cooks, restaurant and shop owners and manual labourers. In France many Vietnamese immigrants and their organisations aligned themselves with the French Communist Party (PCF) who promised to represent them both in legal and political matters. As returnees from France were more skilled and spoke fluent French the French colonists in Indochina would hire them to perform better paying jobs and often brought ideas of the successful Bolshevik Revolution in Russia. In provinces like Thanh Ho\u00e1, Ngh\u1ec7 An, and H\u00e0 T\u0129nh where around twenty thousand returnees lived pro-Bolshevik activities would increase during this decade and this region saw the creation of many pro-Bolshevik parties.\nA number of Vietnamese men would serve in occupied parts of Weimar era Germany after the war. Seeing how the French treated the German inhabitants of the occupied regions, some Vietnamese soldiers would empathise with the German people. Official reports on the French Occupation of the Rhineland summarised the contents of the letters written by the soldiers during that period this way: \"The French oppress the Germans in the same way they have the Annamites [sic].\"\nAfter the Great War former governor-general Albert Sarraut became the French minister of the colonies, Sarraut was the architect of the \"collaboration Franco-annamite\" which characterised French colonial policy during the interwar period. Regarding the internal security of the French apparatus in the Far East Sarraut stated \"I have always estimated that Indochina must be protected against the effects of a revolutionary propaganda that I have never underestimated, by carrying out a double action, one political, the other repressive.\" indicating that he saw repressing subversive elements as paramount to the continued French domination of the region. His policies benefited collaborators while they were instrumental in repressing dissidents. Sarraut boasted the image of himself as a liberal \"indigenophile\" who benefited the indigenous people of French Indochina.\nAlbert Sarraut presented the \"collaboration Franco-annamite\" as a necessity of the French protectorate over their countries, the \"collaboration Franco-annamite\" was attractive to the Westernised indigenous elites of French Indochina as it would build a framework of mutually beneficial partnership between France and the Vietnamese before full sovereignty for the latter could be restored. In the colony of Cochinchina a handful of indigenous people were involved in the decision-making processes through political bodies that were established to serve as representative assemblies (Cochinchina's Colonial Council, Saigon Municipal Council, among other local bodies).\nIn 1920, the French established provincial advisory councils in the Kingdom of Laos. In 1923 this was followed by an indigenous consultative assembly, which served an advisory role. Despite the Laotian indigenous consultative assembly not having any real political power, it served as an organisation that brought people from all over Laos together and contributed to the later formation of a modern Laotian national consciousness where prior they associated themselves more with their region.\nIn 1923, Cochinchina saw the creation of the \"Parti Constitutionnaliste Indochinois\" led by B\u00f9i Quang Chi\u00eau, which was founded to obtain the right of political participation for the indigenous people in Cochinchina. As a member of this party Nguy\u1ec5n Phan Long was elected a member of Cochinchina's colonial council.\nIn Kopong Chang, Cambodia the French resident F\u00e9lix Bardez was assassinated in the year 1925 by disgruntled indigenous people. F\u00e9lix Bardez visited the village at a time when its inhabitants were frustrated with the colonial policies of the French in Cambodia as the French raised the taxes to finance the Bokor mountain resort, when Bardez visited he refused to free prisoners who were arrested for being unable to pay their debts, this agitated a crowd of around 700 angry peasants who then killed him, his interpreter, and the militiamen present during his visit. This assassination was a sign of the wider political unrest that characterised Cambodia during this decade.\nIn March 1925 the French built a war monument resting on two sculpted Asian elephants to commemorate those that died fighting in World War I in the Cambodian capital city of Phnom Penh, the opening ceremony brought together a crowd which contained \"people of all races and all religions\".\nOn 6 November 1925 a \"Convention\" (\"Quy \u01b0\u1edbc\") was established after Kh\u1ea3i \u0110\u1ecbnh's death that stated that while the sovereign is abroad a council (\"H\u1ed9i \u0111\u1ed3ng ph\u1ee5 ch\u00ednh\") had the power to run all affairs of the Southern court, with the signing of the convention only regulations related to custom, favours, amnesty, conferring titles, dignitaries, among others are given by the emperor. Everything else is up to the French protectorate government. This document also merges the budget of the Southern court with the budget of the French protectorate of Annam and that all the meetings of the Council of Ministers (\"H\u1ed9i \u0111\u1ed3ng th\u01b0\u1ee3ng th\u01b0\") must be chaired by the resident-superior of Annam. Thus, in this document, the French colonialists completely took over all the power of the government of the Southern dynasty, even in \"Trung K\u1ef3\".\nIn 1927 Vietnamese World War I veterans staged an unsuccessful rebellion in B\u1eafc Ninh province using vintage World War I era weapons and tactics.\nAccording to American historian David G. Marr the 1920s marked the transition of what he termed the \"traditional\" to the \"modern\" nation-consciousness among the Vietnamese people, indicating a shift among both the elites and the peasants. Marr argues that the Vietnamese \"retours de France\" \"urbanised\" and \"politicised\" Vietnamese nationalism during the 1920s and 1930s, inspiring more \"modern\" movements to take up the struggle against French domination. This decade saw the emergence of the Vi\u1ec7t Nam Qu\u1ed1c D\u00e2n \u0110\u1ea3ng (VNQD\u0110) and the Indochinese Communist Party (ICP) which were often middle class in nature and proved to be more successful in transcending class and geographical divisions to mobilise against the French than earlier movements, relying on better and more organized communication structures than their predecessors.\nDuring the 1920s the contestation of French colonial power in Cambodia and Laos was mostly aimed at the \"corv\u00e9e\" and tax policies, continuing from the war period. The early years of this decade were characterised by widespread violence and a lack of order and security in rural Cambodia, as recorded by French residents in the provinces. Contemporarily Upper Laos was referred to as being \"violently agitated\" by the French administrator Paul Le Boulanger between 1914 and 1921. While the nature of Vietnamese resistance changed radically during the 1920s and the 1930s due to various major socio-cultural changes that were occurring at the time by a small, but growing, urbanised Vietnamese middle class, the rebellions in Cambodia and Laos remained to be \"traditional\" in their style and execution in contrast to the more \"modern\" political activism and radicalism that characterised what is now Vietnam during this period.\nY\u00ean B\u00e1i mutiny (1930).\nOn 10 February 1930, there was an uprising by Vietnamese soldiers in the French colonial army's Y\u00ean B\u00e1i garrison. The Y\u00ean B\u00e1i mutiny was sponsored by the Vi\u1ec7t Nam Qu\u1ed1c D\u00e2n \u0110\u1ea3ng (VNQD\u0110). The VNQD\u0110 was the Vietnamese Nationalist Party. The attack was the largest disturbance brewed up by the C\u1ea7n V\u01b0\u01a1ng monarchist restoration movement of the late 19th century.\nThe aim of the revolt was to inspire a wider uprising among the general populace in an attempt to overthrow the colonial authority. The VNQD\u0110 had previously attempted to engage in clandestine activities to undermine French rule, but increasing French scrutiny of their activities led to their leadership group taking the risk of staging a large scale military attack in the Red River Delta in northern Vietnam.\nLeft opposition and the 1940 uprising in Cochinchina.\nIn Cochinchina where French rule had the distinction of being direct and therefore more sensitive to political shifts in Paris, it was punctuated by periods of relative liberalisation. The most significant was during the 1936\u20131938 Popular Front government led by Leon Blum which appointed as governor-general of Indochina Jules Br\u00e9vi\u00e9. Liberal-minded, in Cochinchina Br\u00e9vi\u00e9 tried to defuse an extremely tense political situation by amnestying political prisoners, and by easing restrictions on the press, political parties, and trade unions.\nSaigon witnessed growing labour unrest culminating in the summer of 1937 in general dock and transport strikes. In April of that year the Vietnamese Communists and their Trotskyist left opposition ran a common slate for the municipal elections with both their respective leaders Nguy\u1ec5n V\u0103n T\u1ea1o and T\u1ea1 Thu Th\u00e2u winning seats. The exceptional unity of the left, however, was split by the lengthening shadow of the Moscow Trials and by growing protest over the failure of the Communist-supported Popular Front to deliver constitutional reform. Colonial Minister Marius Moutet, a Socialist commented that he had sought \"a wide consultation with all elements of the popular [will],\" but with \"Trotskyist-Communists intervening in the villages to menace and intimidate the peasant part of the population, taking all authority from the public officials,\" the necessary \"formula\" had not been found.\nIn April 1939 Cochinchina Council elections T\u1ea1 Thu Th\u00e2u led a \"Workers' and Peasants' Slate\" into victory over both the \"bourgeois\" Constitutionalists and the Communists' Democratic Front. Key to their success was popular opposition to the war taxes (\"national defence levy\") that the Communist Party, in the spirit of Franco-Soviet accord, had felt obliged to support. Br\u00e9vi\u00e9 set the election results aside and wrote to Colonial Minister Georges Mandel: \"the Trotskyists under the leadership of Ta Thu Thau, want to take advantage of a possible war in order to win total liberation.\" The Stalinists, on the other hand, are \"following the position of the Communist Party in France\" and \"will thus be loyal if war breaks out\".\nWith the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact of 23 August 1939, the local communists were ordered by Moscow to return to direct confrontation with the French. Under the slogan \"Land to the Tillers, Freedom for the workers and independence for Vietnam\", in November 1940 the Party in Cochinchina obliged, triggering a widespread insurrection. The revolt did not penetrate Saigon (an attempted uprising in the city was quelled in a day). In the Mekong Delta fighting continued until the end of the year.\nWorld War II.\nIn September 1940, during World War II, the newly created regime of Vichy France granted Japan's demands for military access to Tonkin following the Japanese occupation of French Indochina, which lasted until the end of the Pacific War. This allowed Japan better access to China in the Second Sino-Japanese War against the forces of Chiang Kai-shek, but it was also part of Japan's strategy for dominion over Southeast Asia and later on, the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.\nThailand took this opportunity of weakness to reclaim previously lost territories, resulting in the Franco-Thai War between October 1940 and 9 May 1941. The Thai forces generally did well on the ground, but Thai objectives in the war were limited. In January, Vichy French naval forces decisively defeated Thai naval forces in the Battle of Ko Chang. The war ended in May at the instigation of the Japanese, with the French forced to concede territorial gains for Thailand. The general disorganization of French Indochina, coupled with several natural disasters, caused a dreadful famine in Northern and Central Vietnam. Several hundred thousand people \u2013 possibly over one million \u2013 are believed to have starved to death in 1944\u20131945. Approximately 1 million Vietnamese were estimated to have died of food supply disruption caused by the Japanese invasion of Burma.\nOn 9 March 1945, with France liberated, Germany in retreat, and the United States ascendant in the Pacific, Japan launched a coup d'etat against the French Indochina colonial administration to prevent a potential uprising by the colonial forces. Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos were established as independent states, members of Japan's Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. The Japanese kept power in Indochina until the news of their government's surrender came through in August.\nBoth Vichy French and Japanese authorities encouraged nationalism in Indochina for their own purposes. Disillusioned Vietnamese nationalists redirected this sentiment toward self-determination. Despite Japanese and French efforts to manipulate identities, profound societal changes occurred in the early 1940s, with Vietnam\u2019s right-wing nationalist groups, particularly the parties, embracing a firm national identity.\nThe Viet Minh launched a resistance campaign against Japanese occupation. The Viet Minh had begun fighting in 1944, when the French were attacked on Dinh Ca in October 1944 and in Cao Bang and Bac Can French were attacked by Viet Cong in November 1944 and the French and Japanese fought each other on 9 March 1945, so in Tonkin the Viet Cong began disarming French soldiers and attacking the Japanese. In Quang Ngai, Ba To, Yen Bai and Nghia Lo political prisoners escaped Japanese were attacked din Son La by Meo (Hmong) tribesmen and in Hoa Binh and Lang Son by Muong tribesmen. The Viet Minh took control of 6 provinces in Tonkin after 9 March 1945 within 2 weeks. The Viet Minh led a brutal campaign against the Japanese where many died from 9 March 1945 to 19 August 1945. Truong Chinh ended the article with a quote from Sun Yatsen, \"The revolution is not yet won, All comrades must continue their al out efforts!\"\nOn 26 September 1945 Ho Chi Minh wrote a letter calling for struggle against the French mentioning they were returning after they sold out the Vietnamese to the Japanese twice in 4 years.\nThe Japanese forced Vietnamese women to become comfort women and with Burmese, Indonesia, Thai and Filipino women they made up a notable portion of Asian comfort women in general. Japanese use of Malaysian and Vietnamese women as comfort women was corroborated by testimonies. There were comfort women stations in Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines, Burma, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam, North Korea and South Korea. A Korean comfort woman named Kim Ch'un-hui stayed behind in Vietnam and died there when she was 44 in 1963, owning a dairy farm, cafe, US cash and diamonds worth 200,000 US dollars. 2 billion US dollars' worth (1945 values) of damage, 148 million dollars of them due to destruction of industrial plants was incurred by Vietnam. 90% of heavy vehicles and motorcycles, cars and 16 tons of junks as well as railways, port installations were destroyed as well as one third of bridges. Some Japanese soldiers married Vietnamese women like Nguyen Thi Xuan and Nguyen Thi Thu and fathered multiple children with the Vietnamese women who remained behind in Vietnam while the Japanese soldiers themselves returned to Japan in 1955. The official Vietnamese historical narrative view them as children of rape and prostitution.\nIn the Vietnamese famine of 1944\u20131945 1 to 2 million Vietnamese starved to death in the Red river delta of northern Vietnam due to the Japanese, as the Japanese seized Vietnamese rice and didn't pay. In Phat Diem the Vietnamese farmer Di Ho was one of the few survivors who saw the Japanese steal grain. The North Vietnamese government accused both France and Japan of the famine and said 1\u20132 million Vietnamese died. V\u00f5 An Ninh took photographs of dead and dying Vietnamese during the great famine, which were introduced in some foreign books, say, a Japanese book by Katsumoto Saotome published in 1993. Starving Vietnamese were dying throughout northern Vietnam in 1945 due to the Japanese seizure of their crops by the time the Chinese came to disarm the Japanese and Vietnamese corpses were all throughout the streets of Hanoi and had to be cleaned up by students.\nAlthough the death toll of 1945 famine is generally said to be 1 million to 2 million, the estimated value ranges effectively from 2 hundred thousand to 2 million. Especially 2 million is often cited, which is insisted by the Communist Party of Vietnam, but is not based on academic research since Ho Chin Minh's assertion in the Declaration of Independence of Vietnam on 2 September 1945 is just repeated. Speaking precisely, Ho Chi Minh mentioned over 2 million in the Declaration but 2 million is the official perspective of Communist Party of Vietnam for decades. On the other hand there are Vietnamese considering other numbers, for instance, the Imperial Commissioner in Hanoi Phan K\u1ebf To\u1ea1i, who later joined Viet Minh, insisted four hundred thousand. Based on his research of the joint field works conducted in the northern Vietnam in early 1990s, of which official report was published in the title N\u1ea1n D\u00f3i N\u0103m 1945 \u1edb Vi\u1ec7t Nam: Nh\u1eefng Ch\u1eefng T\u00edch L\u1ecbch S\u1ef1, (edited by V\u0103n T\u1ea1o and Furuta Motoo), Japanese professor Furuta Motoo concluded that the death toll would be likely larger than 1 million but seems skeptical of 2 million.\nReturn of the French and early conflicts.\nAfter the second World War, France petitioned for the nullification of the 1938 Franco-Siamese Treaty and reasserted itself in the region. The Vietnamese themselves were locked in a civil strife over the destiny of their post-colonial state after the ousting of the French and the surrender of Japan. Viet Minh forces seized control from the collapsing Empire of Vietnam, while the Vietnam Nationalist Party and Vi\u1ec7t C\u00e1ch advanced in Tonkin with the support of the Chinese Allied mission, and the \u0110\u1ea1i Vi\u1ec7t Nationalist Party already posed serious competition to the Viet Minh. The South fractured between the Stalinist front Viet Minh and rival groups including the Trotskyists, H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o, Cao \u0110\u00e0i, and B\u00ecnh Xuy\u00ean.\nAmerican President Roosevelt and General Stilwell privately made it adamantly clear that the French were not to reacquire French Indochina after the war was over. He told Secretary of State Cordell Hull the Indochinese were worse off under the French rule of nearly 100 years than they were at the beginning. Roosevelt asked Chiang Kai-shek if he wanted Indochina, to which Chiang Kai-shek replied: \"Under no circumstances!\" Following World War II, the Allied powers agreed to return Indochina to French administration.\nAfter persuading Emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i to abdicate in his favour, on 2 September 1945, Ho Chi Minh declared independence for the Democratic Republic of Vietnam. The Viet Minh tried to negotiate with the French in order to gain independence, but the Ho\u2013Sainteny Agreement and Fontainebleau Agreements of 1946 failed to produce a satisfactory, lasting solution.\nAfter the close of hostilities in WWII, 200,000 Chinese troops under General Lu Han sent by Chiang Kai-shek entered French Indochina north of the 16th parallel to accept the surrender of Japanese occupying forces, and remained there until 1946. This was in accordance with the instructions made by General Douglas MacArthur in General Order No. 1, of 2 September 1945. Working with the VNQD\u0110 (broadly the Vietnamese equivalent of the Chinese Kuomintang), to increase their influence in Indochina and put pressure on their opponents.\nChiang Kai-shek threatened the French with war in response to manoeuvering by the French and Ho Chi Minh against each other, forcing them to come to a peace agreement. In February 1946 he forced the French to surrender all of their concessions in China and renounce their extraterritorial privileges in exchange for withdrawing from northern Indochina and allowing French troops to reoccupy the region starting in March 1946.\nGeneral Lu Han's 200,000 Chinese soldiers occupied north Vietnam starting August 1945. 90,000 arrived by October, the 62nd army came on 26 September to Nam Dinh and Haiphong. Lang Son and Cao Bang were occupied by the Guangxi 62nd army corps and the Red River region and Lai Cai were occupied by a column from Yunnan. Vietnamese VNQDD fighters accompanied the Chinese soldiers. Ho Chi Minh ordered his DRV administration to set quotas for rice to give to the Chinese soldiers and rice was sold in Chinese currency in the Red River delta. Lu Han occupied the French governor general's palace after ejecting the French staff under Sainteny. Chinese soldiers occupied French Indochina north of the 16th parallel while the British under the South-East Asia Command of Lord Mountbatten occupied the south. Vietnamese civilians were robbed, raped and killed by French soldiers in Saigon when they came back in August 1945.\nChiang Kai-shek deliberately withheld his crack and well trained soldiers from occupying Vietnam since he was going to use them to fight the Communists inside China and instead sent undisciplined warlord troops from Yunnan under Lu Han to occupy French Indochina north of the 16th parallel for the purpose of disarming the Japanese. Ho Chi Minh confiscated gold taels, jewelry and coins in September 1945 during \"Gold Week\" to give to Chinese forces occupying northern Vietnam. Rice to Cochinchina by the French in October 1945 were divided by Ho Chi Minh, and the northern Vietnamese only received one third while the Chinese soldiers were given two thirds by Ho Chi Minh. For 15 days elections were postponed by Ho Chi Minh in response to a demand by Chinese general Chen Xiuhe on 18 December 1945 so that the Chinese could get the Dong Minh Hoi and VNQDD to prepare. The Chinese left only in April\u2013June 1946. Ho Chi Minh gave golden smoking paraphernalia and a golden opium pipe to the Chinese general Lu Han after gold week and purchased weapons with what was left of the proceeds. Starving Vietnamese were dying throughout northern Vietnam in 1945 due to the Japanese seizure of their crops by the time the Chinese came to disarm the Japanese and Vietnamese corpses were all throughout the streets of Hanoi and had to be cleaned up by students. \nWhile Chiang Kai-shek, Xiao Wen (Hsiao Wen) and the Kuomintang central government of China was disinterested in occupying Vietnam beyond the allotted time period and involving itself in the war between the Vi\u1ec7t Minh and the French, the Yunnan warlord Lu Han held the opposite view and wanted to occupy Vietnam to prevent the French returning and establish a Chinese trusteeship of Vietnam under the principles of the Atlantic Charter with the aim of eventually preparing Vietnam for independence and blocking the French from returning. Ho Chi Minh sent a cable on 17 October 1945 to American President Harry S. Truman calling on him, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, Premier Stalin and Premier Attlee to go to the United Nations against France and demand France not be allowed to return to occupy Vietnam, accusing France of having sold out and cheated the Allies by surrendering Indochina to Japan and that France had no right to return. Ho Chi Minh dumped the blame on Dong Minh Hoi and VNDQQ for signing the agreement with France for returning its soldiers to Vietnam after he had to do it himself. \nHo Chi Minh's Vi\u1ec7t Minh tried to organize welcome parades for Chinese soldiers in northern Vietnam and covered for instances of bad behavior by warlord soldiers, trying to reassure Vietnamese that the warlord troops of Lu Han were only there temporarily and that China supported Vietnam's independence. Vi\u1ec7t Minh newspapers said that the same ancestors (huy\u1ebft th\u1ed1ng) and culture were shared by Vietnamese and Chinese and that the Chinese heroically fought Japan and changed in the 1911 revolution and was attacked by western imperialists so it was \"not the same as feudal China\". Ho Chi Minh forbade his soldiers like Tr\u1ea7n Huy Li\u1ec7u in Ph\u00fa Th\u1ecd from attacking Chinese soldiers and Ho Chi Minh even surrendered Vietnamese who attacked Chinese soldiers to be executed as punishment in the Ro-Nha incident in Ki\u1ebfn An district on 6 March 1946 after H\u1ed3 \u0110\u1ee9c Th\u00e0nh and \u0110\u00e0o V\u0103n Bi\u1ec3u, special commissioners sent from Hanoi by Ho's DRV examined the case. Ho Chi Minh appeased and granted numerous concessions to the Chinese soldiers to avoid the possibility of them clashing with the Vi\u1ec7t Minh, with him ordering Vietnamese not to carry out anything against Chinese soldiers and pledging his life on his promise, hoping the Chinese would disarm the Japanese soldiers and finish their mission as fast as possible.\nChinese communist guerilla leader Chu Chia-pi came into northern Vietnam multiple times in 1945 and 1948 and helped the Vi\u1ec7t Minh fight against the French from Yunnan. Other Chinese Communists also did the same.\nFirst Indochina War.\nBitter fighting ensued in the First Indochina War as Ho and his government took to the forests and mountains. In 1948, France recognized nominal independence of Vietnam with the H\u1ea1 Long Bay Preliminary Agreement. In 1949, in order to provide a political alternative to Ho Chi Minh, the French favoured the creation of a unified State of Vietnam, and former Emperor B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i was put back in power. Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia became associated states of the French Union and were granted more autonomy.\nThe first few years of the war involved a low-level rural insurgency against the French. In 1949 the conflict turned into a conventional war between two armies equipped with modern weapons supplied by the United States, China and the Soviet Union. French Union forces included colonial troops from their colonial empire \u2013 Moroccan, Algerian, and Tunisian Arabs/Berbers; Laotian, Cambodian and Vietnamese ethnic minorities; Black Africans \u2013 and French professional troops, European volunteers, and units of the Foreign Legion. The use of metropolitan recruits was forbidden by the government to prevent the war from becoming even more unpopular at home. It was called the \"dirty war\" (\"la sale guerre\") by leftists in France. Vietnamese women were also raped in north Vietnam by the French like in B\u1ea3o H\u00e0, B\u1ea3o Y\u00ean District, L\u00e0o Cai province and Phu Lu, which caused 400 Vietnamese who were trained by the French to defect on 20 June 1948. Buddhist statues were looted and Vietnamese were robbed, raped and tortured by the French after the French crushed the Vi\u1ec7t Minh in northern Vietnam in 1947\u20131948 forcing the Vi\u1ec7t Minh to flee into Yunnan, China for sanctuary and aid from the Chinese Communists. A French reporter was told by Vietnamese village notables \"We know what war always is, We understand your soldiers taking our animals, our jewelry, our Buddhas; it is normal. We are resigned to their raping our wives and our daughters; war has always been like that. But we object to being treated in the same way, not only our sons, but ourselves, old men and dignitaries that we are.\"\nThe strategy of pushing the Vi\u1ec7t Minh into attacking well-defended bases in remote parts of the country at the end of their logistical trails was validated at the Battle of N\u00e0 S\u1ea3n even though the base was relatively weak because of a lack of concrete and steel. French efforts were made more difficult due to the limited usefulness of armoured tanks in a forested and mountainous environment, lack of strong air forces for air cover and carpet bombing, and use of foreign recruits from other French colonies (mainly from Algeria, Morocco and even Vietnam). V\u00f5 Nguy\u00ean Gi\u00e1p, however, used efficient and novel tactics of direct fire artillery, convoy ambushes and massed anti-aircraft guns to impede land and air supply deliveries together with a strategy based on recruiting a sizable regular army facilitated by wide popular support, a guerrilla warfare doctrine and instruction developed in China, and the use of simple and reliable war material provided by the Soviet Union.\nHowever, 1950 was the turning point of the war. Ho's government was recognised by the fellow Communist governments of China and the Soviet Union, and Mao's government subsequently gave a fallback position to Ho's forces, as well as abundant supplies of weapons. In October 1950, the French army suffered its first major defeat with the Battle of Route Coloniale 4. Subsequent efforts by the French military managed to improve their situation only in the short term. B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i's State of Vietnam proved a weak and unstable government, and Norodom Sihanouk's Cambodia proclaimed its independence in November 1953. Laos became independent in October 1953 and the State of Vietnam became independent on 4 June 1954 (although they were still members of the French Union). Fighting lasted until May 1954, when the Vi\u1ec7t Minh won the decisive victory against French forces at the gruelling Battle of Dien Bien Phu.\nGeneva Agreements.\nOn 21 July 1954, the Geneva Conference produced the Geneva Agreements between the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and France. Provisions included supporting the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Indochina, re-recognising its independence from France, declaring the cessation of hostilities and foreign involvement in internal Indochina affairs, and delineating northern and southern zones into which opposing troops were to withdraw. The Agreements mandated unification on the basis of internationally supervised free elections to be held in July 1956.\nAt this conference France recognized the independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam led by the communist Vi\u1ec7t Minh, leading to the division of Vietnam into two \"de facto\" countries. The United States and South Vietnam rejected the Geneva Accords and never signed. South Vietnamese Prime Minister Di\u1ec7m rejected the idea of nationwide election as proposed in the agreement, saying that a free election was impossible in the communist North and that his government was not bound by the Geneva Accords. France did withdraw, turning the north over to the Communists while the B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i regime, with American support, kept control of the South. Di\u1ec7m would overthrow B\u1ea3o \u0110\u1ea1i and established a republic led by him in 1955.\nThe events of 1954 marked the beginnings of serious United States involvement in Vietnam and the ensuing Vietnam War. Laos and Cambodia also became independent in 1954, but were both drawn into the Vietnam War.\nThe remnants of the Indochinese Federation were abolished on 30 December 1954. The Geneva Agreement did not state that the French Union had to withdraw its troops from South Vietnam. However, Di\u1ec7m's government and the US asked the French Union to withdraw its troops. The French withdrew on 28 April 1956. And on 9 December 1955, South Vietnam withdrew from the French Union.\nUnited States involvement.\nIn 1954 the French defeat at \u0110i\u1ec7n Bi\u00ean Ph\u1ee7 renewed the United States interest in intervening, including some senators who called out for large scale bombing campaigns, potentially even nuclear weapons. President Dwight Eisenhower, even though he did not believe a military victory, believed in the domino theory, where if Vietnam were to fall to communism then there would be multiple other countries that would fall to the ideology in Southeast Asia, from Vietnam to India there would be a dramatic shift in global power. Eisenhower chose to not put boots on the ground, but his decision to start to get involved likely is more important to the countries eventual step into the country than Johnson's decision to take that last step.\nEisenhower had a further impact in that he would continue to provide support for future presidents policy in the country, Lyndon B. Johnson and Gerald Ford both used him to large extents, Kennedy did have several meetings with him in the White House, and Nixon was mostly on his own, but considering their familial ties there was inevitably some ideas that were considered that otherwise would not have been. As he was so involved the United States policy in French Indochina his influence is hard to underestimate.\nAdministration.\nThe government of French Indochina was headed by a governor-general and a number of French residents. The governor-general was assisted by a system of different government agencies; however, these agencies functioned only to be consultants to help the governor-general perform his role and exercise his powers. The protectorates of Cambodia, Annam, Tonkin, and Laos all had residents-superior while the colony of Cochinchina had a governor. In the protectorates the indigenous administrations were nominally combined with the French administration, but in the colony of Cochinchina as well as \"colonial cities\", such as \u0110\u00e0 N\u1eb5ng in Annam, the French maintained direct rule. All constituent countries of French Indochina had their own legal systems. In Annam and Tonkin the laws of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty, such as \"S\u1eafc\" (\u6555, \"Imperial Order\"), \"Ch\u00ed\" (\u8a8c, \"Ordinance\"), and \"D\u1ee5\" (\u8aed, \"Decree\"), remained in effect but were subordinate to the laws of the French administration.\nThe government-general of French Indochina as well as its powers were established and amended through presidential decrees. The governor-general held supreme power in French Indochina over the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of the government and had the power to appoint the residents below him. The governor-general was also in charge of all the military affairs of the country, among their responsibilities were the ability to set up an army corps, deploy the French Indochinese military forces, and issue conscription orders. However, the governor-general was not in charge of actually commanding the military forces during actual military campaigns and battles. The governor-general was also the chairman of the \"Indochinese Supreme Council\" (later renamed to the \"Indochinese Government Council\") which was the highest government agency in charge of general affairs.\nOther government agencies of the Government-General of French Indochina include the Indochinese Defense Council, Mine Consultancy Committee, the Indochinese Education Consultancy Council, the Supreme Council for Exploitation of Colonies, the Indochinese Economic and Financial Interests Assembly, etc.\nIn the protectorates of Annam and Tonkin the government of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty shared its power with the French administration \"de jure\" but were \"de facto\" directly ruled by the French colonial apparatus. The residents-superior and governor of Cochinchina did not have legislative powers only executive. While the Emperors of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty did maintain their legislative powers, all imperial decrees had to be approved by either the Resident-Superior of Annam or by the governor-general of French Indochina. Until the early 20th century the Gia Long era \"Ho\u00e0ng Vi\u1ec7t lu\u1eadt l\u1ec7\" (\u7687\u8d8a\u5f8b\u4f8b), sometimes known as the \"Gia Long Code\", remained the main civil code of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty until the Emperor issued the nearly identical \"Civil Code of Annam\" and \"Civil Code of Tonkin\".\nA number of the legal documents in effect in the French Republic were also applied to French Indochina, these included the \"Code Napol\u00e9on\" of 1804, the \"Code de commerce\" of 1807, the \"Code d'instruction criminelle\", and the French penal code of 1810. These laws took effect in French Indochina on the date that the governor-general issued decrees that they would also apply to the federation.\nThe legislative decrees of the governor-general had to be sent to the minister of colonies for consideration; the minister would then approve or disapprove the decrees. However, the minister of colonies was not entitled to make any amendments to the decrees, and if they wished to alter it they would have to draft it and then send the draft to the president of France. Only French presidential decrees could overturn the decrees of the governor-general. Executive decrees did not have to be sent to Metropolitan France for review and immediately came into effect.\nThroughout Vietnam thousands of villages had their own independent legal codes that governed the social relations within the village community, thousands of written regulations existed and the central administration often recognised them. These legal codes were known as the \"H\u01b0\u01a1ng \u01b0\u1edbc\" (\u9109\u7d04), \"H\u01b0\u01a1ng l\u1ec7\" (\u9109\u4f8b) and \"L\u1ec7 l\u00e0ng\" (\u4f8b\u5eca), which could be translated as \"rural covenants\", and also existed in China and Korea. The \"H\u01b0\u01a1ng \u01b0\u1edbc\" contained rules about various legal practices like land management, marriage, labour relations, arbitration of disputes, as well as local customs such as family relations, village relations, ghosts, ancestor worship, sacrifice, mourning, and longing. Both the government-general of French Indochina and the government of the Nguy\u1ec5n dynasty attempted reform these rules and regulations in their favour. To expand their power into Vietnamese hamlets and villages the French administration issued models for the villages to follow, but many Vietnamese villages still functioned independent of the French and Nguy\u1ec5n administrations.\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\nThe Viet, Lao, and Khmer ethnic groups formed the majority of their respective colony's populations. Minority groups in the Central Highlands, such as the Jarai, Rade, and Bahnar, were collectively known as Montagnards. Cham communities were dispersed across southern Indochina lowlands. Mountain regions of northern Indochina was home to various ethnic groups, including the Hmong, Muong, and T\u00e0y. Ethnic Chinese were largely concentrated in major cities and towns, especially the \"Hoa\" in Cochinchina and the \"Chen\" in Cambodia, where they became heavily involved in trade and commerce. In addition, there was also a tiny French minority which accounted for 0.2% of the population (or 39,000 people) by 1940. Around 95% of French Indochina's population was rural in a 1913 estimate, although urbanisation did slowly grow over the course of French rule.\nReligion.\nMany religions, including various forms of Buddhism and folk religion, were practiced in French Indochina. Longstanding religious faiths, along with newly emergent ones such as Cao \u0110\u00e0i and H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o, underwent transformations during this period. The secular French Third Republic and its top colonial officials in Indochina took a skeptical stance toward organized religion.\nColonial administrators ironically leaned on Confucianism, especially its civil service model, to govern Annam, Tonkin, and even Cochinchina. Influential figures like Pierre Pasquier viewed Confucianism as the authentic core of Vietnamese society and a useful means of maintaining order and legitimizing French rule. Meanwhile, in Laos and Cambodia, the colonial authorities leveraged Theravada Buddhism, including its schools, monastic order, and organizations, to help govern the population. Colonial administrators distrusted both Mahayana Buddhism and the local Catholics in Vietnam. Buddhists, Catholics, as well as followers of Cao \u0110\u00e0i and H\u00f2a H\u1ea3o, were nationalists and broadly anti-colonial.\nFrench settlements.\nUnlike Algeria, French settlement in Indochina did not occur at a grand scale. By 1940, only about 34,000 French civilians lived in French Indochina, along with a smaller number of French military personnel and government workers (6,000). Of these almost half, 16,550, lived in Cochinchina, the vast majority living in Saigon.\nThe principal reasons why French settlement did not grow in a manner similar to that in French North Africa (which had a population of over 1 million French civilians) were because French Indochina was seen as a (colony for economic exploitation) rather than a (settlement colony helping Metropolitan France from being overpopulated), and because Indochina was distant from France itself.\nLanguage.\nDuring French colonial rule, the French language was the principal language of education, government, trade, and media and French was widely introduced to the general population. French became widespread among urban and semi-urban populations and became the principal language of the elite and educated. This was most notable in the colonies of Tonkin and Cochinchina (Northern and Southern Vietnam respectively), where French influence was most heavy, while Annam, Laos and Cambodia were less influenced by French education. Despite the dominance of French in official and educational settings, local populations still largely spoke their native languages. After French rule ended, the French language was still largely used among the new governments (with the exception of North Vietnam). Today, French continues to be taught as a second language in the former colonies and used in some administrative affairs.\nEconomy.\nFrench Indochina was designated as a (colony of economic exploitation) by the French government. Funding for the colonial government came by means of taxes on locals and the French government established a near monopoly on the trade of opium, salt and rice alcohol. The French administration established quotas of consumption for each Vietnamese village, thereby compelling villagers to purchase and consume set amounts of these monopolised goods. The trade of those three products formed about 44% of the colonial government's budget in 1920 but declined to 20% by 1930 as the colony began to economically diversify.\nThe colony's principal bank was the Banque de l'Indochine, established in 1875 and was responsible for minting the colony's currency, the Indochinese piastre. Indochina was the second most invested-in French colony by 1940 after Algeria, with investments totalling up to 6.7 million francs.\nDuring the first six months of World War I, the government-general would expel all German and Austro-Hungarian people living in French Indochina. The two pre-war import/export houses, Speidel &amp; Co. and F. Engler &amp; Co., were officially re-organised as French companies; however, in reality they continued to operate under both German control and using German capital. During the 1910s, Speidel &amp; Co. was the largest importer of European goods into the country with Engler being one of its major competitors. After the German owners were expelled from the company lower level employees tried to continue running these companies despite increasing push back from the French colonial authorities by means of arbitrary customs enforcement, freight interference, and regulatory aggravations. Later the French would seize all of the German Speidel Company's warehouses and would sell the seized goods at low prices both to Vietnamese consumers and Chinese exporters to try to increase revenue. These goods included rice, wine, and canned goods.\nDuring World War I, export regulations kept changing which the Chinese export businesses took advantage of by purchasing rice for minimal prices from the Vietnamese farmers who grew it and then deliberately passing along the risks of the export trade to those small Vietnamese farmers who were the least able to bear the losses involved.\nAs the war made both imports and exports from and to Europe more difficult, French Indochina would increase trade with other Pacific countries. During the war period, import businesses would import flour from the United States and dairy products from Australia, though at lower levels than during the pre-war period. Prior to World War I, French Indochina had an annual flour import worth $950,000 and an annual condensed milk import worth $135,000, but during the war they would import only half this amount from the United States and about one fifth the amount of condensed milk from Australia.\nIn this context, the French colonizers opened the country's first business school in Hanoi for colonized students.\nBeginning in the 1930s, France began to exploit the region for its natural resources and to economically diversify the colony. Cochinchina, Annam and Tonkin (encompassing modern-day Vietnam) became a source of tea, rice, coffee, pepper, coal, zinc, and tin, while Cambodia became a centre for rice and pepper crops. Only Laos was seen initially as an economically unviable colony, although timber was harvested at a small scale from there.\nAt the turn of the 20th century, the growing automobile industry in France resulted in the growth of the rubber industry in French Indochina, and plantations were built throughout the colony, especially in Annam and Cochinchina. France soon became a leading producer of rubber through its Indochina colony and Indochinese rubber became prized in the industrialised world. The success of rubber plantations in French Indochina resulted in an increase in investment in the colony by various firms, such as Michelin. With the growing number of investments in the colony's mines and rubber, tea and coffee plantations, French Indochina began to industrialise as factories opened in the colony. These new factories produced textiles, cigarettes, beer and cement which were then exported throughout the French Empire.\nInfrastructure.\nWhen French Indochina was viewed as an economically important colony for France, the French government set a goal to improve the transport and communications networks in the colony. Saigon became a principal port in Southeast Asia and rivalled the British port of Singapore as the region's busiest commercial centre. By 1937 Saigon was the sixth busiest port in the entire French Empire.\nIn the 19th century, the French colonial administration worked to develop regular trading networks and an efficient transport infrastructure between Indochina and southwest China. The primary motivation for such an effort was to facilitate export of European goods to China. A railway would also give France access to Yunnan's natural resources, mineral resources and opium, and open up the Chinese market for Indochinese products, such as rice, dry fish, wood and coal. Thus in the early 20th century, they completed the Kunming\u2013Haiphong railway connecting the important port city of Haiphong with the Yunnanese capital city of Kunming.\nIn 1936, the Trans-Indochinois railway linking Hanoi and Saigon opened. Further improvements in the colony's transport infrastructures led to easier travel between France and Indochina. By 1939, it took no more than a month by ship to travel from Marseille to Saigon and around five days by aeroplane from Paris to Saigon. Underwater telegraph cables were installed in 1921.\nAs elsewhere in the world, the railways in French Indochina were the sites of active union and labour organisation.\nFrench settlers further added their influence on the colony by constructing buildings in the form of Beaux-Arts and added French-influenced landmarks, such as the Hanoi Opera House (modeled on the Palais Garnier), the Hanoi St. Joseph's Cathedral (resembling the Notre Dame de Paris) and the Saigon Notre-Dame Basilica. The French colonists also built a number of cities and towns in Indochina which served various purposes from trading outposts to resort towns. The most notable examples include Sa Pa in northern Vietnam, \u0110\u00e0 L\u1ea1t in central Vietnam and Pakse in Laos.\nArchitectural legacy.\nThe governments of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia have previously been reluctant to promote their colonial architecture as an asset for tourism; however, in recent times, the new generation of local authorities has somewhat \"embraced\" the architecture and advertise it. The heaviest concentration of French-era buildings are in Hanoi, \u0110\u00e0 L\u1ea1t, Haiphong, Ho Chi Minh City, Hu\u1ebf, and various places in Cambodia and Laos such as Luang Prabang, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Battambang, Kampot, and Kep.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52054", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52054", "title": "CSMA-CD", "text": ""}
{"id": "52055", "revid": "50992187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52055", "title": "Mars Needs Women", "text": "1968 American TV film by Larry Buchanan\nMars Needs Women is a 1968 independently made American made-for-television science fiction film from Azalea Pictures. The film was produced, written, and directed by self-proclaimed schlock artist/auteur Larry Buchanan, and stars Tommy Kirk, Yvonne Craig, and Byron Lord. The film was released in first-run syndication by American International Pictures without a theatrical release. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPlot.\nA U. S. military station in Houston, the United States Decoding Service (U.S.D.S.), NASA Wing, has intercepted a message from outer space. After decoding, the message contains only the cryptic statement: \"Mars ... Needs ... Women\".\nMartians have developed a genetic deficiency that now produces only male children. A mission to Earth is launched, consisting of five Martian males, led by Dop (Tommy Kirk). Once here, their team intends to recruit Earth women to come to Mars to mate and produce female offspring, saving their civilization from extinction. Using their sophisticated transponder, Dop attempts to make contact with the U.S. military, which has now tracked the aliens' arrival on Earth.\nThe military eventually views the Martians as invaders, so the team takes on the guise of Earth men, acquiring human clothes, money, maps, and transportation. They finally select their prospective candidates, setting their sights on four American women: a homecoming queen, a stewardess, a stripper, and, most especially, a Pulitzer Prize-winning scientist, Dr. Bolen (Yvonne Craig), an expert in \"space genetics\". Resorting to hypnosis, they capture the women, but Dop quickly becomes enamored with Dr. Bolen; soon he is ready to sabotage their mission for her. After the military discovers their hideout, the Martians are forced to return home without their female captives. Mars still needs women.\nCast.\nMain roles and screen credits:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nBuchanan was making low budget films for AIP. He said he might've rejected an idea that AlP had and told them to call him back in an hour. \"With Mars, I called Jim Nicholson with the opening. 'We get this signal from outer space... What is it, Mr. Nicholson, what is it?'. And I said, 'Mars Needs Women!' He said, 'When can you start?' It was almost like a fond throwback to the days at Columbia, when they'd just trust someone with a project. We had a low-budget profile like an old Hawks movie. I don't put myself in the same class, but I do admire them and know how they worked with their bosses\".\nJohn Ashley, who had just made \"The Eye Creatures\" (1965) for Buchanan, says he was meant to play the lead role but got busy on another project, so Kirk then stepped in.\nKirk recalled \"that was a period of my life when I was completely at loose ends. I was out of money, and I did anything anybody offered me. All big mistakes. You can't do that. You must be selective.\" Kirk called the film \"undoubtedly one of the stupidest motion pictures ever made. How I got talked into it, I don't know\".\nKirk had previously played a Martian seeking Earth women in AIP's \"Pajama Party\" (1964). He had made his mark as a Disney child star, but after being fired, was hoping to revive his career with \"Mars Needs Women\" treating it as a serious project, to the extent of rewriting some of his dialogue.\nReportedly, Buchanan allowed Kirk to create his own soliloquy for his scene in a planetarium (at Dallas Fair Park) as he explains that his world is dying.\nThe other notable lead, Yvonne Craig, had starred in several films, and numerous television roles, including her portrayal of Batgirl in the ABC TV series \"Batman\".\nShooting.\nOver a two-week shooting schedule, Buchanan shot \"Mars Needs Women\" in his hometown of Dallas, pretending it to be Houston. Faced with his usual meager budget, he resorted to using available spaces, including office buildings, to serve as NASA headquarters. Typical shoddy \"B\" movie production values are evident throughout the film. Southland Life Insurance Building is clearly visible as the Martians drive among the humans. Other prominent Dallas landmarks, including Southern Methodist University, are also featured. Footage from a SMU Homecoming game is used, and the Homecoming Queen is one of the Martian's \"recruits\". Footage was also shot at Dallas Fair Park (Planetarium, Lagoon, and Science Building). Additional footage was shot at Dallas Love Field, where a man is shown reading the \"Houston Chronicle\", and at the Gypsy Room on Harry Hines Blvd. One scene with dancer Bubbles Cash was shot at an actual Dallas striptease bar The Athens Strip, located on what is now Lower Greenville Ave. Other scenes were shot inside the empty White Rock Lake Pumphouse, once used when the lake was a city water source (the City of Dallas Water Dept eventually converted the building to offices on the southwest end of White Rock Lake). The scene at the NASA \"Space Center\" was filmed in Richardson, Texas, north of Dallas, in the Antenna Building, which belonged to Collins Radio, a NASA contractor; their large radio satellite dish antennas can be seen in some background shots.\n\"Mars Needs Women\" is padded with long sequences taken from stock aviation footage (the North American X-15 spacecraft being launched from its Boeing NB-52B Stratofortress mother ship and General Dynamics F-111 fighter-bomber in particular). Due to poor lighting, parts of the film were made by undercranking the camera and having the actors move slower, sometimes shooting at 18 or 12 frames per second instead of the usual 24. Actors also stretched out scenes with long sequences with no dialogue, either walking or doing menial tasks. One lengthy scene involves the camera focused on a loudspeaker.\nCritical reception.\nA review of the film in TV Guide reported that \"Cheap, amateurish, and dull are words that don't even come close to defining this sci-fi mess. It may be considered as one of those films that represents Hollywood filmmaking at its worst.\" Film critic Richard Scheib wrote that \"there is no particular plot to the film,\" but that \"there is a certain amusement to be found in some of the Martian takes on Earth culture\" and \"the most unintentionally funny scenes in the film feature Tommy Kirk [...] like his intense and over-the-top attempts to provide the narration when the soundtrack at a planetarium breaks down or his hilarious cliche declaration of love for Yvonne Craig.\"\nAlthough originally intended for theatrical release, \"Mars Needs Women\" was distributed directly to television.\nLegacy.\nOne of the film's more notable fans was Frank Zappa, who referenced the film in the title of an instrumental composition, \"Manx Needs Women\" (a pun on the inhabitants of the Isle of Man), which was regularly performed by Zappa in concert in 1976; recordings of the song's performances appear on Zappa's albums \"Zappa In New York\" and \"Philly '76\".\nMusician Peter Wolf released a song of the same name on his 1984 album, \"Lights Out\".\nSamples from the film appear in the track \"Mars Needs Women\" by Meat Beat Manifesto, the B-side of the God O.D. single in 1988. The track itself was resampled on track 4 of the Chemical Brothers remix album \"Brothers Gonna Work It Out\".\nThe introduction to the 1988 hit record \"Pump Up the Volume\" by the group MARRS (\"Mars ... needs ... women ...!\") is taken from the film's original preview trailer.\nOn B\u00e9la Fleck and the Flecktones' eponymous 1990 debut album there is a two-song song cycle \"Mars Needs Women: Space is a Lonely Place\" and \"Mars Needs Women: They're Here.\" \nThe demo release of the 1994 game Marathon contained a level named after the film. It was included as a network-only level in the final release, and again in the sequel Marathon Infinity.\nHeavy metal musician Rob Zombie released a song of the same name on his 2010 album, \"Hellbilly Deluxe 2\".\nTonio K. wrote and recorded a song of the same name, with sarcastic lyrics detailing the end of a tempestuous love affair. The song appears on his 1998 album \"Rodent Weekend '76-'96 (Approximately)\".\nProposed sequel.\nIn the early 1990s Buchanan announced a sequel was in development at Universal Pictures with John Avnet and Jordan Kerner. It was intended to be \"a sophisticated romantic comedy based on the ideas first set forth in the original\". The film was never made.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52056", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52056", "title": "Jonathan Edwards (triple jumper)", "text": "English triple jumper (born 1966)\nJonathan David Edwards (born 10 May 1966) is an English former triple jumper. He is an Olympic, double World, European, European indoor and Commonwealth champion, and has held the world record in the event since 1995. Edwards is regarded as one of the greatest triple-jumpers in history.\nFollowing his retirement as an athlete, Edwards has worked as a sports (primarily athletics) commentator and presenter for BBC television, before moving to Eurosport. In 2011, he was elected President of the Wenlock Olympian Society. He was a member of the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games for the 2012 games.\nEducation.\nEdwards was born in Westminster, London and attended West Buckland School in Devon where his potential for the triple jump was spotted at an early age. He was a strong all-rounder, and on leaving received the school's top award for sporting and academic excellence, the Fortescue Medal.\nContemporaries with Edwards at West Buckland School included Victor Ubogu and Steve Ojomoh, both former Bath and England Rugby international players. Edwards now has a Sports Hall at West Buckland named after him, \"The Jonathan Edwards Sports Centre\". Edwards then studied Physics at Durham University, attending Van Mildert College.\nAthletics career.\nDue to his strong Christian beliefs during his athletic career, discussed in more detail below, he initially refused to compete on Sundays, but eventually decided to do so in 1993. This decision proved timely, since the qualifying round at that year's World Championships took place on a Sunday. He went on to win the bronze medal.\nIn his breakthrough year of 1995, Edwards produced a jump of 18.43\u00a0m (60 feet &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442 inches) at the European Cup. The leap was wind assisted and did not count for record purposes, but it was a sign of things to come as he capped an unbeaten year with a historic gold medal performance at the World Championships, in which he broke the world record twice in the same meeting. On his first jump, he became the first man to legally pass the 18-metre barrier with a jump of 18.16 m (59 feet 7\u00a0inches). That record lasted for about 20 minutes. His second jump of 18.29 m made him the first to jump 60 feet. During his commentary for the 2008 Summer Olympics, Edwards observed that during the 1995 World Championships, he felt as if \"he could jump as far as he needed to\". Later that same year, Edwards became the BBC Sports Personality of the Year.\nDuring 1996 Edwards went into the 1996 Summer Olympics as favourite and world record holder, but it was American Kenny Harrison who took the gold with a jump of 18.09 m. Edwards walked away with the silver after a leap of 17.88 m (the longest ever jump not to win gold). Edwards won the gold medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics, and was appointed a CBE shortly thereafter. He also won golds at the 2001 World Championships and 2002 Commonwealth Games. At one point in 2002, Edwards held all the gold medals for the \"four majors\" (Olympic Games, World Championships, Commonwealth Games and European Championships). He retired after the 2003 World Championships.\nPost-athletics career.\nFollowing his retirement, Edwards has pursued a media career as a television presenter mainly working for the BBC as a sports commentator and presenter, and on programmes such as \"Songs of Praise\" until he gave up this programme, due to his loss of faith, in February 2007.\nEdwards regularly presented BBC coverage of athletics. When he is not presenting coverage, Edwards often provided expert analysis on field events as part of the BBC commentary team. For the London 2012 Olympics, Edwards anchored the BBC's coverage of the athletics events.\nAfter retiring from competition, Edwards became a keen recreational cyclist and has presented the BBC's coverage of cycle racing since 2012. He also covered the 2014 Winter Olympics for the BBC and the 2014 Winter Paralympics for Channel 4.\nEdwards also served as a presenter for the Olympic Announcement ceremonies during the IOC sessions in Guatemala in 2007 and Copenhagen in 2009.\nIn 2004, Edwards joined with Paula Radcliffe on an \"Olympic Special Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?\". The pair raised \u00a364,000 for charity with half of that sum going to the British Olympic Association and a quarter of the sum going to Asthma UK.\nIn 2011, Edwards became President of Wenlock Olympian Society, organisers of the annual Wenlock Olympian Games held in Shropshire.\nHe was a member of the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games, representing athletes in the organisation of the 2012 Summer Olympics.\nIn February 2016, after 13 years with the BBC, Edwards announced that he had agreed to join Eurosport on an exclusive contract as the channel's lead presenter from 2017, although he would continue working for the BBC and Channel 4 on their coverage of the 2016 Summer Olympics and Paralympics alongside duties with Eurosport until the end of 2016, with his first anchoring role for the pay TV channel being the 2016 European Aquatics Championships in May in London. For the BBC's Olympic coverage in Rio, Edwards was a lead presenter on BBC Radio 5 Live and presented the television coverage of triathlon events.\nAwards.\nEdwards received an honorary doctorate from Heriot-Watt University in 2002.\nAn honorary doctorate was conferred upon him at a ceremony at the University of Exeter on 21 January 2006.\nLater in the same year, an honorary doctorate of the university (DUniv) was conferred upon him at the winter graduation ceremony of the University of Ulster (19 December 2006).\nPersonal life.\nEdwards lives with his wife in Newcastle upon Tyne. They have two sons.\nEdwards was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to \"The Guardian\" opposing Scottish independence in the run-up to the 2014 referendum on that issue.\nReligious beliefs.\nEdwards initially refused to compete on Sundays due to his devout Christian beliefs, a decision that cost him a chance to compete in the 1991 World Championships. However, in 1993, after much deliberation and discussion with his father (a vicar), he changed his mind, deciding that God gave him his talent in order for him to compete in athletics. He once said \"My relationship with Jesus and God is fundamental to everything I do. I have made a commitment and dedication in that relationship to serve God in every area of my life.\"\nHe presented episodes of the Christian television show \"Songs of Praise\" until 2007. In June 2007, in an interview in \"The Times\", Edwards said: \"When you think about it rationally, it does seem incredibly improbable that there is a God.\" In the same interview, he stated: \"Looking back now, I can see that my faith was not only pivotal to my decision to take up sport but also my success ... I was always dismissive of sports psychology when I was competing, but I now realise that my belief in God was sports psychology in all but name.\" He has since described himself as \"probably agnostic, but practically an atheist\", and has expressed contentment with his current worldview, stating \"I feel internally happier than at any time of my life.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52057", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52057", "title": "Jonathan Edwards (theologian)", "text": "American preacher and philosopher (1703\u20131758)\nJonathan Edwards (October 5, 1703 \u2013 March 22, 1758) was an American revivalist preacher, philosopher, and Congregationalist theologian. Edwards is widely regarded as one of America's most important and original philosophical theologians. Edwards's theological work is broad in scope but rooted in the Puritan heritage as exemplified in the Westminster and Savoy Confessions of Faith. Recent studies have emphasized how thoroughly Edwards grounded his life's work on conceptions of beauty, harmony, and ethical aptness, and how central the Age of Enlightenment was to his mindset. Edwards played a critical role in shaping the First Great Awakening and oversaw some of the first revivals in 1733\u201335 at his church in Northampton, Massachusetts. His work gave rise to a doctrine known as New England theology.\nAt a 1741 revival in Enfield, Ct, Edwards delivered the sermon \"Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God\", a classic of early American literature, following George Whitefield's tour of the Thirteen Colonies. Edwards is well known for his many books, such as \"The End for Which God Created the World\" and \"The Life of David Brainerd\", which inspired thousands of missionaries throughout the 19th century, and \"Religious Affections\" which many Calvinist Evangelicals still read today. Edwards died from a smallpox inoculation shortly after beginning the presidency at the College of New Jersey in Princeton.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nJonathan Edwards was born on October 5, 1703, the fifth of 11 children and only son of Timothy Edwards, a minister at East Windsor, Connecticut (modern-day South Windsor), who supplemented his salary by tutoring boys for college. His mother, Esther Stoddard, daughter of Rev. Solomon Stoddard of Northampton, Massachusetts, seems to have been a woman of unusual mental gifts and independence of character. Timothy Edwards held at least one person in enslavement in the Edwards's household, a black man named Ansars. Jonathan was prepared for college by his father and elder sisters, all of whom received an excellent education. His sister Esther, the eldest, wrote a semi-humorous tract on the immateriality of the soul, which has often been mistakenly attributed to Jonathan.\nHe entered Yale College in 1716 at just under the age of 13. In the following year, he became acquainted with John Locke's \"Essay Concerning Human Understanding\", which influenced him profoundly. During his college studies, he kept notebooks labeled \"The Mind,\" \"Natural Science\" (containing a discussion of the atomic theory), \"The Scriptures\" and \"Miscellanies,\" had a grand plan for a work on natural and mental philosophy, and drew up rules for its composition. He was interested in natural history and, as an 11-year-old, had observed and written an essay detailing the ballooning behavior of some spiders. Edwards edited this text later to match the burgeoning genre of scientific literature, and his \"The Flying Spider\" fit easily into the contemporary scholarship on spiders. Although he studied theology for two years after his graduation from Yale, Edwards continued to be interested in science. Although many European scientists and American clergymen found the implications of science pushing them towards deism, Edwards believed the natural world was evidence of God's masterful design. Throughout his life, Edwards often went into the woods as a favorite place to pray and worship in the beauty and solace of nature.\nEdwards was fascinated by the discoveries of Isaac Newton and other scientists of this time period. Before he started working as a full-time pastor in Northampton, he wrote on various topics in natural philosophy, including light and optics, in addition to spiders. While he worried about those of his contemporaries who seemed preoccupied by materialism and faith in reason alone, he considered the laws of nature to be derived from God and demonstrating his wisdom and care. Edwards's written sermons and theological treatises emphasize the beauty of God and the role of aesthetics in the spiritual life. He is thought to anticipate a 20th-century current of theological aesthetics, represented by figures such as Hans Urs von Balthasar.\nIn 1722 to 1723, he was for eight months an un-ordained \"supply\" pastor (a clergyman employed to preach and minister in a church for a definite time but not settled as a pastor) of a small Presbyterian church on William Street in New York City. The church invited him to remain, but he declined the call. After spending two months in study at home, in 1724\u20131726, he was one of the two tutors at Yale tasked with leading the college in the absence of a rector. Yale's previous rector, Timothy Cutler, lost his position when he defected to the Anglican Church. After two years, he had not been replaced.\nHe partially recorded the years 1720 to 1726 in his diary and in his resolutions for his conduct which he drew up at this time. He had long been an eager seeker after salvation and was not fully satisfied as to his own conversion until an experience in his last year in college, when he lost his feeling that the election of some to salvation and of others to eternal damnation was \"a horrible doctrine,\" and reckoned it \"exceedingly pleasant, bright and sweet.\" He now took a great and new joy in taking in the beauties of nature and delighted in the allegorical interpretation of the Song of Solomon. Balancing these mystic joys is the stern tone of his Resolutions, in which he is almost ascetic in his eagerness to live earnestly and soberly, to waste no time, to maintain the strictest temperance in eating and drinking.\nOn February 15, 1727, Edwards was ordained minister at Northampton and assistant to his grandfather Solomon Stoddard, a noted minister. He was a scholar-pastor, not a visiting pastor, his rule being 13 hours of study per day. In the same year, he married Sarah Pierpont. Then 17, Sarah was from a notable New England clerical family: her father was James Pierpont, a founder of Yale College; and her mother was the granddaughter of Thomas Hooker. Sarah's spiritual devotion was without peer, and her relationship with God had long proved an inspiration to Edwards. He first remarked on her great piety when she was 13 years old. She was of a bright and cheerful disposition, a practical housekeeper, a model wife, and the mother of his 11 children, who included Esther Edwards. Edwards held to complementarian views of marriage and gender roles.\nSolomon Stoddard died on February 11, 1729, leaving to his grandson the sole ministerial charge of one of the largest and wealthiest congregations in the colony. Its members were proud of its morality, its culture and its reputation. Summing up Edwards's influences during his younger years, scholar John E. Smith writes, \"By thus meditating between Berkeley on the one hand and Locke, Descartes, and Hobbes on the other, the young Edwards hoped to rescue Christianity from the deadweight of rationalism and the paralyzing inertia of skepticism.\"\nGreat Awakening.\nOn July 8, 1731, Edwards preached in Boston the \"Public Lecture,\" afterwards published under the title \"God Glorified in the Work of Redemption, by the Greatness of Man's Dependence upon Him, in the Whole of It,\" which was his first public attack on Arminianism. The emphasis of the lecture was on God's absolute sovereignty in the work of salvation: while it behooved God to create man pure and without sin, it was of his \"good pleasure\" and \"mere and arbitrary grace\" for him to grant any person the faith necessary to incline him or her toward holiness, and that God might deny this grace without any disparagement to any of his character. In 1733, a spiritual revival began in Northampton and reached such an intensity in the winter of 1734 and the following spring that it threatened the business of the town. In six months, nearly 300 of 1,100 youths were admitted to the church.\nThe revival gave Edwards an opportunity to study the process of conversion in all its phases and varieties, and he recorded his observations with psychological minuteness and discrimination in \"A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of God in the Conversion of Many Hundred Souls in Northampton\" (1737). A year later, he published \"Discourses on Various Important Subjects\", the five sermons which had proved most effective in the revival. Of these, none was so immediately effective as that on \"The Justice of God in the Damnation of Sinners\", from the text, \"That every mouth may be stopped.\" Another sermon, published in 1734, \"A Divine and Supernatural Light, Immediately Imparted to the Soul by the Spirit of God\", set forth what he regarded as the inner, moving principle of the revival, the doctrine of a special grace in the immediate, and supernatural divine illumination of the soul.\nBy 1735, the revival had spread and appeared independently across the Connecticut River Valley and perhaps as far as New Jersey. However, criticism of the revival began, and many New Englanders feared that Edwards had led his flock into fanaticism.\nOver the summer of 1735, religious fervor took a dark turn. Many New Englanders were affected by the revivals but not converted and became convinced of their inexorable damnation. Edwards wrote that \"multitudes\" felt urged\u00a0\u2013 presumably by Satan\u00a0\u2013 to take their own lives. At least two people committed suicide in the depths of their spiritual distress, one from Edwards's own congregation\u00a0\u2013 his uncle Joseph Hawley II. It is not known if any others took their own lives, but the \"suicide craze\" effectively ended the first wave of revival, except in some parts of Connecticut.\nDespite these setbacks and the cooling of religious fervor, word of the Northampton revival and Edwards's leadership role had spread as far as England and Scotland. It was at this time that Edwards became acquainted with George Whitefield, who was traveling the Thirteen Colonies on a revival tour in 1739\u201340. The two men may not have seen eye to eye on every detail. Whitefield was far more comfortable with the strongly emotional elements of revival than Edwards was, but they were both passionate about preaching the Gospel. They worked together to orchestrate Whitefield's trip, first through Boston and then to Northampton. When Whitefield preached at Edwards's church in Northampton, he reminded them of the revival they had undergone just a few years before. This deeply touched Edwards, who wept throughout the entire service, and much of the congregation too was moved.\n Revivals began to spring up again, and Edwards preached his most famous sermon, \"Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God\", in Enfield, Connecticut, in 1741. Though this sermon has been widely reprinted as an example of \"fire and brimstone\" preaching in the colonial revivals, that characterization is not in keeping with descriptions of Edward's actual preaching style. Edwards did not shout or speak loudly, but talked in a quiet, emotive voice. He moved his audience slowly from point to point, towards an inexorable conclusion: they were lost without the grace of God. While most 21st-century readers notice the damnation looming in such a sermon text, historian George Marsden reminds us that Edwards was not preaching anything new or surprising: \"Edwards could take for granted... that a New England audience knew well the Gospel remedy. The problem was getting them to seek it.\".\nThe movement met with opposition from conservative Congregationalist ministers. In 1741, Edwards published in the defense of revivals \"The Distinguishing Marks of a Work of the Spirit of God\", dealing particularly with the phenomena most criticized: the swoonings, outcries, and convulsions. These \"bodily effects,\" he insisted, were not distinguishing marks of the work of the Spirit of God one way or another. So bitter was the feeling against the revival in some churches that in 1742 he felt moved to write a second apology, \"Thoughts on the Revival in New England,\" where his main argument concerned the great moral improvement of the country. In the same pamphlet he defends an appeal to the emotions and advocates preaching terror when necessary, even to children, who in God's sight \"are young vipers... if not Christ's.\"\nHe considered \"bodily effects\" incidental to the real work of God. But his own mystic devotion and the experiences of his wife during the Awakening (which he recounts in detail) make him think that the divine visitation usually overpowers the body, a view in support of which he quotes Scripture. In reply to Edwards, Charles Chauncy wrote \"Seasonable Thoughts on the State of Religion in New England\" in 1743 and anonymously penned \"The Late Religious Commotions in New England Considered\" in the same year. In these works, he urged conduct as the sole test of conversion. The general convention of Congregational ministers in the Province of Massachusetts Bay seemed to agree, protesting \"against disorders in practice which have of late obtained in various parts of the land.\" In spite of Edwards's able pamphlet, the impression had become widespread that \"bodily effects\" were recognized by the promoters of the Great Awakening as the true tests of conversion.\nTo offset this feeling, during the years 1742 and 1743, Edwards preached at Northampton a series of sermons published under the title of \"Religious Affections\" (1746), a restatement in a more philosophical and general tone of his ideas as to \"distinguishing marks.\" In 1747, he joined the movement started in Scotland called the \"concert in prayer,\" and in the same year published \"An Humble Attempt to Promote Explicit Agreement and Visible Union of God's People in Extraordinary Prayer for the Revival of Religion and the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom on Earth\". In 1749, he published a memoir of David Brainerd, who had lived with his family for several months and had died at Northampton in 1747. Brainerd had been constantly attended by Edwards's daughter Jerusha, to whom he was rumored to have been engaged to be married, though there is no surviving evidence of this. In the course of elaborating his theories of conversion, Edwards used David Brainerd and his ministry as a case study, making extensive notes of his conversions and confessions.\nLater years.\nIn 1748, there had come a crisis in his relations with his congregation. The Half-Way Covenant, adopted by the synods of 1657 and 1662, had made baptism alone the condition to the civil privileges of church membership, but not of participation in the sacrament of the Lord's Supper. Stoddard had been even more liberal, holding that the Lord's Supper was a converting ordinance and that baptism was a sufficient title to all the privileges of the church.\nAs early as 1744, Edwards, in his sermons on \"Religious Affections\", had plainly intimated his dislike of this practice. In the same year, he had published in a church meeting the names of certain young people, members of the church, who were suspected of reading improper books, and also the names of those who were to be called as witnesses in the case. It has often been reported that the witnesses and accused were not distinguished on this list, and so the entire congregation was in an uproar. However, Patricia Tracy's research has cast doubt on this version of the events, noting that in the list he read from, the names were definitely distinguished. Those involved were eventually disciplined for disrespect to the investigators rather than for the original incident. In any case, the incident further deteriorated the relationship between Edwards and the congregation.\nEdwards's preaching became unpopular. For four years, no candidate presented himself for admission to the church, and when one eventually did, in 1748, he was met with Edwards's formal tests as expressed in the and later in . The candidate refused to submit to them, the church backed him, and the break between the church and Edwards was complete. Even permission to discuss his views in the pulpit was refused. He was allowed to present his views on Thursday afternoons. His sermons were well attended by his fans but not his own congregation. A council was convened to decide the communion matter between the minister and his people. The congregation chose half the council, and Edwards was allowed to select the other half of the council. His congregation, however, limited his selection to one county where the majority of the ministers were against him. The ecclesiastical council voted by 10 to 9 that the pastoral relation be dissolved.\nThe church members, by a vote of more than 200 to 23, ratified the action of the council, and finally a town meeting voted that Edwards should not be allowed to occupy the Northampton pulpit, though he continued to live in the town and preach in the church by the request of the congregation until October 1751. In his \"Farewell Sermon\" he preached from 2 Corinthians 1:14 and directed the thoughts of his people to that far future when the minister and his people would stand before God. In a letter to Scotland after his dismissal, he expresses his preference for Presbyterian to congregational polity. His position at the time was not unpopular throughout New England. His doctrine that the Lord's Supper is not a cause of regeneration and that communicants should be professing Protestants has since (largely through the efforts of his pupil Joseph Bellamy) become a standard of New England Congregationalism.\nEdwards was in high demand. A parish in Scotland could have been procured for him, and he was called to a Virginia church. He declined both of these to become pastor in 1751 of the church in Stockbridge, Massachusetts and a missionary to the Housatonic Indians, taking over for the recently deceased John Sergeant. To the Indians, he preached through an interpreter, and their interests he boldly and successfully defended, by attacking the whites who were using their official positions among them to increase their private fortunes. During this time he got to know Judge Joseph Dwight who was trustee of the Indian Schools. In Stockbridge, he wrote the \"Humble Relation\", also called \"Reply to Williams\" (1752), which was an answer to Solomon Williams, a relative and a bitter opponent of Edwards as to the qualifications for full communion. He composed the treatises on which his reputation as a philosophical theologian chiefly rests, the essay on Original Sin, the \"Dissertation Concerning the Nature of True Virtue\", the \"Dissertation Concerning the End for which God created the World\", and the great work on the \"Will\", written in four and a half months and published in 1754 under the title, \"An Inquiry into the Modern Prevailing Notions Respecting that Freedom of the Will which is supposed to be Essential to Moral Agency\".\nAaron Burr Sr., Edwards's son-in-law, died in 1757 (he had married Esther Edwards five years before, and they had made Edwards the grandfather of Aaron Burr, later U.S. vice president). Edwards felt himself in \"the decline of life\", and inadequate to the office, but was persuaded to replace Burr as president of the College of New Jersey (now Princeton University). He was installed on February 16, 1758. He gave weekly essay assignments in theology to the senior class.\nDeath and legacy.\nAlmost immediately after becoming president of the College of New Jersey, Edwards, a strong supporter of smallpox inoculations, decided to get inoculated in order to encourage others to do the same. Never having been in robust health, he died as a result of the inoculation on March 22, 1758. Edwards left behind eleven children (three sons and eight daughters). The grave of Edwards is located in Princeton Cemetery. Written in Latin, the long emotional epitaph inscription on the horizontal gravestone eulogizes his life and career and laments the great loss of his passing. It draws from the classical tradition in extolling the virtues of the deceased and directly inviting the passerby to pause and mourn.\nThe followers of Jonathan Edwards and his disciples came to be known as the New Light Calvinist ministers. Prominent disciples included the New Divinity school's Samuel Hopkins, Joseph Bellamy, Jonathan Edwards Jr., and Gideon Hawley. Through a practice of apprentice ministers living in the homes of older ministers, they eventually filled a large number of pastorates in the New England area. Many of Jonathan and Sarah Edwards's descendants became prominent citizens in the United States, including Burr and college presidents Timothy Dwight, Jonathan Edwards Jr. and Merrill Edwards Gates. Jonathan and Sarah Edwards were also ancestors of Edith Roosevelt, the writer O. Henry, the publisher Frank Nelson Doubleday, and the writer Robert Lowell. The eminence of many descendants of Edwards led some Progressive Era scholars to view him as proof of eugenics. His descendants have had a disproportionate effect upon American culture: his biographer George Marsden notes that \"the Edwards family produced scores of clergymen, thirteen presidents of higher learning, sixty-five professors, and many other persons of notable achievements.\"\nEdwards's writings and beliefs continue to influence individuals and groups to this day. Early American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions missionaries were influenced by Edwards's writings, as is evidenced in reports in the ABCFM's journal \"The Missionary Herald,\" and beginning with Perry Miller's seminal work, Edwards enjoyed a renaissance among scholars around the time of the Second World War. The Banner of Truth Trust and other publishers continue to reprint Edwards's works, and most of his major works are now available through the series published by Yale University Press, which has spanned three decades and supplies critical introductions by the editor of each volume. Yale has also established the Jonathan Edwards Project online. Author and teacher, Elisabeth Woodbridge Morris, memorialized him, her paternal ancestor (3rd great-grandfather) in two books,\" The Jonathan Papers\" (1912), and \"More Jonathan Papers\" (1915). In 1933, he became the namesake of Jonathan Edwards College, the first of the 12 residential colleges of Yale, and The Jonathan Edwards Center at Yale University was founded to provide scholarly information about Edwards's writings. Edwards is remembered today as a teacher and missionary by the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America on March 22. The contemporary poet Susan Howe frequently describes the composition of Edwards's manuscripts and notebooks held at the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library in a number of her books of poetry and prose, including and . She notes how some of Edwards's notebooks were hand sewn from silk paper that his sisters and wife used for making fans. Howe also argues in \"My Emily Dickinson\" that Emily Dickinson was formatively influenced by Edwards's writings, and that she \"took both his legend and his learning, tore them free from his own humorlessness and the dead weight of doctrinaire Calvinism, then applied the freshness of his perception to the dead weight of American poetry as she knew it.\"\nHe was the maternal grandfather of Aaron Burr, the third United States vice president and the murderer of Alexander Hamilton.\nSlavery.\nEdwards was a slave owner. In June 1731, he purchased a young black teenager named Venus. In subsequent years, he acquired at least five more slaves: Joab and Rose Binney, Titus, Joseph, and Sue. Edwards married Joab and Rose in 1751; Titus was their son. Joseph and Sue were also a married couple. Edwards also owned a slave by the name of Leah, though this is likely the biblical name given to Venus as she was admitted as a full member to Edwards's church by 1736. In a 1741 pamphlet, Edwards defended the institution for those who were debtors, war captives, or were born enslaved in North America, but rejected the Atlantic slave trade.\nAttention to this fact became prominent during the 2010s and 2020s. Responses have ranged from condemnation to the view that he was a man of his time. Other commentators have sought to maintain what they see as valuable in Edwards's theology, while deploring his involvement in slavery.\nWorks.\nThe Beinecke Rare Book &amp; Manuscript Library at Yale University holds the majority of Edwards's surviving manuscripts, including over one thousand sermons, notebooks, correspondence, printed materials, and artifacts. Two of Edwards's manuscript sermons and other related historical texts are held by The Presbyterian Historical Society in Philadelphia. The entire corpus of Edwards's works, including previously unpublished works, is available online through the Jonathan Edwards Center at Yale University website. The Works of Jonathan Edwards project at Yale has been bringing out scholarly editions of Edwards based on fresh transcriptions of his manuscripts since the 1950s; there are 26 volumes so far. Many of Edwards's works have been regularly reprinted. Some of the major works include:\nSermons.\nThe text of many of Edwards's sermons have been preserved, some are still published and read today among general anthologies of American literature. Among his more well-known sermons are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52062", "revid": "43059617", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52062", "title": "POTUS", "text": ""}
{"id": "52070", "revid": "50859085", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52070", "title": "Arch", "text": "Curved structure that spans a space and may support a load\nAn arch is a curved vertical structure spanning an open space underneath it. Arches may support the load above them, or they may perform a purely decorative role. As a decorative element, the arch dates back to the 4th millennium BC, but structural load-bearing arches became popular only after their adoption by the Ancient Romans in the 4th century BC.\nArch-like structures can be horizontal, like an arch dam that withstands a horizontal hydrostatic pressure load. Arches are usually used as supports for many types of vaults, with the barrel vault in particular being a continuous arch. Extensive use of arches and vaults characterizes an arcuated construction, as opposed to the trabeated system, where, like in the architectures of ancient Greece, China, and Japan (as well as the modern steel-framed technique), posts and beams dominate. \nThe arch had several advantages over the lintel, especially in masonry construction: with the same amount of material an arch can have larger span, carry more weight, and can be made from smaller and thus more manageable pieces. Their role in construction was diminished in the middle of the 19th century with introduction of wrought iron (and later steel): the high tensile strength of these new materials made long lintels possible.\nBasic concepts.\nTerminology.\nA true arch is a load-bearing arch with elements held together by compression. In much of the world introduction of the true arch was a result of European influence. The term false arch has a few meanings. It is usually used to designate an arch that has no structural purpose, like a proscenium arch in theaters used to frame the performance for the spectators, but is also applied to corbelled and triangular arches that are not based on compression.\nA typical true masonry arch consists of the following elements:\nA (left or right) half-segment of an arch is called an \"arc\", the overall line of an arch is \"arcature\" (this term is also used for an arcade). Archivolt is the exposed (front-facing) part of the arch, sometimes decorated (occasionally also used to designate the intrados). If the sides of voussoir blocks are not straight, but include angles and curves for interlocking, the arch is called \"joggled\".\nArch action.\nA true arch, due to its rise, resolves the vertical loads into horizontal and vertical reactions at the ends, a so called arch action. The vertical load produces a positive bending moment in the arch, while the inward-directed horizontal reaction from the spandrel/abutment provides a counterbalancing negative moment. As a result, the bending moment in any segment of the arch is much smaller than in a beam with the equivalent load and span. The diagram on the right shows the difference between a loaded arch and a beam. Elements of the arch are mostly subject to compression (A), while in the beam a bending moment is present, with compression at the top and tension at the bottom (B).\nIn the past, when arches were made of masonry pieces, the horizontal forces at the ends of an arch (so called thrust) caused the need for heavy abutments (cf. Roman triumphal arch). The other way to counteract the forces, and thus allow thinner supports, was to use the counter-arches, as in an arcade arrangement, where the horizontal thrust of each arch is counterbalanced by its neighbors, and only the end arches need to buttressed. With new construction materials (steel, concrete, engineered wood), not only the arches themselves got lighter, but the horizontal thrust can be further relieved by a tie connecting the ends of an arch (bowstring arch).\nFunicular shapes.\nWhen evaluated from the perspective of an amount of material required to support a given load, the best solid structures are compression-only; with the flexible materials, the same is true for tension-only designs. There is a fundamental symmetry in nature between solid compression-only and flexible tension-only arrangements, noticed by Robert Hooke in 1676: \"As hangs the flexible line, so but inverted will stand the rigid arch\", thus the study (and terminology) of arch shapes is inextricably linked to the study of hanging chains, the corresponding curves or polygons are called \"funicular\". Just like the shape of a hanging chain will vary depending on the weights attached to it, the shape of an ideal (compression-only) arch will depend on the distribution of the load.\nWhile building masonry arches in the not very tall buildings of the past, a practical assumption was that the stones can withstand virtually unlimited amount of pressure (up to 100 N per mm2), while the tensile strength was very low, even with the mortar added between the stones, and can be effectively assumed to be zero. Under these assumptions the calculations for the arch design are greatly simplified: either a reduced-scale model can be built and tested, or a funicular curve (pressure polygon) can be calculated or modeled, and as long as this curve stays within the confines of the voussoirs, the construction will be stable (a so called \"safe theorem\").\nClassifications.\nThere are multiple ways to classify arches:\nArrangements.\nA sequence of arches can be grouped together forming an arcade. Romans perfected this form, as shown, for example, by arched structures of Pont du Gard. In the interior of hall churches, arcades of separating arches were used to separate the nave of a church from the side aisle, or two adjacent side aisles.\nTwo-tiered arches, with two arches superimposed, were sometimes used in Islamic architecture, mostly for decorative purposes.\nAn opening of the arch can be filled, creating a blind arch. Blind arches are frequently decorative, and were extensively used in Early Christian, Romanesque, and Islamic architecture. Alternatively, the opening can be filled with smaller arches, producing a containing arch, common in Gothic and Romanesque architecture. Multiple arches can be superimposed with an offset, creating an interlaced series of usually (with some exceptions) blind and decorative arches. Most likely of Islamic origin, the interlaced arcades were popular in Romanesque and Gothic architecture. Rear-arch (also rere-arch) is the one that frames the internal side of an opening in the external wall.\nStructural.\nStructurally, relieving arches (often blind or containing) can be used to take off load from some portions of the building (for example, to allow use of thinner exterior walls with larger window openings, or, as in the Roman Pantheon, to redirect the weight of the upper structures to particular strong points). Transverse arches, introduced in Carolingian architecture, are placed across the nave to compartmentalize (together with longitudinal separating arches) the internal space into bays and support vaults. A diaphragm arch similarly goes in the transverse direction, but carries a section of wall on top. It is used to support or divide sections of the high roof. Strainer arches were built as an afterthought to prevent two adjacent supports from imploding due to miscalculation. Frequently they were made very decorative, with one of the best examples provided by the Wells Cathedral. Strainer arches can be \"inverted\" (upside-down) while remaining structural. When used across railway cuttings to prevent collapse of the walls, strainer arches may be referred to as flying arches. A counter-arch is built adjacent to another arch to oppose its horizontal action or help to stabilize it, for example, when constructing a flying buttress.\nShapes.\nThe large variety of arch shapes (left) can mostly be classified into three broad categories: rounded, pointed, and parabolic.\nRounded.\n\"Round\" semicircular arches were commonly used for ancient arches that were constructed of heavy masonry, and were relied heavily on by the Roman builders since the 4th century BC. It is considered to be the most common arch form, characteristic for Roman, Romanesque, and Renaissance architecture.\nA segmental arch, with a rounded shape that is less than a semicircle, is very old (the versions were cut in the rock in Ancient Egypt c. 2100 BC at Beni Hasan). Since then it was occasionally used in Greek temples, utilized in Roman residential construction, Islamic architecture, and got popular as window pediments during the Renaissance.\nA basket-handle arch (also known as \"depressed arch\", \"three-centred arch\", \"basket arch\") consists of segments of three circles with origins at three different centers (sometimes uses five or seven segments, so can also be \"five-centred\", etc.). Was used in late Gothic and Baroque architecture.\nA horseshoe arch (also known as \"keyhole arch\") has a rounded shape that includes more than a semicircle, is associated with Islamic architecture and was known in areas of Europe with Islamic influence (Spain, Southern France, Italy). Occasionally used in Gothics, it briefly enjoyed popularity as the entrance door treatment in the interwar England.\nIn a Florentine arch (also known as \"Venetian\", \"Italian\" on the illustration), the distance between intrados and extrados grows closer to the apex. It can combine rounded intrados with pointed extrados.\nPointed.\nA pointed arch consists of two (\"two-centred arch\") or more circle segments culminating in a point at the top. It originated in the Islamic architecture (there are other opinions, cf. Warren 1991), arrived in Europe in the second half of the 11th century (Cluny Abbey) and later became prominent in the Gothic architecture. The advantages of a pointed arch over a semicircular one are flexible ratio of span to rise and lower horizontal reaction at the base. This innovation allowed for taller and more closely spaced openings, which are typical of Gothic architecture. Equilateral arch is the most common form of the pointed arch, with the centers of two circles forming the intrados coinciding with the springing points of the opposite segment. Together with the apex point, they form an equilateral triangle, thus the name. If the centers of circles are farther apart, the arch becomes a narrower and sharper lancet arch that appeared in France in the Early Gothic architecture (Saint-Denis Abbey) and became prominent in England in the late 12th and early 13th centuries (Salisbury Cathedral). If the centers are closer to another, the result is a wider blunt arch.\nThe intrados of the cusped arch (also known as \"multifoil arch\", \"polyfoil arch\", \"polylobed arch\", and \"scalloped arch\") includes several independent circle segments in a scalloped arrangement. These primarily decorative arches are common in Islamic architecture and Northern European Late Gothic, can be found in Romanesque architecture. A similar trefoil arch includes only three segments and sometimes has a rounded, not pointed, top. Common in Islamic architecture and Romanesque buildings influenced by it, it later became popular in the decorative motifs of the Late Gothic designs of Northern Europe.\nEach arc of an ogee arch consists of at least two circle segments (for a total of at least four), with the center of an upper circle being outside the extrados. After European appearance in the 13th century on the facade of the St Mark's Basilica, the arch became a fixture of the English Decorated style, French Flamboyant, Venetian, and other Late Gothic styles. Ogee arch is also known as \"reversed curve arch\", occasionally also called an \"inverted arch\". The top of an ogee arch sometimes projects beyond the wall, forming the so-called \"nodding ogee\" popular in 14th century England (pulpitum in Southwell Minster).\nEach arc of a four-centred arch is made of two circle segments with distinct centers; usually the radius used closer to the springing point is smaller with a more pronounced curvature. Common in Islamic architecture (Persian arch), and, with upper portion flattened almost to straight lines (Tudor arch), in the English Perpendicular Gothic.A keel arch is a variant of four-centred arch with haunches almost straight, resembling a section view of a capsized ship. Popular in Islamic architecture, it can be also found in Europe, occasionally with a small ogee element at the top, so it is sometimes considered to be a variation of an ogee arch. \nCurtain arch (also known as inflexed arch, and, like the keel arch, usually decorative) uses two (or more) drooping curves that join at the apex. Utilized as a dressing for windows and doors primarily in Saxony in the Late Gothic and early Renaissance buildings (late 15th to early 16th century), associated with Arnold von Westfalen. When the intrados has multiple concave segments, the arch is also called a draped arch or tented arch. A similar arch that uses a mixture of curved and straight segments or exhibits sharp turns between segments is a mixed-line arch (or \"mixtilinear arch\"). In Moorish architecture the mixed-line arch evolved into an ornate lambrequin arch, also known as \"muqarnas arch\".\nParabolic.\nThe popularity of the arches using segments of a circle is due to simplicity of layout and construction, not their structural properties. Consequently, the architects historically used a variety of other curves in their designs: elliptical curves, hyperbolic cosine curves (including catenary), and parabolic curves. There are two reasons behind the selection of these curves:\nThe hyperbolic curve is not easy to trace, but there are known cases of its use. The non-circumferential curves look similar, and match at shallow profiles, so a catenary is often misclassified as a parabola (per Galileo, \"the [hanging] chain fits its parabola almost perfectly\"). Gonz\u00e1lez et al. provide an example of Palau G\u00fcell, where researchers do not agree on classification of the arches or claim the prominence of parabolic arches, while the measurements show that just two of the 23 arches designed by Gaudi are actually parabolic.\nThree parabolic-looking curves in particular are of significance to the arch design: parabola itself, catenary, and weighted catenary. The arches naturally use the inverted (upside-down) versions of these curves.\nA parabola represents an ideal (all-compression) shape when the load is equally distributed along the span, while the weight of the arch itself is negligible. A catenary is the best solution for the case where an arch with uniform thickness carries just its own weight with no external load. The practical designs for bridges are somewhere in between, and thus use the curves that represent a compromise that combines both the catenary and the funicular curve for particular non-uniform distribution of load. The practical free-standing arches are stronger and thus heavier at the bottom, so a weighted catenary curve is utilized for them. The same curve also fits well an application where a bridge consists of an arch with a roadway of packed dirt above it, as the dead load increases with a distance from the center.\nOther.\nUnlike regular arches, the flat arch (also known as \"jack arch\", \"lintel arch\", \"straight arch\", \"plate-bande\") is not curved. Instead, the arch is flat in profile and can be used under the same circumstances as lintel. However, lintels are subject to bending stress, while the flat arches are true arches, composed of irregular voussoir shapes (the keystone is the only one of the symmetric wedge shape), and that efficiently uses the compressive strength of the masonry in the same manner as a curved arch and thus requires a mass of masonry on both sides to absorb the considerable lateral thrust. Used in the Roman architecture to imitate the Greek lintels, Islamic architecture, European medieval and Renaissance architecture. The flat arch is still being used as a decorative pattern, primarily at the top of window openings.\nFalse arches.\nThe corbel (also \"corbelled\") arch, made of two corbels meeting in the middle of the span, is a true arch in a sense of being able to carry a load, but it is false in a structural sense, as its components are subject to bending stress. The typical profile is not curved, but has triangular shape. Invented prior to the semicircular arch, the corbel arch was used already in the Egyptian and Mycenaean architecture in the 3rd and 2nd millennium BC.\nLike a corbel arch, the triangular arch is not a true arch in a structural sense. Its intrados is formed by two slabs leaning against each other. Brick builders would call triangular any arch with straight inclined sides. The design was common in Anglo-Saxon England until the late 11th century (St Mary Goslany). Mayan corbel arches are sometimes called triangular due to their shape.\nVariations.\nFew transformations can be applied to arch shapes.\nIf one impost is much higher than another, the arch (frequently pointed) is known as \"ramping arch\", \"raking arch\", or \"rampant arch\" (from ). Originally used to support inclined structures, like stairs, in the 13th-14th centuries they appeared as parts of flying buttresses used to counteract the thrust of Gothic ribbed vaults. \nA central part of an arch can be raised on short vertical supports, creating a trefoil-like shouldered arch. The raised central part can vary all the way from a flat arch to ogee. The shouldered arches were used to decorate openings in Europe from medieval times to Late Gothic architecture, became common in Iranian architecture from the 14th century, and were later adopted in the Ottoman Turkey.\nIn a stilted arch (also \"surmounted\"), the springing line is located above the imposts (on \"stilts\"). Known to Islamic architects by the 8th century, the technique was utilized to vertically align the apexes of arches of different dimensions in Romanesque and Gothic architecture. Stilting was useful for semicircular arches, where the ratio of the rise fixed at &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 of the span, but was applied to the pointed arches, too.\nThe skew arch (also known as an \"oblique arch\") is used when the arch needs to form an oblique angle in the horizontal plane with respect to the (parallel) springings, for example, when a bridge crosses the river at an angle different than 90\u00b0. A splayed arch is used for the case of unequal spans on the sides of the arch (when, for example, an interior opening in the wall is larger than the exterior one), the intrados of a round splayed arch is not cylindrical, but has a conical shape.\nA wide arch with its rise less than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 of the span (and thus the geometric circle of at least one segment is below the springing line) is called a surbased arch (sometimes also a \"depressed arch\"). A drop arch is either a basket handle arch or a blunt arch.\nHinged arches.\nPractical arch bridges are built either as a fixed arch, a two-hinged arch, or a three-hinged arch. \nThe fixed arch is most often used in reinforced concrete bridges and tunnels, which have short spans. Because it is subject to additional internal stress from thermal expansion and contraction, this kind of arch is statically indeterminate (the internal state is impossible to determine based on the external forces alone).\nThe two-hinged arch is most often used to bridge long spans. This kind of arch has pinned connections at its base. Unlike that of the fixed arch, the pinned base can rotate, thus allowing the structure to move freely and compensate for the thermal expansion and contraction that changes in outdoor temperature cause. However, this can result in additional stresses, and therefore the two-hinged arch is also statically indeterminate, although not as much as the fixed arch.\nThe three-hinged arch is not only hinged at its base, like the two-hinged arch, yet also at its apex. The additional apical connection allows the three-hinged arch to move in two opposite directions and compensate for any expansion and contraction. This kind of arch is thus not subject to additional stress from thermal change. Unlike the other two kinds of arch, the three-hinged arch is therefore statically determinate. It is most often used for spans of medial length, such as those of roofs of large buildings. Another advantage of the three-hinged arch is that the reaction of the pinned bases is more predictable than the one for the fixed arch, allowing shallow, bearing-type foundations in spans of medial length. In the three-hinged arch \"thermal expansion and contraction of the arch will cause vertical movements at the peak pin joint but will have no appreciable effect on the bases,\" which further simplifies foundational design.\nHistory.\nThe arch became popular in the Roman times and mostly spread alongside the European influence, although it was known and occasionally used much earlier. Many ancient architectures avoided the use of arches, including the Viking and Hindu ones. \nBronze Age: ancient Near East.\nTrue arches, as opposed to corbel arches, were known by a number of civilizations in the ancient Near East including the Levant, but their use was infrequent and mostly confined to underground structures, such as drains where the problem of lateral thrust is greatly diminished.\nAn example of the latter would be the Nippur arch, built before 3800 BC, and dated by H. V. Hilprecht\u00a0(1859\u20131925) to even before 4000 BC. Rare exceptions are an arched mudbrick home doorway dated to c.\u20092000\u00a0BC from Tell Taya in Iraq and two Bronze Age arched Canaanite city gates, one at Ashkelon (dated to c.\u20091850 BC), and one at Tel Dan (dated to c.\u20091750 BC), both in modern-day Israel. An Elamite tomb dated 1500 BC from Haft Teppe contains a parabolic vault which is considered one of the earliest evidences of arches in Iran.\nThe use of true arches in Egypt also originated in the 4th millennium BC (underground barrel vaults at the Dendera cemetery). Standing arches were known since at least the Third Dynasty, but very few examples survived, since the arches were mostly used in non-durable secular buildings and made of mud brick voussoirs that were not wedge-shaped, but simply held in place by mortar, and thus susceptible to a collapse (the oldest arch still standing is at Ramesseum). Sacred buildings exhibited either lintel design or corbelled arches. Arches were mostly missing in Egypt temples even after the Roman conquest, even though Egyptians thought of the arch as a spiritual shape and used it in the rock-cut tombs and portable shrines. Auguste Mariette suggested that this choice was based on a relative fragility of a vault: \"what would remain of the tombs and temples of Egyptians today, if they had preferred the vault?\"\nMycenaean architecture utilized only the corbel arches in their beehive tombs with triangular openings. Mycenaeans had also built probably the oldest still standing stone-arch bridge in the world, Arkadiko Bridge, in Greece. \nAs evidenced by their imitations of the parabolic arches, Hittites most likely were exposed to the Egyptian designs, but used the corbelled technique to build them. \nClassical Persia and Greece.\nThe Assyrians, also apparently under the Egyptian influence, adopted the true arch (with a slightly pointed profile) early in the 8th century. In ancient Persia, the Achaemenid Empire (550 BC\u2013330 BC) built small barrel vaults (essentially a series of arches built together to form a hall) known as \"iwan\", which became massive, monumental structures during the later Parthian Empire (247 BC\u2013AD 224). This architectural tradition was continued by the Sasanian Empire (224\u2013651), which built the Taq Kasra at Ctesiphon in the 6th century AD, the largest free-standing vault until modern times.\nAn early European example of a \"voussoir\" arch appears in the 4th century BC Greek Rhodes Footbridge. Proto-true arches can also be found under the stairs of the temple of Apollo at Didyma and the stadium at Olympia. \nAncient Rome.\nThe ancient Romans learned the semicircular arch from the Etruscans (both cultures apparently adopted the design in the 4th century BC), refined it and were the first builders in Europe to tap its full potential for above ground buildings:\nThe Romans were the first builders in Europe, perhaps the first in the world, to fully appreciate the advantages of the arch, the vault and the dome.\nThroughout the Roman Empire, from Syria to Scotland, engineers erected arch structures. The first use of arches was for civic structures, like drains and city gates. Later the arches were utilized for major civic buildings bridges and aqueducts, with the outstanding 1st century AD examples provided by the Colosseum, Pont Du Gard, and the aqueduct of Segovia. The introduction of the ceremonial triumphal arch dates back to Roman Republic, although the best examples are from the imperial times (Arch of Augustus at Susa, Arch of Titus). \nRomans initially avoided using the arch in the religious buildings and, in Rome, arched temples were quite rare until the recognition of Christianity in 313 AD (with the exceptions provided by the Pantheon and the \"temple of Minerva Medica\"). Away from the capital, arched temples were more common (temple of Hadrian at Ephesus, temple of Jupiter at Sbeitla, Severan temple at Djemila). Arrival of Christianity prompted creation of the new type of temple, a Christian basilica, that made a thorough break with the pagan tradition with arches as one of the main elements of the design, along with the exposed brick walls (Santa Sabina in Rome, Sant'Apollinare in Classe). For a long period, from the late 5th century to the 20th century, arcades were a standard staple for the Western Christian architecture. \nVaults began to be used for roofing large interior spaces such as halls and temples, a function that was also assumed by domed structures from the 1st century BC onwards.\nThe segmental arch was first built by the Romans who realized that an arch in a bridge did not have to be a semicircle, such as in Alcon\u00e9tar Bridge or Ponte San Lorenzo. The utilitarian and mass residential (insulae) buildings, as found in Ostia Antica and Pompeii, mostly used low segmental arches made of bricks and architraves made of wood, while the concrete lintel arches can be found in villas and palaces. \nAncient China.\nAncient architecture of China (and Japan) used mostly timber-framed construction and trabeated system. Arches were little-used, although there are few arch bridges known from literature and one artistic depiction in stone-carved relief. Since the only surviving artefacts of architecture from the Han dynasty (202\u00a0BC \u2013 220\u00a0AD) are rammed earth defensive walls and towers, ceramic roof tiles from no longer existent wooden buildings, stone gate towers, and underground brick tombs, the known vaults, domes, and archways were built with the support of the earth and were not free-standing.\nChina's oldest surviving stone arch bridge is the Anji Bridge. Still in use, it was built between 595 CE and 605 CE during the Sui dynasty.\nIslamic.\nIslamic architects adopted the Roman arches, but had quickly shown their resourcefulness: by the 8th century the simple semicircular arch was almost entirely replaced with fancier shapes, few fine examples of the former in the Umayyad architecture notwithstanding (cf. the Great Mosque of Damascus, 706\u2013715 CE). The first pointed arches appear already at the end of the 7th century AD (Al-Aqsa Mosque, Palace of Ukhaidhir, cisterns at the White Mosque of Ramle). Their variations spread fast and wide: Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo (876-879 AD), Nizamiyya Madrasa at Khar Gerd (now Iran, 11th century), Kongo Mosque in Diani Beach (Kenya, 16th century).\nIslamic architecture brought to life a large amount of arch forms: the round horseshoe arch that became a characteristic trait of the Islamic buildings, the keel arch, the cusped arch, and the mixed-line arch (where the curved \"ogee swell\" is interspersed with abrupt bends). The Great Mosque of Cordoba, that can be considered a catalogue of Islamic arches, contains also the arches with almost straight sides, trefoil, interlaced, and joggled. Mosque of Ibn Tulun adds four-centred and stilted version of the pointed arch. \nIt is quite likely that the appearance of the pointed arch, an essential element of the Gothic style, in Europe (Monte Cassino, 1066\u20131071 AD, and the Cluny Abbey five years later) and the ogee arch in Venice (c. 1250) is a result of the Islamic influence, possibly through Sicily. John Ruskin, however, traces the development of the Gothic ogee arch as an indigenous evolution of the different shapes (\"orders\") of the Florentine arch.\nSaoud also credits to Islamic architects the spread of the transverse arch. Mixed-line arch became popular in the Mud\u00e9jar style and subsequently spread around the Spanish-speaking world.\nWestern Europe.\nThe collapse of the Western Roman Empire left the church as the only client of major construction; with all pre-Romanesque architectural styles borrowing from Roman construction with its semicircular arch. Due to the decline in the construction quality, the walls were thicker, and the arches thus heavier, than their Roman prototypes. Eventually the architects started to use the depth of the arches for decoration, turning the deep opening into recessed orders (or \"rebated arch\", a sequence of progressively smaller concentric arches, each inset with a rebate). \nRomanesque style started experiments with the pointed arch late in the 11th century (Cluny Abbey). In few decades, the practice spread (Durham Cathedral, Basilica of Saint-Denis). Early Gothic utilized the flexibility of the pointed arch by grouping together arches of different spans but with the same height. \nWhile the arches used in the mediaeval Europe were borrowed from the Roman and Islamic architecture, the use of pointed arch to form the rib vault was novel and became the defining characteristic of Gothic construction. At about 1400 AD, the city-states of Italy, where the pointed arch had never gotten much traction, initiated the revival of the Roman style with its round arches, Renaissance. By the 16th century the new style spread across Europe and, through the influence of empires, to the rest of the world. Arch became a dominant architectural form until the introduction of the new construction materials, like steel and concrete.\nIndia.\nThe history of arch in India is very long (some arches were apparently found in excavations of Kosambi, 2nd millennium BC. However, the continuous history begins with rock-cut arches in the Lomas Rishi cave (3rd century BC). Vaulted roof of an early Harappan burial chamber has been noted at Rakhigarhi. S.R Rao reports vaulted roof of a small chamber in a house from Lothal. Barrel vaults were also used in the Late Harappan Cemetery H culture dated 1900 BC-1300 BC which formed the roof of the metal working furnace, the discovery was made by Vats in 1940 during excavation at Harappa.\nThe use of arches until the Islamic conquest of India in the 12th century AD was sporadic, with ogee arches and barrel vaults in rock-cut temples (Karla Caves, from the 1st century BC) and decorative pointed gavaksha arches. By the 5th century AD voussoir vaults were used structurally in the brick construction. Surviving examples include the temple at Bhitargaon (5th century AD) and Mahabodhi Temple (7th century AD), the latter has both pointed arches and semicircular arches. These Gupta era arch vault system was later used extensively in Burmese Buddhist temples in Pyu and Bagan in 11th and 12th centuries.\nWith the arrival of Islamic and other Western Asia influence, the arches became prominent in the Indian architecture, although the post and lintel construction was still preferred. A variety of pointed and lobed arches was characteristic for the Indo-Islamic architecture, with the monumental example of Buland Darwaza, that has pointed arch decorated with small cusped arches. \nPre-Columbian America.\nMayan architecture utilized the corbel arches. The other Mesoamerican cultures used only the flat roofs with no arches whatsoever, although some researchers had suggested that both Maya and Aztec architects understood the concept of a true arch.\nRevival of the trabeated system.\nThe 19th-century introduction of the wrought iron (and later steel) into construction changed the role of the arch. Due to the high tensile strength of new materials, relatively long lintels became possible, as was demonstrated by the tubular Britannia Bridge (Robert Stephenson, 1846-1850). A fervent proponent of the trabeated system, Alexander \"Greek\" Thomson, whose preference for lintels was originally based on aesthetic criteria, observed that the spans of this bridge are longer than that of any arch ever built, thus \"the simple, unsophisticated stone lintel contains in its structure all the scientific appliances [...] used in the great tubular bridge. [...] Stonehenge is more scientifically constructed than York Minster.\" Use of arches in bridge construction continued (the Britannia Bridge was rebuilt in 1972 as a truss arch bridge), yet the steel frames and reinforced concrete frames mostly replaced the arches as the load-bearing elements in buildings.\nConstruction.\nAs a pure compression form, the utility of the arch is due to many building materials, including stone and unreinforced concrete, being strong under compression, but brittle when tensile stress is applied to them.\nMasonry.\nThe voussoirs may be wedge-shaped or rectangular; in the latter case, the wedge action is provided by the mortar. During construction, the ring is supported on temporary timber or framed work called centering (a form of falsework), which follows the intrados profile of the arch. For arches higher than head height, the centering may be combined with scaffolding or staging to provide working access. For key parts of an arch, see arch terminology.\nAfter the keystone is set and the ring is seated, the centering is \"struck\" (lowered and removed). In mortared construction, removal is deferred until the mortar has gained adequate strength; modern guidance often recommends a minimum of seven days, with longer periods recommended in cold weather or when analysis requires it. To avoid shock and uneven load transfer, larger works are lowered uniformly using paired wedges, long compound wedges, or sand-boxes (sand jacks). Insufficient stiffness of the centering, premature striking, or construction faults can produce settlement or local failure as reactions shift toward the haunches and abutments.\nReinforced concrete.\nIn reinforced concrete construction, the principle of the arch is used so as to benefit from the concrete's strength in resisting compressive stress. Where any other form of stress is raised, such as tensile or torsional stress, it has to be resisted by carefully placed reinforcement rods or fibres.\nArchitectural styles.\nThe type of arches (or absence of them) is one of the most prominent characteristics of an architectural style. For example, when Heinrich H\u00fcbsch, in the 19th century, tried to classify the architectural style, his \"primary elements\" were roof and supports, with the top-level basic types: trabeated (no arches) and arcuated (arch-based). His next division for the arcuated styles was based on the use of round and pointed arch shapes.\nCultural references.\nThe steady horizontal push of an arch against the abutments gave rise to a saying \"the arch never sleeps\", attributed to many sources, from Hindu to Arabs. This adage stresses that the arch carries \"a seed of death\" for itself and the structure containing it, a statement that can be made upon observation of the Roman ruins. The plot of The Nebuly Coat by J. Meade Falkner, inspired by a collapse of a tower at the Chichester Cathedral plays with the idea while dealing with the slow disintegration of a church building. Saoud explains the proverb by chain-like self-balancing of the horizontal and vertical forces in the arch and its \"universal adaptability\".\nThe metaphoric term bald arch has been used since at least the 19th century to designate a decaying arch or a plain, unadorned, arch. The former meaning is still used in the 21st century.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52077", "revid": "26618737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52077", "title": "Jonathan Edwards (musician)", "text": "American singer-songwriter (born 1946)\nJonathan Edwards (born July 28, 1946) is an American country and folk singer-songwriter best known for his 1971 hit single \"Sunshine\".\nEarly years.\nJonathan Edwards was born John Evan Edwards on July 28, 1946, in Aitkin, Minnesota. At the age of six, he moved with his family to Virginia, where he grew up. At the age of eight, he began singing in church and learning to play piano by ear. While attending Fishburne Military School, he began playing guitar and composing his own songs. As a teenager he began performing in front of audiences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWhile studying art at Ohio University, he became a fixture at local clubs, playing with a variety of rock, folk, and blues bands.\nCareer.\nIn 1967, he and his band moved to Boston and played clubs throughout New England. With Joe Dolce on lead guitar, they played cover tunes as well as their own country-blues originals under various names, including the Headstone Circus, St. James Doorknob, and the Finite Minds, and they made an album for Metromedia Records as Sugar Creek.\nIn the early 1970s, Edwards left the band and began performing as a solo acoustic artist. He would later recall:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEdwards began opening for acts such as the Allman Brothers Band and B.B. King. He signed with Capricorn Records to record his first album, \"Jonathan Edwards\" (1971). \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We took about a year recording the first album\u2014different times, different studios, different sounds, different techniques. Recording was so new in '69 and '70. There was a song on the album called 'Please Find Me', and for some reason the engineer rolled over it. It got erased. We spent hours looking for it. We fired the engineer and put \"Sunshine\" in its place.\nLike most of the songs on \"Jonathan Edwards\", \"Sunshine\" was written shortly after Edwards left the band. \"I felt really fresh, really liberated,\" he later recalled. \"I just went out in the woods every day with my bottle of wine and guitar, sat by a lake near Boston and wrote down all those tunes, day after day.\" Regarding the theme of \"Sunshine\", Edwards commented, \"It was just at the time of the Vietnam War and Nixon. It was looking bad out there. That song meant a lot to a lot of people during that time\u2014especially me.\" \"Sunshine\" reached No. 4 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart, sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc by the R.I.A.A. in January 1972.\nFollowing the release of his debut album, Edwards moved out of the city to a farm in western Massachusetts, which provided the rural, country inspiration for his second album, \"Honky-Tonk Stardust Cowboy\" on the Atlantic Records label. This was an album of mostly self-penned acoustic, country-flavored songs about love and life and was closely followed by \"Have a Good Time For Me\", also on Atlantic.\nIn 1973 he and his friends got together to record a live album called \"Lucky Day\", named after a song he wrote in the truck on his way up to live in Nova Scotia. This \"fresh-air break\" lasted only a couple of months when his friend Emmylou Harris invited him to Los Angeles to sing backup on her album \"Elite Hotel\". That led to a deal with Warner Bros. Records and two albums produced by Harris' husband/producer Brian Ahern: \"Rockin' Chair\" and \"Sailboat\".\nIn 1979, Edwards moved back to the United States to New Hampshire, and then two years later back to Northern Virginia area where he had grown up. In 1983, he produced and recorded \"Blue Ridge\" with the bluegrass band, The Seldom Scene, for Sugar Hill Records. Then in 1987 he recorded a children's album, \"Little Hands\", which was released on the small independent American Melody label. It was selected by the American Library Association as a Notable Children's Recording.\nTurning to acting, Edwards toured as the lead in the Broadway musical \"Pump Boys and Dinettes\". When the show reached Nashville, he met an old friend from the folk circuit, Wendy Waldman. She and Mike Robertson convinced Edwards to come to town and record a country album. \"I've been making country-sounding records all my life, but never in Nashville. Yeah, let's do it.\" Edwards said. So, \"The Natural Thing\" was produced, recorded, and released on MCA/Curb Records in 1989. \"I was crazy about the songs we selected from those great Nashville writers, and the acoustic-based production that Wendy and I put together was just a joy to make and to listen to. I count that as one of the best albums I've ever been involved with.\"\nIn the 1990s, Edwards continued to tour, doing session work, and producing his own music as well as that of other talents, such as Cheryl Wheeler (\"Driving Home,\" \"Mrs. Pinocci's Guitar\"). He took part in the 1994 \"Back to the Future\" tour that also included Don McLean, Tom Rush, Jesse Colin Young, Steve Forbert and Al Stewart. In 1994 he released \"One Day Closer\", his first solo album in five years, on his new record label, Rising Records. \"Man in the Moon\", which includes several of Edwards' original songs, followed the end of 1997. In September 1997, Rising Records released a remixed, re-sequenced \"Among Us\", a CD by Simon Townshend, younger brother of the Who's Pete Townshend. Edwards also scored the soundtrack for \"The Mouse\", starring John Savage.\nIn 2001, Edwards celebrated 30 years of \"Sunshine\" with a First Annual Farewell Tour with Kenny White on piano. In the 2000s, Edwards narrated and performed in a travel series for Media Artists entitled \"Cruising America's Waterways\", which was purchased by PBS. Media Artists also released a companion album. Edwards participated in a second series, which started running on PBS-TV stations in May 2004.\nIn 2008, Edwards appeared in the romantic comedy film \"The Golden Boys\", starring Bruce Dern, David Carradine, Charles Durning, Mariel Hemingway, and Rip Torn. Set in Cape Cod in 1905, the film featured Edwards in the role of Reverend Perley. In addition to acting, Edwards scored the film.\nIn the fall of 2012, he appeared with Michael Martin Murphey in a series of concerts throughout New England. He continues to tour both solo and with band members Tom Snow, Rick Brodsky, Rob Duquette and Joe K. Walsh.\nEdwards lives in Portland, Maine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52078", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52078", "title": "Embedded", "text": "Embedded, embedding, imbedded or imbedding may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52080", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52080", "title": "Vibrio cholerae", "text": "Species of bacterium\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVibrio cholerae is a species of Gram-negative, facultative anaerobe and comma-shaped bacteria. The bacteria naturally live in brackish or saltwater where they attach themselves easily to the chitin-containing shells of crabs, shrimp, and other shellfish. Some strains of \"V. cholerae\" are pathogenic to humans and cause a deadly disease called cholera, which can be derived from the consumption of undercooked or raw marine life species or drinking contaminated water.\n\"V. cholerae\" was first described by F\u00e9lix-Archim\u00e8de Pouchet in 1849 as some kind of protozoa. Filippo Pacini correctly identified it as a bacterium and from him, the scientific name is adopted. The bacterium as the cause of cholera was discovered by Robert Koch in 1884. Sambhu Nath De isolated the cholera toxin and demonstrated the toxin as the cause of cholera in 1959.\nThe bacterium has a flagellum (a tail like structure) at one pole and several pili throughout its cell surface. It undergoes respiratory and fermentative metabolism. Two serogroups called O1 and O139 are responsible for cholera outbreaks. Infection is mainly through drinking contaminated water or ingestion of food contaminated with faecal matter from an infected person, therefore is linked to sanitation and hygiene. When ingested, it invades the intestinal mucosa which can cause diarrhea and vomiting in a host within several hours to 2\u20133 days of ingestion. Ringers lactate and Oral rehydration solution combined with antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines are the common treatment methods in severe cases.\n\"V. cholerae\" has two circular chromosomes. One chromosomes produces the cholera toxin (CT), a protein that causes profuse, watery diarrhea (known as \"rice-water stool\"). But the DNA does not directly code for the toxin as the genes for cholera toxin are carried by CTXphi (CTX\u03c6), a temperate bacteriophage (virus). The virus only produces the toxin when inserted into the bacterial DNA. Quorum sensing in \"V. cholerae\" is well studied and it activates host immune signaling and prolongs host survival, by limiting the bacterial intake of nutrients, such as tryptophan, which further is converted to serotonin. As such, quorum sensing allows a commensal interaction between host and pathogenic bacteria.\nDiscovery.\nInitial observations.\nDuring the third global pandemic of cholera (1846\u20131860), there was extensive scientific research to understand the etiology of the disease. The miasma theory, which posited that infections spread through contaminated air, was no longer a satisfactory explanation. The English physician John Snow was the first to give convincing evidence in London in 1854 that cholera was spread from drinking water \u2013 a contagion, not miasma. Yet he could not identify the pathogens, which made most people still believe in the miasma origin.\n\"V. cholerae\" was first observed and recognized under microscope by the French zoologist F\u00e9lix-Archim\u00e8de Pouchet. In 1849, Pouchet examined the stool samples of four people having cholera. His presentation before the French Academy of Sciences on 23 April was recorded as: \"[Pouchet] could verify that there existed in these [cholera patients] dejecta an immense quantity of microscopic infusoria.\" As summarised in the Gazette medicale de Paris (1849, p 327), in a letter read at the 23 April 1849 meeting of the Paris Academy of Sciences, Pouchet announced that the organisms were \"infusoria\", a name then used for microscopic protists, naming them as the \"'Vibrio rugula\" of Mueller and Shrank', a species of protozoa described by Danish naturalist Otto Friedrich M\u00fcller in 1786.\nIdentification of the bacterium.\nAn Italian physician, Filippo Pacini, while investigating cholera outbreak in Florence in the late 1854, identified the causative pathogen as a new type of bacterium. He performed autopsies of corpses and made meticulous microscopic examinations of the tissues and body fluids. From feces and intestinal mucosa, he identified many comma-shaped bacilli. Reporting his discovery before the Societ\u00e0 Medico-Fisica Fiorentina (Medico-Physician Society of Florence) on 10 December, and published in the 12 December issue of the \"Gazzetta Medica Italiana\" (\"Medical Gazette of Italy\"), Pacini stated:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Le poche materie del vomito che ho potuto esaminare nel secondo e terzo caso di cholera ... e di pi\u00f9 trovai degli ammassi granulosi appianati, simili a quelli che si formano alla superficie delle acque corrotte, quando sono per svilupparsi dei vibrioni; dei quali di fatto ne trovai alcuni del genere \"Bacterium\", mentre la massima parte, per la loro estrema piccolezza, erano stati eliminati con la decantazione del fluido. [From the few samples of vomit that I was able to examine in the second and third cases of cholera ... and in addition I found smoothed granular masses, similar to those which form on the surface of dirty waters, when they are about to develop vibrios; of which in fact I found some of the genus \"Bacterium\", while the greatest part, because of their extreme smallness, had been eliminated with the removal of the liquid.]Pacini thus introduced the name \"vibrioni\" (Latin \"v\u012bbro\" means \"to move rapidly to and fro, to shake, to agitate\"). A Catalan physician Joaquim Balcells i Pascual also reported such bacterium around the same time. The discovery of the new bacterium was not regarded as medically important as the bacterium was not directly attributed to cholera. Pacini also stated that there was no reason to say that the bacterium caused the disease since he failed to create a pure culture and perform experiments, which was necessary 'to attribute the quality of contagion to cholera'. The miasma theory was still not ruled out.\nRediscovery.\nThe medical importance and relationship between the bacterium and the cholera disease was discovered by German physician Robert Koch. In August 1883, Koch, with a team of German physicians, went to Alexandria, Egypt, to investigate the cholera epidemic there. Koch found that the intestinal mucosa of people who died of cholera always had the bacterium, yet he could not confirm if it was the causative agent. He moved to Calcutta (now Kolkata), India, where the epidemic was more severe. It was from here that he isolated the bacterium in a pure culture on 7 January 1884. He subsequently confirmed that the bacterium was a new species, and described it as \"a little bent, like a comma.\" He reported his discovery to the German Secretary of State for the Interior on 2 February, and it was published in the \"Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift\" (\"German Medical Weekly\").\nAlthough Koch was convinced that the bacterium was the cholera pathogen, he could not entirely procure critical evidence that the bacterium produced the symptoms in healthy subjects (an important element in what was later known as Koch's postulates). His experiment on animals using his pure bacteria culture did not lead to the appearance of the disease in any of the subjects, and he correctly deduced that animals are immune to the human pathogen. The bacterium was by then known as \"the comma bacillus.\" It was only in 1959, in Calcutta, that Indian physician Sambhu Nath De isolated the cholera toxin and showed that it caused cholera in healthy subjects, hence fully proving the bacterium-cholera relationship.\nTaxonomy.\nPacini had used the name \"vibrio cholera\", without proper binomial rendering, for the name of the bacterium. Following Koch's description, a scientific name \"Bacillus comma\" was popularised. But an Italian bacteriologist Vittore Trevisan published in 1884 that Koch's bacterium was the same as that of Pacini's and introduced the name \"Bacillus cholerae.\" A German physician Richard Friedrich Johannes Pfeiffer renamed it as \"Vibrio cholerae\" in 1896. The named was adopted by the Committee of the Society of American Bacteriologists on Characterization and Classification of Bacterial Types in 1920. In 1964, Rudolph Hugh of the George Washington University School of Medicine proposed to use the genus \"Vibrio\" with the type species \"V. cholerae\" (Pacini 1854) as a permanent name of the bacterium, regardless of the same name for protozoa. It was accepted by the Judicial Commission of the International Committee on Bacteriological Nomenclature in 1965, and the International Association of Microbiological Societies in 1966.\nCharacteristics.\n\"V. cholerae\" is a highly motile, comma shaped, gram-negative rod. The active movement of \"V. cholerae\" inspired the genus name because \"vibrio\" in Latin means \"to quiver\". Except for \"V. cholerae\" and \"V. mimicus\", all other vibrio species are halophilic. Initial isolates are slightly curved, whereas they can appear as straight rods upon laboratory culturing. The bacterium has a flagellum at one cell pole as well as pili. It tolerates alkaline media that kill most intestinal commensals, but they are sensitive to acid. It is an aerobe while all other Vibrios are facultative anaerobes, and can undergo respiratory and fermentative metabolism. It measures 0.3 \u03bcm in diameter and 1.3 \u03bcm in length with average swimming velocity of around 75.4 \u03bcm/sec.\nPathogenicity.\n\"V. cholerae\" pathogenicity genes code for proteins directly or indirectly involved in the virulence of the bacteria. To adapt the host intestinal environment and to avoid being attacked by bile acids and antimicrobial peptides, \"V. cholera\" uses its outer membrane vesicles (OMVs). Upon entry, the bacteria sheds its OMVs, containing all the membrane modifications that make it vulnerable for the host attack.\nDuring infection, \"V. cholerae\" secretes cholera toxin (CT), a protein that causes profuse, watery diarrhea (known as \"rice-water stool\"). This cholera toxin contains 5 B subunits that plays a role in attaching to the intestinal epithelial cells and 1 A subunit that plays a role in toxin activity\".\" Colonization of the small intestine also requires the toxin coregulated pilus (TCP), a thin, flexible, filamentous appendage on the surface of bacterial cells. Expression of both CT and TCP is mediated by two component systems (TCS), which typically consist of a membrane-bound histidine kinase and an intracellular response element. TCS enable bacteria to respond to changing environments. In \"V. cholerae\" several TCS have been identified to be important in colonization, biofilm production and virulence. Quorum regulatory small RNAs (Qrr RNA) have been identified as targets of \"V. cholerae\" TCS. Here, the small RNA (sRNA) molecules bind to mRNA to block translation or induce degradation of inhibitors of expression of virulence or colonization genes. In \"V. cholerae\" the TCS EnvZ/OmpR alters gene expression via the sRNA \"coaR\" in response to changes in osmolarity and pH. An important target of \"coaR\" is \"tcpI\", which negatively regulates expression of the major subunit of the TCP encoding gene (\"tcpA\"). When \"tcpI\" is bound by \"coaR\" it is no longer able to repress expression \"tcpA\", leading to an increased colonization ability. Expression of \"coaR\" is upregulated by EnvZ/OmpR at a pH of 6,5, which is the normal pH of the intestinal lumen, but is low at higher pH values. \"V. cholerae\" in the intestinal lumen utilizes the TCP to attach to the intestinal mucosa, not invading the mucosa. After doing so it secretes cholerae toxin causing its symptoms. This then increases cyclic AMP or cAMP by binding (cholerae toxin) to adenylyl cyclase activating the GS pathway which leads to efflux of water and sodium into the intestinal lumen causing watery stools or rice watery stools.\n\"V. cholerae\" can cause syndromes ranging from asymptomatic to cholera gravis. In endemic areas, 75% of cases are asymptomatic, 20% are mild to moderate, and 2\u20135% are severe forms such as cholera gravis. Symptoms include abrupt onset of watery diarrhea (a grey and cloudy liquid), occasional vomiting, and abdominal cramps. Dehydration ensues, with symptoms and signs such as thirst, dry mucous membranes, decreased skin turgor, sunken eyes, hypotension, weak or absent radial pulse, tachycardia, tachypnea, hoarse voice, oliguria, cramps, kidney failure, seizures, somnolence, coma, and death. Death due to dehydration can occur in a few hours to days in untreated children. The disease is also particularly dangerous for pregnant women and their fetuses during late pregnancy, as it may cause premature labor and fetal death. A study done by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Haiti found that in pregnant women who contracted the disease, 16% of 900 women had fetal death. Risk factors for these deaths include: third trimester, younger maternal age, severe dehydration, and vomiting Dehydration poses the biggest health risk to pregnant women in countries that there are high rates of cholera. In cases of cholera gravis involving severe dehydration, up to 60% of patients can die; however, less than 1% of cases treated with rehydration therapy are fatal. The disease typically lasts 4\u20136 days. Worldwide, diarrhoeal disease, caused by cholera and many other pathogens, is the second-leading cause of death for children under the age of 5 and at least 120,000 deaths are estimated to be caused by cholera each year. In 2002, the WHO deemed that the case fatality ratio for cholera was about 3.95%.\nCholera illness and symptoms.\n\"V. cholerae\" infects the intestine and causes diarrhea, the hallmark symptom of cholera. Infection can be spread by eating contaminated food or drinking contaminated water. It also can spread through skin contact with contaminated human feces. Not all infection indicate symptoms, only about 1 in 10 people develop diarrhea. The major symptoms include: watery diarrhea, vomiting, rapid heart rate, loss of skin elasticity, low blood pressure, thirst, and muscle cramps. This illness can get serious as it can progress to kidney failure and possible coma. If diagnosed, it can be treated using medications.\nDisease occurrence.\n\"V. cholerae\" has an endemic or epidemic occurrence. In countries where the disease has been for the past three years and the cases confirmed are local (within the confines of the country) transmission is considered to be \"endemic.\" Alternatively, an outbreak is declared when the occurrence of disease exceeds the normal occurrence for any given time or location. Epidemics can last several days or over a span of years. Additionally, countries that have an occurrence of an epidemic can also be endemic. The longest standing \"V. cholerae\" epidemic was recorded in Yemen. Yemen had two outbreaks, the first occurred between September 2016 and April 2017, and the second began later in April 2017 and recently was considered to be resolved in 2019. The epidemic in Yemen took over 2,500 lives and impacted over 1 million people of Yemen. More outbreaks have occurred in Africa, the Americas, and Haiti.\nPreventive measures.\nWhen visiting areas with epidemic cholera, the following precautions should be observed: drink and use bottled water; frequently wash hands with soap and safe water; use chemical toilets or bury feces if no restroom is available; do not defecate in any body of water and cook food thoroughly. Supplying proper, safe water is important. A precaution to take is to properly sanitize. Hand hygiene is an essential in areas where soap and water is not available. When there is no sanitation available for hand washing, scrub hands with ash or sand and rinse with clean water. A single dose vaccine is available for those traveling to an area where cholera is common.\nThere is a \"V. cholerae\" vaccine available to prevent disease spread. The vaccine is known as the, \"oral cholera vaccine\" (OCV). There are three types of OCV available for prevention: Dukoral\u00ae, Shanchol\u2122, and Euvichol-Plus\u00ae. All three OCVs require two doses to be fully effective. Countries who are endemic or have an epidemic status are eligible to receive the vaccine based on several criteria: Risk of cholera, Severity of cholera, WASH conditions and capacity to improve, Healthcare conditions and capacity to improve, Capacity to implement OCV campaigns, Capacity to conduct M&amp;E activities, Commitment at national and local level Since May the start of the OCV program to May 2018 over 25 million vaccines have been distributed to countries who meet the above criteria.\nTreatment.\nThe basic, overall treatment for Cholera is re-hydration, to replace the fluids that have been lost. Those with mild dehydration can be treated orally with an oral rehydration solution (ORS). When patients are severely dehydrated and unable to take in the proper amount of ORS, IV fluid treatment is generally pursued. Antibiotics are used in some cases, typically fluoroquinolones and tetracyclines.\nGenome.\n\"V. cholerae\" (and Vibrionaceae in general) has two circular chromosomes, together totalling 4 million base pairs of DNA sequence and 3,885 predicted genes. The genes for cholera toxin are carried by CTXphi (CTX\u03c6), a temperate bacteriophage inserted into the \"V. cholerae\" genome. CTX\u03c6 can transmit cholera toxin genes from one \"V. cholerae\" strain to another, one form of horizontal gene transfer. The genes for toxin coregulated pilus are coded by the Vibrio pathogenicity island (VPI), which is separate from the prophage.\nThe larger first chromosome is 3\u00a0Mbp long with 2,770 open reading frames (ORFs). It contains the crucial genes for toxicity, regulation of toxicity, and important cellular functions, such as transcription and translation.\nThe second chromosome is 1\u00a0Mbp long with 1115 ORFs. It is determined to be different from a plasmid or megaplasmid due to the inclusion of housekeeping and other essential genes in the genome, including essential genes for metabolism, heat-shock proteins, and 16S rRNA genes, which are ribosomal subunit genes used to track evolutionary relationships between bacteria. Also relevant in determining if the replicon is a chromosome is whether it represents a significant percentage of the genome, and chromosome 2 is 40% by size of the entire genome. And, unlike plasmids, chromosomes are not self-transmissible. However, the second chromosome may have once been a megaplasmid because it contains some genes usually found on plasmids, including a P1 plastid-like origin of replication.\nBacteriophage CTX\u03c6.\nCTX\u03c6 (also called CTXphi) is a filamentous phage that contains the genes for cholera toxin. Infectious CTX\u03c6 particles are produced when \"V. cholerae\" infects humans. Phage particles are secreted from bacterial cells without lysis. When CTX\u03c6 infects \"V. cholerae\" cells, it integrates into specific sites on either chromosome. These sites often contain tandem arrays of integrated CTX\u03c6 prophage. In addition to the \"ctxA\" and \"ctxB\" genes encoding cholera toxin, CTX\u03c6 contains eight genes involved in phage reproduction, packaging, secretion, integration, and regulation. The CTX\u03c6 genome is 6.9 kb long.\nEcology and epidemiology.\nThe main reservoirs of \"V. cholerae\" are aquatic sources such as rivers, brackish waters, and estuaries, often in association with copepods or other zooplankton, shellfish, and aquatic plants.\nCholera infections are most commonly acquired from drinking water in which \"V. cholerae\" is found naturally or into which it has been introduced from the feces of an infected person. Cholera is most likely to be found and spread in places with inadequate water treatment, poor sanitation, and inadequate hygiene. Other common vehicles include raw or undercooked fish and shellfish. Transmission from person to person is very unlikely, and casual contact with an infected person is not a risk for becoming ill.\"V. cholerae\" thrives in an aquatic environment, particularly in surface water. The primary connection between humans and pathogenic strains is through water, particularly in economically reduced areas that do not have good water purification systems.\nNonpathogenic strains are also present in water ecologies. The wide variety of pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains that co-exist in aquatic environments are thought to allow for so many genetic varieties. Gene transfer is fairly common amongst bacteria, and recombination of different \"V. cholerae\" genes can lead to new virulent strains.\nA symbiotic relationship between \"V. cholerae\" and \"Ruminococcus obeum\" has been determined. \"R. obeum\" autoinducer represses the expression of several \"V. cholerae\" virulence factors. This inhibitory mechanism is likely to be present in other gut microbiota species which opens the way to mine the gut microbiota of members in specific communities which may utilize autoinducers or other mechanisms in order to restrict colonization by \"V. cholerae\" or other enteropathogens. Autoinducers, specifically with \"V. cholerae,\" can develop biofilms and control virulence in response to extracellular quorum-sensing molecules. \nOutbreaks of Cholera cause an estimated 120,000 deaths annually worldwide. There has been roughly seven pandemics since 1817, the first. These pandemics first arose in the Indian subcontinent and spread.\nDiversity and evolution.\nTwo serogroups of \"V. cholerae\", O1 and O139, cause outbreaks of cholera. O1 causes the majority of outbreaks, while O139 \u2013 first identified in Bangladesh in 1992 \u2013 is confined to Southeast Asia. Many other serogroups of \"V. cholerae\", with or without the cholera toxin gene (including the nontoxigenic strains of the O1 and O139 serogroups), can cause a cholera-like illness. Only toxigenic strains of serogroups O1 and O139 have caused widespread epidemics.\n\"V. cholerae\" O1 has two biotypes, classical and El Tor, and each biotype has two distinct serotypes, Inaba and Ogawa. The symptoms of infection are indistinguishable, although more people infected with the El Tor biotype remain asymptomatic or have only a mild illness. In recent years, infections with the classical biotype of \"V. cholerae\" O1 have become rare and are limited to parts of Bangladesh and India. Recently, new variant strains have been detected in several parts of Asia and Africa. Observations suggest these strains cause more severe cholera with higher case fatality rates.\nNatural genetic transformation.\n\"V. cholerae\" can be induced to become competent for natural genetic transformation when grown on chitin, a biopolymer that is abundant in aquatic habitats (e.g. from crustacean exoskeletons). Natural genetic transformation is a sexual process involving DNA transfer from one bacterial cell to another through the intervening medium, and the integration of the donor sequence into the recipient genome by homologous recombination. Transformation competence in \"V. cholerae\" is stimulated by increasing cell density accompanied by nutrient limitation, a decline in growth rate, or stress. The \"V. cholerae\" uptake machinery involves a competence-induced pilus, and a conserved DNA binding protein that acts as a ratchet to reel DNA into the cytoplasm. There are two models of genetic transformation, sex hypothesis and competent bacteria.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52081", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52081", "title": "Antihydrogen", "text": "Exotic particle made of an antiproton and positron\nAntihydrogen (H) is the antimatter counterpart of hydrogen. Whereas the common hydrogen atom is composed of an electron and proton, the antihydrogen atom is made up of a positron and antiproton. Scientists hope that studying antihydrogen may shed light on the question of why there is more matter than antimatter in the observable universe, known as the baryon asymmetry problem. Antihydrogen is produced artificially in particle accelerators. \nExperimental history.\nAccelerators first detected hot antihydrogen in the 1990s. ATHENA studied cold H in 2002. It was first trapped by the Antihydrogen Laser Physics Apparatus (ALPHA) team at CERN in 2010, who then measured the structure and other important properties. ALPHA, https://, and GBAR plan to further cool and study H atoms.\n1s\u20132s transition measurement.\nIn 2016, the ALPHA experiment measured the atomic electron transition between the two lowest energy levels of antihydrogen, 1s\u20132s. The results, which are identical to that of hydrogen within the experimental resolution, support the idea of matter\u2013antimatter symmetry and CPT symmetry.\nIn the presence of a magnetic field the 1s\u20132s transition splits into two hyperfine transitions with slightly different frequencies. The team calculated the transition frequencies for normal hydrogen under the magnetic field in the confinement volume as:\nfdd = \nfcc = \nA single-photon transition between s states is prohibited by quantum selection rules, so to elevate ground state positrons to the 2s level, the confinement space was illuminated by a laser tuned to half the calculated transition frequencies, stimulating allowed two photon absorption.\nAntihydrogen atoms excited to the 2s state can then evolve in one of several ways:\nBoth the ionization and spin-flip outcomes cause the atom to escape confinement. The team calculated that, assuming antihydrogen behaves like normal hydrogen, roughly half the antihydrogen atoms would be lost during the resonant frequency exposure, as compared to the no-laser case. With the laser source tuned 200\u00a0kHz below half the transition frequencies, the calculated loss was essentially the same as for the no-laser case.\nThe ALPHA team made batches of antihydrogen, held them for 600 seconds and then tapered down the confinement field over 1.5 seconds while counting how many antihydrogen atoms were annihilated. They did this under three different experimental conditions:\nThe two controls, off-resonance and no-laser, were needed to ensure that the laser illumination itself was not causing annihilations, perhaps by liberating normal atoms from the confinement vessel surface that could then combine with the antihydrogen.\nThe team conducted 11 runs of the three cases and found no significant difference between the off-resonance and no laser runs, but a 58% drop in the number of events detected after the resonance runs. They were also able to count annihilation events during the runs and found a higher level during the resonance runs, again with no significant difference between the off-resonance and no laser runs. The results were in good agreement with predictions based on normal hydrogen and can be \"interpreted as a test of CPT symmetry at a precision of 200\u00a0ppt.\"\nCharacteristics.\nThe CPT theorem of particle physics predicts antihydrogen atoms have many of the characteristics regular hydrogen has; i.e. the same mass, magnetic moment, and atomic state transition frequencies (see \"atomic spectroscopy\"). For example, excited antihydrogen atoms are expected to glow the same color as regular hydrogen. Antihydrogen atoms should be attracted to other matter or antimatter gravitationally with a force of the same magnitude that ordinary hydrogen atoms experience. This would not be true if antimatter has negative gravitational mass, which is considered highly unlikely, though not yet empirically disproven (see \"gravitational interaction of antimatter\"). Recent theoretical framework for negative mass and repulsive gravity (antigravity) between matter and antimatter has been developed, and the theory is compatible with CPT theorem.\nWhen antihydrogen comes into contact with ordinary matter, its constituents quickly annihilate. The positron annihilates with an electron to produce gamma rays. The antiproton, on the other hand, is made up of antiquarks that combine with quarks in either neutrons or protons, resulting in high-energy pions, that quickly decay into muons, neutrinos, positrons, and electrons. If antihydrogen atoms were suspended in a perfect vacuum, they should survive indefinitely.\nAs an anti-element, it is expected to have exactly the same properties as hydrogen. For example, antihydrogen would be a gas under standard conditions and combine with antioxygen to form antiwater, H2O.\nProduction.\nThe first antihydrogen was produced in 1995 by a team led by Walter Oelert at CERN using a method first proposed by Charles Munger Jr., Stanley Brodsky and Ivan Schmidt Andrade.\nIn the LEAR, antiprotons from an accelerator were shot at xenon clusters, producing electron-positron pairs. Antiprotons can capture positrons with probability about , so this method is not suited for substantial production, as calculated. Fermilab measured a somewhat different cross section, in agreement with predictions of quantum electrodynamics. Both resulted in highly energetic, or hot, anti-atoms, unsuitable for detailed study.\nSubsequently, CERN built the Antiproton Decelerator (AD) to support efforts towards low-energy antihydrogen, for tests of fundamental symmetries. The AD supplies several CERN groups. CERN expects their facilities will be capable of producing 10 million antiprotons per minute.\nLow-energy antihydrogen.\nExperiments by the ATRAP and ATHENA collaborations at CERN, brought together positrons and antiprotons in Penning traps, resulting in synthesis at a typical rate of 100 antihydrogen atoms per second. Antihydrogen was first produced by ATHENA in 2002, and then by ATRAP and by 2004, millions of antihydrogen atoms were made. The atoms synthesized had a relatively high temperature (a few thousand kelvins), and would hit the walls of the experimental apparatus as a consequence and annihilate. Most precision tests require long observation times.\nALPHA, a successor of the ATHENA collaboration, was formed to stably trap antihydrogen. While electrically neutral, its spin magnetic moments interact with an inhomogeneous magnetic field; some atoms will be attracted to a magnetic minimum, created by a combination of mirror and multipole fields.\nIn November 2010, the ALPHA collaboration announced that they had trapped 38 antihydrogen atoms for a sixth of a second, the first confinement of neutral antimatter. In June 2011, they trapped 309 antihydrogen atoms, up to 3 simultaneously, for up to 1,000 seconds. They then studied its hyperfine structure, gravity effects, and charge. ALPHA will continue measurements along with experiments ATRAP, https:// and GBAR.\nIn 2018, https:// has produced a novel pulsed source of antihydrogen atoms with a production time spread of merely 250 nanoseconds.\nThe pulsed source is generated by the charge exchange reaction between Rydberg positronium atoms -- produced via the injection of a pulsed positron beam into a nanochanneled Si target, and excited by laser pulses -- and antiprotons, trapped, cooled and manipulated in electromagnetic traps. The pulsed production enables the control of the antihydrogen temperature, the formation of an antihydrogen beam, and in the next phase a precision measurement on the gravitational behaviour using an atomic interferometer, the so-called Moir\u00e9 deflectormeter.\nLarger antimatter atoms.\nLarger antimatter atoms such as antideuterium (D), antitritium (T), and antihelium (He) are much more difficult to produce. Antideuterium, antihelium-3 (He) and antihelium-4 (He) nuclei have been produced with such high velocities that synthesis of their corresponding atoms poses several technical hurdles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52082", "revid": "38046478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52082", "title": "Cable transport", "text": "Class of transport modes\nCable transport is a broad class of transport modes that have cables. They transport passengers and goods, often in vehicles called cable cars. The cable may be driven or passive, and items may be moved by pulling, sliding, sailing, or by drives within the object being moved on cableways. The use of pulleys and balancing of loads moving up and down are common elements of cable transport. They are often used in mountainous areas where cable haulage can overcome large differences in elevation.\nCommon modes of cable transport.\nAerial transport.\nForms of cable transport in which one or more cables are strung between supports of various forms and cars are suspended from these cables.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCable railways.\nForms of cable transport where cars on rails are hauled by cables. The rails are usually steeply inclined and usually at ground level. \nOther.\nOther forms of cable-hauled transport.\nHistory.\nRope-drawn transport dates back to 250 BC as evidenced by illustrations of aerial ropeway transportation systems in South China.\nEarly aerial tramways.\nThe first recorded mechanical ropeway was by Venetian Fausto Veranzio who designed a bi-cable passenger ropeway in 1616. The industry generally considers Dutchman Adam Wybe to have built the first operational system in 1644. The technology, which was further developed by the people living in the Alpine regions of Europe, progressed and expanded with the advent of wire rope and electric drive.\nThe first use of wire rope for aerial tramways is disputed. American inventor Peter Cooper is one early claimant, constructing an aerial tramway using wire rope in Baltimore 1832, to move landfill materials. Though there is only partial evidence for the claimed 1832 tramway, Cooper was involved in many of such tramways built in the 1850s, and in 1853 he built a two-mile-long tramway to transport iron ore to his blast furnaces at Ringwood, New Jersey.\nWorld War I motivated extensive use of military tramways for warfare between Italy and Austria.\nDuring the industrial revolution, new forms of cable-hauled transportation systems were created including the use of steel cable to allow for greater load support and larger systems. Aerial tramways were first used for commercial passenger haulage in the 1900s.\nThe first cable railways.\nThe earliest form of cable railway was the gravity incline, which in its simplest form consists of two parallel tracks laid on a steep gradient, with a single rope wound around a winding drum and connecting the trains of wagons on the tracks. Loaded wagons at the top of the incline are lowered down, their weight hauling empty wagons from the bottom. The winding drum has a brake to control the rate of travel of the wagons. The first use of a gravity incline isn't recorded, but the Llandegai Tramway at Bangor in North Wales was opened in 1798, and is one of the earliest examples using iron rails.\nThe first cable-hauled street railway was the London and Blackwall Railway, built in 1840, which used fibre to grip the haulage rope. This caused a series of technical and safety issues, which led to the adoption of steam locomotives by 1848.\nThe first Funicular railway was opened in Lyon in 1862.\nThe Westside and Yonkers Patent Railway Company developed a cable-hauled elevated railway. This 3\u00bd mile long line was proposed in 1866 and opened in 1868. It operated as a cable railway until 1871 when it was converted to use steam locomotives.\nThe next development of the cable car came in California. Andrew Hallidie, a Scottish emigre, gave San Francisco the first effective and commercially successful route, using steel cables, opening the Clay Street Hill Railroad on August 2, 1873. Hallidie was a manufacturer of steel cables. The system featured a human-operated grip, which was able to start and stop the car safely. The rope that was used allowed the multiple, independent cars to run on one line, and soon Hallidie's concept was extended to multiple lines in San Francisco.\nThe first cable railway outside the United Kingdom and the United States was the Roslyn Tramway, which opened in 1881, in Dunedin, New Zealand. America remained the country that made the greatest use of cable railways; by 1890 more than 500 miles of cable-hauled track had been laid, carrying over 1,000,000 passengers per year. However, in 1890, electric tramways exceeded the cable hauled tramways in mileage, efficiency and speed.\nEarly ski lifts.\nThe first surface lift was built in 1908 by German Robert Winterhalder in Schollach/Eisenbach, Hochschwarzwald and started operations February 14, 1908. \nA steam-powered toboggan tow, in length, was built in Truckee, California, in 1910. The first skier-specific tow in North America was apparently installed in 1933 by Alec Foster at Shawbridge in the Laurentians outside Montreal, Quebec.\nThe modern J-bar and T-bar mechanism was invented in 1934 by the Swiss engineer Ernst Constam, with the first lift installed in Davos, Switzerland. \nThe first chairlift was developed by James Curran in 1936. The co-owner of the Union Pacific Railroad, William Averell Harriman owned America's first ski resort, Sun Valley, Idaho. He asked his design office to tackle the problem of lifting skiers to the top of the resort. Curran, a Union Pacific bridge designer, adapted a cable hoist he had designed for loading bananas in Honduras to create the first ski lift.\nMore recent developments.\nMore recent developments are being classified under the type of track that their design is based upon. After the success of this operation, several other projects were initiated in New Zealand and Chicago. The social climate around pollution is allowing for a shift from cars back to the utilization of cable transport due to their advantages. However, for many years they were a niche form of transportation used primarily in difficult-to-operate conditions for cars (such as on ski slopes as lifts). Now that cable transport projects are on the increase, the social effects are beginning to become more significant.\nIn 2018 the highest 3S cablecar has been inaugurated in Zermatt, Switzerland after more than two years of construction. This cablecar is also called the \"Matterhorn Glacier ride\" and it allows passengers to reach the top of the Klein Matterhorn mountain (3883m)\nUrban cableways.\nUrban cable transport encompasses all transport systems that use cables to pull vehicles around cities. The gondola or cableway type is spreading relatively quickly in South American urban environments, following the success of Medell\u00edn's Metrocable around 2004.&lt;ref name=\"10.1080/01441647.2023.2294752\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; As of 2023, 33 aerial cable cars (ACC) transit lines were inaugurated in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), the majority after 2010. There are also three recent installations in Algeria in Tlemcen, Skikda and Constantine. Urban cable cars are a relatively old concept \u2013 the Bastille cable car in Grenoble, France went into service in 1934 and the Sugarloaf Cable Cars in Rio de Janeiro in 1912 and 1913, although the purpose of these installations is not to transport city dwellers in the narrow sense, but to serve as a tourist site. The majority of installations were built to overcome specific geographical challenges, such as for river crossings, access to islands, major urban breaks (motorway, railway, large industrial site) or steep gradients.\nUrban cable cars often have advantages such as relatively small environmental footprints or less air pollution, rapid and less complex construction than other transport infrastructures, lower cost, low noise pollution, faster transport, a comfortable pleasant view, a pull factor for tourists, very little space needs at ground level,and lower energy cost per passenger. In Medellin, connecting high-up neighborhoods with the rest of the city through its MetroCable system has helped reduce the city's crime rates. Disadvantages can include challenges of poor weather conditions and slower speeds depending on the case. \nAccording to a World Bank study, they typically reach speeds of between 10-20km/h and can carry up to 2,000 people per hour in each direction. One line in Bolivia's capital La Paz carries up to 65,000 people every 24 hours. It has a length of 16km as of 2019 and a one-way ticket costed around $0.42. There are installations planned all over the world that do not necessarily address specific geographical problems \u2013 according to The Gondola Project, these include Tasmania, Gothenburg (Sweden), Mombasa (Kenya) and Chicago.\nSocial effects.\nComparison with other transport types.\nWhen compared to trains and cars, the volume of people to transport over time and the start-up cost of the project must be a consideration. In areas with extensive road networks, personal vehicles offer greater flexibility and range. Remote places like mountainous regions and ski slopes may be difficult to link with roads, making cable transport project a much easier approach. A cable transport project system may also need fewer invasive changes to the local environment.\nThe use of Cable Transport is not limited to such rural locations as skiing resorts; it can be used in urban development areas. Their uses in urban areas include funicular railways, gondola lifts, and aerial tramways.\nSafety.\nAccording to a study by the technical inspection association T\u00dcV S\u00dcD, for every 100 million hours of travel, there are on average 25 deaths due to car accidents, 16 due to plane accidents and only two due to cable car accidents, most of which are due to passenger behaviour.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52083", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52083", "title": "Astronomical satellite", "text": ""}
{"id": "52085", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52085", "title": "Protein folding", "text": "Change of a linear protein chain to a 3D structure\nProtein folding is the physical process by which a protein, after synthesis by a ribosome as a linear chain of amino acids, changes from an unstable random coil into a more ordered three-dimensional structure. This structure permits the protein to become biologically functional or active.\nThe folding of many proteins begins even during the translation of the polypeptide chain. The amino acids interact with each other to produce a well-defined three-dimensional structure, known as the protein's native state. This structure is determined by the amino-acid sequence or primary structure.\nThe correct three-dimensional structure is essential to function, although some parts of functional proteins may remain unfolded, indicating that protein dynamics are important. Failure to fold into a native structure generally produces inactive proteins, but in some instances, misfolded proteins have modified or toxic functionality. Several neurodegenerative and other diseases are believed to result from the accumulation of amyloid fibrils formed by misfolded proteins, the infectious varieties of which are known as prions. Many allergies are caused by the incorrect folding of some proteins because the immune system does not produce the antibodies for certain protein structures.\nDenaturation of proteins is a process of transition from a folded to an unfolded state. It happens in cooking, burns, proteinopathies, and other contexts. Residual structure present, if any, in the supposedly unfolded state may form a folding initiation site and guide the subsequent folding reactions.\nThe duration of the folding process varies dramatically depending on the protein of interest. When studied outside the cell, the slowest folding proteins require many minutes or hours to fold, primarily due to proline isomerization, and must pass through a number of intermediate states, like checkpoints, before the process is complete. On the other hand, very small single-domain proteins with lengths of up to a hundred amino acids typically fold in a single step. Time scales of milliseconds are the norm, and the fastest known protein folding reactions are complete within a few microseconds. The folding time scale of a protein depends on its size, contact order, and circuit topology.\nUnderstanding and simulating the protein folding process has been an important challenge for computational biology since the late 1960s.\nProcess of protein folding.\nPrimary structure.\nThe primary structure of a protein, its linear amino-acid sequence, determines its native conformation. The specific amino acid residues and their position in the polypeptide chain are the determining factors for which portions of the protein fold closely together and form its three-dimensional conformation. The amino acid composition is not as important as the sequence. The essential fact of folding, however, remains that the amino acid sequence of each protein contains the information that specifies both the native structure and the pathway to attain that state. This is not to say that nearly identical amino acid sequences always fold similarly. Conformations differ based on environmental factors as well; similar proteins fold differently based on where they are found.\nSecondary structure.\nFormation of a secondary structure is the first step in the folding process that a protein takes to assume its native structure. Characteristic of secondary structure are the structures known as alpha helices and beta sheets that fold rapidly because they are stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonds, as was first characterized by Linus Pauling. Formation of intramolecular hydrogen bonds provides another important contribution to protein stability. \u03b1-helices are formed by hydrogen bonding of the backbone to form a spiral shape (refer to figure on the right). The \u03b2 pleated sheet is a structure that forms with the backbone bending over itself to form the hydrogen bonds (as displayed in the figure to the left). The hydrogen bonds are between the amide hydrogen and carbonyl oxygen of the peptide bond. There exists anti-parallel \u03b2 pleated sheets and parallel \u03b2 pleated sheets where the stability of the hydrogen bonds is stronger in the anti-parallel \u03b2 sheet as it hydrogen bonds with the ideal 180 degree angle compared to the slanted hydrogen bonds formed by parallel sheets.\nTertiary structure.\nThe \u03b1-Helices and \u03b2-Sheets are commonly amphipathic, meaning they have a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic portion. This ability helps in forming tertiary structure of a protein in which folding occurs so that the hydrophilic sides are facing the aqueous environment surrounding the protein and the hydrophobic sides are facing the hydrophobic core of the protein. Secondary structure hierarchically gives way to tertiary structure formation. Once the protein's tertiary structure is formed and stabilized by the hydrophobic interactions, there may also be covalent bonding in the form of disulfide bridges formed between two cysteine residues. These non-covalent and covalent contacts take a specific topological arrangement in a native structure of a protein. Tertiary structure of a protein involves a single polypeptide chain; however, additional interactions of folded polypeptide chains give rise to quaternary structure formation.\nQuaternary structure.\nTertiary structure may give way to the formation of quaternary structure in some proteins, which usually involves the \"assembly\" or \"coassembly\" of subunits that have already folded; in other words, multiple polypeptide chains could interact to form a fully functional quaternary protein.\nDriving forces of protein folding.\nFolding is a spontaneous process that is mainly guided by hydrophobic interactions, formation of intramolecular hydrogen bonds, van der Waals forces, and it is opposed by conformational entropy. The folding time scale of an isolated protein depends on its size, contact order, and circuit topology. Inside cells, the process of folding often begins co-translationally, so that the N-terminus of the protein begins to fold while the C-terminal portion of the protein is still being synthesized by the ribosome; however, a protein molecule may fold spontaneously during or after biosynthesis. While these macromolecules may be regarded as \"folding themselves\", the process also depends on the solvent (water or lipid bilayer), the concentration of salts, the pH, the temperature, the possible presence of cofactors and of molecular chaperones.\nProteins will have limitations on their folding abilities by the restricted bending angles or conformations that are possible. These allowable angles of protein folding are described with a two-dimensional plot known as the Ramachandran plot, depicted with psi and phi angles of allowable rotation.\nHydrophobic effect.\nProtein folding must be thermodynamically favorable within a cell in order for it to be a spontaneous reaction. Since it is known that protein folding is a spontaneous reaction, then it must assume a negative Gibbs free energy value. Gibbs free energy in protein folding is directly related to enthalpy and entropy. For a negative delta G to arise and for protein folding to become thermodynamically favorable, then either enthalpy, entropy, or both terms must be favorable.\nMinimizing the number of hydrophobic side-chains exposed to water is an important driving force behind the folding process. The hydrophobic effect is the phenomenon in which the hydrophobic chains of a protein collapse into the core of the protein (away from the hydrophilic environment). In an aqueous environment, the water molecules tend to aggregate around the hydrophobic regions or side chains of the protein, creating water shells of ordered water molecules. An ordering of water molecules around a hydrophobic region increases order in a system and therefore contributes a negative change in entropy (less entropy in the system). The water molecules are fixed in these water cages which drives the hydrophobic collapse, or the inward folding of the hydrophobic groups. The hydrophobic collapse introduces entropy back to the system via the breaking of the water cages which frees the ordered water molecules. The multitude of hydrophobic groups interacting within the core of the globular folded protein contributes a significant amount to protein stability after folding, because of the vastly accumulated van der Waals forces (specifically London Dispersion forces). The hydrophobic effect exists as a driving force in thermodynamics only if there is the presence of an aqueous medium with an amphiphilic molecule containing a large hydrophobic region. The strength of hydrogen bonds depends on their environment; thus, H-bonds enveloped in a hydrophobic core contribute more than H-bonds exposed to the aqueous environment to the stability of the native state.\nIn proteins with globular folds, hydrophobic amino acids tend to be interspersed along the primary sequence, rather than randomly distributed or clustered together. However, proteins that have recently been born de novo, which tend to be intrinsically disordered, show the opposite pattern of hydrophobic amino acid clustering along the primary sequence.\nChaperones.\nMolecular chaperones are a class of proteins that aid in the correct folding of other proteins \"in vivo\". Chaperones exist in all cellular compartments and interact with the polypeptide chain in order to allow the native three-dimensional conformation of the protein to form; however, chaperones themselves are not included in the final structure of the protein they are assisting in. Chaperones may assist in folding even when the nascent polypeptide is being synthesized by the ribosome. Molecular chaperones operate by binding to stabilize an otherwise unstable structure of a protein in its folding pathway, but chaperones do not contain the necessary information to know the correct native structure of the protein they are aiding; rather, chaperones work by preventing incorrect folding conformations. In this way, chaperones do not actually increase the rate of individual steps involved in the folding pathway toward the native structure; instead, they work by reducing possible unwanted aggregations of the polypeptide chain that might otherwise slow down the search for the proper intermediate and they provide a more efficient pathway for the polypeptide chain to assume the correct conformations. Chaperones are not to be confused with folding catalyst proteins, which catalyze chemical reactions responsible for slow steps in folding pathways. Examples of folding catalysts are protein disulfide isomerases and peptidyl-prolyl isomerases that may be involved in formation of disulfide bonds or interconversion between cis and trans stereoisomers of peptide group. Chaperones are shown to be critical in the process of protein folding \"in vivo\" because they provide the protein with the aid needed to assume its proper alignments and conformations efficiently enough to become \"biologically relevant\". This means that the polypeptide chain could theoretically fold into its native structure without the aid of chaperones, as demonstrated by protein folding experiments conducted \"in vitro\"; however, this process proves to be too inefficient or too slow to exist in biological systems; therefore, chaperones are necessary for protein folding \"in vivo.\" Along with its role in aiding native structure formation, chaperones are shown to be involved in various roles such as protein transport, degradation, and even allow denatured proteins exposed to certain external denaturant factors an opportunity to refold into their correct native structures.\nA fully denatured protein lacks both tertiary and secondary structure, and exists as a so-called random coil. Under certain conditions some proteins can refold; however, in many cases, denaturation is irreversible. Cells sometimes protect their proteins against the denaturing influence of heat with enzymes known as heat shock proteins (a type of chaperone), which assist other proteins both in folding and in remaining folded. Heat shock proteins have been found in all species examined, from bacteria to humans, suggesting that they evolved very early and have an important function. Some proteins never fold in cells at all except with the assistance of chaperones which either isolate individual proteins so that their folding is not interrupted by interactions with other proteins or help to unfold misfolded proteins, allowing them to refold into the correct native structure. This function is crucial to prevent the risk of precipitation into insoluble amorphous aggregates. The external factors involved in protein denaturation or disruption of the native state include temperature, external fields (electric, magnetic), molecular crowding, and even the limitation of space (i.e. confinement), which can have a big influence on the folding of proteins. High concentrations of solutes, extremes of pH, mechanical forces, and the presence of chemical denaturants can contribute to protein denaturation, as well. These individual factors are categorized together as stresses. Chaperones are shown to exist in increasing concentrations during times of cellular stress and help the proper folding of emerging proteins as well as denatured or misfolded ones.\nUnder some conditions proteins will not fold into their biochemically functional forms. Temperatures above or below the range that cells tend to live in will cause thermally unstable proteins to unfold or denature (this is why boiling makes an egg white turn opaque). Protein thermal stability is far from constant, however; for example, hyperthermophilic bacteria have been found that grow at temperatures as high as 122\u00a0\u00b0C, which of course requires that their full complement of vital proteins and protein assemblies be stable at that temperature or above.\nThe bacterium \"E. coli\" is the host for bacteriophage T4, and the phage encoded gp31 protein (https://) appears to be structurally and functionally homologous to \"E. coli\" chaperone protein GroES and able to substitute for it in the assembly of bacteriophage T4 virus particles during infection. Like GroES, gp31 forms a stable complex with GroEL chaperonin that is absolutely necessary for the folding and assembly in vivo of the bacteriophage T4 major capsid protein gp23.\nFold switching.\nSome proteins have multiple native structures, and change their fold based on some external factors. For example, the KaiB protein switches fold throughout the day, acting as a clock for cyanobacteria. It has been estimated that around 0.5\u20134% of PDB (Protein Data Bank) proteins switch folds.\nProtein misfolding and neurodegenerative disease.\nA protein is considered to be misfolded if it cannot achieve its normal native state. This can be due to mutations in the amino acid sequence or a disruption of the normal folding process by external factors. The misfolded protein typically contains \u03b2-sheets that are organized in a supramolecular arrangement known as a cross-\u03b2 structure. These \u03b2-sheet-rich assemblies are very stable, very insoluble, and generally resistant to proteolysis. The structural stability of these fibrillar assemblies is caused by extensive interactions between the protein monomers, formed by backbone hydrogen bonds between their \u03b2-strands. The misfolding of proteins can trigger the further misfolding and accumulation of other proteins into aggregates or oligomers. The increased levels of aggregated proteins in the cell leads to formation of amyloid-like structures which can cause degenerative disorders and cell death. The amyloids are fibrillary structures that contain intermolecular hydrogen bonds which are highly insoluble and made from converted protein aggregates. Therefore, the proteasome pathway may not be efficient enough to degrade the misfolded proteins prior to aggregation. Misfolded proteins can interact with one another and form structured aggregates and gain toxicity through intermolecular interactions.\nAggregated proteins are associated with prion-related illnesses such as Creutzfeldt\u2013Jakob disease, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (mad cow disease), amyloid-related illnesses such as Alzheimer's disease and familial amyloid cardiomyopathy or polyneuropathy, as well as intracellular aggregation diseases such as Huntington's and Parkinson's disease. These age onset degenerative diseases are associated with the aggregation of misfolded proteins into insoluble, extracellular aggregates and/or intracellular inclusions including cross-\u03b2 amyloid fibrils. It is not completely clear whether the aggregates are the cause or merely a reflection of the loss of protein homeostasis, the balance between synthesis, folding, aggregation and protein turnover. Recently the European Medicines Agency approved the use of Tafamidis or Vyndaqel (a kinetic stabilizer of tetrameric transthyretin) for the treatment of transthyretin amyloid diseases. This suggests that the process of amyloid fibril formation (and not the fibrils themselves) causes the degeneration of post-mitotic tissue in human amyloid diseases. Misfolding and excessive degradation instead of folding and function leads to a number of proteopathy diseases such as antitrypsin-associated emphysema, cystic fibrosis and the lysosomal storage diseases, where loss of function is the origin of the disorder. While protein replacement therapy has historically been used to correct the latter disorders, an emerging approach is to use pharmaceutical chaperones to fold mutated proteins to render them functional.\nExperimental techniques for studying protein folding.\nWhile inferences about protein folding can be made through mutation studies, typically, experimental techniques for studying protein folding rely on the gradual unfolding or folding of proteins and observing conformational changes using standard non-crystallographic techniques.\nX-ray crystallography.\nX-ray crystallography is one of the more efficient and important methods for attempting to decipher the three dimensional configuration of a folded protein. To be able to conduct X-ray crystallography, the protein under investigation must be located inside a crystal lattice. To place a protein inside a crystal lattice, one must have a suitable solvent for crystallization, obtain a pure protein at supersaturated levels in solution, and precipitate the crystals in solution. Once a protein is crystallized, X-ray beams can be concentrated through the crystal lattice which would diffract the beams or shoot them outwards in various directions. These exiting beams are correlated to the specific three-dimensional configuration of the protein enclosed within. The X-rays specifically interact with the electron clouds surrounding the individual atoms within the protein crystal lattice and produce a discernible diffraction pattern. Only by relating the electron density clouds with the amplitude of the X-rays can this pattern be read and lead to assumptions of the phases or phase angles involved that complicate this method. Without the relation established through a mathematical basis known as Fourier transform, the \"phase problem\" would render predicting the diffraction patterns very difficult. Emerging methods like multiple isomorphous replacement use the presence of a heavy metal ion to diffract the X-rays into a more predictable manner, reducing the number of variables involved and resolving the phase problem.\nFluorescence spectroscopy.\nFluorescence spectroscopy is a highly sensitive method for studying the folding state of proteins. Three amino acids, phenylalanine (Phe), tyrosine (Tyr) and tryptophan (Trp), have intrinsic fluorescence properties, but only Tyr and Trp are used experimentally because their quantum yields are high enough to give good fluorescence signals. Both Trp and Tyr are excited by a wavelength of 280\u00a0nm, whereas only Trp is excited by a wavelength of 295\u00a0nm. Because of their aromatic character, Trp and Tyr residues are often found fully or partially buried in the hydrophobic core of proteins, at the interface between two protein domains, or at the interface between subunits of oligomeric proteins. In this apolar environment, they have high quantum yields and therefore high fluorescence intensities. Upon disruption of the protein's tertiary or quaternary structure, these side chains become more exposed to the hydrophilic environment of the solvent, and their quantum yields decrease, leading to low fluorescence intensities. For Trp residues, the wavelength of their maximal fluorescence emission also depend on their environment.\nFluorescence spectroscopy can be used to characterize the equilibrium unfolding of proteins by measuring the variation in the intensity of fluorescence emission or in the wavelength of maximal emission as functions of a denaturant value. The denaturant can be a chemical molecule (urea, guanidinium hydrochloride), temperature, pH, pressure, etc. The equilibrium between the different but discrete protein states, i.e. native state, intermediate states, unfolded state, depends on the denaturant value; therefore, the global fluorescence signal of their equilibrium mixture also depends on this value. One thus obtains a profile relating the global protein signal to the denaturant value. The profile of equilibrium unfolding may enable one to detect and identify intermediates of unfolding. General equations have been developed by Hugues Bedouelle to obtain the thermodynamic parameters that characterize the unfolding equilibria for homomeric or heteromeric proteins, up to trimers and potentially tetramers, from such profiles. Fluorescence spectroscopy can be combined with fast-mixing devices such as stopped flow, to measure protein folding kinetics, generate a chevron plot and derive a Phi value analysis.\nCircular dichroism.\nCircular dichroism is one of the most general and basic tools to study protein folding. Circular dichroism spectroscopy measures the absorption of circularly polarized light. In proteins, structures such as alpha helices and beta sheets are chiral, and thus absorb such light. The absorption of this light acts as a marker of the degree of foldedness of the protein ensemble. This technique has been used to measure equilibrium unfolding of the protein by measuring the change in this absorption as a function of denaturant concentration or temperature. A denaturant melt measures the free energy of unfolding as well as the protein's m value, or denaturant dependence. A temperature melt measures the denaturation temperature (Tm) of the protein. As for fluorescence spectroscopy, circular-dichroism spectroscopy can be combined with fast-mixing devices such as stopped flow to measure protein folding kinetics and to generate chevron plots.\nVibrational circular dichroism of proteins.\nThe more recent developments of vibrational circular dichroism (VCD) techniques for proteins, currently involving Fourier transform (FT) instruments, provide powerful means for determining protein conformations in solution even for very large protein molecules. Such VCD studies of proteins can be combined with X-ray diffraction data for protein crystals, FT-IR data for protein solutions in heavy water (D2O), or quantum computations.\nProtein nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.\nProtein nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is able to collect protein structural data by inducing a magnet field through samples of concentrated protein. In NMR, depending on the chemical environment, certain nuclei will absorb specific radio-frequencies. Because protein structural changes operate on a time scale from ns to ms, NMR is especially equipped to study intermediate structures in timescales of ps to s. Some of the main techniques for studying proteins structure and non-folding protein structural changes include COSY, TOCSY,\u00a0HSQC, time relaxation (T1 &amp; T2), and NOE. NOE is especially useful because magnetization transfers can be observed between spatially proximal hydrogens are observed. Different NMR experiments have varying degrees of timescale sensitivity that are appropriate for different protein structural changes. NOE can pick up bond vibrations or side chain rotations, however, NOE is too sensitive to pick up protein folding because it occurs at larger timescale.\nBecause protein folding takes place in about 50 to 3000 s\u22121 CPMG Relaxation dispersion and chemical exchange saturation transfer have become some of the primary techniques for NMR analysis of folding. In addition, both techniques are used to uncover excited intermediate states in the protein folding landscape. To do this, CPMG Relaxation dispersion takes advantage of the spin echo phenomenon. This technique exposes the target nuclei to a 90 pulse followed by one or more 180 pulses. As the nuclei refocus, a broad distribution indicates the target nuclei is involved in an intermediate excited state. By looking at Relaxation dispersion plots the data collect information on the thermodynamics and kinetics between the excited and ground. Saturation Transfer measures changes in signal from the ground state as excited states become perturbed. It uses weak radio frequency irradiation to saturate the excited state of a particular nuclei which transfers its saturation to the ground state. This signal is amplified by decreasing the magnetization (and the signal) of the ground state.\nThe main limitations in NMR is that its resolution decreases with proteins that are larger than 25 kDa and is not as detailed as X-ray crystallography. Additionally, protein NMR analysis is quite difficult and can propose multiple solutions from the same NMR spectrum.\nIn a study focused on the folding of an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis involved protein SOD1, excited intermediates were studied with relaxation dispersion and Saturation transfer. SOD1 had been previously tied to many disease causing mutants which were assumed to be involved in protein aggregation, however the mechanism was still unknown. By using Relaxation Dispersion and Saturation Transfer experiments many excited intermediate states were uncovered misfolding in the SOD1 mutants.\nDual-polarization interferometry.\nDual polarisation interferometry is a surface-based technique for measuring the optical properties of molecular layers. When used to characterize protein folding, it measures the conformation by determining the overall size of a monolayer of the protein and its density in real time at sub-Angstrom resolution, although real-time measurement of the kinetics of protein folding are limited to processes that occur slower than ~10\u00a0Hz. Similar to circular dichroism, the stimulus for folding can be a denaturant or temperature.\nStudies of folding with high time resolution.\nThe study of protein folding has been greatly advanced in recent years by the development of fast, time-resolved techniques. Experimenters rapidly trigger the folding of a sample of unfolded protein and observe the resulting dynamics. Fast techniques in use include ultrafast mixing of solutions, photochemical methods, and laser temperature jump spectroscopy. Among the many scientists who have contributed to the development of these techniques are Heinrich Roder, Terry Oas, Harry Gray, Martin Gruebele, Brian Dyer, William Eaton, Sheena Radford, Chris Dobson, Alan Fersht, Bengt N\u00f6lting and Lars Konermann.\nProteolysis.\nProteolysis is routinely used to probe the fraction unfolded under a wide range of solution conditions (e.g. fast parallel proteolysis (FASTpp).\nSingle-molecule force spectroscopy.\nSingle molecule techniques such as optical tweezers and AFM have been used to understand protein folding mechanisms of isolated proteins as well as proteins with chaperones. Optical tweezers have been used to stretch single protein molecules from their C- and N-termini and unfold them to allow study of the subsequent refolding. The technique allows one to measure folding rates at single-molecule level; for example, optical tweezers have been recently applied to study folding and unfolding of proteins involved in blood coagulation. von Willebrand factor (vWF) is a protein with an essential role in blood clot formation process. It discovered \u2013 using single molecule optical tweezers measurement \u2013 that calcium-bound vWF acts as a shear force sensor in the blood. Shear force leads to unfolding of the A2 domain of vWF, whose refolding rate is dramatically enhanced in the presence of calcium. Recently, it was also shown that the simple src SH3 domain accesses multiple unfolding pathways under force.\nBiotin painting.\nBiotin painting enables condition-specific cellular snapshots of (un)folded proteins. Biotin 'painting' shows a bias towards predicted Intrinsically disordered proteins.\nComputational studies of protein folding.\nComputational studies of protein folding includes three main aspects related to the prediction of protein stability, kinetics, and structure. A 2013 review summarizes the available computational methods for protein folding. \nLevinthal's paradox.\nIn 1969, Cyrus Levinthal noted that, because of the very large number of degrees of freedom in an unfolded polypeptide chain, the molecule has an astronomical number of possible conformations. An estimate of 3300 or 10143 was made in one of his papers. Levinthal's paradox is a thought experiment based on the observation that if a protein were folded by sequential sampling of all possible conformations, it would take an astronomical amount of time to do so, even if the conformations were sampled at a rapid rate (on the nanosecond or picosecond scale). Based upon the observation that proteins fold much faster than this, Levinthal then proposed that a random conformational search does not occur, and the protein must, therefore, fold through a series of meta-stable intermediate states.\nEnergy landscape of protein folding.\nThe configuration space of a protein during folding can be visualized as an energy landscape. According to Joseph Bryngelson and Peter Wolynes, proteins follow the \"principle of minimal frustration\", meaning that naturally evolved proteins have optimized their folding energy landscapes, and that nature has chosen amino acid sequences so that the folded state of the protein is sufficiently stable. In addition, the acquisition of the folded state had to become a sufficiently fast process. Even though nature has reduced the level of \"frustration\" in proteins, some degree of it remains up to now as can be observed in the presence of local minima in the energy landscape of proteins.\nA consequence of these evolutionarily selected sequences is that proteins are generally thought to have globally \"funneled energy landscapes\" (a term coined by Jos\u00e9 Onuchic) that are largely directed toward the native state. This \"folding funnel\" landscape allows the protein to fold to the native state through any of a large number of pathways and intermediates, rather than being restricted to a single mechanism. The theory is supported by both computational simulations of model proteins and experimental studies, and it has been used to improve methods for protein structure prediction and design. The description of protein folding by the leveling free-energy landscape is also consistent with the 2nd law of thermodynamics. Physically, thinking of landscapes in terms of visualizable potential or total energy surfaces simply with maxima, saddle points, minima, and funnels, rather like geographic landscapes, is perhaps a little misleading. The relevant description is really a high-dimensional phase space in which manifolds might take a variety of more complicated topological forms.\nThe unfolded polypeptide chain begins at the top of the funnel where it may assume the largest number of unfolded variations and is in its highest energy state. Energy landscapes such as these indicate that there are a large number of initial possibilities, but only a single native state is possible; however, it does not reveal the numerous folding pathways that are possible. A different molecule of the same exact protein may be able to follow marginally different folding pathways, seeking different lower energy intermediates, as long as the same native structure is reached. Different pathways may have different frequencies of utilization depending on the thermodynamic favorability of each pathway. This means that if one pathway is found to be more thermodynamically favorable than another, it is likely to be used more frequently in the pursuit of the native structure. As the protein begins to fold and assume its various conformations, it always seeks a more thermodynamically favorable structure than before and thus continues through the energy funnel. Formation of secondary structures is a strong indication of increased stability within the protein, and only one combination of secondary structures assumed by the polypeptide backbone will have the lowest energy and therefore be present in the native state of the protein. Among the first structures to form once the polypeptide begins to fold are alpha helices and beta turns, where alpha helices can form in as little as 100 nanoseconds and beta turns in 1 microsecond.\nThere exists a saddle point in the energy funnel landscape where the transition state for a particular protein is found. The transition state in the energy funnel diagram is the conformation that must be assumed by every molecule of that protein if the protein wishes to finally assume the native structure. No protein may assume the native structure without first passing through the transition state. The transition state can be referred to as a variant or premature form of the native state rather than just another intermediary step. The folding of the transition state is shown to be rate-determining, and even though it exists in a higher energy state than the native fold, it greatly resembles the native structure. Within the transition state, there exists a nucleus around which the protein is able to fold, formed by a process referred to as \"nucleation condensation\" where the structure begins to collapse onto the nucleus.\nModeling of protein folding.\n\"De novo\" or \"ab initio\" techniques for computational protein structure prediction can be used for simulating various aspects of protein folding. Molecular dynamics (MD) was used in simulations of protein folding and dynamics in silico. First equilibrium folding simulations were done using implicit solvent model and umbrella sampling. Because of computational cost, ab initio MD folding simulations with explicit water are limited to peptides and small proteins. MD simulations of larger proteins remain restricted to dynamics of the experimental structure or its high-temperature unfolding. Long-time folding processes (beyond about 1 millisecond), like folding of larger proteins (&gt;150 residues) can be accessed using coarse-grained models.\nSeveral large-scale computational projects, such as Rosetta@home, Folding@home and Foldit, target protein folding.\nLong continuous-trajectory simulations have been performed on Anton, a massively parallel supercomputer designed and built around custom ASICs and interconnects by D. E. Shaw Research. The longest published result of a simulation performed using Anton as of 2011 was a 2.936 millisecond simulation of NTL9 at 355 K. Such simulations are currently able to unfold and refold small proteins (&lt;150 amino acids residues) in equilibrium and predict how mutations affect folding kinetics and stability.\nIn 2020 a team of researchers that used AlphaFold, an artificial intelligence (AI) protein structure prediction program developed by DeepMind placed first in CASP, a long-standing structure prediction contest. The team achieved a level of accuracy much higher than any other group. It scored above 90% for around two-thirds of the proteins in CASP's global distance test (GDT), a test that measures the degree of similarity between the structure predicted by a computational program, and the empirical structure determined experimentally in a lab. A score of 100 is considered a complete match, within the distance cutoff used for calculating GDT.\nAlphaFold's protein structure prediction results at CASP were described as \"transformational\" and \"astounding\". Some researchers noted that the accuracy is not high enough for a third of its predictions, and that it does not reveal the physical mechanism of protein folding for the protein folding problem to be considered solved. Nevertheless, it is considered a significant achievement in computational biology and great progress towards a decades-old grand challenge of biology, predicting the structure of proteins.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52086", "revid": "49291118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52086", "title": "Word play", "text": "Form of wit where words are used for special effect\nWord play or wordplay (also: play-on-words) is a literary technique and a form of wit in which words used become the main subject of the work, primarily for the purpose of intended effect or amusement. Examples of word play include puns, phonetic mix-ups such as spoonerisms, obscure words and meanings, clever rhetorical excursions, oddly formed sentences, double entendres, and telling character names (such as in the play \"The Importance of Being Earnest\", \"Ernest\" being a given name that sounds exactly like the adjective \"earnest\").\nWord play is quite common in oral cultures as a method of reinforcing meaning. Examples of text-based (orthographic) word play are found in languages with or without alphabet-based scripts, such as homophonic puns in Mandarin Chinese.\nUnpaired words: Deliberate use of unusual or obsolete antonyms, such as \"I was well-coiffed and sheveled\", (back-formation from \"disheveled\").\nExamples.\nMost writers engage in word play to some extent, but certain writers are particularly committed to, or adept at, word play as a major feature of their work. Shakespeare's \"quibbles\" have made him a noted punster. Similarly, P.G. Wodehouse was hailed by \"The Times\" as a \"comic genius recognized in his lifetime as a classic and an old master of farce\" for his own acclaimed wordplay. James Joyce, author of \"Ulysses\", is another noted word-player. For example, in his \"Finnegans Wake\" Joyce's phrase \"they were yung and easily freudened\" clearly implies the more conventional \"they were young and easily frightened\"; however, the former also makes an apt pun on the names of two famous psychoanalysts, Jung and Freud.\nAn epitaph, probably unassigned to any grave, demonstrates use in rhyme.\nHere lie the bones of one 'Bun'\nHe was killed with a gun.\nHis name was not 'Bun' but 'Wood'\nBut 'Wood' would not rhyme with gun\nBut 'Bun' would.\nCrossword puzzles often employ wordplay to challenge solvers. Cryptic crosswords especially are based on elaborate systems of wordplay.\nAn example of modern word play can be found on line 103 of Childish Gambino's \"III. Life: The Biggest Troll\".H2O plus my D, that's my hood, I'm living in it\nRapper Milo uses a play on words in his verse on \"True Nen\".\nKeep any heat by the fine China dinner set\nYour man's caught the chill and it ain't even winter yet\nA farmer says, \"I got soaked for nothing, stood out there in the rain bang in the middle of my land, a complete waste of time. I'll like to kill the swine who said you can win the Nobel Prize for being out standing in your field!\"\nThe \"Mario Party\" series is known for its mini-game titles that usually are puns and various plays on words; for example: \"Shock, Drop, and Roll\", \"Gimme a Brake\", and \"Right Oar Left\". These mini-game titles are also different depending on regional differences and take into account that specific region's culture.\nMany of the books the character Gromit in the Wallace &amp; Gromit series reads or the music Gromit listens to are plays on words, such as \"Pup Fiction\" (Pulp Fiction), \"Where Beagles Dare\" (Where Eagles Dare), \"Red Hot Chili Puppies\" (Red Hot Chili Peppers) and \"The Hound of Music\" (The Sound of Music).\nRelated phenomena.\nWord play can enter common usage as neologisms.\nWord play is closely related to word games; that is, games in which the point is manipulating words. See also language game for a linguist's variation.\nWord play can cause problems for translators: e.g., in the book \"Winnie-the-Pooh\" a character mistakes the word \"issue\" for the noise of a sneeze, a resemblance which disappears when the word \"issue\" is translated into another language.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52087", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52087", "title": "Vladimir Nabakov", "text": ""}
{"id": "52088", "revid": "10431141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52088", "title": "Osvaldo Ardiles", "text": "Argentine association football player and manager\nOsvaldo C\u00e9sar Ardiles (born 3 August 1952), more commonly known as Ossie Ardiles, is an Argentine football manager, pundit and former player.\nA competitive and skilled midfielder, Ardiles became a cult hero in England, along with Glenn Hoddle and compatriot Ricardo Villa, as a player for Tottenham Hotspur. He left England for a period on loan as a result of the outbreak of the Falklands War in 1982, thus missing most of the 1982\u201383 English season. He won the 1978 FIFA World Cup as part of the Argentina national team.\nAfter retirement, Ardiles began his management career in England, coaching Swindon Town, Newcastle United and West Bromwich Albion, before returning to Tottenham to become the first Premier League manager from Argentina. As manager of \"Spurs\" in the mid-1990s, he played several matches utilizing a formation that had five forwards, a formation that had not been used in English football since the 1900s.\nDuring his career, Ardiles has also coached in Mexico, Croatia, Japan, Syria, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, Israel, Paraguay and his native Argentina. In Ireland, he is a pundit for RT\u00c9 Sport.\nClub career.\nArdiles was born in C\u00f3rdoba, and played for Instituto de C\u00f3rdoba from a young age. As a youngster, Ardiles played football in the streets and was given the nickname \"Pit\u00f3n\" (python) by his brother because of his snake-like dribbling skills. He was named as \"El Gr\u00e1fico\"'s best player of the interior in 1974, and abandoned his law degree studies in order to play professional football.\nHe also played for Club Atl\u00e9tico Belgrano and Hurac\u00e1n. After the 1978 World Cup he moved to England to play for Tottenham Hotspur where he spent ten seasons.\nHe helped Tottenham win the FA Cup in his third season there (1980\u201381), and collaborated with pop duo Chas &amp; Dave as well as the rest of the Tottenham players for a song, \"Ossie's Dream\". He played a big part in another FA Cup triumph the following year, but did not play in the final because it had already been arranged with Spurs\u2019 management that he would leave early to join up with Argentina's 1982 World Cup squad.\nIn the wake of the Falklands War between Britain and Argentina it became difficult for him to return to White Hart Lane and he went on loan to Paris Saint-Germain in France. After one season in Paris, he returned to Tottenham, helping the club to win the UEFA Cup in 1984 (coming on as a substitute in the second leg of the final). In the autumn of 1987, he was caretaker coach under caretaker manager Doug Livermore of Tottenham between the resignation of David Pleat and the appointment of Terry Venables. Ardiles left Spurs in 1988.\nHe then played for Blackburn Rovers, Queens Park Rangers and Swindon Town, before being appointed as manager of Swindon Town in July 1989. He played part of the 1989 American Soccer League season with the Fort Lauderdale Strikers.\nOn 7 February 2008, Ardiles, along with his fellow countryman Ricardo Villa, was inducted into the Tottenham Hotspur Hall of Fame.\nInternational career.\nArdiles was called up to the Argentina senior team by manager C\u00e9sar Luis Menotti in 1975. He was a member of the World Cup winning squad in 1978. At the 1982 World Cup he wore the number 1 shirt, as Argentina's policy at the time was to number their players alphabetically by surname, with an exception made so Diego Maradona could wear his preferred number 10.\nManagement career.\nIn July 1989, Ardiles moved into football management with second division Swindon Town when Lou Macari resigned to join West Ham in July 1989. He wowed fans by replacing the long ball style which had been so successful with a new \"Samba style\", which saw the Town playing attacking football. Part of this change was the new \"diamond formation\" which Ardiles implemented: a 4\u20134\u20132 style with left-sided, right-sided, attacking and defensive midfielders.\nTen months after he had joined, Ardiles led Swindon to their highest ever league position, finishing fourth in the second division. After beating Blackburn in the first leg of the play-off semi-final, the fans paid tribute with a tickertape reception in the second leg. Swindon went on to win promotion to the top flight for the first time in their history\u2014beating Sunderland in the Play-off final\u2014only to have the promotion taken from them ten days later, when the Football League demoted them for irregular payments to players.\nThe following season, Ardiles was told to sell players to keep the club alive and Wembley hero Alan McLoughlin was the first big-money departure. With Swindon rocked by their pre-season troubles, their form deserted them. By the end of February, relegation threatened, and when Newcastle offered Ardiles the chance to become their new boss, he accepted, becoming the club's first foreign manager. But his time on Tyneside was not a success and he lasted 12 months in the job before being sacked, with the Magpies bottom of the second division, though they achieved safety under his successor Kevin Keegan.\nIn June 1992, Ardiles replaced Bobby Gould as manager of West Bromwich Albion, who had just missed out on the third division playoffs in 1991\u201392. At the end of the 1992\u201393 season, Ardiles guided Albion to victory over Port Vale in the Division Two playoff final. Shortly afterwards he walked out of the Hawthorns to return his former club Tottenham as manager, but his management spell was nowhere near as successful as his spell as a player. Tottenham finished 15th in the Premiership and despite the expensive acquisition of J\u00fcrgen Klinsmann and Ilie Dumitrescu in the 1994 close season, Ardiles was sacked in October 1994 with Tottenham languishing in the bottom half of the Premier League. They had just been punished for financial irregularities committed during the late 1980s: with a 1-year FA Cup ban, \u00a3600,000 fine and 12 league points deducted. The punishment was later amended to a \u00a31.5million fine and six points deducted but the FA Cup ban and points deduction were later quashed.\nArdiles became coach of J. League Division 1 side Yokohama F. Marinos in January 2000, but was sacked in June 2001, following a poor start to the season. From 2003 to 2005 he coached Tokyo Verdy, with whom he won the 2004 Emperor's Cup, In July 2005 Ardiles was fired after a nine-game winless streak. In mid-2006, he moved to Israel to coach Beitar Jerusalem, though he quit after only a few months in charge on 18 October 2006, due to severe differences of opinion with the club's board of directors. After a short break he was appointed Club Atl\u00e9tico Hurac\u00e1n manager, in his native Argentina, in September 2007; he steered the club to 7th in the table before resigning at the end of the Apertura 2007.\nHe joined Paraguayan club Cerro Porte\u00f1o in May 2008 but was sacked in August of the same year after a string of poor results and was replaced by Pedro Troglio.\nMedia career.\nArdiles was enlisted by RT\u00c9 Sport for their squad of pundits ahead of the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. He returned to RT\u00c9's team for the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil.\nArdiles played Carlos Rey in the 1981 World War II film \"Escape to Victory\".\nPersonal life.\nHe married fellow Argentine Silvia Navarro in December 1973. Ardiles' cousin, Jos\u00e9, was shot down and killed while piloting an IAI Dagger, the Israeli version of the Mirage 5, by Sea Harrier XZ455 on 1 May 1982 during one of the first air engagements of the Falklands War.\nArdiles son, Pablo, was at one time a player and manager of Hertford Town.\nIn January 2014, Ardiles and Ricardo Villa were involved in a car crash in the Falkland Islands during the filming of Camilo Antolini's \"30 for 30\" documentary \"White, Blue and White\". Ardiles sustained minor injuries in the accident, and required more than 20 stitches in his head.\nHonours.\nPlayer.\nHurac\u00e1n\nTottenham Hotspur\nArgentina\nIndividual\nManager.\nSwindon Town\nWest Bromwich Albion\nShimizu S-Pulse\nTokyo Verdy\nIndividual\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52089", "revid": "48911350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52089", "title": "FDDI", "text": ""}
{"id": "52090", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52090", "title": "Time-Division Multiplexing", "text": ""}
{"id": "52091", "revid": "2902776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52091", "title": "TDM", "text": "TDM may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52092", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52092", "title": "XNS", "text": "XNS or xns may refer to:\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "52093", "revid": "898784855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52093", "title": "Connectionless", "text": ""}
{"id": "52094", "revid": "68", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52094", "title": "Prinston University", "text": ""}
{"id": "52095", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52095", "title": "CSMA/CA", "text": ""}
{"id": "52097", "revid": "1275294031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52097", "title": "Fictionary", "text": "Word game\nFictionary, also known as the Dictionary Game or simply Dictionary, is a word game in which players guess the definition of an obscure word. Each round consists of one player selecting and announcing a word from the dictionary, and other players composing a fake definition for it. The definitions, as well as the correct definition, are collected blindly by the selector and read aloud, and players vote on which definition they believe to be correct. Points are awarded for correct guesses, and for having a fake definition guessed by another player.\nGameplay.\nThe game requires a large and preferably unabridged dictionary, a pencil, pen or other writing implement for each player, and notecards or identical pieces of paper for each player.\nIndividual house rules may vary when playing Fictionary, but play usually proceeds like this:\nOne variation allows a player to vote for their own definition, although they do not get points for doing so. (This can encourage other people to vote for that definition as well, and the player would get those points.) Another variation does not allow a player to vote for their own definition.\nStrategy.\nOften simple words (e.g., \"strunt\") are more successful than complicated words with detectable Latin roots. Stock phrases such as \"Any of several...\" or \"One or more...\" sometimes lend authority to definitions. Players may decide beforehand whether lexicographic labels (e.g., \"obsolete\", \"geology\", \"dialect\", etc.) are to be included. The dictionary might be passed around first, to remind players of its characteristic style.\nVariants.\nOne variation uses a book of assorted poems instead of a dictionary. A rhyming quatrain is chosen by the picker. The first three lines are read and a fake fourth line must be made up by the other players which acts like the fake definitions.\nAnother variation asks players to write the first line of a novel using the title and the blurb read out from the back of the book as clues.\nAcademic use.\nThe dictionary game is sometimes suggested as a game to teach vocabulary.\nOther versions of the game.\nBoard and party games.\nThe board games \"Balderdash\", \"Dictionary Dabble\", \"Flummoxed\", and \"Weird Wordz\" are based on Fictionary. In one round of the board game \"Derivation\", players describe or fabricate a word's etymology; players who provide a correct etymology receive one point for doing so, but their entries are then removed from play, and they lose their chance to receive multiple points by drawing multiple votes from other players. Similarly, in the board game \"Wise and Otherwise\", the Picker randomly chooses a quotation and reads the beginning, and other players try to create realistic endings to the quotation.\nRadio and television.\nFictionary is featured as a segment on the weekly US National Public Radio quiz show \"Says You!\", where it is known as the bluffing round.\nIn the UK, \"Call My Bluff\" was a popular daytime BBC television panel game based on Fictionary, which ran from 1965 to 1988, and was revived in 1996. Two teams of three players (journalists, B and C list celebrities, etc.) compete. A player from one team has to decide between the three proposed definitions provided by the opposing team. If the first player correctly identifies the true definition of the word, they earn their team a point. If they are wrong, the team which provided the definitions are awarded the point. \"Call My Bluff\" was first aired in October 1965, with Robin Ray as chair. Presenter Robert Robinson chaired it for many years. The series finished on 18 June 2004, with a Comic Relief special in 2011.\nOther television game shows based on the concept include \"Take My Word For It\" and \"Wordplay\". In Japan, featured the game under the same name. The 30 minute late night game show aired on Fuji TV in 1993, and was rebroadcast on Fuji TV 739 satellite channel in 2008. \"Tahoiya\", originally meaning \"a cabin used for boar hunting\", was one of the chosen words in early game play.\nElectronic and online games.\nA version of the game called Dixonary has been running online since July 4, 1989, for the first fifteen years on CompuServe in its Tapcis Forum. It is believed that this game is the longest-running on-line game, and has run for more than 3,515 rounds. In May 2005, the game moved to its own website when CompuServe disconnected the forum. Since May 2007 it has been played in a https://, and has a support site at http://, which has an archive of the game that goes back, with minor gaps, to its inception in 1989.\nJackbox Games has produced multiple editions of \"Fibbage\", a game in which the players use their mobile devices to choose categories, write fake answers, and vote for the real answers. However, the questions are general trivia.\nJackbox also produced \"Dictionarium\", with the key difference that the words are all made-up instead of picked from an unabridged dictionary. It has two additional rounds: In the second round, players make up synonyms to the winning definitions. In the final round, players use the synonyms in a sentence.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52098", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52098", "title": "Word game", "text": "Puzzles, board games, or video games based on language\nWord games are spoken, board, card or video games often designed to test ability with language or to explore its properties.\nWord games are generally used as a source of entertainment, but can additionally serve an educational purpose. Young children may enjoy playing games such as Mad Libs Junior, while developing spelling and writing skills. Researchers have found that adults who regularly solved crossword puzzles, which require familiarity with a larger vocabulary, had better brain function later in life.\nPopular word-based game shows have been a part of television and radio throughout broadcast history, including \"Spelling Bee\", the first televised game show, and \"Wheel of Fortune\", the longest-running syndicated game show in the United States.\nCategories.\nLetter arrangement games.\nIn a letter arrangement game, the goal is to form words out of given letters. These games generally test vocabulary skills as well as lateral thinking skills. Some examples of letter arrangement games include \"Scrabble\", \"Upwords\", \"Bananagrams\", and \"Countdown\".\nPaper and pencil games.\nIn a paper and pencil game, players write their own words, often under specific constraints. For example, a crossword requires players to use clues to fill out a grid, with words intersecting at specific letters. Other examples of paper and pencil games include hangman, categories, \"Boggle\", and word searches.\nSemantic games.\nSemantic games focus on the semantics of words, utilising their meanings and the shared knowledge of players as a mechanic. Connections, \"Mad Libs\", \"Blankety Blank\", and \"Codenames\" are all semantic games.\nWord formation games.\nGames involving creating words that meet specific conditions, such as Wordle, Word Ladder.\nModern word games.\nAs part of the modern \"Golden Age\" of board games, designers have created a variety of newer, non-traditional word games, often with more complex rules. Games like \"Codenames\", \"Decrypto\", and \"Anomia\" were all designed after 2010, and have earned widespread acclaim. Mobile games like \"Letterpress\", \"Words with Friends\", and \"Word Connect\" have also brought word games to modern audiences.\nIn media.\nMany popular word games have been adapted to television and radio game shows. In addition to the examples given above, shows like \"Lingo\", \"Says You!\", \"Catchphrase,\" and \"Only Connect\" either revolve around or include elements of word games. On NPR, the \"Sunday Puzzle\" is hosted by Will Shortz, \"The New York Times\" crossword editor.\nWord games have also been launched on the Internet and featured in major publications, such as \"The New York Times\" Spelling Bee, \"Connections\", and \"Wordle\"."}
{"id": "52100", "revid": "40193331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52100", "title": "Charades", "text": "Word guessing game\nCharades (, ) is a parlor or party word guessing game. Originally, the game was a dramatic form of literary charades: a single person would act out each syllable of a word or phrase in order, followed by the whole phrase together, while the rest of the group guessed. A variant was to have teams who acted scenes out together while the others guessed. Today, it is common to require the actors to mime their hints without using any spoken words, which requires some conventional gestures. Puns and visual puns were and remain common.\nHistory.\nLiterary charades.\nA charade was a form of literary riddle popularized in France in the 18th century where each syllable of the answer was described enigmatically as a separate word before the word as a whole was similarly described. The term \"charade\" was borrowed into English from French in the second half of the eighteenth century, denoting a \"kind of riddle in which each syllable of a word, or a complete word or phrase, is enigmatically described or dramatically represented\". \nWritten forms of charade appeared in magazines and books, and on the folding fans of the Regency. The answers were sometimes printed on the reverse of the fan, suggesting that they were a flirting device, used by a young woman to tease her beau. One charade composed by Jane Austen goes as follows:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em\"&gt;\nWhen my first is a task to a young girl of spirit,\nAnd my second confines her to finish the piece,\nHow hard is her fate! but how great is her merit\nIf by taking my whole she effects her release!\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe answer is \"hem-lock\".\nWilliam Mackworth Praed's poetic charades became famous. \nLater examples omitted direct references to individual syllables, such as the following, said to be a favorite of Theodore Roosevelt:\n&lt;poem style=\"margin-left:2em\"&gt;\nI talk, but I do not speak my mind\nI hear words, but I do not listen to thoughts\nWhen I wake, all see me\nWhen I sleep, all hear me\nMany heads are on my shoulders\nMany hands are at my feet\nThe strongest steel cannot break my visage\nBut the softest whisper can destroy me\nThe quietest whimper can be heard.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nThe answer is \"an actor\".\nIn the early 20th century, the 11th edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\" offered these two prose charades as \"perhaps as good as could be selected\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"My \"first\", with the most rooted antipathy to a Frenchman, prides himself, whenever they meet, upon sticking close to his jacket; my \"second\" has many virtues, nor is its least that it gives its name to my first; my \"whole\" may I never catch!\"\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"My \"first\" is company; my \"second\" shuns company; my \"third\" collects company; and my \"whole\" amuses company.\"\nwith the answers being tartar and conundrum.\nActed charades.\nIn the early 19th century, the French began performing \"acting\" or \"acted charades\"\u2014with the written description replaced by dramatic performances as a parlor game\u2014and this was brought over to Britain by the English aristocracy. Thus the term gradually became more popularly used to refer to acted charades, examples of which are described in William Thackeray's \"Vanity Fair\" and in Charlotte Bront\u00eb's \"Jane Eyre\".\nThackeray snarked that charades were enjoyed for \"enabling the many ladies amongst us who had beauty to display their charms, and the fewer number who had cleverness, to exhibit their wit\". In his \"Vanity Fair\", the height of Rebecca Sharp's social success is brought on by her performances of acting charades before the Prince Regent. The first scene\u2014\"first two syllables\"\u2014displays a Turkish lord dealing with a slaver and his odalisque before being garroted by the sultan's chief black eunuch; the second\u2014\"last two syllables\"\u2014finds a Turk, his consort, and his black slave praying at sunrise when an enormous Egyptian head enters and begins singing. The answer\u2014Agamemnon\u2014is then acted out by Becky's husband, while she makes her (first) appearance as Clytemnestra. After refreshments, another round begins, partially in pantomime: the first scene shows a household yawningly finishing a game of cribbage and preparing for bed; the second opens on the household bustling with activity as daybreak prompts bells ringing, arguments over receipts, collection of the chamber pots, calls for carriages, and greetings to new guests; the third closes with a ship's crew and passengers tossed about by a storm with strong winds. The answer\u2014nightingale\u2014is then (somewhat mistakenly) acted out by Becky in the role of a singing French marquise, recalling both Lacoste's 1705 tragic opera \"Philom\u00e8le\" and an \"arriviste\" lover and wife of Louis XIV. Apart from its importance in the book, the scenes were subsequently considered models of the genre.\nBy the time of the First World War, \"acting charades\" had become the most popular form and, as written charades were forgotten, it adopted its present, terser name. Thackeray's scenes\u2014even those said to be \"in pantomime\"\u2014included dialogue from the actors but truly \"dumb\" or \"mime charades\" gradually became more popular as well and similarly dropped their descriptive adjectives. The amateurish acting involved in charades led to the word's use to describe any obvious or inept deception, but over time \"a charade\" became used more broadly for any put-on (even highly competent and successful ones) and its original association with the parlor game has largely been lost.\nThe acted form of charades has been repeatedly made into television game shows, including the American \"Play the Game\", \"Movietown, RSVP\", \"Pantomime Quiz\", \"Stump the Stars\", \"Celebrity Charades\", \"Showoffs\" and \"Body Language\"; the British \"Give Us a Clue\"; the Canadian \"Party Game\" and \"Acting Crazy\"; and the Australian \"Celebrity Game\". On Britain's BBC Radio 4, \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\" performs a variant of the old written and spoken form of the game as \"Sound Charades\".\nIn the 1939 movie \"The Mystery of Mr. Wong\", the game is called \"Indications\".\nRules.\nAs a long-lived and informal game, charades' rules can vary widely. Common features of the game include holding up a number of fingers to indicate the number of syllables in the answer, silently replying to questions, and making a \"come on\" gesture once the guesses become close; some forms of the games, however, forbid anything except physically acting out the answer. In a mixed setting, it is therefore advisable to clarify the rules before play begins.\nCommon features of the modern game include:\nCommon signals.\nThe following gestures are commonly used in the game:\nSome of these signs may be banned from some forms of the game.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "52102", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52102", "title": "Middle Age", "text": ""}
{"id": "52103", "revid": "1304113438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52103", "title": "Prose", "text": "Ordinary conversational form of language\nProse is language that follows the natural flow or rhythm of speech, ordinary grammatical structures, or, in writing, typical conventions and formatting. Thus, prose ranges from informal speaking to formal academic writing. Prose differs most notably from poetry, which follows some type of intentional, contrived, artistic structure. s vary dramatically by language; in English poetry, language is often organized by a rhythmic metre and a rhyme scheme. \nThe ordinary conversational language of a region or community, and many other forms and styles of language usage, fall under prose, a label that can describe both speech and writing. In writing, prose is visually formatted differently than poetry. Poetry is traditionally written in verse: a series of lines on a page, parallel to the way that a person would highlight the structure orally if saying the poem aloud; for example, poetry may end with a rhyme at the end of each line, making the entire work more melodious or memorable. Prose uses writing conventions and formatting that may highlight meaning\u2014for instance, the use of a new paragraph for a new speaker in a novel\u2014but does not follow any special rhythmic or other artistic structure. \nThe word \"prose\" first appeared in English in the 14th century. It is derived from the Old French \"prose\", which in turn originates in the Latin expression \"prosa oratio\" (literally, \"straightforward or direct speech\"). In highly-literate cultures where spoken rhetoric is considered relatively unimportant, definitions of prose may be narrower, including only written language (but including written speech or dialogue). In written languages, spoken and written prose usually differ sharply. Sometimes, these differences are transparent to those using the languages; linguists studying extremely literal transcripts for conversation analysis see them, but ordinary language-users are unaware of them.\nAcademic writing (works of philosophy, history, economics, etc.), journalism, and fiction are usually written in prose (excepting verse novels etc.). Developments in twentieth century literature, including free verse, concrete poetry, and prose poetry, have led to the idea of poetry and prose as two ends on a spectrum rather than firmly distinct from each other. The British poet T. S. Eliot noted, whereas \"the distinction between verse and prose is clear, the distinction between poetry and prose is obscure.\"\nHistory.\nLatin was a major influence on the development of prose in many European countries. Especially important was the great Roman orator Cicero (106\u201343 BC). It was the \"lingua franca\" among literate Europeans until quite recent times, and the great works of Descartes (1596\u20131650), Francis Bacon (1561\u20131626), and Baruch Spinoza (1632\u20131677) were published in Latin. Among the last important books written primarily in Latin prose were the works of Swedenborg (d. 1772), Linnaeus (d. 1778), Euler (d. 1783), Gauss (d. 1855), and Isaac Newton (d. 1727).\nLatin had almost universally been used in Italy until the close of the 13th century, when Dante created a vernacular prose in the non-metrical part of his famous \"Vita Nuova\", written about 1293.\nAbout the year 1200, verse began to be abandoned by French chroniclers who had some definite statements to impart, and who had no natural gifts as poets. The earliest French prose was translated from the Latin, but Baldwin\u00a0VI., who died in 1205, is said to have commissioned several scribes to compile in the vulgar tongue a history of the world.\nThe earliest coherent attempts at the creation of German prose belong to the age of Charlemagne, and the first example usually quoted is the Strassburger Eidschw\u00fcre of 842. For all literary purposes, however, metrical language was used exclusively during the mittelhochdeutsch period, which lasted until the end of the 13th century.\nLatin's role was replaced by French from the 17th to the mid-20th century, i.e. until the uptake of English:\nFor about three hundred years French prose was the form in which the European intelligence shaped and communicated its thoughts about history, diplomacy, definition, criticism, human relationships \u2014 everything except metaphysics. It is arguable that the non-existence of a clear, concrete German prose has been one of the chief disasters to European civilisation.\nQualities.\nProse usually lacks the more formal metrical structure of the verses found in traditional poetry. It comprises full grammatical sentences (other than in stream of consciousness narrative), and paragraphs, whereas poetry often involves a metrical or rhyming scheme. Some works of prose make use of rhythm and verbal music. Verse is normally more systematic or formulaic, while prose is closer to both ordinary, and conversational speech.\nIn Moli\u00e8re's play \"Le Bourgeois gentilhomme\" the character Monsieur Jourdain asked for something to be written in neither verse nor prose, to which a philosophy master replies: \"there is no other way to express oneself than with prose or verse\", for the simple reason that \"everything that is not prose is verse, and everything that is not verse is prose\".\nAmerican novelist Truman Capote, in an interview, commented as follows on prose style:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe a story can be wrecked by a faulty rhythm in a sentence\u2014 especially if it occurs toward the end\u2014or a mistake in paragraphing, even punctuation. Henry James is the maestro of the semicolon. Hemingway is a first-rate paragrapher. From the point of view of ear, Virginia Woolf never wrote a bad sentence. I don't mean to imply that I successfully practice what I preach. I try, that's all.\nTypes.\nMany types of prose exist, which include those used in works of nonfiction, prose poem, alliterative prose and prose fiction.\nDivisions.\nProse is divided into two main divisions:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
