{"id": "46378", "revid": "4051065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46378", "title": "Aquitaine", "text": "Aquitaine (, ; ; ; ; Poitevin-Saintongeais: \"Agui\u00e9ne\"), archaic Guyenne or Guienne (), is a historical region of southwestern France and a former administrative region. Since 1 January 2016 it has been part of the administrative region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. It is situated in the southwest corner of metropolitan France, along the Atlantic Ocean and the Pyrenees mountain range on the border with Spain. It is composed of five departments: Dordogne, Lot-et-Garonne, Pyr\u00e9n\u00e9es-Atlantiques, Landes, and Gironde. The Romans established Gallia Aquitania as a province. In the Middle Ages, Aquitaine was a kingdom and a duchy whose boundaries fluctuated considerably. For most of Aquitaine's written history, Bordeaux has been a vital port and administrative centre.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThere are traces of human settlement by prehistoric peoples, especially in the P\u00e9rigord, but the earliest attested inhabitants in the south-west were the Aquitani, who were not considered Celtic people, but more akin to the Iberians (see Gallia Aquitania). Although a number of different languages and dialects were in use in the area during ancient times, it is most likely that the prevailing language of Aquitaine during the late pre-historic to Roman period was an early form of the Basque language. This has been demonstrated by various Aquitanian names and words that were recorded by the Romans, and which are currently easily readable as Basque. Whether this Aquitanian language (Proto-Basque) was a remnant of a Vasconic language group that once extended much farther, or it was generally limited to the Aquitaine/Basque region, is not known. One reason the language of Aquitaine is important is because Basque is the last surviving non-Indo-European language in western Europe and it has had some effect on the languages around it, including Spanish and, to a lesser extent, French.\nThe original Aquitania (named after the inhabitants) at the time of Caesar's conquest of Gaul included the area bounded by the river Garonne, the Pyrenees and the Atlantic Ocean. The name may stem from Latin 'aqua', maybe derived from the town \"Aquae Augustae\", \"Aquae Tarbellicae\" or just \"Aquis\" (Dax, Akize in modern Basque) or as a more general geographical feature.\nUnder Augustus' Roman rule, from 27 BCE the province of Aquitania was further stretched to the north to the river Loire, thus including proper Gaul tribes along with old Aquitani south of the Garonne (cf. Novempopulania and Gascony) within the same region.\nIn 392, the Roman imperial provinces were restructured as \"Aquitania Prima\" (north-east), \"Aquitania Secunda\" (centre) and \"Aquitania Tertia\", better known as \"Novempopulania\" in the south-west.\nEarly Middle Ages.\nAccounts of Aquitania during the Early Middle Ages are imprecise, but there was much unrest. The Visigoths were called into Gaul as \"foederati\", legalizing their status within the Empire. Eventually they established themselves as the \"de facto\" rulers in south-west Gaul as central Roman rule collapsed. Visigoths established their capital in Toulouse, but their tenure on Aquitaine was feeble. In 507, they were expelled south to Hispania after their defeat in the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 by the Franks, who became the new rulers in the area to the south of the Loire.\nThe Roman Aquitania Tertia remained in place as Novempopulania, where a duke was appointed to hold a grip over the Basques (Vascones/Wascones, rendered \"Gascons\" in English). These dukes were quite detached from central Frankish overlordship, sometimes governing as independent rulers with strong ties to their kinsmen south of the Pyrenees. As of 660, the foundations for an independent Aquitaine/Vasconia polity were established by the duke Felix of Aquitaine, a magnate (\"potente(m)\") from Toulouse, probably of Gallo-Roman stock. Despite its nominal submission to the Merovingians, the ethnic make-up of the new Aquitanian realm was not Frankish, but Gallo-Roman north of the Garonne and in main towns and Basque, especially south of the Garonne.\nA united Basque-Aquitanian realm reached its heyday under Odo the Great's rule. In 721, the Aquitanian duke fended Umayyad troops (\"Sarracens\") off at Toulouse, but in 732 (or 733, according to Roger Collins), an Umayyad expedition commanded by Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi defeated Odo next to Bordeaux, and went on to loot its way up to Poitiers. Odo was required to pledge allegiance to the Frankish Charles Martel in exchange for help against the advancing Arab forces. Basque-Aquitanian self-rule temporarily came to a halt, definitely in 768 after the assassination of Waifer.\nIn 781, Charlemagne decided to proclaim his son Louis King of Aquitaine within the Carolingian Empire, ruling over a realm comprising the Duchy of Aquitaine and the Duchy of Vasconia. He suppressed various Basque (\"Gascon\") uprisings, even venturing into the lands of Pamplona past the Pyrenees after ravaging Gascony, with a view to imposing his authority also in the Vasconia to south of Pyrenees. According to his biography, he achieved everything he wanted and after staying overnight in Pamplona, on his way back his army was attacked in Roncevaux in 812, but narrowly escaped an engagement at the Pyrenean passes.\nSeguin (Sihiminus), count of Bordeaux and Duke of Vasconia, seemed to have attempted a detachment from the Frankish central authority on Charlemagne's death. The new emperor Louis the Pious reacted by removing him from his capacity, which stirred the Basques into rebellion. The king in turn sent his troops to the territory, obtaining their submission in two campaigns and killing the duke, while his family crossed the Pyrenees and continued to foment risings against Frankish power. In 824, the 2nd Battle of Roncevaux took place, in which counts Aeblus and Aznar, Frankish vassals from the Duchy of Vasconia sent by the new King of Aquitaine, Pepin, were captured by the joint forces of I\u00f1igo Arista and the Banu Qasi.\nBefore Pepin's death, emperor Louis had appointed a new king in 832, his son Charles the Bald, while the Aquitanian lords elected Pepin II as king. This struggle for control of the kingdom led to a constant period of war between Charles, loyal to his father and the Carolingian power, and Pepin II, who relied more on the support of Basque and Aquitanian lords.\nEthnic make-up in the Early Middle Ages.\nDespite the early conquest of southern Gaul by the Franks after the Battle of Vouill\u00e9 in 507, the Frankish element was feeble south of the Loire, where Gothic and Gallo-Roman Law prevailed and a small Frankish settlement took place. However scarce, some Frankish population and nobles settled down in regions like Albigeois, Carcassonne (on the fringes of Septimania), Toulouse, and Provence and Lower Rhone (the last two not in Aquitaine). After the death of the king Dagobert I, the Merovingian tenure south of the Loire became largely nominal, with the actual power being in the hands of autonomous regional leaders and counts. The Franks may have become largely assimilated to the preponderant Gallo-Roman culture by the 8th century, but their names were well in use by the ruling class, like Odo. Still, in the Battle of Toulouse, the Aquitanian duke Odo the Great was said to be leading an army of Aquitanians and Franks.\nOn the other hand, the Franks did not mix with the Basques, keeping separate paths. In the periods before and after the Muslim thrust, the Basques are often cited in several accounts stirring against Frankish attempts to subdue Aquitaine (stretching up to Toulouse) and Vasconia, pointing to a not preponderant but clearly significant Basque presence in the former too. Recorded evidence points to their deployment across Aquitaine in a military capacity as a mainstay of the Duke's forces. 'Romans' are cited as living in the cities of Aquitaine, as opposed to the Franks (mid 8th century).\nAquitaine after the Treaty of Verdun.\nAfter the 843 Treaty of Verdun, the defeat of Pepin II of Aquitaine and the death of Charles the Bald, the Kingdom of Aquitaine (subsumed in West Francia) ceased to have any relevance and the title of King of Aquitaine took on a nominal value. In 1058, the Duchy of Vasconia (Gascony) and Aquitaine merged under the rule of William VIII, Duke of Aquitaine.\nThe title \"Duke of Aquitaine\" was held by the counts of Poitiers from the 10th to the 12th century.\nEnglish Aquitaine.\nAquitaine passed to France in 1137 when the duchess Eleanor of Aquitaine married Louis VII of France, but their marriage was annulled in 1152. When Eleanor's new husband became King Henry II of England in 1154, the area became an English possession, and a cornerstone of the Angevin Empire. Aquitaine remained English until the end of the Hundred Years' War in 1453, when it was annexed by France.\nDuring the three hundred years that the region was ruled by the Kings of England, links between Aquitaine and England strengthened, with large quantities of wine produced in southwestern France being exported to London, Southampton, and other English ports. In fact, so much wine and other produce was being exported to London and sold that by the start of the Hundred Years' War the profits from Aquitaine were the principal source of the English King's income per annum.\nAfter the Hundred Years' War.\nThe region served as a stronghold for the Protestant Huguenots during the 16th and 17th centuries, who suffered persecution at the hands of the French Catholics. The Huguenots called upon the English crown for assistance against forces led by Cardinal Richelieu.\nFrom the 13th century until the French Revolution, Aquitaine was usually known as Guyenne.\nDemographics.\nAquitaine consists of 3,150,890 inhabitants, equivalent to 6% of the total French population.\nThe region of Aquitaine forms the 6th most populated region in France.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nFrench is the official language of the region. Many residents also have some knowledge of Basque, of a variety of Occitan (Gascon, Limousin, or Languedocien), or of the Poitevin-Saintongeais dialect of French.\nIn 2005, 78,000 children were learning Occitan as a second language in state schools and 2,000 were enrolled in Occitan-medium private schools.\nBasque speakers number about 73,000, concentrated in the far south of the region:\nImportant cities.\nBordeaux is the largest city in Aquitaine. It is a port city on the Garonne River in the Gironde department. It is the capital of Aquitaine, as well as the prefecture of the Gironde department. Bordeaux is famous for its wine industry. Apart from Bordeaux, there are also other important cities in Aquitaine.\nSport.\nThe region is home to many successful sports teams. In particular worth mentioning are:\nFootball\nRugby union is particularly popular in the region. Clubs include:\nBasketball\nBull-fighting is also popular in the region.\nMajor surfing championships regularly take place on Aquitaine's coast.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46379", "revid": "3556578", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46379", "title": "East Anglia", "text": "Region of England\nEast Anglia is an area of the East of England, often defined as including the counties of Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, with parts of Essex sometimes also included.\nThe name derives from the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the East Angles, a people whose name originated in Anglia (Angeln), in what is now the Schleswig-Holstein state of Northern Germany. East Anglia is a predominantly rural region and contains mainly flat or low-lying and agricultural land. The area is known for considerable natural beauty, sharing a long North Sea coastline, and The Broads (known for marketing purposes as The Broads National Park). Norwich is the largest city in the region.\nArea.\nDefinitions of what constitutes East Anglia vary. The Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of East Anglia, established in the 6th century, originally consisted of the modern counties of Norfolk and Suffolk and expanded west into at least part of Cambridgeshire, typically the northernmost parts known as The Fens. The modern NUTS 2 statistical unit of East Anglia comprises Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridgeshire (including the City of Peterborough unitary authority). Those three counties have formed the Roman Catholic Diocese of East Anglia since 1976, and were the subject of a possible government devolution package in 2016.\nEssex has sometimes been included in definitions of East Anglia, including by the London Society of East Anglians. Although the Kingdom of Essex to the south was a separate element of the heptarchy of Anglo-Saxon England and did not identify as Angles but Saxons, many people in Essex today still consider themselves to be East Anglian. For example, Colchester United F.C. is one of the clubs competing for the informal football title Pride of Anglia, but not Southend United F.C. from further south in the county. Culturally, north Essex has much more in common with Suffolk and the rest of East Anglia due to its similar rural landscape, when compared to the south which is much more urban given its proximity to London. However, the county of Essex by itself forms a NUTS 2 statistical unit in the East of England region.\nOther definitions of the area have been used or proposed over the years. For example, the Redcliffe-Maud Report in 1969, which followed the Royal Commission on the Reform of Local Government, recommended the creation of eight provinces in England. The proposed East Anglia province would have included northern Essex, southern Lincolnshire and a small part of Northamptonshire as well as Cambridgeshire, Norfolk and Suffolk.\nCultural identity.\nDespite being considered by some to be a sub-region of the East of England, it is considered to have its own differing cultural identity and characteristics, with some considering it an informal region in its own right. It has more distinct accents within the area compared to the rest of the East of England region, such as the Norfolk and Suffolk accents. It is also considered a less commercialised area, with more agricultural business being based within East Anglia. However, several areas of East Anglia are starting to experience a renaissance, with more frequent decentralisation and expansions of certain businesses taking place in several areas such as the recent introductions of commercial businesses such as Taco Bell and Odeon Cinemas into areas of East Anglia. However, despite a recent economic renaissance, East Anglia is also still a poorer area than the rest of the East of England region, with several areas suffering from intense deprivation and poverty.\nFrom a geographical perspective, East Anglia also differs hugely from the rest of the East of England due to it being somewhat situated on the east coast of England, leading to several seaside towns being situated within the area. A more noticeable differing geographical feature is The Fens, an area of low-lying marshland populated throughout East Anglia as well as, to a lesser extent, the East Midlands. It has managed to define East Anglia, especially from a historical perspective, and help it stand out from the rest of the East of England, with several plans recently set up to restore The Fens to its initial state, prior to its drainage, as a big wetland area. East Anglia is also more likely than any other area in the East of England to be considered part of the Midlands. This is mostly because East Anglia's geographical location aligns with The Midlands. It is also likely due to several areas of East Anglia being situated above or on several somewhat common but unofficial borders that separate the Midlands and even the North in some cases, from Southern England such as River Great Ouse, River Nene or even the Thames. East Anglia and the Midlands were also previously combined in a grouping known as \"Central England\" based on European Parliament constituencies in the United Kingdom. Similarly, some East Anglian citizens have expressed interests in turning East Anglia into its own independent state.\nHistory.\nThe kingdom of East Anglia initially consisted of Norfolk and Suffolk, but the Isle of Ely also became part of it upon the marriage of East Anglian princess \u00c6thelthryth (Etheldreda). It may have been formed around 520 by merging the North and South Folk, Angles who had settled in the former lands of the Iceni during the previous century, and it was one of the Anglo-Saxon heptarchy kingdoms as defined in the 12th-century writings of Henry of Huntingdon. East Anglia has been cited by a number of scholars as being a region where settlement of continental Germanic speakers was particularly early and dense, possibly following a depopulation in the 4th century.\nA 2016 study found that modern East Anglians share a strong genetic affinity with Anglo-Saxon era skeletons, but differ substantially from Iron Age and Roman era ones, which are more similar to the Welsh. This was taken to support a major influence of the Anglo-Saxon migrations on the genetic makeup of East Anglia. In a 2022 study by Joscha Gretzinger et al., the populations of Norfolk and Suffolk were found to be the group with the lowest amount of Iron Age/Roman period British Isles-related ancestry, with only about 11\u201312.7% of their ancestry being derived from that group, while having one of the highest amounts of Continental North European (45.9\u201346.1%), and the highest amount of Continental West European (41.2\u201343.1%) ancestry in all of England.\nEast Anglia was the most powerful of the kingdoms of Anglo-Saxon England for a brief period following a victory over the rival kingdom of Northumbria around 616, and its King R\u00e6dwald was Bretwalda (overlord of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms). Just before this point East Anglia started becoming Christian. However, this did not last; the Mercians defeated it twice over the next 40 years, and East Anglia continued to weaken in relation to the other kingdoms. Offa of Mercia finally had king \u00c6thelberht killed in 794 and took control of the kingdom himself. Independence was temporarily restored by rebellion in 825, but the Danes killed King Edmund on 20 November 869 and captured the kingdom. Edward the Elder incorporated East Anglia into the Kingdom of England, and it later became an earldom.\nThe Anglo-Saxon Chronicles make reference to East Anglian military hero Ulfcytel, first described for his attempts to ward off an attack by the Danes in 1004. The Norwegian court poet Sigvatr \u00de\u00f3r\u00f0arson called all of East Anglia \"Ulfkell's land\" (Ulfcytel's land), named for the military leader.\nParts of East Anglia remained marshland until the 17th-century drainage of the Fens, despite some earlier engineering work during the Roman occupation. The alluvial land was converted into wide swaths of productive arable land by a series of systematic drainage projects, mainly using drains and river diversions along the lines of Dutch practice. In the 1630s, thousands of Puritan families from East Anglia emigrated to New England in America, taking much East Anglian culture with them that can still be traced today. East Anglia based much of its earnings on wool, textiles, and arable farming and was a rich area of England until the Industrial Revolution caused a manufacturing and development shift to the Midlands and the North.\nDuring the Second World War, the Royal Air Force and the United States Army Air Force constructed many airbases in East Anglia for the heavy bomber fleets of the Combined Bomber Offensive against German-occupied Europe. East Anglia was ideally suited to airfield construction, as it includes large areas of open, level terrain and is close to mainland Europe. Many of the airfields can still be seen today, particularly from aerial photographs, and a few remain in use, the most prominent being Norwich International Airport. Pillboxes were erected in 1940 to help defend the nation against invasion, and they can also be found throughout the area at strategic points. Similarly, but from the Napoleonic Wars, a number of Martello towers can be found along the coast.\nGeography.\nEast Anglia is bordered to the north and east by the North Sea, to the south by the estuaries of the rivers Orwell and Stour, and shares an undefined land border to the west with the rest of England. Much of northern East Anglia is flat, low-lying and marshy (such as the Fens of Cambridgeshire and Norfolk), although the extensive drainage projects of the past centuries actually make this one of the driest areas in the UK. Inland, much of the rest of Suffolk and Norfolk is gently undulating, with glacial moraine ridges providing some areas of steeper relief. The highest point in Norfolk is the Beacon Hill; the supposed flatness of Norfolk is noted in literature, including No\u00ebl Coward's \"Private Lives\" \u2013 \"Very flat, Norfolk\".\nOn the north-west corner East Anglia is bordered by a bay known as The Wash, where owing to deposits of sediment and land reclamation, the coastline has altered markedly within historical times; several towns once on the coast of the Wash (notably King's Lynn) are now some distance inland. Conversely, over to the east on the coast exposed to the North Sea the coastline is subject to rapid erosion and has shifted inland significantly since historic times.\nMajor rivers include the River Nene and Suffolk's Stour, running through country beloved of the painter John Constable. The River Cam is a tributary of the Great Ouse and gives its name to Cambridge, whilst Norwich sits on the River Yare and River Wensum. The River Orwell flows through Ipswich and has its mouth, along with the Stour at Felixstowe. The Norfolk and Suffolk Broads form a network of waterways between Norwich and the coast and are popular for recreational boating. The Ouse flows into the Wash at King's Lynn.\nMajor urban areas in East Anglia include the cities of Norwich, Cambridge and Peterborough, and the town of Ipswich. Other towns and cities include Bury St Edmunds, Ely, Lowestoft, Great Yarmouth, King's Lynn, and Newmarket. Much of the area is still rural in nature with many villages surrounded by a mixture of breckland, fens, broads and agricultural land.\nClimate.\nThe climate of East Anglia is generally dry and mild. Temperatures range from an average of 1\u201310\u00a0\u00b0C in the winter to 12\u201322\u00a0\u00b0C in the summer, although it is not uncommon for daily temperatures to fall and rise significantly outside these averages. Although water plays a significant role in the Fenland and Broadland landscapes, the area is among the driest in the United Kingdom and during the summer months, tinder-dry conditions are frequently experienced, occasionally resulting in field and heath fires. Many areas receive less than 700\u00a0mm of rainfall a year and this is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year. Sunshine totals tend to be higher towards the coastal areas.\nTransport.\nTransport in East Anglia consists of an extensive road and rail network. Main A roads, such as the A12 and A47 link the area to the rest of the UK, and the A14 links the Midlands to the Port of Felixstowe. This is the busiest container port in the UK, dealing with over 40% of UK container traffic and is a major gateway port into the country. There is very little motorway within East Anglia.\nRail links include the Great Eastern Main Line from Norwich to London Liverpool Street and the West Anglia Main Line connecting Cambridge to London. Sections of the East Coast Main Line run through the area and Peterborough is an important interchange on this line. The area is linked to the Midlands and north-west England by rail and has a number of local rail services, such as the Bittern Line from Norwich to Sheringham.\nEast Anglia is ideal for cycling and National Cycle Route 1 passes through it. Cambridge has the largest proportion of its residents in the UK cycling to work with 25% commuting by bicycle. The city is also home to the Cambridgeshire Guided Busway, which at 13.3 miles (21.4\u00a0km) was the longest stretch of guided bus-way in the world when it opened in 2011.\nThe only major commercial airport is Norwich Airport, although London Stansted Airport, the fourth busiest passenger airport in the UK, lies just south of Cambridge in north-west Essex.\nUniversities.\nThe University of Cambridge, established at the start of the 13th century and in the town of the same name, is East Anglia's best-known institution of higher learning and is among the oldest and most famous universities in the world. Other institutions include the University of East Anglia (in Norwich), University of Essex, Norwich University of the Arts, Anglia Ruskin University (based in Cambridge), University of Suffolk (based in Ipswich) and University Centre Peterborough.\nEnterprise zones.\nGreat Yarmouth and Lowestoft Enterprise Zone, an enterprise zone initiated by New Anglia Local Enterprise Partnership, was announced in 2011 and launched in April 2012. It includes six sites with a total area of , which have attracted a number of energy-related businesses. The sites are Beacon Park and South Denes in Great Yarmouth, Mobbs Way, Riverside Road and South Lowestoft Industrial Estate in Lowestoft and Ellough Business Park in Ellough near Beccles. There is also an enterprise zone in Cambridgeshire, Alconbury Enterprise Campus in Huntingdon.\nSymbols and culture.\nA shield of three golden crowns, placed two above one, on a blue background has been used as a symbol of East Anglia for centuries. The coat of arms was ascribed by medieval heralds to the Anglo-Saxon Kingdom of East Anglia and the Wuffingas dynasty which ruled it. The arms are effectively identical to the coat of arms of Sweden.\nThe three crowns appear, carved in stone, on the baptismal font (c.1400) in the parish church of Saxmundham, and on the 15th-century porch of Woolpit church, both in Suffolk. They also appear in local heraldry and form part of the arms of the diocese of Ely and the arms of the borough of Bury St Edmunds, where the crowns are shown pierced with arrows to represent the martyrdom of Edmund the Martyr, the last king of East Anglia. Other users of the arms include the former Isle of Ely County Council, the Borough of Colchester and the University of East Anglia. The flag of Cambridgeshire (adopted in 2015) includes the three gold crowns on a blue field.\nThe East Anglian flag as it is known today was proposed by George Henry Langham and adopted in 1902 by the London Society of East Anglians (established in 1896). It superimposes the three crowns in a blue shield on a St George's cross.\nEast Anglia features heavily in English literature, notably in No\u00ebl Coward's \"Private Lives\" and the history of its waterways and drainage forms the backdrop to Graham Swift's novel \"Waterland\". The area also figures in works by L.P. Hartley, Arthur Ransome and Dorothy L. Sayers, among many others.\n\"Suffolk pink\" and similar pastel colours of whitewash are commonly seen on houses in Suffolk, Norfolk and their neighbouring counties.\nTourism.\nEast Anglia has holiday resorts that range from the traditional coastal towns of Felixstowe and Lowestoft in Suffolk and Great Yarmouth and Hunstanton in Norfolk, to towns like Aldeburgh and Southwold in Suffolk. Other tourist attractions include historic towns and cities like Bury St Edmunds, Cambridge and Ely as well as areas such as Constable Country, the Broads and the North Norfolk coast.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46380", "revid": "46448177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46380", "title": "Coaxial cable", "text": "Electrical cable with concentric construction\nCoaxial cable, or coax (pronounced ), is a type of electrical cable consisting of an inner conductor surrounded by a concentric conducting shield, with the two separated by a dielectric (insulating material); many coaxial cables also have a protective outer sheath or jacket. The term \"coaxial\" refers to the inner conductor and the outer shield sharing a geometric axis.\nCoaxial cable is a type of unbalanced transmission line, used to carry high-frequency unbalanced electrical signals with low losses. It is used in such applications as telephone trunk lines, broadband internet networking cables, high-speed computer data buses, cable television signals, and connecting radio transmitters and receivers to their antennas. It differs from other shielded cables because the dimensions of the cable and connectors are controlled to give a precise, constant conductor spacing, which is needed for it to function efficiently as a transmission line.\nCoaxial cable was used in the first (1858) and following transatlantic cable installations, but its theory was not described until 1880 by English physicist, engineer, and mathematician Oliver Heaviside, who patented the design in that year (British patent No. 1,407).\nApplications.\nCoaxial cable is used as a transmission line for radio frequency signals. Its applications include feedlines connecting radio transmitters and receivers to their antennas, computer network (e.g., Ethernet) connections, digital audio (S/PDIF), and distribution of cable television signals. One advantage of coaxial over other types of radio transmission line is that in an ideal coaxial cable the electromagnetic field carrying the signal exists only in the space between the inner and outer conductors. This allows coaxial cable runs to be installed next to metal objects such as gutters without the power losses that occur in other types of transmission lines. Coaxial cable also provides protection of the signal from external electromagnetic interference.\nDescription.\nCoaxial cable conducts electrical signals using an inner conductor (usually a solid copper, stranded copper or copper-plated steel wire) surrounded by an insulating layer and all enclosed by a shield, typically one to four layers of woven metallic braid and metallic tape. The cable is protected by an outer insulating jacket. Normally, the outside of the shield is kept at ground potential and a signal carrying voltage is applied to the centre conductor. When using differential signaling, coaxial cable provides an advantage of equal push-pull currents on the inner conductor and inside of the outer conductor that restrict the signal's electric and magnetic fields to the dielectric, with little leakage outside the shield. Further, if unequal currents are filtered out at the receiving end of the line, electric and magnetic fields outside the cable are largely kept from interfering with signals inside the cable. This property makes coaxial cable a good choice both for carrying weak signals that cannot tolerate interference from the environment, and for stronger electrical signals that must not be allowed to radiate or couple into adjacent structures or circuits. Larger diameter cables and cables with multiple shields have less leakage.\nCommon applications of coaxial cable include video and CATV distribution, RF and microwave transmission, and computer and instrumentation data connections.\nThe characteristic impedance of the cable (Z0) is determined by the dielectric constant of the inner insulator and the radii of the inner and outer conductors. In radio frequency systems, where the cable length is comparable to the wavelength of the signals transmitted, a uniform cable characteristic impedance is important to minimize loss. The source and load impedances are chosen to match the impedance of the cable to ensure maximum power transfer and minimum standing wave ratio. Other important properties of coaxial cable include attenuation as a function of frequency, voltage handling capability, and shield quality.\nConstruction.\nCoaxial cable design choices affect physical size, frequency performance, attenuation, power handling capabilities, flexibility, strength, and cost. The inner conductor might be solid or stranded; stranded is more flexible. To get better high-frequency performance, the inner conductor may be silver-plated. Copper-plated steel wire is often used as an inner conductor for cable used in the cable TV industry.\nThe insulator surrounding the inner conductor may be solid plastic, a foam plastic, or air with spacers supporting the inner wire. The properties of the dielectric insulator determine some of the electrical properties of the cable. A common choice is a solid polyethylene (PE) insulator, used in lower-loss cables. Solid Teflon (PTFE) is also used as an insulator, and exclusively in plenum-rated cables. Some coaxial lines use air (or some other gas) and have spacers to keep the inner conductor from touching the shield.\nMany conventional coaxial cables use braided copper wire forming the shield. This allows the cable to be flexible, but it also means there are gaps in the shield layer, and the inner dimension of the shield varies slightly because the braid cannot be flat. Sometimes the braid is silver-plated. For better shield performance, some cables have a double-layer shield. The shield might be just two braids, but it is more common now to have a thin foil shield covered by a wire braid. Some cables may invest in more than two shield layers, such as \"quad-shield\", which uses four alternating layers of foil and braid. Other shield designs sacrifice flexibility for better performance; some shields are a solid metal tube. Those cables cannot be bent sharply, as the shield will kink, causing losses in the cable. When a foil shield is used a small wire conductor incorporated into the foil makes soldering the shield termination easier.\nFor high-power radio-frequency transmission up to about 1\u00a0GHz, coaxial cable with a solid copper outer conductor is available in sizes of 0.25\u00a0inch upward. The outer conductor is corrugated like a bellows to permit flexibility and the inner conductor is held in position by a plastic spiral to approximate an air dielectric. One brand name for such cable is \"Heliax\".\nCoaxial cables require an internal structure of an insulating (dielectric) material to maintain the spacing between the centre conductor and shield. The dielectric losses increase in this order: Ideal dielectric (no loss), vacuum, air, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), polyethylene foam, and solid polyethylene. An inhomogeneous dielectric needs to be compensated by a non-circular conductor to avoid current hot-spots.\nWhile many cables have a solid dielectric, many others have a foam dielectric that contains as much air or other gas as possible to reduce the losses by allowing the use of a larger diameter centre conductor. Foam coax will have about 15% less attenuation but some types of foam dielectric can absorb moisture\u2014especially at its many surfaces\u2014in humid environments, significantly increasing the loss. Supports shaped like stars or spokes are even better but more expensive and very susceptible to moisture infiltration. Still more expensive were the air-spaced coaxials used for some inter-city communications in the mid-20th century. The centre conductor was suspended by polyethylene discs every few centimetres. In some low-loss coaxial cables such as the RG-62 type, the inner conductor is supported by a spiral strand of polyethylene, so that an air space exists between most of the conductor and the inside of the jacket. The lower dielectric constant of air allows for a greater inner diameter at the same impedance and a greater outer diameter at the same cutoff frequency, lowering ohmic losses. Inner conductors are sometimes silver-plated to smooth the surface and reduce losses due to skin effect. A rough surface extends the current path and concentrates the current at peaks, thus increasing ohmic loss.\nThe insulating jacket can be made from many materials. A common choice is PVC, but some applications may require fire-resistant materials. Outdoor applications may require the jacket to resist ultraviolet light, oxidation, rodent damage, or direct burial. Flooded coaxial cables use a water-blocking gel to protect the cable from water infiltration through minor cuts in the jacket. For internal chassis connections the insulating jacket may be omitted.\nSignal propagation.\nTwin-lead transmission lines have the property that the electromagnetic wave propagating down the line extends into the space surrounding the parallel wires. These lines have low loss, but also have undesirable characteristics. They cannot be bent, tightly twisted, or otherwise shaped without changing their characteristic impedance, causing reflection of the signal back toward the source. They also cannot be buried or run along or attached to anything conductive, as the extended fields will induce currents in the nearby conductors causing unwanted radiation and detuning of the line. Standoff insulators are used to keep them away from parallel metal surfaces. Coaxial lines largely solve this problem by confining virtually all of the electromagnetic wave to the area inside the cable. Coaxial lines can therefore be bent and moderately twisted without negative effects, and they can be strapped to conductive supports without inducing unwanted currents in them, so long as provisions are made to ensure differential signalling push-pull currents in the cable.\nIn radio-frequency applications up to a few gigahertz, the wave propagates primarily in the transverse electric magnetic (TEM) mode, which means that the electric and magnetic fields are both perpendicular to the direction of propagation. However, above a certain cutoff frequency, transverse electric (TE) or transverse magnetic (TM) modes can also propagate, as they do in a hollow waveguide. It is usually undesirable to transmit signals above the cutoff frequency, since it may cause multiple modes with different phase velocities to propagate, interfering with each other. The outer diameter is roughly inversely proportional to the cutoff frequency. A propagating surface-wave mode that only involves the central conductor also exists, but is effectively suppressed in coaxial cable of conventional geometry and common impedance. Electric field lines for this TM mode have a longitudinal component and require line lengths of a half-wavelength or longer.\nCoaxial cable may be viewed as a type of waveguide. Power is transmitted through the radial electric field and the circumferential magnetic field in the TEM mode. This is the dominant mode from zero frequency (DC) to an upper limit determined by the electrical dimensions of the cable.\nConnectors.\nCoaxial connectors are designed to maintain a coaxial form across the connection and have the same impedance as the attached cable. Connectors are usually plated with high-conductivity metals such as silver or tarnish-resistant gold. Due to the skin effect, the RF signal is only carried by the plating at higher frequencies and does not penetrate to the connector body. Silver however tarnishes quickly and the silver sulfide that is produced is poorly conductive, degrading connector performance, making silver a poor choice for this application.\nImportant parameters.\nCoaxial cable is a particular kind of transmission line, so the circuit models developed for general transmission lines are appropriate. See Telegrapher's equation.\nPhysical parameters.\nIn the following section, these symbols are used:\nDerived electrical parameters.\n \"j\u03c9\" \n \"j\"2\"\u03c0f\" is the frequency. The \"per unit length\" dimensions cancel out in the impedance formula. At DC the two reactive terms are zero, so the impedance is real-valued, and is extremely high. It looks like formula_16 With increasing frequency, the reactive components take effect, and the impedance of the line is complex-valued. At very low frequencies (audio range, of interest to telephone systems) G is typically much smaller than sC, so the impedance at low frequencies is formula_17 which has a phase value of \u221245\u00b0. At higher frequencies, the reactive terms usually dominate R and G, and the cable impedance again becomes real-valued. That value is \"Z\"0, the \"characteristic impedance\" of the cable: formula_18 Assuming that the dielectric properties of the material inside the cable do not vary appreciably over the operating range of the cable, the characteristic impedance is frequency independent above about five times the shield cutoff frequency. For typical coaxial cables, the shield cutoff frequency is 600\u00a0Hz (for RG-6A) to 2,000\u00a0Hz (for RG-58C). The parameters L and C are determined from the ratio of the inner (d) and outer (D) diameters and the dielectric constant (\u03b5). The characteristic impedance is given by formula_19\nChoice of impedance.\nThe best coaxial cable impedances were experimentally determined at Bell Laboratories in 1929 to be 77\u00a0\u03a9 for low-attenuation, 60\u00a0\u03a9 for high-voltage, and 30\u00a0\u03a9 for high-power. For a coaxial cable with air dielectric and a shield of a given inner diameter, the attenuation is minimized by choosing the diameter of the inner conductor to give a characteristic impedance of 76.7\u00a0\u03a9. When more common dielectrics are considered, the lowest insertion loss impedance drops down to a value between 52 and 64\u00a0\u03a9. Maximum power handling is achieved at 30\u00a0\u03a9.\nThe approximate impedance required to match a centre-fed dipole antenna in free space (i.e., a dipole without ground reflections) is 73\u00a0\u03a9, so 75\u00a0\u03a9 coax was commonly used for connecting shortwave antennas to receivers. These typically involve such low levels of RF power that power-handling and high-voltage breakdown characteristics are unimportant when compared to attenuation. Likewise with CATV, although many broadcast TV installations and CATV headends use 300\u00a0\u03a9 folded dipole antennas to receive off-the-air signals, 75\u00a0\u03a9 coax makes a convenient 4:1 balun transformer for these as well as possessing low attenuation.\nThe arithmetic mean between 30\u00a0\u03a9 and 77\u00a0\u03a9 is 53.5\u00a0\u03a9; the geometric mean is 48\u00a0\u03a9. The selection of 50\u00a0\u03a9 as a compromise between power-handling capability and attenuation is in general cited as the reason for the number. 50\u00a0\u03a9 also works out tolerably well because it corresponds approximately to the feedpoint impedance of a half-wave dipole, mounted approximately a half-wave above \"normal\" ground (ideally 73\u00a0\u03a9, but reduced for low-hanging horizontal wires).\nRG-62 is a 93\u00a0\u03a9 coaxial cable originally used in mainframe computer networks in the 1970s and early 1980s (it was the cable used to connect IBM 3270 terminals to IBM 3274/3174 terminal cluster controllers). Later, some manufacturers of LAN equipment, such as Datapoint for ARCNET, adopted RG-62 as their coaxial cable standard. The cable has the lowest capacitance per unit-length when compared to other coaxial cables of similar size.\nAll of the components of a coaxial system should have the same impedance to avoid internal reflections at connections between components (see Impedance matching). Such reflections may cause signal attenuation. They introduce standing waves, which increase losses and can even result in cable dielectric breakdown with high-power transmission. In analog video or TV systems, reflections cause ghosting in the image; multiple reflections may cause the original signal to be followed by more than one echo. If a coaxial cable is open (not connected at the end), the termination has nearly infinite resistance, which causes reflections. If the coaxial cable is short-circuited, the termination resistance is nearly zero, which causes reflections with the opposite polarity. Reflections will be nearly eliminated if the coaxial cable is terminated in a pure resistance equal to its impedance.\nIssues.\nSignal leakage.\nSignal leakage is the passage of electromagnetic fields through the shield of a cable and occurs in both directions. Ingress is the passage of an outside signal into the cable and can result in noise and disruption of the desired signal. Egress is the passage of signal intended to remain within the cable into the outside world and can result in a weaker signal at the end of the cable and radio frequency interference to nearby devices. Severe leakage usually results from improperly installed connectors or faults in the cable shield.\nFor example, in the United States, signal leakage from cable television systems is regulated by the FCC, since cable signals use the same frequencies as aeronautical and radionavigation bands. CATV operators may also choose to monitor their networks for leakage to prevent ingress. Outside signals entering the cable can cause unwanted noise and picture ghosting. Excessive noise can overwhelm the signal, making it useless. In-channel ingress can be digitally removed by ingress cancellation.\nAn ideal shield would be a perfect conductor with no holes, gaps, or bumps connected to a perfect ground. However, a smooth solid highly conductive shield would be heavy, inflexible, and expensive. Such coax is used for straight-line feeds to commercial radio broadcast towers. More economical cables must make compromises between shield efficacy, flexibility, and cost, such as the corrugated surface of flexible hardline, flexible braid, or foil shields. Since shields cannot be perfect conductors, current flowing on the inside of the shield produces an electromagnetic field on the outer surface of the shield.\nConsider the skin effect. The magnitude of an alternating current in a conductor decays exponentially with distance beneath the surface, with the depth of penetration being proportional to the square root of the resistivity. This means that, in a shield of finite thickness, some small amount of current will still be flowing on the opposite surface of the conductor. With a perfect conductor (i.e., zero resistivity), all of the current would flow at the surface, with no penetration into and through the conductor. Real cables have a shield made of an imperfect, although usually very good, conductor, so there must always be some leakage.\nThe gaps or holes, allow some of the electromagnetic field to penetrate to the other side. For example, braided shields have many small gaps. The gaps are smaller when using a foil (solid metal) shield, but there is still a seam running the length of the cable. Foil becomes increasingly rigid with increasing thickness, so a thin foil layer is often surrounded by a layer of braided metal, which offers greater flexibility for a given cross-section.\nSignal leakage can be severe if there is poor contact at the interface to connectors at either end of the cable or if there is a break in the shield.\nTo greatly reduce signal leakage into or out of the cable, by a factor of 1000, or even 10,000, superscreened cables are often used in critical applications, such as for neutron flux counters in nuclear reactors.\nSuperscreened cables for nuclear use are defined in IEC 96-4-1, 1990, however as there have been long gaps in the construction of nuclear power stations in Europe, many existing installations are using superscreened cables to the UK standard AESS(TRG) 71181 which is referenced in IEC 61917.\nGround loops.\nA continuous current, even if small, along the imperfect shield of a coaxial cable can cause visible or audible interference. In CATV systems distributing analog signals the potential difference between the coaxial network and the electrical grounding system of a house can cause a visible \"hum bar\" in the picture. This appears as a wide horizontal distortion bar in the picture that scrolls slowly upward. Such differences in potential can be reduced by proper bonding to a common ground at the house. See ground loop.\nNoise.\nExternal fields create a voltage across the inductance of the outside of the outer conductor between sender and receiver. The effect is less when there are several parallel cables, as this reduces the inductance and, therefore, the voltage. Because the outer conductor carries the reference potential for the signal on the inner conductor, the receiving circuit measures the wrong voltage.\nTransformer effect.\nThe transformer effect is sometimes used to mitigate the effect of currents induced in the shield. The inner and outer conductors form the primary and secondary winding of the transformer, and the effect is enhanced in some high-quality cables that have an outer layer of mu-metal. Because of this 1:1 transformer, the aforementioned voltage across the outer conductor is transformed onto the inner conductor so that the two voltages can be cancelled by the receiver. Many senders and receivers have means to reduce the leakage even further. They increase the transformer effect by passing the whole cable through a ferrite core one or more times.\nCommon mode current and radiation.\nCommon mode current occurs when stray currents in the shield flow in the same direction as the current in the centre conductor, causing the coax to radiate. They are the opposite of the desired \"push-pull\" differential signalling currents, where the signal currents on the inner and outer conductor are equal and opposite.\nMost of the shield effect in coax results from opposing currents in the centre conductor and shield creating opposite magnetic fields that cancel, and thus do not radiate. The same effect helps ladder line. However, ladder line is extremely sensitive to surrounding metal objects, which can enter the fields before they completely cancel. Coax does not have this problem, since the field is enclosed in the shield. However, it is still possible for a field to form between the shield and other connected objects, such as the antenna the coax feeds. The current formed by the field between the antenna and the coax shield would flow in the same direction as the current in the centre conductor, and thus not be canceled. Energy would radiate from the coax itself, affecting the radiation pattern of the antenna. With sufficient power, this could be a hazard to people near the cable. A properly placed and properly sized balun can prevent common-mode radiation in coax. An isolating transformer or blocking capacitor can be used to couple a coaxial cable to equipment, where it is desirable to pass radio-frequency signals but to block direct current or low-frequency power.\nHigher impedance at audio frequencies.\nThe characteristic impedance formula above is a good approximation at radio frequencies; however, for frequencies below 100\u00a0kHz (such as audio) it becomes important to use the complete telegrapher's equation:\nformula_23\nApplying this formula to typical 75-ohm coaxial cable gives impedance across the audio spectrum in the range from ~150\u00a0\u03a9 to ~5\u00a0k\u03a9, much higher than nominal. The velocity of propagation also decreases considerably. Thus coaxial-cable impedances are consistent at RF frequencies but variable across audio frequencies. This effect was manifested when trying to send a plain voice signal across the transatlantic telegraph cable, with poor results.\nStandards.\nMost coaxial cables have a characteristic impedance of either 50, 52, 75, or 93 \u03a9. The RF industry uses standard type-names for coaxial cables. Thanks to television, RG-6 is the most commonly used coaxial cable for home use, and the majority of connections outside Europe are by F connectors.\nA series of standard types of coaxial cable were specified for military uses, in the form \"RG-#\" or \"RG-#/U\". They date from World War II and were listed in \"MIL-HDBK-216\" published in 1962. These designations are now obsolete. The RG designation stands for Radio Guide; the U designation stands for Universal. The current military standard is MIL-SPEC MIL-C-17. MIL-C-17 numbers, such as \"M17/75-RG214\", are given for military cables and manufacturer's catalog numbers for civilian applications. However, the RG-series designations were so common for generations that they are still used, although critical users should be aware that since the handbook is withdrawn there is no standard to guarantee the electrical and physical characteristics of a cable described as \"RG-# type\". The RG designators are mostly used to identify compatible connectors that fit the inner conductor, dielectric, and jacket dimensions of the old RG-series cables.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDielectric material codes:\n FPE is foamed polyethylene\n PE is solid polyethylene\n PF is polyethylene foam\n PTFE is polytetrafluoroethylene\n ASP is air-space polyethylene\nVF is the velocity factor; it is determined by the effective formula_5 and formula_10\n VF for solid PE is about 0.66\n VF for foam PE is about 0.78 to 0.88\n VF for air is about 1.00\n VF for solid PTFE is about 0.70\n VF for foam PTFE is about 0.84\nThere are also other designation schemes for coaxial cables such as the URM, CT, BT, RA, PSF and WF series.\nUses.\nShort coaxial cables are commonly used to connect home video equipment, in ham radio setups, and in Nuclear Instrumentation Modules. While formerly common for implementing computer networks, in particular Ethernet (\"thick\" 10BASE5 and \"thin\" 10BASE2), twisted pair cables have replaced them in most applications except in the consumer cable modem market for broadband Internet access.\nLong distance coaxial cable was used in the 20th century to connect radio networks, television networks, and long-distance telephone networks though this has largely been superseded by later methods (fibre optics, T1/E1, satellite).\nShorter coaxials still carry cable television signals to the majority of television receivers, and this purpose consumes the majority of coaxial cable production. In 1980s and early 1990s coaxial cable was also used in computer networking, most prominently in Ethernet networks, where it was later in late 1990s to early 2000s replaced by UTP cables in North America and STP cables in Western Europe, both with 8P8C modular connectors.\nMicro coaxial cables are used in a range of consumer devices, military equipment, and also in ultrasound scanning equipment.\nThe most common impedances that are widely used are 50 or 52 ohms and 75 ohms, although other impedances are available for specific applications. The 50 / 52 ohm cables are widely used for industrial and commercial two-way radio frequency applications (including radio, and telecommunications), although 75 ohms is commonly used for broadcast television and radio.\nCoaxial cable is often used to carry signals from an antenna to a receiver. In many cases, the same cable carries power toward the antenna, to power a preamplifier. In some cases, a single cable carries unidirectional power and bidirectional data/signals, as in DiSEqC.\nTypes.\nHard line.\nLarger varieties of hardline may have a centre conductor that is constructed from either rigid or corrugated copper tubing. The dielectric in hard line may consist of polyethylene foam, air, or a pressurized gas such as nitrogen or desiccated air (dried air). In gas-charged lines, hard plastics such as nylon are used as spacers to separate the inner and outer conductors. The addition of these gases into the dielectric space reduces moisture contamination, provides a stable dielectric constant, and provides a reduced risk of internal arcing. Gas-filled hardlines are usually used on high-power RF transmitters such as television or radio broadcasting, military transmitters, and high-power amateur radio applications but may also be used on some critical lower-power applications such as those in the microwave bands. However, in the microwave region, \"waveguide\" is more often used than hard line for transmitter-to-antenna, or antenna-to-receiver applications. The various shields used in hard line also differ; some forms use rigid tubing, or pipe, while others may use a corrugated tubing, which makes bending easier, as well as reduces kinking when the cable is bent to conform. Smaller varieties of hard line may be used internally in some high-frequency applications, in particular in equipment within the microwave range, to reduce interference between stages of the device.\nRadiating.\nRadiating or leaky cable is another form of coaxial cable which is constructed in a similar fashion to hard line, however it is constructed with tuned slots cut into the shield. These slots are tuned to the specific RF wavelength of operation or tuned to a specific radio frequency band. This type of cable is to provide a tuned bi-directional \"desired\" leakage effect between transmitter and receiver. It is often used in elevator shafts, US Navy Ships, underground transportation tunnels and in other areas where an antenna is not feasible. One example of this type of cable is Radiax (CommScope).\nRG-6.\nRG-6 is available in four different types designed for various applications. In addition, the core may be copper clad steel (CCS) or bare solid copper (BC). \"Plain\" or \"house\" RG-6 is designed for indoor or external house wiring. \"Flooded\" cable is infused with water-blocking gel for use in underground conduit or direct burial. \"Messenger\" may contain some waterproofing but is distinguished by the addition of a steel messenger wire along its length to carry the tension involved in an aerial drop from a utility pole. \"Plenum\" cabling is expensive and comes with a special Teflon-based outer jacket designed for use in ventilation ducts to meet fire codes. It was developed since the plastics used as the outer jacket and inner insulation in many \"Plain\" or \"house\" cabling gives off poisonous gas when burned.\nTriaxial cable.\nTriaxial cable or triax is coaxial cable with a third layer of shielding, insulation and sheathing. The outer shield, which is earthed (grounded), protects the inner shield from electromagnetic interference from outside sources.\nSemi-rigid.\nSemi-rigid cable is a coaxial form using a solid copper outer sheath. This type of coax offers superior screening compared to cables with a braided outer conductor, especially at higher frequencies. The major disadvantage is that the cable, as its name implies, is not very flexible, and is not intended to be flexed after initial forming. (See )\nConformable cable is a flexible reformable alternative to semi-rigid coaxial cable used where flexibility is required. Conformable cable can be stripped and formed by hand without the need for specialized tools, similar to standard coaxial cable.\nRigid line.\nRigid line is a coaxial line formed by two copper tubes maintained concentric every other metre using PTFE-supports. Rigid lines cannot be bent, so they often need elbows. Interconnection with rigid line is done with an inner bullet/inner support and a flange or connection kit. Typically, rigid lines are connected using standardised EIA RF Connectors whose bullet and flange sizes match the standard line diameters. For each outer diameter, either 75 or 50\u00a0ohm inner tubes can be obtained.\nRigid line is commonly used indoors for interconnection between high-power transmitters and other RF-components, but more rugged rigid line with weatherproof flanges is used outdoors on antenna masts, etc. In the interests of saving weight and costs, on masts and similar structures the outer line is often aluminium, and special care must be taken to prevent corrosion.\nWith a flange connector, it is also possible to go from rigid line to hard line. Many broadcasting antennas and antenna splitters use the flanged rigid line interface even when connecting to flexible coaxial cables and hard line.\nRigid line is produced in a number of different sizes:\nInterference and troubleshooting.\nCoaxial cable insulation may degrade, requiring replacement of the cable, especially if it has been exposed to the elements on a continuous basis. The shield is normally grounded, and if even a single thread of the braid or filament of foil touches the centre conductor, the signal will be shorted causing significant or total signal loss. This most often occurs at improperly installed end connectors and splices. Also, the connector or splice must be properly attached to the shield, as this provides the path to ground for the interfering signal.\nDespite being shielded, interference can occur on coaxial cable lines. Susceptibility to interference has little relationship to broad cable type designations (e.g. RG-59, RG-6) but is strongly related to the composition and configuration of the cable's shielding. For cable television, with frequencies extending well into the UHF range, a foil shield is normally provided, and will provide total coverage as well as high effectiveness against high-frequency interference. Foil shielding is ordinarily accompanied by a tinned copper or aluminium braid shield, with anywhere from 60 to 95% coverage. The braid is important to shield effectiveness because (1) it is more effective than foil at preventing low-frequency interference, (2) it provides higher conductivity to ground than foil, and (3) it makes attaching a connector easier and more reliable. \"Quad-shield\" cable, using two low-coverage aluminium braid shields and two layers of foil, is often used in situations involving troublesome interference, but is less effective than a single layer of foil and single high-coverage copper braid shield such as is found on broadcast-quality precision video cable.\nIn the United States and some other countries, cable television distribution systems use extensive networks of outdoor coaxial cable, often with in-line distribution amplifiers. Leakage of signals into and out of cable TV systems can cause interference to cable subscribers and to over-the-air radio services using the same frequencies as those of the cable system.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46381", "revid": "735741", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46381", "title": "Jan van Eyck", "text": "Flemish painter (died 1441)\nJan van Eyck ( ; ; c.\u2009before 1390 \u2013 9 July 1441) was a Flemish painter active in Bruges who was one of the early innovators of what became known as Early Netherlandish painting, and one of the supreme figures of the Early Northern Renaissance. Such was his legacy, that he has been called \u201cthe inventor of oil-painting\u201d by Vasari, Ernst Gombrich, and others, although this claim is now considered an oversimplification.\nSurviving records date his birth at around 1380 or 1390, in Maaseik (then Maaseyck, hence his name), Limburg, which is located in present-day Belgium. He took employment in The Hague around 1422, when he was already a master painter with workshop assistants, and was employed as painter and \"valet de chambre\" to John III the Pitiless, ruler of the counties of Holland and Hainaut. Some time after John's death in 1425, he was appointed as court painter to Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, and worked in Lille before moving to Bruges in 1429, where he lived until his death. He was highly regarded by Philip, and was dispatched on several diplomatic visits abroad, including one to Lisbon in 1428 to discuss the possibility of a marriage contract between the duke and Isabella of Portugal.\nAbout 20 surviving paintings are confidently attributed to him, as well as the \"Ghent Altarpiece\" and the illuminated miniatures of the Turin-Milan Hours, all dated between 1432 and 1439. Ten are dated and signed with a variation of his motto (\"As I (Eyck) can\"), a pun on his name, which he typically painted in Greek characters. \nVan Eyck painted both secular and religious subjects. His works include altarpieces, painted panels\u2014diptychs (dismantled), triptychs, and polyptychs\u2014and commissioned portraits. He was well paid by Philip, who wanted the painter to have the financial security and artistic freedom to paint \"whenever he pleased.\" Van Eyck's early work shows influence from the International Gothic style, which he soon eclipsed, in part through a greater emphasis on naturalism and realism. He achieved a new level of virtuosity through his developments in the use of oil paint. His style and techniques profoundly altered the development of the Early Netherlandish school.\nLife and career.\nEarly life.\nLittle is known of Jan van Eyck's early life and neither the date nor place of his birth is documented. The first extant record of his life comes from the court of John of Bavaria at The Hague where, between 1422 and 1424, payments were made to \"Meyster Jan den malre\" (Master Jan the painter) who was then a court painter with the rank of valet de chambre, with at first one and then two assistants. This suggests a date of birth of 1395 at the latest. However, some scholars have argued it was closer to 1380. He was identified in the late 16th century as having been born in Maaseik, a borough of the prince-bishopric of Li\u00e8ge. His daughter Lievine was in a nunnery in Maaseik after her father's death. The notes on his preparatory drawing for \"Portrait of Cardinal Niccol\u00f2 Albergati\" are written in the Maasland dialect.\nVan Eyck is known to have had two brothers, Hubert, who died in 1426 and with whom Jan probably served his apprenticeship and Lambert (active between 1431 and 1442), both also painters. The order of their births has not been established, though Alfred Acres states that Hubert was probably older than Jan. Van Eyck may also have had a sister, Margaret, also a painter, though her existence is uncertain and \"could reflect a historical confusion with Jan's wife\" Margaret. Another significant, and rather younger, painter who worked in Southern France, Barth\u00e9lemy van Eyck, is presumed to be a relation. It is not known where Jan was educated, but he had knowledge of Latin and used the Greek and Hebrew alphabets in his inscriptions, indicating that he was schooled in the classics. This level of education was rare among painters, and would have made him more attractive to the cultivated Philip.\nCourt painter.\nVan Eyck served as official to John of Bavaria-Straubing, ruler of Holland, Hainault and Zeeland. By this time he had assembled a small workshop and was involved in redecorating the Binnenhof palace in The Hague. After John's death in 1425 he moved to Bruges and came to the attention of Philip the Good c.\u20091425. His emergence as a collectable painter generally follows his appointment to Philip's court, and from this point his activity in the court is comparatively well documented. He served as court artist and diplomat, and was a senior member of the Tournai painters' guild. On 18 October 1427, the Feast of St. Luke, he travelled to Tournai to attend a banquet in his honour, also attended by Robert Campin and Rogier van der Weyden.\nA court salary freed him from commissioned work, and allowed a large degree of artistic freedom. Over the following decade van Eyck's reputation and technical ability grew, mostly from his innovative approaches towards the handling and manipulating of oil paint. Unlike most of his peers, his reputation never diminished and he remained well regarded over the following centuries. His revolutionary approach to oil was such that a myth, perpetuated by Giorgio Vasari, arose that he had invented oil painting.\nHis brother Hubert van Eyck collaborated on Jan's most famous work, the \"Ghent Altarpiece\". Art historians believe it was begun c.\u20091420 by Hubert and completed in 1432 by Jan. Another brother, Lambert, is mentioned in Burgundian court documents and, probably in partnership with Jan's widow, may have overseen his brother's workshop after Jan's death.\nMaturity and success.\nConsidered revolutionary within his lifetime, van Eyck's designs and methods were heavily copied and reproduced. His motto, one of the first and still most distinctive signatures in art history, \"\" (\"AS I CAN\"), a pun on his name, first appeared in 1433 on \"Portrait of a Man in a Turban\", which can be seen as indicating his emerging self-confidence. The years between 1434 and 1436, when he produced the \"Madonna of Chancellor Rolin\", \"Lucca Madonna\" and \"Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele\", are generally considered his high point. \nAround 1432, he married Margaret who was 15 years younger. At about the same time he bought a house in Bruges; Margaret is unmentioned before he relocated, when the first of their two children was born in 1434. Very little is known of Margaret; even her maiden name is lost\u00a0\u2013 contemporary records refer to her mainly as \"Damoiselle Marguerite\". She may have been of aristocratic birth, though from the lower nobility, as evidenced from her clothes in the portrait, which are fashionable but not of the sumptuousness worn by the bride in the \"Arnolfini Portrait\". Later, as the widow of a renowned painter Margaret was afforded a modest pension by the city of Bruges. At least some of this income was invested in lottery.\nVan Eyck undertook a number of journeys on Philip the Duke of Burgundy's behalf between 1426 and 1429, described in records as \"secret\" commissions, for which he was paid multiples of his annual salary. Their precise nature is still unknown, but they seem to involve his acting as envoy of the court. In 1426 he departed for \"certain distant lands\", possibly to the Holy Land, a theory given weight by the topographical accuracy of Jerusalem in \"The Three Marys at the Tomb\", a painting completed by members of his workshop c.\u20091440.\nA better documented commission was the journey to Lisbon along with a group intended to prepare the ground for the Duke's wedding to Isabella of Portugal. Van Eyck was tasked with painting the bride, so that the Duke could visualise her before their marriage. Because Portugal was ridden with plague, their court was itinerant and the Dutch party met them at the out-of-the-way castle of Avis. Van Eyck spent nine months there, returning to the Netherlands with Isabella as a bride to be; the couple married on Christmas Day of 1429. The princess was probably not particularly attractive, and that is exactly how Van Eyck conveyed her in the now lost portrait. Typically he showed his sitters as dignified, yet did not hide their imperfections. After his return, he was preoccupied with completing the \"Ghent Altarpiece\", which was consecrated on 6 May 1432 at Saint Bavo Cathedral during an official ceremony for Philip. Records from 1437 say that he was held in high esteem by the upper ranks of Burgundian nobility and was employed in foreign commissions.\nDeath and legacy.\nJan van Eyck died on 9 July 1441, in Bruges. He was buried in the graveyard of the Church of St Donatian. As a mark of respect, Philip made a one-off payment to Jan's widow Margaret, to a value equal to the artist's annual salary. He left behind many unfinished works to be completed by his workshop journeymen. After his death, Lambert van Eyck ran the workshop, as Jan's reputation and stature steadily grew. Early in 1442 Lambert had the body exhumed and placed inside St. Donatian's Cathedral.\nIn 1449 he was mentioned by the Italian humanist and antiquarian Ciriaco de' Pizzicolli as a painter of note and ability, and was recorded by Bartolomeo Facio in 1456.\nWorks.\nJan van Eyck produced paintings for private clients in addition to his work at the court. Foremost among these is the \"Ghent Altarpiece\" painted for the merchant, financier and politician Jodocus Vijdts and his wife Elisabeth Borluut. Started sometime before 1426 and completed by 1432, the polyptych is seen as representing \"the final conquest of reality in the North\", differing from the great works of the Early Renaissance in Italy by virtue of its willingness to forgo classical idealisation in favor of the faithful observation of nature.\nEven though it may be assumed\u00a0\u2013 given the demand and fashion\u00a0\u2013 that he produced a number of triptychs, only the \"Dresden altarpiece\" survives, although a number of extant portraits may be wings of dismantled polyptychs. Telltale signs are hinges on original frames, the sitter's orientation, and praying hands or the inclusion of iconographical elements in an otherwise seemingly secular portrait.\nAbout 20 surviving paintings are confidently attributed to him, all dated between 1432 and 1439. Ten, including the \"Ghent Altarpiece\", are dated and signed with a variation of his motto, . In 1998 Holland Cotter estimated that \"only two dozen or so paintings...attributed...with varying degrees of confidence, along with some drawings and a few pages from...the Turin-Milan Hours.\" He described the \"complex relationship and tension between art historians and holding museums in assigning authorship. Of the 40 or so works considered originals in the mid 80s, around ten are now vigorously contested by leading researchers as workshop.\"\nTurin-Milan Hours: Hand G.\nSince 1901 Jan van Eyck has often been credited as the anonymous artist known as Hand G of the Turin-Milan Hours. If this is correct, the Turin illustrations are the only known works from his early period; according to Thomas Kren the earlier dates for Hand G precede any known panel painting in an Eyckian style, which \"raise[s] provocative questions about the role that manuscript illumination may have played in the vaunted verisimilitude of Eyckian oil painting.\"\nThe evidence for attributing van Eyck rests on part on the fact that although the figures are mostly of the International Gothic type, they reappear in some of his later work. In addition, there are coats of arms connected with the Wittelsbach family with whom he had connections in the Hague, while some of the figures in the miniatures echo the horsemen in the \"Ghent Altarpiece\".\nMost of the Turin-Milan Hours were destroyed by fire in 1904 and survive only in photographs and copies; only three pages at most attributed to Hand G now survive, those with large miniatures of the \"Birth of John the Baptist\", the \"Finding of the True Cross\" and the \"Office of the Dead\" (or \"Requiem Mass\"), with the \"bas-de-page\" miniatures and initials of the first and last of these The \"Office of the Dead\" is often seen as recalling Jan's 1438\u20131440 \"Madonna in the Church\". Four more were lost in 1904: all the elements of the pages with the miniatures called \"The Prayer on the Shore\" (or \"Duke William of Bavaria at the Seashore\", the \"Sovereign's prayer\" etc.), and the night-scene of the \"Betrayal of Christ\" (which was already described by Durrieu as \"worn\" before the fire), the \"Coronation of the Virgin\" and its bas-de-page, and the large picture only of the seascape \"Voyage of St Julian &amp; St Martha\".\nMarian iconography.\nExcept the 'Ghent Altarpiece,' Van Eyck's religious works feature the Virgin Mary as the central figure. She is typically seated, wearing a jewel-studded crown, cradling a playful child Christ who gazes at her and grips the hem of her dress in a manner that recalls the 13th-century Byzantine tradition of the Eleusa icon (\"Virgin of Tenderness\"). She is sometimes shown reading a Book of Hours. She usually wears red. In the 1432 \"Ghent Altarpiece\" Mary wears a crown adorned with flowers and stars. She is dressed as a bride, and reads from a girdle book draped with green cloth, perhaps an element borrowed from Robert Campin's \"Virgin Annunciate\". The panel contains a number of motifs that later reappear in later works; she is already Queen of Heaven, wearing a crown adorned with flowers and stars. Van Eyck usually presents Mary as an apparition before a donor kneeling in prayer to the side. The idea of a saint appearing before a layperson was common in Northern donor portraits of the period. In \"Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele\" (1434\u20131436), the Canon seems to have just paused momentarily to reflect on a passage from his hand-held bible as the Virgin and Child with two saints appear before him, as if embodiments of his prayer.\nMary's role in his works should be viewed in the context of the contemporary cult and veneration surrounding her. In the early 15th century Mary grew in importance as an intercessor between the divine and members of the Christian faith. The concept of purgatory as an intermediary state that each soul had to pass through before admission to heaven was at its height. Prayer was the most obvious means of decreasing time in limbo, while the wealthy could commission new churches, extensions to existing ones, or devotional portraits. At the same time, there was a trend towards the sponsorship of requiem masses, often as part of the terms of a will, a practice that Joris van der Paele actively sponsored. With this income he endowed the churches with embroidered cloths and metal accessories such as chalices, plates and candlesticks.\nEyck usually gives Mary three roles: Mother of Christ; the personification of the \"Ecclesia Triumphans\"; or Queen of Heaven.\nThe idea of Mary as a metaphor for the Church itself is especially strong in his later paintings. In \"Madonna in the Church\" she dominates the cathedral; her head is almost level with the approximately sixty feet high gallery. Art historian Otto P\u00e4cht describes the interior of the panel as a \"throne room\" which envelops her as if a \"carrying case\". This distortion of scale is found in a number of other of his Madonna paintings, including \"Annunciation\". Her monumental stature borrows from the works of 12th- and 13th-century Italian artists such as Cimabue and Giotto, who in turn reflect a tradition reaching back to an Italo-Byzantine type and emphasises her identification with the cathedral itself. Art historians in the 19th century thought the work was executed early in van Eyck's career and attributed her scale as the mistake of a relatively immature painter. The idea that her size represents her embodiment as the church was first suggested by Erwin Panofsky in 1941. Till-Holger Borchert says that van Eyck did not paint \"the Madonna in a church\", but as \"the Church\".\nVan Eyck's later works contain very precise and detailed architectural details, but are not modeled on actual historical buildings. He probably sought to create an ideal and perfect space for Mary's apparition, and was more concerned with their visual impact rather than physical possibility.\nThe Marian paintings are characterized by complex depictions of both physical space and light sources. Many of van Eyck's religious works contain a reduced interior space that is nonetheless subtly managed and arranged to convey a sense of intimacy without feeling constricted. The \"Madonna of Chancellor Rolin\" is lit from both the central portico and the side windows, while the floor-tiles in comparison to other elements indicate that the figures are only about six feet from the columned loggia screen, and that Rolin might have had to squeeze himself through the opening to get out that way. The Gothic and contemporary architectural elements of the cathedral in \"Madonna in the Church\" are so minutely detailed that many art and architecture historians have concluded that he must have had enough architectural knowledge to make nuanced distinctions. Given this accuracy, many scholars have tried to link the painting with particular buildings. But in all the buildings in van Eyck's work, the structure is imagined and probably an idealized formation of what he viewed as a perfect architectural space. This can be seen from the many examples of features that would be unlikely in a contemporary church, including the placing of a round arched triforium above a pointed colonnade in the Berlin work.\nThe Marian works are heavily lined with inscriptions. The lettering on the arched throne above Mary in the \"Ghent Altarpiece\" is taken from a passage from the Book of Wisdom (7:29): \"She is more beautiful than the sun and the army of the stars; compared to the light she is superior. She is truly the reflection of eternal light and a spotless mirror of God\". Wording from the same source on the hem of her robe, on the frame of \"Madonna in the Church\" and on her dress in \"Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele\", reads Although inscriptions are present in all of van Eyck's paintings, they are predominant in his Marian paintings, where they seem to serve a number of functions. They breathe life into portraits and give voice to those venerating Mary but also play a functional role; given that contemporary religious works were commissioned for private devotion, the inscriptions may have been intended to be read as an incantation or personalized indulgence prayers. Harbison notes that van Eyck's privately commissioned works are unusually heavily inscribed with prayer, and that the words may have served a similar function to prayer tablets, or more properly \"Prayer Wings\", as seen in the London \"Virgin and Child\" triptych.\nSecular portraits.\nVan Eyck was in high demand as a portrait artist. Growing affluence across northern Europe meant that portraiture was no longer the preserve of royalty and high aristocracy. Further raising the demand for portraits was the emergence of the merchant middle class and the growing awareness of humanist ideas of selfhood. Responding to this shift, van Eyck used layers of thin translucent glazes that gave his paintings a rich depth of color and tone, resulting in strikingly vivid likenesses. Nine three-quarters view portraits attributed to van Eyck survive today. His style was widely adopted, most notably by van der Weyden, Petrus Christus and Hans Memling.\nThe small \"Portrait of a Man with a Blue Chaperon\" (c. 1430) is thought to be his earliest surviving portrait. It contains many of the elements that were to become characteristic of his portraiture style, including the three-quarters view (a type he revived from antiquity and which soon spread across Europe), directional lighting, elaborate headdress, and, for the single portraits, the framing of the figure within an undefined narrow space set against a flat black background. It is noted for its realism and observation of the small details of the sitter's appearance; the man has a light stubble of one or two days' growth, a reoccurring feature in van Eyck's early male portraits, where the sitter is, according to Lorne Campbell, \"rather inefficiently shaved\". Campbell lists other van Eyck unshaven sitters; \"Niccol\u00f2 Albergati\" (1431), \"Jodocus Vijdt\" (1432), \"Jan van Eyck?\" (1433), \"Joris van der Paele\" (c. 1434\u20131436), \"Nicolas Rolin\" (1435) and \"Jan de Leeuw\" (1436).\nThe \"L\u00e9al Souvenir\" portrait of 1432 continues the adherence to realism and acute observation of the small details of the sitter's appearance. However, by his later works, the sitter is placed at more of a distance, and the attention to detail less marked. The descriptions are less forensic, more of an overview, while the forms are broader and flatter. Even in his early works, his descriptions of the model are not faithful reproductions; parts of the sitter's face or form were altered either to improve the composition or to fit an ideal. He often altered a model's proportions in order to emphasize features of interest. In the portrait of his wife, he altered the angle of her nose, and flattered her with a fashionably high forehead.\nThe stone parapet at the base of the canvas of \"L\u00e9al Souvenir\" is painted as if to simulate marked or scarred stone and bears three layers of inscriptions, each rendered in an illusionistic manner, giving the impression they are chiseled onto stone. van Eyck often set the inscriptions as if in the sitter's voice, so that they \"appear to be speaking\". Examples include the \"Portrait of Jan de Leeuw\" which reads \"...\u00a0Jan de [Leeuw], who first opened his eyes on the Feast of St Ursula [21 October], 1401. Now Jan van Eyck has painted me, you can see when he began it. 1436\". In \"Portrait of Margaret van Eyck\" of 1439 the lettering acclaims \"My husband Johannes completed me in the year 1439 on 17 June, at the age of 33. As I can.\"\nHands play a special significance in van Eyck's painting. In his early portraits, the sitters are often shown holding objects emblematic of their profession. The small scroll\u2014possibly a legal document\u2014in the right hand of the man in \"L\u00e9al Souvenir\" suggests that he may have practiced law.\nThe \"Arnolfini Portrait\" of 1432 is filled with symbolism, as is the 1435 \"Madonna of Chancellor Rolin\", commissioned to display Rolin's power, influence and piety.\nStyle.\nIconography.\nThe small, subtle details often seen in the background of van Eyck's works belong to a rich iconography embodying what he believed to be the co-existence of the spiritual and the material. This use of symbolism and biblical references is characteristic of his work, a handling of religious iconography he pioneered, with his innovations taken up and developed by van der Weyden, Memling and Christus.\nCraig Harbison describes the blending of realism and symbolism as perhaps \"the most important aspect of early Flemish art\". The placement of such symbols into a scene \"was a deliberate strategy to create an experience of spiritual revelation\". Van Eyck's religious paintings in particular \"always present the spectator with a transfigured view of visible reality\". To him the day-to-day is harmoniously steeped in symbolism, such that, according to Harbison, \"descriptive data were rearranged\u00a0[...] so that they illustrated not earthly existence but what he considered supernatural truth.\" This blend of the earthly and the heavenly points to van Eyck's belief that the \"essential truth of Christian doctrine\" can be found in \"the marriage of secular and sacred worlds, of reality and symbol\". He depicts overly large Madonnas, whose unrealistic size shows the separation between the heavenly from the earthly, but placed them in everyday settings such as churches, domestic chambers or seated with court officials.\nYet the earthly churches are heavily decorated with heavenly symbols. A heavenly throne is clearly represented in some domestic chambers (for example in the \"Lucca Madonna\"). More difficult to discern are the settings for paintings such as \"Madonna of Chancellor Rolin\", where the location is a fusion of the earthly and celestial. Van Eyck's iconography is often so densely and intricately layered that a work has to be viewed multiple times before even the most obvious meaning of an element is apparent. The symbols were often subtly woven into the paintings so that they only became apparent after close and repeated viewing, while much of the iconography reflects the idea that, according to John Ward, there is a \"promised passage from sin and death to salvation and rebirth\".\nSignature.\nVan Eyck was the only 15th-century Netherlandish painter to sign his panels. His motto always contained variants of the words \"\" (or a variant)\u00a0\u2013 \"As I Can\", or \"As Best I Can\", which forms a pun on his name. The aspirated \"ICH\" instead of the Brabantian \"IK\" is derived from his native Limburgish. The signature is sometimes inscribed using Greek lettering such as \"\". The word \"Kan\" derives from the Middle Dutch word \"kunnen\" related to the Dutch word \"kunst\" or to the German \"Kunst\" (\"art\").\nThe words may be related to a type of formula of modesty sometimes seen in medieval literature, where the writer prefaces his work with an apology for its imperfections, although, given the typical lavishness of the signatures and mottos, it may merely be a playful reference. Indeed, his motto is sometimes recorded in a manner intended to mimic Christ's monogram \"\", for example in his c 1440 \"Portrait of Christ\". Further, as the signature is often a variant of \"I, Jan van Eyck was here\", it can be seen as a, perhaps somewhat arrogant, assertion of both the faithfulness and trustworthiness of the record and the quality of the work (\"As I (K)Can\").\nThe habit of signing his work ensured that his reputation survived, and attribution has not been as difficult and uncertain as with other first generation artists of the early Netherlandish school. The signatures are usually completed in a decorative script, often of a kind reserved for legal documents, as can be seen in \"L\u00e9al Souvenir\" and the \"Arnolfini Portrait\", the latter of which is signed \"Johannes de eyck fuit hic 1434\" (\"Jan van Eyck was here 1434\"), a way of recording his presence.\nInscriptions.\nMany of van Eyck's paintings are heavily inscribed, in lettering of Greek, Latin or vernacular Dutch. Campbell sees in many examples a \"certain consistency which suggest that he himself had painted them\", rather than they are later additions. The letterings seem to serve different functions depending on the type of work on which they appear. In his single panel portraits they give voice to the sitter, most notably in \"Portrait of Margaret van Eyck\", where the Greek lettering on the frame translates as \"My husband Johannes completed me in the year 1439 on 17 June, at the age of 33. As I can.\"\nBy contrast, the inscriptions on his commissioned religious paintings are written from the point of view of the patron, and written to serve the patron's piousness, charity and dedication to the saint who the sitter is shown accompanying. An inscription on the \"Virgin and Child with Canon van der Paele\", reads \"Joris van der Paele, canon of this church, had this work made by painter Jan van Eyck. And he founded two chaplaincies here in the choir of the Lord. 1434. He only completed it in 1436, however.\"\nFrames.\nExceptionally for his time, van Eyck often signed and dated his frames, then considered an integral part of the work \u2013\nthe two were often painted together, and while the frames were constructed by a body of craftsmen separate to the master's workshop, their work was often considered as equal in skill to that of the painter.\nHe designed and painted the frames for his single head portraits to look like imitation stone, with the signature or other inscriptions giving the impression that they had been chiseled into the stone. The frames serve other illusionistic purposes; in \"Portrait of Isabella of Portugal\", described by the frame, her eyes gaze coyly but directly out of the painting, as she rests her hands on the edge of a faux stone parapet. With this gesture Isabella extends her presence out of the pictorial space and into that of the viewer.\nMany of the original frames are lost and known only through copies or inventory records. The London \"Portrait of a Man\" was likely half of a double portrait or pendant; the last record of the original frames contained many inscriptions, but not all were original; the frames were often overpainted by later artists. \"Portrait of Jan de Leeuw\" also bears its original frame, which is painted over to look like bronze.\nMany of his frames are heavily inscribed, which serves a dual purpose. They are decorative but also function to set the context for the significance of the imagery, similar to the function of margins in medieval manuscripts. Pieces such as the \"Dresden Triptych\" were usually commissioned for private devotion, and van Eyck would have expected the viewer to contemplate text and imagery in unison. The interior panels of the small 1437 \"Dresden Triptych\" are outlined with two layers of painted bronze frames, inscribed with mostly Latin lettering. The texts are drawn from a variety of sources, in the central frames from biblical descriptions of the assumption, while the inner wings are lined with fragments of prayers dedicated to saints Michael and Catherine.\nWorkshop, unfinished or lost works.\nIn the years after van Eyck's death in the summer of 1441, members of his workshop executed works based on his designs. This was not unusual; the widow of a master would often carry on the business after his death. It is thought that either his wife, Margaret, or brother Lambert took over after 1441. Works thus created include the \"Ince Hall Madonna\", \"Saint Jerome in His Study\", a \"Madonna of Jan Vos\" (\"Virgin and Child with St Barbara and Elizabeth\") c. 1443, and others. A number of designs were reproduced by second-generation Netherlandish artists of the first rank, including Petrus Christus, who painted a version of the \"Exeter Madonna\".\nAfter his death, members of his workshop also finished paintings that were incomplete. The upper portions of the right hand panel of the \"Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych\" are generally considered the work of a weaker painter with a less distinctive style. It is thought that van Eyck died leaving the panel unfinished but with completed underdrawings, so the upper area was finished by workshop members or followers.\nThere are three works confidently attributed to him but known only from copies. His \"Portrait of Isabella of Portugal\" dates to his 1428 visit to Portugal for Philip to draw up a preliminary marriage agreement with the daughter of John I of Portugal. From surviving copies, it can be deduced that there were two other \"painted-on\" frames apart from the actual oak frame, one of which was lettered with gothic inscription to the top, while a faux stone parapet provided support for her hands to rest upon.\nTwo extant copies of his \"Woman Bathing\" were made in the 60 years after his death, but it is known mostly through its appearance in Willem van Haecht's expansive 1628 painting \"The Gallery of Cornelis van der Geest\", a view of a collector's gallery containing many other identifiable old masters. \"Woman Bathing\" bears many similarities to the \"Arnolfini Portrait\", including an interior with a bed and a small dog, a mirror and its reflection, a chest of drawers and clogs on the floor; more broadly similar are the attendant woman's dress, the outline of her figure, and the angle from which she faces.\nReputation and legacy.\nIn the earliest significant source on van Eyck, a 1454 biography in Genoese humanist Bartolomeo Facio's \"De viris illustribus\", Jan van Eyck is named \"the leading painter\" of his day. Facio places him among the best artists of the early 15th century, along with Rogier van der Weyden, Gentile da Fabriano, and Pisanello. It is particularly interesting that Facio shows as much enthusiasm for Netherlandish painters as he does for Italian painters. This text sheds light on aspects of Jan van Eyck's production now lost, citing a bathing scene owned by a prominent Italian, but mistakenly attributing to van Eyck a world map painted by another.\nJan van Eyckplein in Bruges is named for him. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46382", "revid": "1862829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46382", "title": "April Fools Day", "text": ""}
{"id": "46383", "revid": "6488475", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46383", "title": "Jane Seymour", "text": "Queen of England from 1536 to 1537\nJane Seymour (; c.\u20091508\u00a0\u2013 24 October 1537) was Queen of England as the third wife of King Henry VIII from their marriage on 30 May 1536 until her death the next year. She became queen following the execution of Henry's second wife, Anne Boleyn, who was accused by Henry of adultery after failing to produce a male heir. Jane, however, died of postnatal complications less than two weeks after the birth of her only child, the future King Edward VI. She was the only wife of Henry VIII to receive a queen's funeral; and Henry was later buried alongside her remains in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle.\nEarly life.\nJane, the daughter of Sir John Seymour and Margery Wentworth, was most likely born at Wulfhall, Wiltshire, although West Bower Manor in Somerset has also been suggested. Her birth date is not recorded; various accounts use anywhere from 1504 to 1509, but it is generally estimated at between 1508 and 1509. Through her maternal grandfather, she was a descendant of King Edward III's son Lionel of Antwerp, 1st Duke of Clarence. Because of this, she and King Henry VIII were fifth cousins. She also shared a great-grandmother, Elizabeth Cheney, Lady Say, with his second and fifth wives, Anne Boleyn and Catherine Howard.\nJane was not as highly educated as Henry's first and second wives, Catherine of Aragon and Anne Boleyn. She could read and write a little but was much better at needlework and household management, which were considered much more necessary for women. Her needlework was reportedly beautiful and elaborate; some of it survived as late as 1652, when it is recorded to have been given to the Seymour family. After her death, it was noted that Henry was an \"enthusiastic embroiderer\".\nJane became a maid-of-honour in 1532 to Queen Catherine, but may have served her as early as 1527, and went on to serve Queen Anne with her sister Elizabeth. The first report of Henry's interest in Jane was in February 1536, about three months before Anne's execution.\nJane was highly praised for her gentle, peaceful nature, being called as \"gentle a lady as ever I knew\" by John Russell and \"the Pacific\" by the Imperial Ambassador Eustace Chapuys (who referred to her as Jane Semel in his letters), for her peacemaking efforts at court. According to Chapuys, she was of middling stature and very pale; he also said that she was not of much beauty, but Russell said she was \"the fairest of all the King's wives\". Polydore Vergil commented that she was \"a woman of the utmost charm in both character and appearance\". She was regarded as meek, gentle, simple, and chaste, with her large family making her thought to be suitable to have many children.\nMarriage and birth of heir.\nJane was pursued by Henry VIII before Queen Anne's death, as reported by Eustace Chapuys, but Jane at first refused his advances. Henry VIII was betrothed to Jane on 20 May 1536, the day after Anne Boleyn's execution. They were married at the Palace of Whitehall, Whitehall, London, in the Queen's closet by Bishop Stephen Gardiner on 30 May 1536. As a wedding gift he granted her 104 manors in four counties as well as a number of forests and hunting chases for her jointure, the income to support her during their marriage. She was publicly proclaimed queen on 4 June 1536. Her well-publicised sympathy for the late Queen Catherine and her daughter Mary showed her to be compassionate and made her a popular figure with the common people and most of the courtiers. She was never crowned because of plague in London, where the coronation was to take place. Henry may have been reluctant to have her crowned before she had fulfilled her duty as a queen consort by bearing him a male heir.\nAs queen, Jane was said to be strict and formal. The lavish entertainments, gaiety, and extravagance of the queen's household, which had reached their peak during Anne Boleyn's time, were replaced by strict decorum. She banned the French fashions Anne had introduced. Politically, Jane appears to have been conservative. Her only reported involvement in national affairs, in 1536, was when she asked for pardons for participants in the Pilgrimage of Grace. Henry is said to have rejected this, reminding her of the fate her predecessor met with when she \"meddled in his affairs\". Her motto as a queen was \"Bound to obey and serve\".\nJane formed a close relationship with her stepdaughter Mary, making efforts to have Mary restored to court and to the royal succession, behind any children she might have with Henry. She brought up the issue of Mary's restoration both before and after she became queen. While she was unable to restore Mary to the line of succession, she was able to reconcile her with Henry. Chapuys wrote to Emperor Charles V of her compassion and efforts on behalf of Mary's return to favour. A letter from Mary to her shows Mary's gratitude. While it was she who first pushed for the restoration, Mary and Elizabeth were not reinstated to the succession until Henry's sixth wife, Catherine Parr, convinced him to do so.\nOne non-contemporary source conjectures that she may have been pregnant and had a miscarriage by Christmas 1536. In January 1537, Jane conceived again. During her pregnancy, she developed a craving for quail, which Henry ordered for her from Calais and Flanders. During the summer, she took no public engagements and led a relatively quiet life, attended by the royal physicians and the best midwives in the kingdom. She went into confinement in September 1537 and gave birth to the coveted male heir, the future King Edward VI, at two o'clock in the morning on 12 October 1537 at Hampton Court Palace. Edward was christened on 15 October 1537, without his mother in attendance, as was the custom. He was the only legitimate son of Henry VIII to survive infancy. Both of his daughters, Mary and Elizabeth, were present and carried Edward's train during the ceremony.\nDeath and funeral.\nJane's labour had been difficult, lasting two days and three nights, probably because the baby was not well positioned. After the christening, it became clear that she was seriously ill. She died on 24 October 1537 at Hampton Court Palace. Within a few weeks, there were conflicting accounts of the cause of her death. According to King Edward's biographer Jennifer Loach, her death may have been due to an infection from a retained placenta. According to Alison Weir, she may have succumbed to puerperal fever following a bacterial infection contracted during the birth. Weir has also speculated, after medical consultation, that the cause of her death may have been a pulmonary embolism.\nJane was buried on 12 November 1537 in St. George's Chapel, Windsor Castle after the funeral in which her stepdaughter Mary acted as chief mourner. A procession of 29 mourners followed Mary, one for every year of Jane's life. She was the only one of Henry's wives to receive a queen's funeral.\nAfter her death, Henry wore black for the next three months. He married Anne of Cleves two years later, although marriage negotiations were tentatively begun soon after Jane's death. He put on weight during his widowerhood, becoming obese and swollen and developing diabetes and gout. When he died in 1547, he was buried beside her, on his request, in the grave he had made for her.\nLegacy.\nJane gave the King the son he so desperately desired, helped to restore Mary to the succession and her father's affections, and used her influence to bring about the advancement of her family. Two of her brothers, Thomas and Edward, used her memory to improve their own fortunes. Thomas was rumoured to have been pursuing the future Elizabeth I, but he married the queen dowager Catherine Parr instead. In the reign of the young King Edward VI, Edward Seymour set himself up as Lord Protector and de facto ruler of the kingdom. Both brothers eventually fell from power and were executed. \nCostume.\nLady Margery Lyster was in charge of the jewels of Jane Seymour. An inventory was made of the queen's beads, jewels, pomanders, tablets, girdles, borders, brooches, bracelets, buttons, aglets, and chains. Many of the pieces were gold decorated with enamel and some were set with gems.\nAn inventory of Henry VIII includes costume belonging to Jane Seymour, which was stored in 1542 in the Old Jewel House of Whitehall Palace. The list includes: gowns of damask, velvet, and satin; kirtles of velvet, cloth of silver, taffeta, and purple cloth of gold; cloaks of satin; sleeves of silver and gold tissue embroidered with Venice gold and tied with gold aglets; placards for gowns; stomachers; frontlets; French hoods and billiments of black velvet and white satin; partlets; and crimson velvet hats. The same clothes were listed again in 1547.\nJane Seymour was said to have embroidered a bed and a chair, later given by Charles I to her relation William Seymour. Included in the 1542 inventory are some items of embroidery, possibly her own work such as a cushion featuring an antelope. A piece with a branch of roses and a crowned white falcon seems to be an emblem associated with Anne Boleyn. Jane Seymour owned great and little \"babies\", dolls dressed in gowns of cloth of silver, satin, and velvet tied with gold \"aglettes\", like her own sleeves. These may have been fashion dolls.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46384", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46384", "title": "James VI of Scotland", "text": ""}
{"id": "46385", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46385", "title": "Multicamera setup", "text": ""}
{"id": "46386", "revid": "48165819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46386", "title": "Richard Cromwell", "text": "English statesman (1626\u20131712)\nRichard Cromwell (4 October 1626\u00a0\u2013 12 July 1712) was an English statesman who served as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland from 1658 to 1659. He was the son of Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell.\nFollowing his father's death in 1658, Richard became Lord Protector, but he lacked authority. He tried to mediate between the army and civil society, and allowed a Parliament that contained many disaffected Presbyterians and Royalists to sit. Suspicions that civilian councillors were intent on supplanting the army peaked in an attempt to prosecute a major-general for actions against a Royalist. The army made a threatening demonstration of force against Richard, and may have had him in detention. He formally renounced power only nine months after succeeding.\nThough a Royalist revolt was crushed by the recalled civil war figure General John Lambert, who subsequently prevented the Rump Parliament from reconvening and created a Committee of Safety, Lambert found his troops melted away in the face of General George Monck's advance from Scotland. Monck then presided over the Restoration of 1660. Cromwell went into exile on the Continent, living in relative obscurity for the remainder of his life. He ultimately returned to his English estate and died thirty years later at the age of 85. \nEarly years and family.\nCromwell was born in Huntingdon on 4 October 1626, the third son of Oliver Cromwell and his wife Elizabeth. Little is known about his childhood. He and his three brothers were educated at Felsted School in Essex close to their mother's family home. There is no record of his attending university. In May 1647, he became a member of Lincoln's Inn; however, he was not called to the bar subsequently. Instead, in 1647 Richard joined the New Model Army as a captain in Viscount Lisle's lifeguard, and later that year was appointed captain in Thomas Fairfax's lifeguard.\nIn 1649, Cromwell married Dorothy Maijor, daughter of Richard Maijor, a member of the Hampshire gentry. He and his wife then moved to Maijor's estate at Hursley in Hampshire. During the 1650s they had nine children, five of whom survived to adulthood. Cromwell was named a Justice of the Peace for Hampshire and sat on various county committees. During this period, Richard seems to have been a source of concern for his father, who wrote to Richard Maijor saying, \"I would have him mind and understand business, read a little history, study the mathematics and cosmography: these are good, with subordination to the things of God. Better than idleness, or mere outward worldly contents. These fit for public services, for which a man is born\".\nPolitical background.\nOliver Cromwell had risen from being an unknown member of Parliament in his forties to being a commander of the New Model Army, which emerged victorious from the English Civil War. When he returned from a final campaign in Ireland, Oliver became disillusioned at inconclusive debates in the Rump Parliament between Presbyterians and other schools of thought within Protestantism. Parliamentarian suspicion of anything smacking of Catholicism, which was strongly associated with the Royalist side in the war, led to the enforcement of religious precepts that left moderate Anglicans barely tolerated.\nA Puritan regime strictly enforced the Sabbath, and banned almost all form of public celebration, including even at Christmas. Cromwell attempted to reform the government through an army-nominated assembly known as Barebone's Parliament, but the proposals were so unworkably radical that he was forced to end the experiment after a few months. Thereafter, a written constitution created the position of Lord Protector for Oliver and from 1653 until his death in 1658, he ruled with many of the powers of a monarch, while Richard took on the role of heir.\nMove into political life.\nIn 1653, Richard Cromwell was passed over as a member of Barebone's Parliament, although his younger brother Henry was a member of it. Neither was he given any public role when his father was made Lord Protector in the same year; however, he was elected to the First Protectorate Parliament as M.P. for Huntingdon and the Second Protectorate Parliament as M.P. for Cambridge University.\nUnder the Protectorate's constitution, Oliver Cromwell was required to nominate a successor, and from 1657 he involved Richard much more heavily in the politics of the regime. He was present at the second installation of his father as Lord Protector in June, having played no part in the first installation. In July he was appointed chancellor of Oxford University, and in December was made a member of the Council of State.\nLord Protector (1658\u201359).\nOliver Cromwell died on 3 September 1658, and Richard was informed on the same day that he was to succeed him. Some controversy surrounds the succession. A letter by John Thurloe suggests that Cromwell nominated his son orally on 30 August, but other theories claim either that he nominated no successor, or that he put forward Charles Fleetwood, his son-in-law.\nRichard was faced by two immediate problems. The first was the army, which questioned his position as commander given his lack of military experience. The second was the financial position of the regime, with a debt estimated at \u00a32 million. As a result, Cromwell's Privy council decided to call a parliament in order to redress these financial problems on 29 November 1658 (a decision which was formally confirmed on 3 December 1658). Under the terms of the Humble Petition and Advice, this Parliament was called using the traditional franchise (thus moving away from the system under the Instrument of Government whereby representation of rotten boroughs was cut in favour of county constituencies.) This meant that the government was less able to control elections and therefore unable to manage the parliament effectively. As a result, when this Third Protectorate Parliament first sat on 27 January 1659 it was dominated by moderate Presbyterians, crypto-royalists and a small number of vociferous Commonwealthsmen (or Republicans).\nThe \"Other House\" of Parliament \u2013 a body which had been set up under the Humble Petition and Advice to act as a balance on the Commons \u2013 was also revived. It was this second parliamentary chamber and its resemblance to the House of Lords (which had been abolished in 1649) that dominated this Parliamentary session. Republican malcontents gave filibustering speeches about the inadequacy of the membership of this upper chamber (especially its military contingent) and also questioned whether it was indicative of the backsliding of the Protectorate regime in general and its divergence from the \"Good Old Cause\" for which parliamentarians had originally engaged in civil war. Reviving this House of Lords in all but name, they argued, was but a short step to returning to the Ancient Constitution of King, Lords and Commons.\nAt the same time, the officers of the New Model Army became increasingly wary about the government's commitment to the military cause. The fact that Cromwell lacked military credentials grated with men who had fought on the battlefields of the English Civil War to secure their nation's liberties. Moreover, the new Parliament seemed to show a lack of respect for the army which many military men found alarming. In particular, there were fears that Parliament would make military cuts to reduce costs, and by April 1659 the army's general council of officers had met to demand higher taxation to fund the regime's costs.\nTheir grievances were expressed in a petition to Cromwell on 6 April 1659 which he forwarded to the Parliament two days later. Yet Parliament did not act on the army's suggestions; instead they shelved this petition and increased the suspicion of the military by bringing articles of impeachment on 12 April 1659 against William Boteler, who was alleged to have mistreated a royalist prisoner while acting as a major-general under Oliver Cromwell in 1655. This was followed by two resolutions in the Commons on 18 April 1659 which stated that no more meetings of army officers should take place without the express permission of both the Lord Protector and Parliament, and that all officers should swear an oath that they would not subvert the sitting of Parliament by force.\nThese direct affronts to military prestige were too much for the army grandees to bear and set in motion the final split between the civilian-dominated Parliament and the army, which would culminate in the dissolution of Parliament and Cromwell's ultimate fall from power. When Cromwell refused a demand by the army to dissolve Parliament, troops were assembled at St. James's Palace. Cromwell eventually gave in to their demands and on 22 April, Parliament was dissolved and the Rump Parliament recalled on 7 May 1659.\nIn the subsequent month, Cromwell did not resist and refused an offer of armed assistance from the French ambassador, although it is possible he was being kept under house arrest by the army. On 25 May, after the Rump agreed to pay his debts and provide a pension, Cromwell delivered a formal letter resigning the position of Lord Protector. He told parliament that \"I love and value the Peace of this Commonwealth much above my own concernments\u201d. \"Richard was never formally deposed or arrested, but allowed to fade away. The Protectorate was treated as having been from the first a mere usurpation.\"\nHe continued to live in the Palace of Whitehall until July, when he was forced by the Rump to return to Hursley. Royalists rejoiced at Cromwell's fall, and many satirical attacks surfaced, in which he was given the unflattering nicknames \"Tumbledown Dick\" and \"Queen Dick\".\nLater years (1659\u20131712).\nDuring the political difficulties of the winter of 1659, there were rumours that Cromwell was to be recalled as Protector, but these came to nothing. In July 1660, Cromwell left for France, never to see his wife again. While there, he went by a variety of pseudonyms, including John Clarke. He later travelled around Europe, visiting various European courts. As a visiting Englishman, he was once invited to dine with Armand de Bourbon, Prince of Conti, who was unaware of who he was. At dinner, the prince questioned Cromwell about affairs in England and observed, \"Well, that Oliver, tho' he was a traitor and a villain, was a brave man, had great parts, great courage, and was worthy to command; but that Richard, that coxcomb and poltroon, was surely the basest fellow alive; what is become of that fool?\" Cromwell replied, \"He was betrayed by those he most trusted, and who had been most obliged by his father.\" Cromwell departed from the town the following morning. During this period of voluntary exile, he wrote many letters to his family back in England; these letters are now held by Cambridgeshire Archives and Local Studies at the County Record Office in Huntingdon.\nIn 1680 or 1681, Cromwell returned to England and lodged with the merchant Thomas Pengelly in Cheshunt in Hertfordshire, living off the income from his estate in Hursley. He died on 12 July 1712 at the age of 85. His body was returned to Hursley and interred in a vault beneath All Saints' Parish Church, where a memorial tablet to him has been placed in recent years. He was the longest-lived British head of state for three centuries, exceeding even the long-lived and far longer-reigning George III and Queen Victoria, until Elizabeth II, who died aged 96.\nFictional portrayals.\nCromwell has been depicted in historical films. They include \"Cromwell\" (1970), where he was portrayed by Anthony May, and \"To Kill a King\" (2003), where he was played by John-Paul Macleod. The 1840 historical stage play \"Master Clarke\" by Thomas Serle revolves around Cromwell, who was portrayed by William Macready at the Haymarket Theatre.\nCromwell is portrayed in the novel \"The Last Protector\" by Andrew Taylor.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46387", "revid": "8561672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46387", "title": "Incubus (1966 film)", "text": "1966 American horror film\nIncubus () is a 1966 American horror film directed by Leslie Stevens. It was filmed entirely in the constructed language Esperanto, shortly before its star, William Shatner, began his work on \"\". The film's cinematography was by Conrad Hall, who went on to win three Academy Awards for his work on the films \"Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid\", \"American Beauty\", and \"Road to Perdition\".\n\"Incubus\" was the second feature film to use Esperanto, following the 1964 film \"Angoroj\". The use of Esperanto was intended to create an eerie, otherworldly feeling, and Stevens prohibited dubbing the film into other languages; however, on the \"Special Features\" section of the DVD the makers claim that Esperanto was used because of perceived greater international sales. Esperanto speakers are generally disappointed by the pronunciation of the language by the cast of \"Incubus\". The film was considered to be lost for many years, until a copy with French subtitles was found at Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise in 1996.\nPlot.\nThe film is set in the village of Nomen Tuum (Latin, \"your name\"), which has a well that can heal the sick and make a person more beautiful. Because of the latter, many conceited or corrupt individuals come to the village for this cosmetic effect. The village has notoriety for its magical water, as well as being a ground for darkness and demons. Along the village, succubi entice the tainted souls who come to Nomen Tuum and lead them to their deaths in order to offer their souls to Hell/the God of Darkness. A prominent young succubus named Kia loathes the routine of herding sinners to hell. Kia claims her powers are being wasted, and needs something/someone more stimulating as her prey. Her sister succubus, Amael, warns Kia of the danger that a pure soul will bring: love. Kia persists anyway and attempts to find a clergyman to seduce into darkness. After watching their behaviour, however, she realizes these men are just as iniquitous and shrewd as her previous victims.\nShe soon stumbles upon a suitable victim: Marc, a young soldier, who with his sister Arndis. comes to the sacred water in order to heal his battle wounds. Kia then continues to follow the siblings and pretends to be lost. After a brief eclipse, Kia convinces Marc to accompany her to the sea. During the eclipse, Arndis becomes blind from looking into the sky. Disoriented, she stumbles around in order to find Marc. Marc and Kia quickly become attracted to each other.\nMarc will not have closer relations with Kia unless they marry. As Kia sleeps, Marc takes her to the village cathedral. Kia flees from the cathedral, bewildered by the sight of Christ and the saints. She is repulsed by both the Godly images and Marc's pure love. His purity makes her ill.\nAmael and Kia meditate revenge on Marc for \"defiling her\" with an \"act of love\". Amael summons an incubus that attempts to kill Marc and rapes and murders Arndis. As Marc prays for his sister, he makes the sign of the cross and the lurking demons cringe in horror. Defending himself from the incubus' attack, he appears to have killed him and Amael tells him he has the sin of murder on his hands. Kia follows Marc, who is dying, to the cathedral where she professes her love for him. The resurrected incubus intervenes and claims she belongs to the God of Darkness. Kia defies him and makes the sign of the cross, surprising even herself. The incubus transforms into a goat and wrestles her to the ground.\nAfter the struggle, she says \"I belong to the God of Light,\" and crawls toward Marc, who immediately embraces her. The final scene shows the couple staring in disbelief at the boundary of the cathedral, with the goat gazing back at them.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nPre-production.\nAfter the ABC Television Network cancelled producer Leslie Stevens' science fiction series \"The Outer Limits\" in 1965, Stevens wrote a horror script to make use of the talents of the \"Outer Limits\" team he had brought together \u2013 including cinematographer Conrad L. Hall and composer Dominic Frontiere \u2013 with an eye to marketing it to art houses.\nStevens and producer Anthony M. Taylor wanted a device to make the film unique, and, to this end, chose Esperanto as the film's language. The script was translated into Esperanto, and the actors rehearsed for 10 days to learn their lines phonetically, but no one was present on the set to correct their pronunciation during shooting.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography took place over 18 days in May 1965. Location shooting took place at Big Sur Beach and at the Mission San Antonio de Padua near Fort Hunter Liggett in Monterey County. Concerned that the authorities would not grant permission to shoot a horror film in these places, especially the Mission, Stevens concocted a cover story that the film was actually called \"Religious Leaders of Old Monterey\", and showed the script, in Esperanto, but with stage directions and descriptions about monks and farmers.\nRelease.\nTheatrical release.\nThe premiere of \"Incubus\" took place at the San Francisco Film Festival on October 26, 1966, where, according to producer Taylor, a group of 50 to 100 Esperanto enthusiasts \"screamed and laughed\" at the actors' poor pronunciation of the language. Partly because of its Esperanto dialogue, and partly because of the scandal of actor Milos Milos taking his own life and that of his girlfriend Carolyn Mitchell, Taylor and Stevens were unable to find any distribution for the film except in France, where it premiered in November 1966.\nRestoration and home media.\n\"Incubus\" was considered a lost film for many years. When producer Anthony Taylor attempted to prepare \"Incubus\" for home video release in 1993, he was told by the company that stored the negative, film elements, and prints, that all were missing and presumed to have been destroyed in a fire.\nIn 1998,&lt;ref name=\"cinetson/t17092\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; a print was discovered in the permanent collection of the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise in Paris. However, not only was that print in poor condition, it had French subtitles. A new master was created by frame-by-frame optical printing, and English subtitles were superimposed over the French ones. The Sci Fi Channel funded the restoration from that print and a home video DVD was released in 2001.\nOn February 14, 2023, CineSavant stated that Le Chat Qui Fume reported that a new 35mm print with \"excellent\" image quality has been located. A Ultra HD Blu-ray sourced from a restored version of this print was released by Arrow Video on January 14, 2025.\nReception.\nStanley Eichelbaum of the \"San Francisco Examiner\" called the film \"a dud, so pretentious and arty that it nearly drowns in dull, studied technique.\" \nDennis Schwartz of \"Ozus' World Movie Reviews\" awarded the film a grade C+, criticizing the film's \"thin\" story and Shatner's performance, but commended the film's atmosphere, cinematography, and ability to engage in spite of its flaws. \n\"TV Guide\" rated the film one out of four stars, calling it \"Inept, pretentious, and dull once the novelty wears off, but handsomely shot in Big Sur\". \nBill Burke from \"HorrorNews.net\" praised the film's cinematography, surreal atmosphere, and uniqueness, calling it \"a noble attempt at bargain basement surrealism\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nMetadata"}
{"id": "46389", "revid": "48683141", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46389", "title": "George II of Great Britain", "text": "King of Great Britain and Ireland from 1727 to 1760\nGeorge II (George Augustus; ; 30 October / 9 November 1683\u00a0\u2013 25 October 1760) was King of Great Britain and Ireland, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg (Hanover) and a prince-elector of the Holy Roman Empire from 11 June 1727 (O.S.) until his death in 1760.\nBorn and brought up in northern Germany, George is the most recent British monarch born outside Great Britain. The Act of Settlement 1701 and the Acts of Union 1707 positioned his grandmother Sophia of Hanover and her Protestant descendants to inherit the British throne. George married Princess Caroline of Ansbach, with whom he had eight children. After the deaths of George's grandmother and Anne, Queen of Great Britain, George's father, the Elector of Hanover, ascended the British throne as George I in 1714. In the first years of his father's reign as king, Prince George was associated with opposition politicians until they rejoined the governing party.\nAs king from 1727, George exercised little control over British domestic policy, which was largely controlled by the Parliament of Great Britain. As elector he spent twelve summers in Hanover, where he had more direct control over government policy. He had a difficult relationship with his eldest son, Frederick, who supported the parliamentary opposition. During the War of the Austrian Succession, George participated at the Battle of Dettingen, and thus became the most recent British monarch to lead an army in battle. Supporters of the Catholic claimant to the British throne, James Francis Edward Stuart, led by James's son, attempted and failed to depose George in the last of the Jacobite rebellions in 1745. Prince Frederick died suddenly in 1751, before his father, and George was succeeded by Frederick's eldest son, George III.\nFor two centuries after George II's death, historians tended to view him with disdain, concentrating on his mistresses, short temper, and boorishness. Since then, reassessment of his legacy has led scholars to conclude that he exercised more influence in foreign policy and military appointments than previously thought.\nEarly life.\nBirth and family.\nGeorge was born in the city of Hanover in Germany, followed by his sister, Sophia Dorothea, three years later. Their parents, George Louis, Hereditary Prince of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg (later King George I of Great Britain), and Sophia Dorothea of Celle, both committed adultery. In 1694 the marriage was dissolved on the pretext that Sophia Dorothea had abandoned her husband. She was confined to Ahlden House and denied access to her two children, who probably never saw their mother again.\nGeorge spoke only French, the language of diplomacy and the court, until the age of four, after which he was taught German by one of his tutors, Johann Hilmar Holstein. In addition to French and German, he also learned English and Italian, and studied genealogy, military history, and battle tactics with particular diligence.\nGeorge's second cousin once removed, Queen Anne, ascended the thrones of England, Scotland, and Ireland in 1702. Though she had had seventeen pregnancies, of which five resulted in live births, her only surviving child died in 1700. By the Act of Settlement 1701, therefore, the English Parliament designated Anne's closest Protestant blood relations, George's grandmother Sophia and her descendants, as Anne's heirs in England and Ireland. Consequently, after his grandmother and father, George was third in line to succeed Anne in two of her three realms. He was naturalized as an English subject in 1705 by the Sophia Naturalization Act, and in 1706 he was made a Knight of the Garter and created Duke and Marquess of Cambridge, Earl of Milford Haven, Viscount Northallerton, and Baron Tewkesbury in the Peerage of England. England and Scotland united in 1707 to form the Kingdom of Great Britain, and jointly accepted the succession as laid down by the English Act of Settlement.\nMarriage.\nGeorge's father did not want his son to enter into a loveless arranged marriage as he had and wanted him to have the opportunity of meeting his bride before any formal arrangements were made. Negotiations from 1702 for the hand of Princess Hedvig Sophia of Sweden, Dowager Duchess and regent of Holstein-Gottorp, came to nothing. In June 1705, under the false name \"Monsieur de Busch\", George visited the Ansbach court at its summer residence in Triesdorf to investigate \"incognito\" a marriage prospect: Princess Caroline of Ansbach, the former ward of his aunt Queen Sophia Charlotte of Prussia. The English envoy to Hanover, Edmund Poley, reported that George was so taken by \"the good character he had of her that he would not think of anybody else\". A marriage contract was concluded by the end of July. On 22 August / 2 September 1705 Caroline arrived in Hanover for her wedding, which was held the same evening in the chapel at Herrenhausen Palace.\nGeorge was keen to participate in the war against France in Flanders, but his father refused to let him join the army in an active role until he had a son and heir. In early 1707 George's hopes were fulfilled when Caroline gave birth to a son, Frederick. In July Caroline fell seriously ill with smallpox, and George caught the infection after staying by her side devotedly during her illness. They both recovered. In 1708 George participated in the Battle of Oudenarde in the vanguard of the Hanoverian cavalry; his horse and a colonel immediately beside him were killed, but George survived unharmed. The British commander, Marlborough, wrote that George \"distinguished himself extremely, charging at the head of and animating by his example [the Hanoverian] troops, who played a good part in this happy victory\". Between 1709 and 1713 George and Caroline had three daughters: Anne, Amelia, and Caroline.\nBy 1714 Queen Anne's health had declined, and British Whigs, who supported the Hanoverian succession, thought it prudent for one of the Hanoverians to live in England to safeguard the Protestant succession on Anne's death. As George was a peer of the realm (as Duke of Cambridge), it was suggested that he be summoned to Parliament to sit in the House of Lords. Both Anne and George's father refused to support the plan, although George, Caroline, and Sophia were all in favour. George did not go. Within the year both Sophia and Anne were dead, and George's father was king.\nPrince of Wales.\nQuarrel with the King.\nGeorge and his father sailed for England from The Hague on 16/27 September 1714 and arrived at Greenwich two days later. The following day, they formally entered London in a ceremonial procession. George was given the title of Prince of Wales. Caroline followed her husband to Britain in October with their daughters, while Frederick remained in Hanover to be brought up by private tutors. London was like nothing George had seen before; it was 50 times larger than Hanover, and the crowd was estimated at up to one and a half million spectators. George courted popularity with voluble expressions of praise for the English, and claimed that he had no drop of blood that was not English.\nIn July 1716, the King returned to Hanover for six months, and George was given limited powers, as \"Guardian and Lieutenant of the Realm\", to govern in his father's absence. He made a royal progress through Chichester, Havant, Portsmouth, and Guildford in southern England. Spectators were allowed to see him dine in public at Hampton Court Palace. An attempt on his life at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, in which one person was shot dead before the assailant was brought under control, boosted his high public profile.\nThe King distrusted or was jealous of George's popularity, which contributed to the development of a poor relationship between them. The birth in 1717 of George's second son, George William, proved to be a catalyst for a family quarrel; the King, supposedly following custom, appointed Lord Chamberlain Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle, as one of the baptismal sponsors of the child. The King was angered when George, who disliked Newcastle, verbally insulted the Duke at the christening, which the Duke misunderstood as a challenge to a duel. George and Caroline were temporarily confined to their apartments on the order of the King, who subsequently banished his son from St James's Palace, the King's residence. The Prince and Princess of Wales left court, but their children remained in the care of the King.\nGeorge and Caroline missed their children, and were desperate to see them. On one occasion, they secretly visited the palace without the approval of the King; Caroline fainted and George \"cried like a child\". The King partially relented and permitted them to visit once a week, though he later allowed Caroline unconditional access. In February 1718, Prince George William died aged only three months, with his father by his side.\nPolitical opposition.\nBanned from the palace and shunned by his own father, the Prince of Wales was identified for the next several years with opposition to George I's policies, which included measures designed to increase religious freedom in Great Britain and expand Hanover's German territories at the expense of Sweden. His new London residence, Leicester House, became a frequent meeting place for his father's political opponents, including Sir Robert Walpole and Lord Townshend, who had left the government in 1717.\nThe King visited Hanover again from May to November 1719. Instead of appointing George to the guardianship, he established a regency council. In 1720, Walpole encouraged the King and his son to reconcile, for the sake of public unity, which they did half-heartedly. Walpole and Townshend returned to political office, and rejoined the ministry. George was soon disillusioned with the terms of the reconciliation; his three daughters who were in the care of the King were not returned and he was still barred from becoming regent during the King's absences. He came to believe that Walpole had tricked him into the rapprochement as part of a scheme to regain power. Over the next few years, he and Caroline lived quietly, avoiding overt political activity. They had three more children: William, Mary, and Louisa, who were brought up at Leicester House and Richmond Lodge, George's summer residence.\nIn 1721, the economic disaster of the South Sea Bubble allowed Walpole to rise to the pinnacle of government. Walpole and his Whig Party were dominant in politics, as the King feared that the Tories would not support the succession laid down in the Act of Settlement. The power of the Whigs was so great that the Tories would not hold power for another half-century.\nReign.\nAccession.\nGeorge I died on 11/22 June 1727 during one of his visits to Hanover, and his son succeeded him as king and elector at the age of 43. George II decided not to travel to Germany for his father's funeral, which far from bringing criticism led to praise from the English who considered it proof of his fondness for England. He suppressed his father's will because it attempted to split the Hanoverian succession between George II's future grandsons rather than vest all the domains (both British and Hanoverian) in a single person. Both British and Hanoverian ministers considered the will unlawful, as George I did not have the legal power to determine the succession personally. Critics supposed that George II hid the will to avoid paying out his father's legacies.\nGeorge II was crowned at Westminster Abbey on 11/22 October 1727. George Frideric Handel was commissioned to write four new anthems for the coronation, including \"Zadok the Priest\".\nIt was widely believed that George would dismiss Walpole, who had distressed him by joining his father's government, and replace him with Sir Spencer Compton. George asked Compton, rather than Walpole, to write his first speech as king, but Compton asked Walpole to draft it. Caroline advised George to retain Walpole, who continued to gain royal favour by securing a generous civil list (a fixed annual amount set by Parliament for the king's official expenditure) of \u00a3800,000, equivalent to \u00a3 today. Walpole commanded a substantial majority in Parliament and George had little choice but to retain him or risk ministerial instability. Compton was ennobled as Lord Wilmington the following year.\nWalpole directed domestic policy, and after the resignation of Lord Townshend in 1730 also controlled George's foreign policy. Historians generally believe that George played an honorific role in Britain, and closely followed the advice of Walpole and senior ministers, who made the major decisions. Although the King was eager for war in Europe, his ministers were more cautious. A truce was agreed in the Anglo-Spanish War, and George unsuccessfully pressed Walpole to join the War of the Polish Succession on the side of the German states. In April 1733 Walpole withdrew the unpopular Excise Bill that had attracted strong opposition, including from within his own party. George lent Walpole support by dismissing the bill's opponents from their court offices.\nFamily problems.\nGeorge II's relationship with his son Frederick, Prince of Wales, worsened during the 1730s. Frederick had been left behind in Germany when his parents came to England, and they had not met for 14 years. In 1728, he was brought to England, and swiftly became a figurehead of the political opposition. When George visited Hanover in the summers of 1729, 1732 and 1735, he left his wife to chair the regency council in Britain rather than his son. Meanwhile, rivalry between George II and his brother-in-law and first cousin Frederick William I of Prussia led to tension along the Prussian\u2013Hanoverian border, which eventually culminated in the mobilization of troops in the border zone and suggestions of a duel between the two kings. Negotiations for a marriage between the Prince of Wales and Frederick William's daughter Wilhelmine dragged on for years but neither side would make the concessions demanded by the other, and the idea was shelved. Instead, the Prince married Princess Augusta of Saxe-Gotha in April 1736.\nIn May 1736, George returned to Hanover, which resulted in unpopularity in England; a satirical notice was even pinned to the gates of St James's Palace decrying his absence. \"Lost or strayed out of this house\", it read, \"a man who has left a wife and six children on the parish.\" The King made plans to return in the face of inclement December weather; when his ship was caught in a storm, gossip swept London that he had drowned. Eventually, in January 1737, he arrived back in England. Immediately, he fell ill with a fever and piles, and withdrew to his bed. The Prince of Wales put it about that the King was dying, with the result that George insisted on getting up and attending a social event to disprove the gossip-mongers.\nWhen the Prince of Wales applied to Parliament for an increase in his allowance, an open quarrel broke out. The King, who had a reputation for stinginess, offered a private settlement, which Frederick rejected. Parliament voted against the measure, but George reluctantly increased his son's allowance on Walpole's advice. Further friction between them followed when Frederick excluded the King and Queen from the birth of his daughter in July 1737 by bundling his wife, who was in labour, into a coach and driving off in the middle of the night. George banished him and his family from the royal court, much as his own father had done to him, except that he allowed Frederick to retain custody of his children.\nSoon afterwards, George's wife Caroline died on 20 November 1737 (O.S.). He was deeply affected by her death, and to the surprise of many displayed \"a tenderness of which the world thought him before utterly incapable\". On her deathbed she told her sobbing husband to remarry, to which he replied, \"\" (French for \"No, I shall have mistresses!\"). It was common knowledge that George had already had mistresses during his marriage, and he had kept Caroline informed about them. Henrietta Howard, later Countess of Suffolk, had moved to Hanover with her husband during the reign of Queen Anne, and had been one of Caroline's women of the bedchamber. She was his mistress from before the accession of George I until November 1734. She was followed by Amalie von Wallmoden, later Countess of Yarmouth, whose son, Johann Ludwig von Wallmoden, may have been fathered by George. Johann Ludwig was born while Amalie was still married to her husband, and George did not acknowledge him publicly as his own son.\nWar and rebellion.\nAgainst Walpole's wishes, but to George's delight, Britain reopened hostilities with Spain in 1739. Britain's conflict with Spain, the War of Jenkins' Ear, became part of the War of the Austrian Succession when a major European dispute broke out upon the death of Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI in 1740. At issue was the right of Charles's daughter, Maria Theresa, to succeed to his Austrian dominions. George spent the summers of 1740 and 1741 in Hanover, where he was more able to intervene directly in European diplomatic affairs in his capacity as elector.\nPrince Frederick campaigned actively for the opposition in the 1741 British general election, and Walpole was unable to secure a stable majority. Walpole attempted to buy off the Prince with the promise of an increased allowance and offered to pay off his debts, but Frederick refused. With his support eroded, Walpole retired in 1742 after over 20 years in office. He was replaced by Spencer Compton, Lord Wilmington, whom George had originally considered for the premiership in 1727. Wilmington, however, was a figurehead; actual power was held by others, such as Lord Carteret, George's favourite minister after Walpole. When Wilmington died in 1743, Henry Pelham took his place at the head of the government.\nThe pro-war faction was led by Carteret, who claimed that French power would increase if Maria Theresa failed to succeed to the Austrian throne. George agreed to send 12,000 hired Hessian and Danish mercenaries to Europe, ostensibly to support Maria Theresa. Without conferring with his British ministers, George stationed them in Hanover to prevent enemy French troops from marching into the electorate. The British Army had not fought in a major European war in over 20 years, and the government had badly neglected its upkeep. George had pushed for greater professionalism in the ranks, and promotion by merit rather than by sale of commissions, but without much success. An allied force of Austrian, British, Dutch, Hanoverian and Hessian troops engaged the French at the Battle of Dettingen on 16/27 June 1743. George personally accompanied them, leading them to victory, thus becoming the last British monarch to lead troops into battle. Though his actions in the battle were admired, the war became unpopular with the British public, who felt that the King and Carteret were subordinating British interests to Hanoverian ones. Carteret lost support, and to George's dismay resigned in 1744.\nTension grew between the Pelham ministry and George, as he continued to take advice from Carteret and rejected pressure from his other ministers to include William Pitt the Elder in the Cabinet, which would have broadened the government's support base. The King disliked Pitt because he had previously opposed government policy and attacked measures seen as pro-Hanoverian. In February 1746, Pelham and his followers resigned. George asked Lord Bath and Carteret to form an administration, but after less than 48 hours they returned the seals of office, unable to secure sufficient parliamentary support. Pelham returned to office triumphant, and George was forced to appoint Pitt to the ministry.\nGeorge's French opponents encouraged rebellion by the Jacobites, the supporters of the Roman Catholic claimant to the British throne, James Francis Edward Stuart, often known as the Old Pretender. Stuart was the son of James II, who had been deposed in 1688 and replaced by his Protestant relations. Two prior rebellions in 1715 and 1719 had failed. In July 1745, the Old Pretender's son, Charles Edward Stuart, popularly known as Bonnie Prince Charlie or the Young Pretender, landed in Scotland, where support for his cause was highest. George, who was summering in Hanover, returned to London at the end of August. The Jacobites defeated British forces in September at the Battle of Prestonpans, and then moved south into England. The Jacobites failed to gain further support, and the French reneged on a promise of help. Losing morale, the Jacobites retreated back into Scotland. On 16/27 April 1746, Charles faced George's military-minded son Prince William, Duke of Cumberland, in the Battle of Culloden, the last pitched battle fought on British soil. The ravaged Jacobite troops were routed by the government army. Charles escaped to France, but many of his supporters were caught and executed. Jacobitism was all but crushed; no further serious attempt was made at restoring the House of Stuart. The War of the Austrian Succession continued until 1748, when Maria Theresa was recognized as Archduchess of Austria and Queen of Bohemia. The peace was celebrated by a f\u00eate in Green Park, London, for which Handel composed \"Music for the Royal Fireworks\".\nPlanning for succession.\nIn the general election of 1747, Frederick, Prince of Wales, again campaigned actively for the opposition but Pelham's party won easily. Like his father before him, Frederick entertained opposition figures at his house in Leicester Square. When Frederick died unexpectedly in 1751, his eldest son, Prince George, became heir apparent. The King commiserated with Frederick's widow, Augusta, and wept with her. As her son would not reach the age of majority until 1756, a new British Regency Act was passed that would make her regent, assisted by a council led by Frederick's brother William in case of George II's death. The King also made a new will, which provided for William to be sole regent in Hanover. After the death of his daughter Louisa at the end of the year, George lamented, \"This has been a fatal year for my family. I lost my eldest son\u00a0\u2013 but I am glad of it\u00a0... Now [Louisa] is gone. I know I did not love my children when they were young: I hated to have them running into my room; but now I love them as well as most fathers.\"\nSeven Years' War.\nIn 1754 Pelham died, to be succeeded by his elder brother, Thomas Pelham-Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle.\nHostility between France and Britain, particularly over the colonization of North America, continued. Fearing a French invasion of Hanover, George aligned himself with Prussia (ruled by his nephew, Frederick the Great), Austria's enemy. Russia and France allied with Austria, their former enemy. A French invasion of the British-held island of Minorca led to the outbreak of the Seven Years' War in 1756. Public disquiet over British failures at the start of the conflict led to Newcastle's resignation and the appointment of William Cavendish, 4th Duke of Devonshire, as prime minister and William Pitt the Elder as Secretary of State for the Southern Department. In April the following year George dismissed Pitt in an attempt to construct an administration more to his liking. Over the succeeding three months attempts to form another stable ministerial combination failed. In June Lord Waldegrave held the seals of office for only four days. By the start of July, Pitt was recalled and Newcastle returned as prime minister. As Secretary of State, Pitt guided policy relating to the war. Great Britain, Hanover, and Prussia and their allies Hesse-Kassel and Brunswick-Wolfenb\u00fcttel fought against other European powers, including France, Austria, Russia, Sweden and Saxony. The war involved multiple theatres from Europe to North America and India, where British dominance increased with the victories of Robert Clive over French forces and their allies at the Battle of Arcot and the Battle of Plassey.\nGeorge's son William commanded the King's troops in northern Germany. In 1757 Hanover was invaded and George gave his son full powers to conclude a separate peace, but by September George was furious at William's negotiated settlement, which he felt greatly favoured the French. George said his son had \"ruined me and disgraced himself\". William, by his own choice, resigned his military offices, and George revoked the peace deal on the grounds that the French had infringed it by disarming Hessian troops after the ceasefire.\nIn the \"Annus Mirabilis\" of 1759 British forces captured Quebec and captured Guadeloupe, defeated a French plan to invade Britain following naval battles at Lagos and Quiberon Bay, and halted a resumed French advance on Hanover at the Battle of Minden.\nDeath.\nBy October 1760 George II was blind in one eye and hard of hearing. On the morning of 25 October he rose as usual at 6:00\u00a0am, drank a cup of hot chocolate, and went to his close stool alone. After a few minutes, his valet heard a loud crash and entered the room to find the King on the floor; his physician, Frank Nicholls, recorded that he \"appeared to have just come from his necessary-stool, and as if going to open his escritoire\".\nThe King was lifted into his bed, and Princess Amelia was sent for; before she reached him, he was dead. At the age of nearly 77 he had lived longer than any of his English or British predecessors. A post-mortem revealed that George had died as the result of a thoracic aortic dissection. He was succeeded by his grandson George III, and buried on 11 November in Westminster Abbey. He left instructions for the sides of his and his wife's coffins to be removed so that their remains could mingle.\nLegacy.\nGeorge donated the royal library to the British Museum in 1757, four years after the museum's foundation. He had no interest in reading, or in the arts and sciences, and preferred to spend his leisure hours stag-hunting on horseback or playing cards. In 1737, he founded the Georg August University of G\u00f6ttingen, the first university in the Electorate of Hanover, and visited it in 1748. The asteroid 359 Georgia was named in his honour at the university in 1902. He served as the Chancellor of the University of Dublin between 1716 and 1727; and in 1754 issued the charter for King's College in New York City, which later became Columbia University. The province of Georgia, founded by royal charter in 1732 and later a U.S. state, was named after him.\nDuring George II's reign British interests expanded throughout the world, the Jacobite challenge to the Hanoverian dynasty was extinguished, and the power of ministers and Parliament in Britain became well-established. Nevertheless, in the memoirs of contemporaries such as Lord Hervey and Horace Walpole, George is depicted as a weak buffoon, governed by his wife and ministers. Biographies of George written during the nineteenth and first part of the twentieth century relied on these biased accounts. Since the last quarter of the twentieth century, scholarly analysis of surviving correspondence has indicated that George was not as ineffective as previously thought. Letters from ministers are annotated by George with pertinent remarks and demonstrate that he had a grasp of and interest in foreign policy in particular. He was often able to prevent the appointment of ministers or commanders he disliked, or sideline them into lesser offices. This academic reassessment, however, has not completely eliminated the popular perception of George II as a \"faintly ludicrous king\". His parsimony, for example, may have opened him to ridicule, though his biographers observe that parsimony is preferable to extravagance. Lord Charlemont excused George's short temper by explaining that sincerity of feeling is better than deception, \"His temper was warm and impetuous, but he was good-natured and sincere. Unskilled in the royal talent of dissimulation, he always was what he appeared to be. He might offend, but he never deceived.\" Lord Waldegrave wrote, \"I am thoroughly convinced that hereafter, when time shall have wore away those specks and blemishes which sully the brightest characters, and from which no man is totally exempt, he will be numbered amongst those patriot kings, under whose government the people have enjoyed the greatest happiness\". George may not have played a major role in history, but he was influential at times and he upheld constitutional government. Elizabeth Montagu said of him, \"With him our laws and liberties were safe, he possessed in a great degree the confidence of his people and the respect of foreign governments; and a certain steadiness of character made him of great consequence in these unsettled times\u00a0... His character would not afford subject for epic poetry, but will look well in the sober page of history.\"\nTitles, styles and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nIn Britain:\nGeorge II's full style was \"George the Second, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick-L\u00fcneburg, Archtreasurer and Prince-Elector of the Holy Roman Empire\".\nArms.\nWhen George became Prince of Wales in 1714, he was granted the royal arms with an inescutcheon of gules plain in the Hanoverian quarter differenced overall by a label of three points argent. The crest included the single arched coronet of his rank. As king, he used the royal arms as used by his father undifferenced.\nFamily.\nIssue.\nCaroline's ten or eleven pregnancies resulted in eight live births. One of the couple's children died in infancy, and seven lived to adulthood.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46390", "revid": "25333358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46390", "title": "Edward IV", "text": "King of England (1461\u201370, 1471\u201383)\nEdward IV (28 April 1442\u00a0\u2013 9 April 1483) was King of England from 4 March 1461 to 3 October 1470, then again from 11 April 1471 until his death in 1483. He was a central figure in the Wars of the Roses, a series of civil wars in England fought between the Yorkist and Lancastrian factions between 1455 and 1487.\nEdward inherited the Yorkist claim to the throne at the age of eighteen when his father, Richard, Duke of York, was killed at the Battle of Wakefield in December 1460. After defeating Lancastrian armies at Mortimer's Cross and Towton in early 1461, he deposed King Henry VI and took the throne. His marriage to Elizabeth Woodville in 1464 led to conflict with his chief advisor, Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, known as the \"Kingmaker\". In 1470, a revolt led by Warwick and Edward's brother George, Duke of Clarence, briefly re-installed Henry VI. Edward fled to Flanders, where he gathered support and invaded England in March 1471; after victories at the battles of Barnet and Tewkesbury (where both the Earl of Warwick and Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales, were killed), he resumed the throne. Shortly afterwards, Henry VI was found dead in the Tower of London, possibly killed on Edward's orders.\nDespite facing an overseas threat from Henry Tudor, the last remaining Lancastrian claimant, Edward reigned in relative peace for the next twelve years. However, he nearly restarted the Hundred Years' War, following his invasion of France in 1475, but was assuaged by Louis XI in the Treaty of Picquigny. This diplomatic agreement formally ended the Hundred Years' War, which had been in abeyance since 1453. Following his sudden death in April 1483, Edward was briefly succeeded by his son Edward V. He had appointed his younger brother, Richard, Duke of Gloucester, Lord Protector of England for the duration of the new king's minority. However, Edward V and his younger brother Richard, Duke of York, disappeared shortly after and their uncle seized the throne as Richard III.\nBirth and ancestry.\nEdward was born on 28 April 1442 at Rouen in Normandy, eldest surviving son of Richard, 3rd Duke of York, and Cecily Neville. Until his father's death, he was known as the Earl of March. Both his parents were direct descendants of King Edward III, giving Edward a potential claim to the throne. This was strengthened in 1447, when York became heir to the childless King Henry VI on the death of Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester.\nAllegations of illegitimacy were discounted at the time as politically inspired, and by later historians. Edward and his siblings George, Duke of Clarence, and Margaret, Duchess of Burgundy, were physically very similar, all three being tall and blond, in contrast to their father, the Duke of York, who was short and dark. His youngest brother, who later became King Richard III, closely resembled their father.\nEarly life.\nDuring Edward's youth, there was economic decline in England and military defeat abroad, exacerbated by a weak and corrupt central government. Both Edward and his younger brother Edmund, Earl of Rutland, were born in Rouen, where their father, the Duke of York, served as governor of English lands in France until 1445, when he was replaced by Henry Beaufort, 3rd Duke of Somerset. Edward and Edmund were probably brought up at Ludlow Castle, in the Welsh Marches, where the Duke of York was the dominant landowner.\nIn 1447, the Duke of York was made chief governor of Ireland, although he did not take up the post until 1449. Most of Normandy was recaptured by the French, leaving Calais as the last English possession in Northern France; Somerset, whom many held responsible for the losses, was appointed King Henry's chief minister. English politics became dominated by the struggle between the Yorkists and supporters of the House of Lancaster, or Lancastrians, notably the Duke of Somerset, William de la Pole, 1st Duke of Suffolk, and King Henry VI's wife, Margaret of Anjou.\nMatters came to a head in August 1453 when King Henry VI collapsed into a catatonic stupor on hearing news of the loss of Gascony, an English possession for over 300 years. The Duke of York took over the government, his chief supporters being Richard Neville, 5th Earl of Salisbury, and Salisbury's eldest son, Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick. In January 1454, 12-year-old Edward accompanied his father to London to attend the Great Council.\nThe birth of King Henry VI's son, Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales, in October 1453 created a viable Lancastrian figurehead, and the 1450s was dominated by political conflict between the two factions. By the age of 17, the Earl of March was a political and military leader in his own right; after their defeat at the Battle of Ludford Bridge in 1459, his father and brother Edmund fled to Ireland, while the Earls of March, Salisbury and Warwick made their way to Calais. Edward's name appears alongside those of his father, Warwick and Salisbury in widely circulated manifestoes declaring their quarrel was only with Henry's evil counsellors.\nIn 1460, Edward crossed the English Channel with Warwick and Salisbury, and marched into London. At Northampton in July, he commanded one of three divisions in a Yorkist victory that led to the capture of Henry VI. York returned from Ireland; on entering the Palace of Westminster, he declared himself king, a claim greeted by the assembled lords in silence. The Act of Accord agreed a compromise, whereby Henry remained king, but York and his descendants were designated his successors.\nThe implications of removing the legally accepted heir to the throne created substantial opposition to the Yorkist administration; in late 1460, Edward was given his first independent command and sent to deal with a Lancastrian insurgency in Wales. Warwick remained in London, while York, Salisbury, and Edmund marched north to suppress another in Yorkshire; all three were killed following defeat at Wakefield on 30 December, leaving Edward as the new head of the Yorkist party.\nReign.\nAccession to the throne.\nAt this stage of Edward's career, contemporaries like Philippe de Commines described him as handsome, affable, and energetic. Unusually tall for the period at , he was an impressive sight in armour, and took care to wear splendid clothes. This was done deliberately to contrast him with King Henry VI, whose physical and mental frailties undermined his position.\nOn 2 February 1461, Edward won a hard-fought victory at the Battle of Mortimer's Cross in Herefordshire. The battle was preceded by a meteorological phenomenon known as parhelion, or three suns, which he took as his emblem, the \"Sun in splendour\". However, this was offset by Warwick's defeat at the Second Battle of St Albans on 17 February, the Lancastrians regaining custody of Henry VI. The two met in London, where Edward was hastily appointed king, before marching north, where the two sides met at the Battle of Towton. Fought on 29 March in the middle of a snowstorm, it was the bloodiest battle ever to take place on English soil, and ended in a decisive Yorkist victory.\nEstimates of the dead range from 9,000 to 20,000; figures are uncertain, as most of the mass graves were emptied or moved over the centuries, while corpses were generally stripped of clothing or armour before burial. Nevertheless, casualties among the Lancastrian nobility were enormous and explain the enduring bitterness among those who survived. Since 1996, excavations have uncovered over 50 skeletons from the battle; an analysis of their injuries shows the brutality of the contest, including extensive post-mortem mutilations.\nMargaret fled to Scotland with Edward of Westminster, while the new king returned to London for his 28 June 1461 coronation. Henry VI remained at large for over a year, but was caught and imprisoned in the Tower of London. There was little point in killing him while his son remained alive since this would have transferred the Lancastrian claim from a frail captive to one who was young and free.\n1461 to 1470.\nMost of the nobility had either remained loyal to Henry or stayed neutral, forcing Edward to rely heavily on the Nevilles. Consolidating the regime initially took precedence, but John Neville's victory at the 1464 Battle of Hexham seemed to end the Lancastrian threat. This exposed internal divisions, particularly over foreign policy, which in this period largely focused on the relationship between England, France and the Duchy of Burgundy, with two of the parties manoeuvring to form an alliance against the third. Although Edward preferred Burgundy as a partner, he allowed Warwick to negotiate a treaty with Louis XI of France, which included a suggested marriage between Edward and Anne of France or Bona of Savoy, respectively daughter and sister-in-law of the French king.\nIn October 1464, Warwick was enraged to discover that on 1 May, Edward had secretly married Elizabeth Woodville, a widow with two sons, whose Lancastrian husband, John Grey of Groby, died at the Second Battle of St Albans. If nothing else, it was a clear demonstration he was not in control of the king, despite suggestions to the contrary. Edward's motives have been widely discussed by contemporaries and historians. Although Elizabeth's mother, Jacquetta of Luxembourg, came from the upper nobility, her father, Richard Woodville, Lord Rivers, was a middle-ranking provincial baron. The Privy Council told Edward with unusual frankness that \"she was no wife for a prince such as himself, for she was not the daughter of a duke or earl.\"\nThe marriage was certainly unwise and unusual, although not unheard of; Henry VI's mother, Catherine of Valois, married her chamberlain, Owen Tudor. By all accounts, Elizabeth possessed considerable charm of person and intellect, while Edward was used to getting what he wanted. Historians generally accept the marriage was an impulsive decision, but differ on whether it was also a \"calculated political move\". One view is the low status of the Woodvilles was part of the attraction, since unlike the Nevilles, they were reliant on Edward and thus more likely to remain loyal. Others argue if this was his purpose, there were far better options available; all agree it had significant political implications that impacted the rest of Edward's reign.\nOne reason for this was that twelve of the new queen's siblings survived into adulthood, creating a large pool of competitors for offices and estates, as well as in the matrimony market. Resentment built when her sisters made a series of advantageous unions, including that of Catherine Woodville to Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham; Anne Woodville to William, heir to Henry Bourchier, 1st Earl of Essex; and Eleanor Woodville with Anthony, heir to Edmund Grey, 1st Earl of Kent.\nIn 1467, Edward dismissed his Lord Chancellor, Warwick's brother George Neville, Archbishop of York. Warwick responded by building an alliance with Edward's disaffected younger brother and heir, the Duke of Clarence, who held estates adjacent to the Neville heartland in the north. Concerned by this, Edward blocked a proposed marriage between Clarence and Warwick's eldest daughter Isabel. In early July, Clarence defied his brother by travelling to Calais, where he married Isabel in a ceremony conducted by George Neville and overseen by Warwick. The three men issued a 'remonstrance', listing alleged abuses by the Woodvilles and other advisors close to Edward and then returned to London, where they assembled an army to remove these 'evil councillors' and establish good government.\nWith Edward still in the north, the royal army was defeated by a Neville force at Edgecote Moor on 24 July 1469. After the battle, Edward was held in Middleham Castle; on 12 August, his father-in-law Richard Woodville and Richard's younger son, John Woodville, were executed at Kenilworth. It soon became clear there was little support for Warwick or Clarence; Edward was released in September and resumed the throne. Outwardly, the situation remained unchanged, but tensions persisted and Edward did nothing to reduce the Nevilles' sense of vulnerability. The Percys, traditional rivals of the Neville family in the North, fought for Lancaster at Towton; their titles and estates were confiscated and given to Warwick's brother John Neville. In early 1470, Edward reinstated Henry Percy as Earl of Northumberland; John was compensated with the title Marquess of Montagu, but this was a significant demotion for a key supporter.\nIn March 1470, Warwick and Clarence exploited a private feud to start the 1470 Lincolnshire Rebellion; when it was defeated, the two fled to France in May 1470. Seeing an opportunity, Louis XI persuaded Warwick to negotiate with his enemy, Margaret of Anjou; she eventually agreed, first making him kneel before her in silence for fifteen minutes. With French support, Warwick landed in England on 9 September 1470 and announced his intention to restore Henry. By now, the Yorkist regime was deeply unpopular and the Lancastrians rapidly assembled an army of over 30,000; when John Neville switched sides, Edward narrowly escaped capture and was forced to seek refuge in Bruges.\nExile and restoration.\nEdward took refuge in Flanders, part of the Duchy of Burgundy, accompanied by a few hundred men, including his younger brother Richard, Duke of Gloucester, Anthony Woodville and William Hastings. The Duchy was ruled by Charles the Bold, husband of his sister Margaret; he provided minimal help, something Edward never forgot. The restored Lancastrian regime faced the same issue that dominated Henry's previous reign. Mental and physical frailties made him incapable of ruling and resulted in an internal struggle for control, made worse because the coalition that put him back on the throne consisted of bitter enemies. Edmund Beaufort, 4th Duke of Somerset, held Warwick responsible for his father's death in 1455, while he had executed his elder brother in 1464; Warwick and Clarence quickly found themselves isolated by the new regime.\nBacked by wealthy Flemish merchants, in March 1471 Edward landed near Hull, close to his estates in Yorkshire. Supporters were reluctant to join him; the important northern city of York opened its gates only when he claimed to be seeking the return of his dukedom, like Henry IV seventy years earlier. The first significant contingent to join was a group of 600 men under William Parr and James Harrington. Parr fought against the Yorkists at Edgecote in 1469 and his defection confirmed Clarence's decision to switch sides; as they marched south, more recruits came in, including 3,000 at Leicester.\nEdward entered London unopposed and took Henry prisoner; Warwick was defeated and killed at the Battle of Barnet on 14 April, while a second Lancastrian army was destroyed at the Battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May. Sixteen-year-old Edward of Westminster, the heir to the throne, died on the battlefield, with surviving leaders like Somerset executed shortly afterwards. This was followed by Henry's death a few days later; a contemporary chronicle claimed this was due to \"melancholy\" but it is generally assumed he was killed on Edward's orders.\nAlthough the Lancastrian cause seemed at an end, the regime was destabilised by a quarrel between Clarence and his brother Gloucester. The two were married to Isabel Neville and Anne Neville, respectively, the daughters of the Earl and Countess of Warwick and heirs to their mother's considerable inheritance. Many of the estates held by the brothers had been granted by Edward, who could also remove them, making them dependent on his favour. This was not the case with property acquired through marriage and explains the importance of this dispute.\n1471 to 1483.\nThe last significant rebellion ended in February 1474 with the surrender of John de Vere, 13th Earl of Oxford, who survived to command the Lancastrian army at Bosworth in 1485. Clarence was widely suspected of involvement, a factor in his eventual execution in the Tower on 18 February 1478; claims he was \"drowned in a butt of Malmsey wine\" appears to have been a joke by Edward, referring to his favourite drink.\nIn 1475, Edward allied with Burgundy and declared war on France. With Duke Charles busy with the Siege of Neuss, Louis opened negotiations. Soon after Edward landed at Calais, the two signed the Treaty of Picquigny. Edward received an immediate payment of 75,000 crowns, plus a yearly pension of 50,000 crowns, thus allowing him to recoup the costs of his army. In 1482, Edward backed an attempt to usurp the Scottish throne by Alexander Stewart, 1st Duke of Albany, brother of James III of Scotland. Gloucester invaded Scotland and took the town of Edinburgh, but not Edinburgh Castle, where James was being held prisoner by his nobles. Albany switched sides and without siege equipment, the English army was forced to withdraw, with little to show for an expensive campaign, apart from the capture of Berwick Castle.\nIllness and death.\nEdward's health began to fail, and he became subject to an increasing number of ailments; his physicians attributed this in part to a habitual use of emetics, which allowed him to gorge himself at meals, then return after vomiting to start again. He fell fatally ill at Easter 1483, but survived long enough to add codicils to his will, the most important naming his brother as Protector after his death. He died on 9 April 1483 and was buried in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle. His twelve-year-old son, Edward V, was never crowned, Gloucester becoming King Richard III in July.\nThe cause of Edward's death is uncertain; allegations of poison were common in an era when lack of medical knowledge meant death often had no obvious explanation. Other suggestions include pneumonia or malaria, although both were well-known and easy to describe. One contemporary attributed it to apoplexy brought on by excess, which fits with what is known of his physical habits. Another theory is that Edward died of syphilis.\nWhile the War of the Roses has been documented by numerous historians, Edward as an individual is less well known; 19th century historians like William Stubbs generally dismissed him as a bloodthirsty nonentity. The most comprehensive modern biography was written by Charles Ross in 1974, who concluded the peace and stability of his later reign was squandered in short-term aggrandisement. He further suggests that Edward \"remains the only king in English history since 1066 in active possession of his throne who failed to secure the safe succession of his son. His lack of political foresight is largely to blame for the unhappy aftermath of his early death.\"\nPolitical.\nCommentators observe a marked difference between Edward's first period as king, and the second. The failure of attempts to reconcile former enemies like Somerset meant he was noticeably more ruthless after 1471, including the execution of his brother Clarence. In his youth, Edward was a capable and charismatic military commander, who led from the front, but as he grew older, the energy noted by contemporaries became less apparent.\nOne effect of this was that Parliament became increasingly reluctant to approve taxes for wars which Edward failed to prosecute, then used the funds instead to finance his household expenditures. Under his rule, ownership of the Duchy of Lancaster was transferred to the Crown, where it remains today. In 1478, his staff prepared the so-called 'Black Book', a comprehensive review of government finances, still in use a century later. He invested heavily in business ventures with the City of London, which he used as an additional source of funding.\nAlthough the economy recovered from the depression of 1450 to 1470, Edward's spending habitually exceeded income; on his death in 1483, the Crown had less than \u00a31,200 in cash. His close relationship with the London branch of the Medici Bank ended in its bankruptcy; in 1517, the Medicis were still seeking repayment of Edward's debts.\nEconomics was closely linked to foreign policy; Edward's reign was dominated by the three-sided diplomatic contest between England, France, and Burgundy, with two of the three seeking to ally against the third. As Flemish merchants were the largest buyers of English wool, Edward was generally pro-Burgundian, although Duke Charles' reluctance to support him in 1471 cooled their relationship. The death of Charles in 1477 led to the 1482 Treaty of Arras; Flanders, along with the lands known as the Burgundian Netherlands, became part of the Holy Roman Empire and France acquired the rest. Edward and his successors lost much of their influence.\nCultural.\nEdward's court was described by a visitor from Europe as \"the most splendid ... in all Christendom\". He spent large amounts on expensive status symbols to show off his power and wealth as king of England, while his collecting habits show an eye for style and an interest in scholarship, particularly history. He acquired fine clothes, jewels, and furnishings, as well as a collection of beautifully illuminated historical and literary manuscripts, many made specially for him by craftsmen in Bruges. His book purchases included books for entertainment and instruction, whose contents reveal his interests. They focus on the lives of great rulers, including Julius Caesar, historical chronicles, and instructional and religious works. In 1476, William Caxton established the first English printing press in the outbuildings of Westminster Abbey; on 18 November 1477, he produced \"Sayengis of the Philosophres\", translated into English for Edward by his brother-in-law Anthony Woodville.\nIt is not known where or how Edward's library was stored, but it is recorded that he transferred volumes from the Great Wardrobe to Eltham Palace and that he had a yeoman \"to kepe the king's bookes\". More than forty of his books survive intact from the 15th century, which suggests they were carefully stored, and are in the Royal Collection of manuscripts, held by the British Library. Edward spent large sums on Eltham Palace, including the extant Great Hall, the site of a feast for 2,000 people in December 1482, shortly before his death in April. He also began great improvements to St George's Chapel, Windsor, where he was buried in 1483; later completed by Henry VII, it was badly damaged during the First English Civil War, and little of the original work remains.\nMarriage and children.\nEdward had ten children by Elizabeth Woodville, seven of whom survived him; they were declared illegitimate under the 1484 \"Titulus Regius\", an act repealed by Henry VII, who married Edward's eldest daughter, Elizabeth.\nEdward had numerous mistresses, including Lady Eleanor Talbot and Elizabeth Lucy, possibly daughter of Thomas Waite (or Wayte), of Southampton. The most famous was Jane Shore, later compelled by Richard III to perform public penance at Paul's Cross; Thomas More claimed this backfired, since \"albeit she were out of al array save her kyrtle only: yet went she so fair &amp; lovely ... that her great shame wan her much praise.\"\nEdward had several acknowledged illegitimate children;\nThere are claims for many others, including Mary, second wife of Henry Harman of Ellam, and Isabel Mylbery (born circa 1470), who married John Tuchet, son of John Tuchet, 6th Baron Audley. However, the evidence for these is circumstantial.\nAftermath.\nEdward IV's eldest son, also named Edward, was made Prince of Wales when he was seven months old and given his own household at the age of three. Based in Ludlow Castle, he was supervised by his uncle, Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers, who also acted as his regent for the Council of Wales and the Marches. The historical consensus is he and his brother Richard were killed, probably between July and September 1483; debate on who gave the orders, and why, continues, although their uncle Richard III was the beneficiary.\nBy mid-August, Elizabeth Woodville was certain of the deaths of her sons; after her initial grief turned to fury, she opened secret talks with Margaret Beaufort. She promised her support in return for Henry's agreement to marry her eldest daughter Elizabeth. In December 1483, Henry swore an oath to do so, which he duly carried out after his coronation in October 1485.\nPrior to his succession, Richard III declared his nephews illegitimate, on the grounds his brother's marriage to Elizabeth Woodville was invalid. The \"Titulus Regius\" argued that the alleged pre-contract of marriage between Edward IV and Lady Eleanor Talbot rendered his marriage to Elizabeth Woodville void. Both Eleanor and Edward were dead, but according to Philippe de Commines, Robert Stillington, Bishop of Bath and Wells, claimed to have carried out the ceremony himself. Once secure on the throne, Henry VII annulled \"Titulus Regius\" and arrested Stillington, who died in prison in 1491.\nDespite this apparent resolution, the Yorkist cause continued well into the 16th century. The most famous Yorkist claimants were the pretenders Lambert Simnel and Perkin Warbeck, but other claimants remained a concern for Henry VII and his son.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46391", "revid": "11308236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46391", "title": "Ramsay MacDonald", "text": "Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1924; 1929\u20131935)\nJames Ramsay MacDonald (n\u00e9\u00a0James McDonald Ramsay; 12 October 1866\u00a0\u2013 9 November 1937) was a British statesman and politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. The first two of his governments belonged to the Labour Party, where he led a minority Labour government for nine months in 1924 and again between 1929 and 1931. In 1931, MacDonald was expelled from the Labour Party, after he formed a National Government dominated by the Conservative Party and supported by only a few Labour members, his premiership of which lasted until 1935.\nMacDonald, along with Keir Hardie and Arthur Henderson, was one of the three principal founders of the Labour Party in 1900. He was chairman of the Labour MPs before 1914 and, after an eclipse in his career caused by his opposition to the First World War, he was Leader of the Labour Party from 1922. The second Labour Government (1929\u20131931) was dominated by the Great Depression. He formed the National Government to carry out spending cuts to defend the gold standard, but it had to be abandoned after the Invergordon Mutiny, and he called a general election in 1931 seeking a \"doctor's mandate\" to fix the economy.\nThe National coalition won an overwhelming landslide and the Labour Party was reduced to a rump of around 50 seats in the House of Commons. His health deteriorated and he stood down as prime minister in 1935, remaining as Lord President of the Council until retiring in 1937. He died later that year.\nMacDonald's speeches, pamphlets and books made him an important theoretician. Historian John Shepherd states that \"MacDonald's natural gifts of an imposing presence, handsome features and a persuasive oratory delivered with an arresting Highlands accent made him the iconic Labour leader\". After 1931, MacDonald was repeatedly and bitterly denounced by the Labour movement as a traitor to its cause. Since the 1960s, some historians have defended his reputation, emphasising his earlier role in building up the Labour Party, dealing with the Great Depression, and as a forerunner of the political realignments of the 1990s and 2000s.\nEarly life.\nLossiemouth.\nMacDonald was born at Gregory Place, Lossiemouth, Moray, Scotland, the illegitimate son of John MacDonald, a farm labourer, and Anne Ramsay, a housemaid. Registered at birth as James McDonald (sic) Ramsay, he was known as Jaimie MacDonald. Illegitimacy could be a serious handicap in 19th-century Presbyterian Scotland, but in the north and northeast farming communities this was less of a problem; in 1868, a report of the Royal Commission on the Employment of Children, Young Persons and Women in Agriculture noted that the illegitimacy rate was around 15%\u2014nearly every sixth person was born out of wedlock. MacDonald's mother had worked as a domestic servant at Claydale farm, near Alves, where his father was also employed. They were to have been married, but the wedding never took place, either because the couple quarrelled and chose not to marry, or because Anne's mother, Isabella Ramsay, stepped in to prevent her daughter from marrying a man she deemed unsuitable.\nRamsay MacDonald received an elementary education at the Free Church of Scotland school in Lossiemouth from 1872 to 1875, and then at Drainie Parish School. He left school at the end of the summer term in 1881, at the age of 15, and began work on a nearby farm. In December 1881, he was appointed a pupil teacher at Drainie parish school. In 1885, he moved to Bristol to take up a position as an assistant to Mordaunt Crofton, a clergyman who was attempting to establish a Boys' and Young Men's Guild at St Stephen's Church. In Bristol, Ramsay MacDonald joined the Democratic Federation, a Radical organisation, which changed its name a few months later to the Social Democratic Federation (SDF). He remained in the group when it left the SDF to become the Bristol Socialist Society. In early 1886 he moved to London.\nDiscovering socialism in London.\nFollowing a short period of work addressing envelopes at the National Cyclists' Union in Fleet Street, he found himself unemployed and forced to live on the small amount of money he had saved from his time in Bristol. MacDonald eventually found employment as an invoice clerk in the warehouse of Cooper, Box and Co. During this time, he was deepening his socialist credentials, and engaged himself energetically in C. L. Fitzgerald's Socialist Union which, unlike the SDF, aimed to progress socialist ideals through the parliamentary system. MacDonald witnessed the Bloody Sunday of 13 November 1887 in Trafalgar Square, and in response, had a pamphlet published by the \"Pall Mall Gazette\", titled \"Remember Trafalgar Square: Tory Terrorism in 1887\".\nMacDonald retained an interest in Scottish politics. Gladstone's first Irish Home Rule Bill inspired the setting up of a Scottish Home Rule Association in Edinburgh. On 6 March 1888, MacDonald took part in a meeting of London-based Scots, who, upon his motion, formed the London General Committee of the Scottish Home Rule Association. For a while, he supported home rule for Scotland, but found little support among London's Scots. However, MacDonald never lost his interest in Scottish politics and home rule, and in \"Socialism: critical and constructive\", published in 1921, he wrote: \"The Anglification of Scotland has been proceeding apace to the damage of its education, its music, its literature, its genius, and the generation that is growing up under this influence is uprooted from its past.\"\nPolitics in the 1880s was still of less importance to MacDonald than furthering his education. In 1886\u201387, MacDonald studied botany, agriculture, mathematics, and physics at the Birkbeck Literary and Scientific Institution (now Birkbeck, University of London) but his health suddenly failed him due to exhaustion one week before his examinations, which put an end to any thought of a scientific career. He would, however, later be appointed a Governor of the institution in 1895, and continued to have a great fondness for the mission of Birkbeck into his later years.\nIn 1888, MacDonald took employment as private secretary to Thomas Lough who was a tea merchant and a Radical politician. Lough was elected as the Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for West Islington, in 1892. Many doors now opened to MacDonald: he had access to the National Liberal Club as well as the editorial offices of Liberal and Radical newspapers; he made himself known to various London Radical clubs among Radical and labour politicians; and he gained valuable experience in the workings of electioneering. At the same time, he left Lough's employment to pursue a career as a freelance journalist. Elsewhere, as a member of the Fabian Society for some time, MacDonald toured and lectured on its behalf at the London School of Economics and elsewhere.\nActive politics.\nThe Trades Union Congress (TUC) had created the Labour Electoral Association (LEA) and entered into an unsatisfactory alliance with the Liberal Party in 1886. In 1892, MacDonald was in Dover to give support to the candidate for the LEA in the general election, who was well beaten. MacDonald impressed the local press and the Association and was adopted as its candidate, announcing that his candidature would be under a Labour Party banner. He denied the Labour Party was a wing of the Liberal Party but saw merit in a working political relationship. In May 1894, the local Southampton Liberal Association was seeking to find a labour-minded candidate for the constituency. Two others joined MacDonald to address the Liberal Council: one was offered but turned down the invitation, while MacDonald failed to secure the nomination despite strong support among Liberals.\nIn 1893, Keir Hardie had formed the Independent Labour Party (ILP), which had established itself as a mass movement. In May 1894, MacDonald applied for membership and was accepted. He was officially adopted as the ILP candidate for one of the Southampton seats on 17 July 1894 but was heavily defeated at the election of 1895. MacDonald stood for Parliament again in 1900 for one of the two Leicester seats; he lost and was accused of splitting the Liberal vote, allowing the Conservative candidate to win. That same year he became Secretary of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC), the forerunner of the Labour Party, allegedly in part because many delegates confused him with prominent London trade unionist Jimmie MacDonald when they voted for \"Mr. James R. MacDonald\". MacDonald retained membership of the ILP; while it was not a Marxist organisation it was more rigorously socialist than the Labour Party would prove to be, and ILP members would operate as a \"ginger group\" within the Labour Party for many years.\nAs Party Secretary, MacDonald negotiated an agreement with the leading Liberal politician Herbert Gladstone (son of the late Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone), which allowed Labour to contest a number of working class seats without Liberal opposition, thus giving Labour its first breakthrough into the House of Commons. He married Margaret Ethel Gladstone, who was unrelated to the Gladstones of the Liberal Party, in 1896. Although not wealthy, Margaret MacDonald was comfortably well off, and this allowed them to indulge in foreign travel, visiting Canada and the United States in 1897, South Africa in 1902, Australia and New Zealand in 1906 and India several times.\nIt was during this period that MacDonald and his wife began a long friendship with the social investigator and reforming civil servant Clara Collet with whom he discussed women's issues. She was an influence on MacDonald and other politicians in their attitudes towards women's rights. In 1901, he was elected to the London County Council for Finsbury Central as a joint Labour\u2013Progressive Party candidate, but he was disqualified from the register in 1904 due to his absences abroad.\nIn 1906, the LRC changed its name to the \"Labour Party\", amalgamating with the ILP. In that same year, 29 Labour MPs were elected, including MacDonald, for Leicester, who then became one of the leaders of the Parliamentary Labour Party. These Labour MPs undoubtedly owed their election to the 'Gladstone\u2013MacDonald pact' between the Liberals and Labour, a minor party supporting the Liberal governments of Henry Campbell-Bannerman and H. H. Asquith. MacDonald became the leader of the left wing of the party, arguing that Labour must seek to displace the Liberals as the main party of the left.\nParty Leadership.\nIn 1911 MacDonald became \"Chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party\", the leader of the party. He was the chief intellectual leader of the party, paying little attention to class warfare and much more to the emergence of a powerful state as it exemplified the Darwinian evolution of an ever more complex society. He was an Orthodox Edwardian progressive, keen on intellectual discussion, and averse to agitation.\nWithin a short period, his wife became ill with blood poisoning and died. This deeply and permanently affected MacDonald.\nMacDonald had always taken a keen interest in foreign affairs and knew from his visit to South Africa, just after the Boer War had ended, what the effects of modern conflict would be. Although the Parliamentary Labour Party generally held an anti-war opinion, when war was declared in August 1914, patriotism came to the fore. After the Foreign Secretary, Sir Edward Grey, warned the House of Commons on 3 August that war with Germany was likely, MacDonald responded by declaring that \"this country ought to have remained neutral\". In the \"Labour Leader\" he claimed that the real cause of the war was the \"policy of the balance of power through alliance\".\nThe Party supported the government in its request for \u00a3100,000,000 of war credits and, as MacDonald could not, he resigned from the party Chairmanship. Arthur Henderson became the new leader, while MacDonald took the party Treasurer's post. Despite his opposition to the war, MacDonald visited the Western Front in December 1914 with the approval of Lord Kitchener. MacDonald and General Seely set off for the front at Ypres and soon found themselves in the thick of an action in which both behaved with the utmost coolness. Later, MacDonald was received by the Commander-in-Chief at St Omer and made an extensive tour of the front. Returning home, he paid a public tribute to the courage of the French troops, but said nothing then or later of having been under fire himself.\nDuring the early part of the war, he was extremely unpopular and was accused of treason and cowardice. Former Liberal Party MP and publisher Horatio Bottomley attacked him through his magazine \"John Bull\" in September 1915, by publishing an article carrying details of MacDonald's birth and his so-called deceit in not disclosing his real name. His illegitimacy was no secret and he had not seemed to have suffered by it, but, according to the journal he had, by using a false name, gained access to parliament falsely and should suffer heavy penalties and have his election declared void. MacDonald received much internal support, but how the disclosures were made public had affected him. He wrote in his diary:\n...I spent hours of terrible mental pain. Letters of sympathy began to pour in upon me. ... Never before did I know that I had been registered under the name of Ramsay, and cannot understand it now. From my earliest years, my name has been entered in lists, like the school register, etc. as MacDonald.\nIn August 1916, the Moray Golf Club passed a resolution declaring that MacDonald's anti-war activities \"had endangered the character and interests of the club\" and that he had forfeited his right to membership. In January 1917, MacDonald published \"National Defence\", in which he argued that open diplomacy and disarmament were necessary to prevent future wars.\nAs the war dragged on, his reputation began to recover. However, he still lost his seat in the 1918 \"Coupon Election\", which saw the Liberal David Lloyd George's coalition government win a large majority. The election campaign in Leicester West focused on MacDonald's opposition to the war, with MacDonald writing after his defeat: \"I have become a kind of mythological demon in the minds of the people\".\nMacDonald denounced the Treaty of Versailles: \"We are beholding an act of madness unparalleled in history\".\nIn Opposition.\n1920\u20131923.\nMacDonald stood for Parliament in the 1921 Woolwich East by-election and lost. His opponent, Captain Robert Gee, had been awarded the Victoria Cross at Cambrai; MacDonald tried to counter this by having ex-soldiers appear on his platforms. MacDonald also promised to pressure the government into converting the Woolwich Arsenal to civilian use. Horatio Bottomley intervened in the by-election, opposing MacDonald's election because of his anti-war record. Bottomley's influence may have been decisive in MacDonald's failure to be elected, as there were under 700 votes difference between Gee and MacDonald.\nIn 1922, MacDonald was returned to the House as MP for Aberavon in Wales, with a vote of 14,318 against 11,111 and 5,328 for his main opponents. His rehabilitation was complete; the Labour \"New Leader\" magazine opined that his election was, \"enough in itself to transform our position in the House. We have once more a voice which must be heard\".\nBy now, the party was reunited and MacDonald was re-elected as Leader. Historian Kenneth O. Morgan examines his newfound stature:\n as dissolution set in with the Lloyd George coalition in 1921\u201322, and unemployment mounted, MacDonald stood out as the leader of a new kind of broad-based left. His opposition to the war had given him a new charisma. More than anyone else in public life, he symbolised peace and internationalism, decency and social change... [He] had become The voice of conscience.\nAt the 1922 election, Labour replaced the Liberals as the main opposition party to the Conservative government of Stanley Baldwin, making MacDonald Leader of the Opposition. By now, he had moved away from the Labour left and abandoned the socialism of his youth: he strongly opposed the wave of radicalism that swept through the labour movement in the wake of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and became a determined enemy of Communism. Unlike the French Section of the Workers' International and the Social Democratic Party of Germany, the Labour Party did not split, and the Communist Party of Great Britain remained small and isolated.\nIn 1922, MacDonald visited Palestine. In a later account of his visit, he contrasted Zionist pioneers with 'the rich plutocratic Jew'. MacDonald believed the latter \"was the true economic materialist. He is the person whose views upon life make one anti-Semitic. He has no country, no kindred. Whether as a sweater or a financier, he is an exploiter of everything he can squeeze. He is behind every evil that Governments do, and his political authority, always exercised in the dark, is greater than that of Parliamentary majorities. He is the keenest of brains and the bluntest of consciences. He detests Zionism because it revives the idealism of his race, and has political implications which threaten his economic interests.\"\nMacDonald became noted for \"woolly\" rhetoric such as the occasion at the Labour Party Conference of 1930 at Llandudno when he appeared to imply unemployment could be solved by encouraging the jobless to return to the fields \"where they till and they grow and they sow and they harvest\". Equally, there were times when it was unclear what his policies were. There was already some unease in the party about what he would do if Labour was able to form a government.\nElection of 1923.\nAt the 1923 election, the Conservatives had lost their majority, and when they lost a vote of confidence in the House in January 1924, King George V called on MacDonald to form a minority Labour government, with the tacit support of the Liberals under Asquith from the corner benches. On 22 January 1924, he took office as the first Labour Prime Minister, the first from a working-class background and one of the very few without a university education.\nPrime Minister (1924).\nFirst term: January\u2013October 1924.\nMacDonald had never held office but demonstrated energy, executive ability, and political astuteness. He consulted widely within his party, making the Liberal Lord Haldane the Lord Chancellor, and Philip Snowden Chancellor of the Exchequer. He took the foreign office himself. Besides himself, ten other cabinet members came from working-class origins, a dramatic breakthrough in British history. His first priority was to undo the perceived damage caused by the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, by settling the reparations issue and coming to terms with Germany. King George V noted in his diary, \"He wishes to do the right thing... Today, 23 years ago, dear Grandmama [Queen Victoria] died. I wonder what she would have thought of a Labour Government!\"\nWhile there were no major labour strikes during his term, MacDonald acted swiftly to end those that did erupt. When the Labour Party executive criticised the government, he replied that \"public doles, Poplarism [local defiance of the national government], strikes for increased wages, limitation of output, not only are not Socialism, but may mislead the spirit and policy of the Socialist movement\". The Government lasted only nine months and did not have a majority in either House of the Parliament, but it was still able to support the unemployed with the extension of benefits and amendments to the Insurance Acts. In a personal triumph for John Wheatley, Minister for Health, a Housing Act was passed, which greatly expanded municipal housing for low-paid workers. Several other reforms were carried out during MacDonald's first premiership in areas such as education, social security, agriculture, and taxation.\nForeign affairs.\nMacDonald had long been a leading spokesman for internationalism in the Labour movement; at first, he verged on pacifism. He founded the Union of Democratic Control in early 1914 to promote international socialist aims, but it was overwhelmed by the war. His 1917 book, \"National Defence\", revealed his own long-term vision for peace. Although disappointed at the harsh terms of the Versailles Treaty, he supported the League of Nations \u2013 but, by 1930, he felt that the internal cohesion of the British Empire and a strong, independent British defence programme might turn out to be the wisest British government policy.\nMacDonald moved in March 1924 to end construction work on the Singapore military base, despite strong opposition from the Admiralty. He believed the building of the base would endanger the disarmament conference; the First Sea Lord Lord Beatty considered the absence of such a base as dangerously imperilling British trade and territories East of Aden and could mean the security of the British Empire in the Far East being dependent on the goodwill of Japan.\nIn June 1924, MacDonald convened a conference in London of the wartime Allies and achieved an agreement on a new plan for settling the reparations issue and French-Belgian occupation of the Ruhr. German delegates joined the meeting, and the London Settlement was signed. An Anglo-German commercial treaty followed it. Another major triumph for MacDonald was the conference held in London in July and August 1924 to deal with the implementation of the Dawes Plan. MacDonald, who accepted the popular view of the economist John Maynard Keynes of German reparations as impossible to pay, pressured French Premier \u00c9douard Herriot until many concessions were made to Germany, including the evacuation of the Ruhr.\nA British onlooker commented, \"The London Conference was for the French 'man in the street' one long Calvary ... as he saw M. Herriot abandoning one by one the cherished possessions of French preponderance on the Reparations Commission, the right of sanctions in the event of German default, the economic occupation of the Ruhr, the French-Belgian railroad R\u00e9gie, and finally, the military occupation of the Ruhr within a year.\" MacDonald was proud of what had been achieved, which was the pinnacle of his short-lived administration's achievements. In September, he made a speech to the League of Nations Assembly in Geneva, the main thrust of which was for general European disarmament, which was received with great acclaim.\nMacDonald recognised the Soviet Union and informed Parliament in February 1924 that negotiations would begin to negotiate a treaty with the Soviet Union. The treaty was to cover Anglo-Soviet trade and the repayment of the British bondholders, who had lent billions to the pre-revolutionary Russian government and been rejected by the Bolsheviks. There were, in fact, two proposed treaties: one would cover commercial matters, and the other would address a fairly vague future discussion on the problem of the bondholders. If the treaties were signed, the British government would conclude a further treaty and guarantee a loan to the Bolsheviks. The treaties were popular neither with the Conservatives nor with the Liberals, who, in September, criticised the loan so vehemently that negotiation with them seemed impossible.\nHowever, the government's fate was determined by the \"Campbell Case\", the abrogation of prosecuting the left-wing newspaper the \"Workers' Weekly\" for inciting servicemen to mutiny. The Conservatives put down a censure motion, to which the Liberals added an amendment. MacDonald's Cabinet resolved to treat both motions as matters of confidence. The Liberal amendment was carried, and the King granted MacDonald a dissolution of Parliament the following day. The issues that dominated the election campaign were the Campbell Case and the Russian treaties, which soon combined into the single issue of the Bolshevik threat.\nZinoviev letter.\nOn 25 October 1924, just four days before the election, the \"Daily Mail\" reported that a letter had come into its possession which purported to be a letter sent from Grigory Zinoviev, the President of the Communist International, to the British representative on the Comintern Executive. The letter was dated 15 September, and so before the dissolution of parliament, it stated that it was imperative for the agreed treaties between Britain and the Bolsheviks to be ratified urgently. The letter said that those Labour members who could apply pressure on the government should do so. It went on to say that a resolution of the relationship between the two countries would \"assist in the revolutionising of the international and British proletariat ... make it possible for us to extend and develop the ideas of Leninism in England and the Colonies\".\nThe government had received the letter before its publication in the newspapers. It had protested to the Bolsheviks' London charg\u00e9 d'affaires and had already decided to make public the contents of the letter with details of the official protest, but it had not been swift enough. Historians mostly agree that the Zinoviev letter was a forgery, but it closely reflected attitudes current in the Comintern.\nIn Opposition (1924\u20131929).\nOn 29 October 1924, the 1924 United Kingdom general election was held and the Conservative Party under Stanley Baldwin was returned decisively, gaining 155 seats for a total of 413 members of parliament. This was a landslide victory against the Liberals, who lost 118 seats (leaving them with only 40); their vote fell by over a million.\nFor Labour, the result was a defeat, not a disaster, holding on to 151 seats and losing 40. The real significance of the election was that the Liberal Party, which Labour had displaced as the second-largest political party in 1922, was now clearly the third party. Labour had put up more candidates than in 1923, and its total vote increased, suggesting that the Zinoviev letter had little effect. But for years, many Labourites blamed their defeat on the Letter, through misunderstanding the political forces at work.\nPrime Minister (1929\u20131935).\nSecond term (1929\u20131931).\nThe strong majority held by the Conservatives gave Baldwin a full term during which the government had to deal with the 1926 General Strike. Unemployment remained high but relatively stable at just over 10%, and apart from 1926, strikes were at a low level. At the May 1929 election, Labour won 288 seats to the Conservatives' 260, with 59 Liberals under Lloyd George holding the balance of power. MacDonald was increasingly out of touch with his supposedly safe Welsh seat at Aberavon; he largely ignored the district, and had little time or energy to help with its increasingly difficult problems regarding coal disputes, strikes, unemployment and poverty. The miners expected a wealthy man who would fund party operations, but he had no money. He disagreed with the increasingly radical activism of party leaders in the district, as well as the permanent agent, and the South Wales Mineworkers' Federation. He moved to Seaham Harbour in County Durham, a safer seat, to avoid a highly embarrassing defeat.\nBaldwin resigned and MacDonald again formed a minority government, with intermittent Liberal support. This time, MacDonald knew he had to concentrate on domestic matters. Arthur Henderson became Foreign Secretary, with Snowden again at the Exchequer. JH Thomas became Lord Privy Seal with a mandate to tackle unemployment, assisted by the young radical Oswald Mosley. Margaret Bondfield was appointed as Minister of Labour, becoming the first-ever woman cabinet minister.\nMacDonald's second government was in a stronger parliamentary position than his first, and was able to introduce a number of progressive reforms.&lt;ref name=\" babel.hathitrust.org/\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 1930, for instance, it was able to raise unemployment pay, pass an act to improve wages and conditions in the coal industry (i.e. the issues behind the General Strike) and pass the Housing Act 1930 which focused on slum clearances. However, an attempt by the Education Minister Charles Trevelyan to introduce an act to raise the school-leaving age to 15 was defeated by opposition from Roman Catholic Labour MPs, who feared that the costs would lead to increasing local authority control over faith schools.\nIn international affairs, he also convened the Round Table conferences in London with the political leaders of India, at which he offered them responsible government, but not independence or even Dominion status. In April 1930 he negotiated the London Naval Treaty, limiting naval armaments, with France, Italy, Japan, and the United States. Grants were also provided for colonial welfare through legislation introduced in 1929.\nGreat Depression.\nMacDonald's government had no effective response to the economic crisis which followed the Stock Market Crash of 1929. Philip Snowden was a rigid exponent of orthodox finance and would not permit any deficit spending to stimulate the economy, despite the urgings of Oswald Mosley, David Lloyd George and the economist John Maynard Keynes. Mosley put forward a memorandum in January 1930, calling for the public control of imports and banking as well as an increase in pensions to boost spending power. When this was repeatedly turned down, Mosley resigned from the government in February 1931 and formed the New Party. He later converted to fascism.\nBy the end of 1930, unemployment had doubled to over two and a half million. The government struggled to cope with the crisis and found itself attempting to reconcile two contradictory aims: achieving a balanced budget to maintain sterling on the gold standard, and maintaining assistance to the poor and unemployed, at a time when tax revenues were falling. During 1931, the economic situation deteriorated, and pressure from orthodox economists for sharp cuts in government spending increased. Under pressure from its Liberal allies, as well as the Conservative opposition, who feared that the budget was unbalanced, Snowden appointed a committee headed by Sir George May to review the state of public finances. The May Report of July 1931, urged large public-sector wage cuts and large cuts in public spending, notably in payments to the unemployed, to avoid a budget deficit.\nNational government (1931\u20131935).\nFormation of the National Government.\nAlthough there was a narrow majority in the Cabinet for drastic reductions in spending, the minority included senior ministers such as Arthur Henderson who made it clear they would resign rather than acquiesce in the cuts. With this unworkable split, on 24 August 1931, MacDonald submitted his resignation and then agreed, on the urging of King George V, to form a National Government with the Conservatives and Liberals. With Henderson taking the lead, MacDonald, Snowden, and Thomas were quickly expelled from the Labour Party. They responded by forming a new National Labour Organisation, which provided a nominal party base for the expelled MPs, but received little support in the country or the unions. Great anger in the labour movement greeted MacDonald's move. Riots took place in protest in Glasgow and Manchester. Many in the Labour Party viewed this as a cynical move by MacDonald to rescue his career, and accused him of 'betrayal'. MacDonald, however, argued that the sacrifice was for the common good.\n1931 general election.\nIn the 1931 general election, the National Government won 554 seats, comprising 473 Conservatives, 13 National Labour, 68 Liberals (Liberal National and Liberal) and various others, while Labour, now led by Arthur Henderson won only 52 and the Lloyd George Liberals four. Henderson and his deputy J. R. Clynes both lost their seats in Labour's worst-ever rout. Labour's disastrous performance at the 1931 election greatly increased the bitterness felt by MacDonald's former colleagues towards him. MacDonald was genuinely upset to see the Labour Party so badly defeated at the election. He had regarded the National Government as a temporary measure, and had hoped to return to the Labour Party.\nPremiership of the National Government (1931\u20131935).\nThe National Government's huge majority left MacDonald with the largest mandate ever won by a British Prime Minister at a democratic election. Still, he had only a small following of National Labour men in Parliament. He was ageing rapidly and was increasingly a figurehead. In control of domestic policy were Conservatives Stanley Baldwin as Lord President and Neville Chamberlain the chancellor of the exchequer, together with National Liberal Walter Runciman at the Board of Trade. MacDonald, Chamberlain and Runciman devised a compromise tariff policy, which stopped short of protectionism while ending free trade and, at the 1932 Ottawa Conference, cementing commercial relations within the Commonwealth.\nBesides his preference for a cohesive British Empire and a protective tariff, he felt an independent British defence programme would be the wisest policy. However, budget pressures and a strong popular pacifist sentiment forced a reduction in the military and naval budgets. MacDonald involved himself heavily in foreign policy. Assisted by the National Liberal leader and Foreign Secretary John Simon, he continued to lead British delegations to international conferences, including the Geneva Disarmament Conference and the Lausanne Conference in 1932, and the Stresa Conference in 1935. He went to Rome in March 1933 to facilitate Nazi Germany's return to the concert of European powers and to continue the policy of appeasement. On 16 August 1932 he granted the Communal Award upon India, partitioning it into separate electorates for Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs and Untouchables. Most important of all, he presided at the World Economic Conference in London in June 1933. Nearly every nation was represented, but no agreement was possible. The American president torpedoed the conference with a bombshell message that the US would not stabilise the depreciating dollar. The failure marked the end of international economic cooperation for another decade.\nMacDonald was deeply affected by the anger and bitterness caused by the fall of the Labour government. He continued to regard himself as a true Labour man, but the rupturing of virtually all his old friendships left him an isolated figure. One of the only other leading Labour figures to join the government, Philip Snowden, was a firm believer in free trade and resigned from the government in 1932 following the introduction of tariffs after the Ottawa agreement.\nRetirement.\nBy 1933, MacDonald's health was so poor that his doctor Thomas Horder had to supervise his trip to Geneva personally. By 1934, MacDonald's mental and physical health had declined further, and he became an increasingly ineffective leader as the international situation grew more threatening. His speeches in the House of Commons and at international meetings became incoherent. One observer noted how \"Things ... got to the stage where nobody knew what the Prime Minister was going to say in the House of Commons, and, when he did say it, nobody understood it\". Newspapers did not report MacDonald denying to reporters that he was seriously ill because he only had \"loss of memory\". His pacifism, which had been widely admired in the 1920s, led Winston Churchill and others to accuse him of failure to stand up to the threat of Adolf Hitler. His government began the negotiations for the Anglo-German Naval Agreement.\nIn these years, he was irritated by the attacks of Lucy, Lady Houston, the strongly nationalistic proprietor of the \"Saturday Review\". Lady Houston believed that MacDonald was under the control of the Soviets and amused the nation by giving MacDonald such epithets as the 'Spider of Lossiemouth,' and hanging a large sign in electric lights from the rigging of her luxury yacht, the . According to some versions, it read 'Down with Ramsay MacDonald,' and to others 'To Hell with Ramsay MacDonald.' Lady Houston also sent agents to disrupt his election campaigns. In 2020, new research revealed how she purchased three letters, supposedly written by Ramsay MacDonald to Soviet officials but actually the work of an American forger. In 1935 Lady Houston stated that she intended to publish them but eventually handed them over to Special Branch, and MacDonald's solicitors entered a legal battle with her.\nMacDonald was aware of his fading powers, and in 1935, he agreed to a timetable with Baldwin to stand down as Prime Minister after King George V's Silver Jubilee celebrations in May 1935. He resigned on 7 June in favour of Baldwin, and remained in the cabinet, taking the largely honorary post of Lord President vacated by Baldwin.\nLast years and death (1935\u20131937).\nAt the November 1935 election MacDonald was defeated at Seaham by Emanuel Shinwell, but was re-elected to Parliament at a by-election in January 1936 for the Combined Scottish Universities seat. After Hitler's re-militarisation of the Rhineland in 1936, MacDonald declared that he was \"pleased\" that the Treaty of Versailles was \"vanishing\", expressing his hope that the French had been taught a \"severe lesson\". MacDonald was one of the signatories to the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936.\nHis health was failing. King George\u00a0V died a week before voting began in the Scottish by-election, and MacDonald deeply mourned his death, paying tribute to him in his diary as \"a gracious and kingly friend whom I have served with all my heart\". There had been genuine affection between the two and the king is said to have regarded MacDonald as his favourite prime minister. Following the king's death MacDonald's physical and mental health collapsed.\nA sea voyage (with his youngest daughter Sheila) was recommended to restore MacDonald's health, but he died of heart failure on board the liner , on 9 November 1937, aged 71.\nMacDonald's body was transferred to the Royal Navy at Bermuda for return to Plymouth. All of the Bermuda-based cruisers of the America and West Indies Station were away from Bermuda at that time except for HMS \"Orion\" and HMS \"Apollo\". As \"Apollo\" was undergoing a refit at the dockyard, it would have fallen to \"Orion\" to deliver MacDonald's body, but as she was temporary flagship since HMS \"York\" had departed on 27 October for Trinidad (due to civil unrest there) she could not leave the station and \"Apollo\" was consequently hurried through her refit instead. \"Orion\" was tasked with the memorial service for Macdonald. His body was taken aboard the Royal Navy tug \"Sandboy\" from the \"Reina del Pacifico\" and landed on Front Street in Hamilton along with the Royal Naval Dockyard Chaplain, the \"Orion\"'s Chaplain, an honour guard, sentries and coffin bearers. MacDonald's coffin was borne on a gun carriage to the Church of England's Cathedral of the Most Holy Trinity, in a procession that included the ship's company of \"Orion\" and a detachment of the Sherwood Foresters (Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment), serving in the Bermuda Garrison. At the cathedral, Arthur Browne, the Bishop of Bermuda, conducted the memorial service, which was followed by a lying in state. Thousands visited to pay their respects. MacDonald's body and his daughter departed Bermuda the following day aboard \"Apollo\", arriving at Plymouth on 25 November. His funeral was in Westminster Abbey on 26 November, followed by a private cremation service at Golders Green. After cremation, his ashes were taken to Lossiemouth, where a service commenced in his house, The Hillocks, followed by a procession to Holy Trinity Church, Spynie, where they were buried alongside his wife Margaret and their son David in his native Moray.\nPersonal life.\nRamsay MacDonald married Margaret Ethel Gladstone (no relation to Prime Minister William Gladstone) in 1896. The marriage was a very happy one, and they had six children, including Malcolm MacDonald (1901\u20131981), who had a distinguished career as a politician, colonial governor and diplomat, and Ishbel (1903\u20131982) and Sheila MacDonald, who were both very close to their father. Another son, Alister Gladstone MacDonald (1898\u20131993) was a conscientious objector in the First World War, serving in the Friends' Ambulance Unit; he became a prominent architect who worked on promoting the planning policies of his father's government, and specialised in cinema design.\nMacDonald was devastated by Margaret's death from blood poisoning in 1911, and had few significant personal relationships after that time, apart from with Ishbel, who acted as his consort while he was Prime Minister and cared for him for the rest of his life. Following his wife's death, MacDonald commenced a relationship with Lady Margaret Sackville.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, he was frequently entertained by the society hostess Lady Londonderry, which was much disapproved of in the Labour Party since her husband was a Conservative cabinet minister.\nMacDonald was born into a religious family and was originally quite devout in his own beliefs. Raised in the Presbyterian church, he later joined the Free Church of Scotland as an adult \"but neither creeds or ritual attracted him\". Subsequently, he became interested in the Unitarian movement during his time in London, and led Unitarian worship sessions. MacDonald was a passionate and prolific Unitarian preacher, leading more than 500 services. Unitarianism led him to the Ethical movement, attending services at the South Place Ethical Society (now Conway Hall). He became intensely involved in the Union of Ethical Societies (today known as Humanists UK), and friends with its founder, Stanton Coit, writing regularly in Coit's \"Ethical World\" publication. On more than one occasion he took the Chair at the annual meeting of the Union of Ethical Societies. His motives are evidenced in the manifesto of the Society of Ethical Propagandists to which Macdonald was a signatory (including Coit). The manifesto stated that Ethical societies \"are founded upon a conviction that the good life is desirable for its own sake, and rests upon no supernatural sanction\".\nMacDonald's unpopularity in the country following his stance against Britain's involvement in the First World War spilt over into his private life. In 1916, he was expelled from Moray Golf Club in Lossiemouth for being deemed to bring the club into disrepute because of his pacifist views. The manner of his expulsion was regretted by some members, but an attempt to reinstate him by a vote in 1924 failed. However, a Special General Meeting held in 1929 finally voted for his reinstatement. By this time, MacDonald was Prime Minister for the second time. He felt the initial expulsion very deeply and refused to take up the final offer of membership, which he had framed and mounted. He ultimately became a member of nearby Spey Bay Golf Club where he gifted the Club Championship trophy that is still used to this day.\nReputation.\nFor half a century, MacDonald was demonised by the Labour Party as a turncoat who consorted with the enemy and drove the Labour Party to its nadir. Later, however, a number of scholars came to present him as an important founder and leader of the Labour Party, and a man who held Britain together during its darkest economic times.\nMacDonald's expulsion from Labour and its rejection of his National Labour Organisation's coalition with the Conservatives, combined with the decline in his physical and mental powers after 1931, left him a discredited figure. The downfall of the Labour government in 1931, his National coalition with the Conservatives and the electoral defeat were blamed on him, and few spoke on his behalf. MacNeill Weir, MacDonald's former parliamentary private secretary, published the first major biography \"The Tragedy of Ramsay MacDonald\" in 1938. Weir demonised MacDonald for obnoxious careerism, class betrayal and treachery. Clement Attlee in his autobiography \"As it Happened\" (1954) called MacDonald's decision to abandon the Labour government in 1931 \"the greatest betrayal in the political history of the country\". The coming of war in 1939 led to a search for the politicians who had appeased Hitler and failed to prepare Britain; MacDonald was grouped among the \"Guilty Men\".\nBy the 1960s, while union activists maintained their hostile attitude, academic writers showed a greater appreciation of his challenges and successes. Finally, in 1977, he received a long scholarly biography that some historians have judged to be \"definitive\". Labour MP David Marquand, a trained historian, wrote \"Ramsay MacDonald\" with the stated intention of giving MacDonald credit for his work in founding and building the Labour Party, and in trying to preserve peace in the years between the two world wars. He also argued to place MacDonald's fateful decision in 1931 in the context of the crisis of the times and the limited choices open to him. Marquand praised what he saw as the prime minister's decision to place national interests before those of the Labour Party in 1931. He also emphasised MacDonald's lasting intellectual contribution to socialism and his pivotal role in transforming Labour from an outside protest group to an inside party of government.\nSimilarly, scholarly analysis of the economic decisions made during the inter-war period, such as the return to the Gold Standard in 1925 and MacDonald's desperate efforts to defend it in 1931, has changed. Thus Robert Skidelsky, in his classic 1967 account of the 1929\u201331 government, \"Politicians and the Slump\", compared the orthodox policies advocated by leading politicians of both parties unfavourably with the more radical, proto-Keynesian measures proposed by David Lloyd George and Oswald Mosley; subsequently, in the preface to the 1994 edition Skidelsky argued that recent experience of currency crises and capital flight made it hard to be critical of politicians who wanted to achieve stability by cutting so-called \"labour costs\" and defending the value of the currency. In 2004, Marquand advanced a similar argument:\nIn the harsher world of the 1980s and 1990s, it was no longer obvious that Keynes was right in 1931 and the bankers wrong. Pre-Keynesian orthodoxy had come in from the cold. Politicians and the public had learned anew that confidence crises feed on themselves; that currencies can collapse; that the public credit can be exhausted; that a plummeting currency can be even more painful than deflationary expenditure cuts; and that governments which try to defy the foreign exchange markets are apt to get their\u2014and their countries'\u2014fingers burnt. Against that background, MacDonald's response to the 1931 crisis increasingly seemed not just honourable and consistent, but right ... he was the unacknowledged precursor of the Blairs, the Schr\u00f6ders, and the Clintons of the 1990s and 2000s.\nHonours.\nIn 1930, MacDonald was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) under Statute 12. He was awarded honorary Doctor of Laws (LLD) degrees by the universities of Wales, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Oxford and McGill and George Washington University.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrimary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46393", "revid": "5957417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46393", "title": "John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute", "text": "British statesman (1713\u20131792)\nJohn Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute (; 25 May 1713 \u2013 10 March 1792), styled Lord Mount Stuart between 1713 and 1723, was a British Tory statesman who served as the Prime Minister of Great Britain from 1762 to 1763 under George III. He became the first Tory to hold the position and was arguably the last important royal favourite in British politics. He was the first prime minister from Scotland following the Acts of Union in 1707. He was also elected as the first president of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland when it was founded in 1780.\nEarly life.\nFamily.\nHe was born in Parliament Close, near to St Giles Cathedral on the Royal Mile in Edinburgh on 25 May 1713, the son of James Stuart, 2nd Earl of Bute, and his wife, Lady Anne Campbell. He attended Eton College from 1724 to 1730. He went on to study civil law at the Universities of Groningen (1730\u20131732) and Leiden (1732\u20131734) in the Netherlands, graduating from the latter with a degree in civil law.\nA close relative of the Clan Campbell (his mother was a daughter of the 1st Duke of Argyll), Bute succeeded to the Earldom of Bute (named after the Isle of Bute) upon the death of his father in 1723. He was brought up thereafter by his maternal uncles, the 2nd Duke of Argyll and Archibald Campbell, 3rd Duke of Argyll, 1st and only Earl of Ilay. In August 1735, he eloped with Mary Wortley Montagu, whose parents Sir Edward and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu were slow to consent to the marriage.\nPolitical career.\nRise to prominence.\nIn 1737, he was elected a Scottish representative peer; despite being in London in December of that year, he did not participate in deliberations in the House of Lords. Because of his support for Argyll against Walpole, he was not re-elected in 1741. For the next several years he retired to his estates in Scotland to manage his affairs and indulge his interest in botany. \nIn 1745, Bute moved to Twickenham, Middlesex where his family rented a house for forty-five pounds per annum. He met Frederick, Prince of Wales, in 1747 at the Egham Races and became a close friend.\nAfter the Prince's death in 1751, Bute was appointed tutor to Prince George, the new Prince of Wales (later George III).\nBute arranged for the Prince and his brother Prince Edward to follow a course of lectures on natural philosophy by the itinerant lecturer Stephen Demainbray. This led to an interest in natural philosophy on the part of the young prince and may have led to George III's collection of natural philosophical instruments.\nBute furthermore became close to Prince Frederick's widow, Augusta of Saxe-Gotha, the Dowager Princess of Wales, and it was rumoured that the couple were having an affair. Indeed, one of the Prince of Wales's associates, John Horne Tooke, published a scandalous pamphlet alluding to the liaison, but the rumours were almost certainly untrue, since Bute held sincere religious beliefs against adultery and, by all indications, appeared happily married.\nIn 1780, Bute was elected as the first President of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland.\nPrime Minister (1760-1763).\nAppointment.\nBecause of the influence he had over his pupil, Bute expected to rise quickly to political power following George's accession to the throne in 1760, but his plans were premature. It would first be necessary to remove both the incumbent prime minister (the Duke of Newcastle) and arguably the even more powerful Secretary of State for the Southern Department (William Pitt the Elder). The Government of the day, buoyed by recent successes in the Seven Years' War, was popular, however, and did well at the 1761 British general election which, as was customary at the time, took place on the accession of the new monarch.\nSupported by the King, Bute manoeuvred himself into power by first allying himself with Newcastle against Pitt over the latter's desire to declare war on Spain. Once thwarted in his designs against Spain by Bute and Newcastle, Pitt resigned his post as Secretary of State for the Southern Department. Next, Bute forced Newcastle's resignation as prime minister when he found himself in a small minority within the government over the level of funding and direction of the Seven Years' War. Re-elected as a Scottish representative peer in 1760, Bute was appointed the \"de facto\" prime minister after the resignations of Pitt and Newcastle, thus ending a long period of Whig dominance. \nThe Anglo-Prussian Alliance, which was established in 1756 was dissolved in 1762. Frederick the Great accused Bute of a plot to destroy the Prussian monarchy.\nBute's premiership was notable for the negotiation of the Treaty of Paris (1763) which concluded the Seven Years' War. In so doing, Bute had to soften his previous stance in relation to concessions given to France in that he agreed that the important fisheries in Newfoundland be returned to France without Britain's possession of Guadeloupe in return.\nAfter peace was concluded, Bute and the King decided that Britain's military expenditure should not exceed its prewar levels, but they thought a large presence was necessary in America to deal with the French and Spanish threat. They therefore charged the colonists for the increased military levels, thus catalysing the resistance to taxes which led to the American Revolution. Bute also introduced a cider tax of four shillings per hogshead in 1763 to help finance the Seven Years' War.\nThe journalist John Wilkes published a newspaper, \"The North Briton\", in which both Bute and the Dowager Princess of Wales were savagely satirised. Bute resigned as prime minister shortly afterwards, although he remained in the House of Lords as a Scottish representative peer until 1780.\nPost-premiership.\nFor the remainder of his life, Bute remained at his estate in Hampshire, where he built himself a mansion called High Cliff near Christchurch. From there he continued his pursuit of botany and became a major literary and artistic patron. Among his beneficiaries were Samuel Johnson, Tobias Smollett, Robert Adam, William Robertson and John Hill. He also gave considerably to the Scottish universities.\nHe financed Alberto Fortis's travels into Dalmatia. His botanical work culminated in the publication of \"Botanical Tables Containing the Families of British Plants\" in 1785. Even after his retirement, Bute was accused by many Americans in the years leading up to the American Revolutionary War as having an undue corrupting influence over the British government.\nHe died at his home in South Audley Street, Grosvenor Square, Westminster, from complications of a fall suffered while staying at Highcliffe, and was buried at Rothesay on the Isle of Bute.\nLegacy.\nThe flowering plant genera \"Butea\" and \"Stewartia\" are named after him.\nIn 1761, Bute was appointed Ranger of Richmond Park by King George III, a post he held until his death; Bute Avenue in Petersham near the park is named after him.\nAccording to historian John Naish, the 18th-century expression \"Jack Boot\" meaning a stupid person originated as disparagement of Stuart's performance as prime minister.\nStuart Island (British Columbia) is named for Stuart.\nLuton Hoo.\nBute purchased Luton Hoo, or Luton Park, from Francis Herne MP in 1763 for the sum of \u00a394,700. Recognising that the existing buildings were unsuitable, Bute commissioned the neoclassical architect Robert Adam to oversee the redesign of the estate house.\nInitial designs were unsatisfactory and, coupled with the sale of Bute House, Adams submitted new designs for a larger complex, which Bute further adjusted to include five book rooms and seven water closets. The building also housed an extensive art collection, particularly paintings of the Dutch and Flemish schools. A fire in March 1771 \"did considerable damage\" according to contemporary reports. The project was completed by 1773 but not according to the full plan, the second phase of which was abandoned.\nDeath.\nHe died on 10 March 1792, from a fall he had a year and a half prior. He fell down cliffs in Hampshire while collecting plants. He died in his mansion on South Audley Street off Grosvenor Square.\nFamily.\nIn 1736 he married Mary Wortley Montagu, daughter of Edward and Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, daughter of 1st Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull. They had at least eleven children:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46394", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46394", "title": "Swansea", "text": "City and county in Wales\nSwansea ( ; ) is a coastal city and the second-largest city of Wales. It forms a principal area, officially known as the City and County of Swansea ().\nThe city is the twenty-eighth largest in the United Kingdom. Located along Swansea Bay in south-west Wales, with the principal area covering the Gower Peninsula, it is part of the Swansea Bay region and part of the historic county of Glamorgan and the ancient Welsh commote of G\u0175yr.\nThe principal area is the second most populous local authority area in Wales, with an estimated population of 251,304 in 2024. Swansea, along with Neath and Port Talbot, forms the Swansea urban area, with a population of 300,352 in 2011. It is also part of the Swansea Bay City Region.\nDuring the 19th-century industrial heyday, Swansea was the key centre of the copper-smelting industry, earning the nickname \"Copperopolis\".\nToponymy.\nThe Welsh name, \"Abertawe\", translates as \"mouth/estuary of the Tawe\" and this name was likely used for the area before a settlement was established. The first written record of the Welsh name for the town itself dates from 1150 and appears in the form \"Aper Tyui\".\nThe name \"Swansea\", pronounced (Swans-ee, not Swan-sea), is derived from the Old Norse name of the original Viking trading post that was founded by King Sweyn Forkbeard (c.\u2009960\u20131014). It was the name of the king, 'Svein' or 'Sweyn', with the suffix of '-ey' (\"island\"), referring either to a bank of the river at its mouth or to an area of raised ground in marshland. However, the Norse termination \"-ey\" can mean \"inlet\", and the name may simply refer to the mouth of the river.\nHistory.\nAncient history.\nThe area around Swansea has a unique archaeological history dating back to the Palaeolithic. Finds at Long Hole Cave on the Gower Peninsula have been interpreted as those of the first modern humans in Britain, and the same area is also home to the oldest ceremonial burial in Western Europe, discovered at Paviland in 1823 and dated to 22,000 BC. The area also has many Bronze Age and Iron Age sites, such as the burial mound at Cillibion and the hill forts at Llwynheiernin and Cil Ifor. There are also the remains of a Roman villa also on the Gower peninsula.\nMedieval Swansea.\nThe area that would become Swansea was known as the Cantref Eginog in ancient times, located on the eastern edge of the cwmwd (commote) of Gwyr, the easternmost cantref of Ystrad Tywi. This area was noted for its valuable land and was highly contested by the early Welsh kingdoms. During the Viking Age, the mouth of the Tawe became a focus for trade, and a trade post may have been founded sometime between the 9th and 11th centuries.\nThe settlement remained under Welsh control until the Norman invasion of Wales, when Iestyn ap Gwrgant ceded the settlement as part of the new Lordship of Gower to Henry de Beaumont, 1st Earl of Warwick in the early 1100s. The Lordship included land around Swansea Bay as far as the River Tawe, the manor of Kilvey beyond the Tawe, and the peninsula itself.\nIn the following years, Henry built Swansea Castle c.\u20091106, and minted coins bearing the names \"Swensi\", \"Sweni\" and \"Svenshi\" c.\u20091140. Swansea was designated chief town of the lordship and received its first borough charter sometime between 1158 and 1184 from William de Newburgh, 3rd Earl of Warwick. This charter contains the earliest reference in English to \"Sweynesse\" and gave it the status of a borough, granting the townsmen (called burgesses) certain rights to develop the area. In 1215 King John granted a second charter, in which the name appears as \"Sweyneshe\". A town seal which is believed to date from this period names the town as \"Sweyse\". Another charter was granted in 1304.\nIndustrial Revolution.\nFrom the early 1700s to the late 1800s, Swansea was the world's leading copper-smelting area. Numerous smelters along the River Tawe received copper and other metal ores shipped from Cornwall and Devon, as well as from North and South America, Africa, and Australia. The industry declined severely in the late 1800s, and none of the smelters are now active.\nThe port of Swansea initially traded in wine, hides, wool, cloth and later in coal. After the invention of the reverbatory furnace in the late 1600s, copper smelting could use coal rather than the more expensive charcoal. At the same time, the mines of Cornwall were increasing copper production. Swansea became the ideal place to smelt the Cornish copper ores, being close to the coalfields of South Wales and having an excellent port to receive ships carrying Cornish copper ore. Because each ton of copper ore smelted used about three tons of coal, it was more economical to ship the copper ore to Wales rather than sending the coal to Cornwall.\nThe first copper smelter at Swansea was established in 1717, followed by many more. Once smelting was established, the smelters began receiving high-grade ore and ore concentrates from around the world. More coal mines opened to meet demand from northeast Gower to Clyne and Llangyfelach. In the 1850s Swansea had more than 600 furnaces, and a fleet of 500 oceangoing ships carrying out Welsh coal and bringing back metal ore from around the world. At that time most of the copper matte produced in the United States was sent to Swansea for refining.\nSmelters also processed arsenic, zinc, tin, and other metals. Nearby factories produced tinplate and pottery. The Swansea smelters became so adept at recovering gold and silver from complex ores that in the 1800s they received ore concentrates from the United States, for example from Arizona in the 1850s, and Colorado in the 1860s.\nThe city expanded rapidly in the 18th and 19th centuries, and was termed \"Copperopolis\". From the late 17th century to 1801, Swansea's population grew by 500%\u2014the first official census (in 1841) indicated that, with 6,099 inhabitants, Swansea had become significantly larger than Glamorgan's county town, Cardiff, and was the second most populous town in Wales behind Merthyr Tydfil (which had a population of 7,705). However, the census understated Swansea's true size, as much of the built-up area lay outside the contemporary boundaries of the borough; the total population was actually 10,117. Swansea's population was later overtaken by Merthyr in 1821 and by Cardiff in 1881, although in the latter year Swansea once again surpassed Merthyr. Much of Swansea's growth was due to migration from within and beyond Wales\u2014in 1881 more than a third of the borough's population had been born outside Swansea and Glamorgan, and just under a quarter outside Wales.\nCopper smelting at Swansea declined in the late 1800s for a number of reasons: copper mining in Cornwall declined; the price of copper dropped from \u00a3112 in 1860 to \u00a335 in the 1890s; in the early 1900s, mining shifted to lower-grade copper deposits in North and South America, and the lower-grade ore could not support transportation to Swansea.\nThe Swansea and Mumbles Railway was built in 1804 to move limestone from the quarries of Mumbles and coal from the Clyne valley to Swansea and to the markets beyond. It carried the world's first fare-paying rail passengers on the same day the British Parliament abolished the transportation of slaves from Africa. It later moved from horse power to steam locomotion, and finally converting to electric trams, before closing in January 1960, in favour of motor buses.\n20th century.\nThrough the 20th century, heavy industries in the town declined, leaving the Lower Swansea Valley filled with derelict works and mounds of waste products from them. The Lower Swansea Valley Scheme (which still continues) reclaimed much of the land. The present Enterprise Zone was the result and, of the many original docks, only those outside the city continue to work as docks; North Dock is now Parc Tawe and South Dock became the Marina.\nIn the Second World War, Swansea's industrial importance made it a target of German bombing; much of the town centre was destroyed during the Swansea Blitz on the 19, 20 and 21 February 1941 (the \"Three Nights Blitz\").)\nIn 1969, Swansea was granted city status to mark Prince Charles's investiture as the Prince of Wales. The Prince made the announcement on 3 July 1969 during a tour of Wales. Swansea obtained the further right to have a Lord Mayor in 1982.\nWithin the city centre are the ruins of the castle, the Marina, the Glynn Vivian Art Gallery, Swansea Museum, the Dylan Thomas Centre, the Environment Centre, and the Market, which is the largest covered market in Wales.\nIt backs onto the Quadrant Shopping Centre, which opened in 1978, and the adjoining St David's Centre opened in 1982. Other notable modern buildings include the BT Tower (formerly the GPO tower) built around 1970, Alexandra House opened in 1976, County Hall opened in July 1982. Swansea Leisure Centre opened in 1977; it has undergone extensive refurbishment which retained elements of the original structure and re-opened in March 2008.\nGovernance.\nThe \"City and County of Swansea\" local authority area is bordered by unitary authorities of Carmarthenshire to the north, and Neath Port Talbot to the east. The Urban Subdivision of Swansea covers all urbanised areas within the city boundary, with a population of 179,485, it is considerably smaller than the unitary authority.\nThe local government area is in size, about 2% of the area of Wales. It includes a large amount of open countryside and a central urban and suburban belt.\nLocal government.\nIn 1887, Swansea was a township at the mouth of the river Tawe, covering in the county of Glamorgan. There were three major extensions to the boundaries of the borough: the first in 1835, when Morriston, St Thomas, Landore, St John-juxta-Swansea and part of Llansamlet parish were added; again in 1889, when areas around Cwmbwrla and Trewyddfa were included; and when the borough was enlarged in 1918 to include the whole of the ancient parish of Swansea, the southern part of Llangyfelach parish, all of Llansamlet parish, Oystermouth Urban District and Brynau parish.\nIn 1889, Swansea attained county borough status and it was granted city status in 1969, which was inherited by the Swansea district when it was formed by the merger of the borough and Gower Rural District in 1974. In 1996, Swansea became one of 22 unitary authorities with the addition of part of the former Lliw Valley Borough. The new authority received the name \"City and County of Swansea\" ().\nSwansea was once a staunch stronghold of the Labour Party which, until 2004, had overall control of the council for 24 years. The Liberal Democrats were the largest group in the administration that took control of Swansea Council in the 2004 local elections until the 2012 council elections saw the council return to Labour control. For 2009/2010, the Lord Mayor of Swansea was Councillor Alan Lloyd, and in 2010/2011 Richard Lewis was the Lord Mayor. The Lord Mayor changes in May each year.\nSenedd.\nThe Senedd constituencies are:\nThe city also falls under the South Wales West regional constituency which is served by Tom Giffard (Conservative), Sioned Williams (Plaid Cymru), Altaf Hussain (Conservative) and Luke Fletcher (Plaid Cymru).\nUK parliament.\nThe UK parliamentary constituencies covering Swansea and their MPs are:\nGeography.\nSwansea may be divided into four physical areas. The geology is complex, providing diverse scenery. The Gower Peninsula was the first area in the United Kingdom to be designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). Apart from the southeast corner, the whole of the Gower Peninsula is within the AONB. Swansea has numerous urban and country parklands. The region has featured regularly in the Wales in Bloom awards.\nTo the north are the Lliw uplands which are mainly open moorland, reaching the foothills of the Black Mountain range. To the east is the coastal strip around Swansea Bay. Cutting through the middle from the south-east to the north-west is the urban and suburban zone stretching from the Swansea city centre to the towns of Gorseinon and Pontarddulais. The most populated areas of Swansea are Morriston, Sketty and the city centre. The chief urbanised area radiates from the city centre towards the north, south and west; along the coast of Swansea Bay to Mumbles; up the Swansea Valley past Landore and Morriston to Clydach; over Townhill and Mayhill to Cwmbwrla, Penlan, Treboeth and Fforestfach; through Uplands, Sketty, Killay to Dunvant; and east of the river from St. Thomas to Bonymaen, Llansamlet and Birchgrove. A second urbanised area is focused on a triangle defined by Gowerton, Gorseinon and Loughor along with the satellite communities of Penllergaer and Pontarddulais. About three-quarters of Swansea is on the coast\u2014the Loughor Estuary, Swansea Bay and the Bristol Channel.\nThe geology of the Gower Peninsula ranges from Carboniferous Limestone cliffs along its southern edge from Mumbles to Worm's Head and the salt-marshes and dune systems of the Loughor estuary to the north. The eastern, southern and western coasts of the peninsula are lined with numerous sandy beaches both wide and small, separated by steep cliffs. The South Wales Coalfield reaches the coast in the Swansea area. This had a great bearing on the development of the city of Swansea and other nearby towns such as Morriston. The inland area is covered by large swathes of grassland common overlooked by sandstone heath ridges including the prominent Cefn Bryn. The traditional agricultural landscape consists of a patchwork of fields characterised by walls, stone-faced banks and hedgerows. Valleys cut through the peninsula and contain rich deciduous woodland.\nMuch of Swansea is hilly, with the main area of upland being located in the council ward of Mawr. Areas up to in elevation range across the central section: Kilvey Hill, Townhill and Llwynmawr separate the centre of Swansea from its northern suburbs. Cefn Bryn, a ridge of high land, is the backbone of the Gower Peninsula. Rhossili Down, Hardings Down and Llanmadoc Hill are up to high. The highest point is located Penlle'r Castell at on the northern border with Carmarthenshire.\nClimate.\nSwansea has a temperate oceanic climate (\"Cfb\"). As part of a coastal region, it experiences a milder climate than inland. Swansea is exposed to rain-bearing winds from the Atlantic, also cooling summer temperatures.\nDemography.\nFrom 1804 until the 1920s, Swansea experienced continuous population growth. The 1930s and 1940s was a period of slight decline. In the 1950s and 1960s, the population grew and then fell in the 1970s. The population grew again in the 1980s only to fall again during the second half of the 1990s. In the 21st century, Swansea is experiencing a small amount of population growth; the local authority area had an estimated population of 228,100 in 2007. However, by the 2021 census, this population growth has reversed its trend very slightly with the population declining by 0.2%\nAround 82% of the population were born in Wales and 13% born in England; 13.4% were Welsh speakers.\nThe population of the Swansea built-up area within the unitary authority boundaries in 2011 was about 179,485 and the council population was 238,700. The other built-up areas within the unitary authority are centred on Gorseinon and Pontarddulais. In 2011, the Gorseinon built-up area had a population of 20,581 and the Pontarddulais built-up area had a population of 9,073.\nThe wider urban area, including most of Swansea Bay, has a total population of 300,352, making it the third largest urban area in Wales and the 27th largest urban area in the United Kingdom. Over 218,000 individuals are white; 1,106 are of mixed race; 2,215 are Asian\u00a0\u2013 mainly Bangladeshi (1,015); 300 are black; and 1,195 belong to other ethnic groups.\nThe Office for National Statistics 2010 mid-year population estimate for the City &amp; County of Swansea is 232,500.\nReligion.\nIn 2001, 158,457 people in the local authority area (71 per cent) stated their religion to be Christian, 44,286 (20 per cent) no religion, 16,800 (7.5 per cent) did not state a religion and 2,167 were Muslim There are small communities of other religions, each making up a little under 1 per cent of the total population. Since 2001, there has been a significant shift in religious affiliation. According to the 2021 census, the proportion of Christians has declined to 41 per cent, while nearly half of residents (47 per cent) report no religious affiliation.\nSwansea is part of the Anglican Diocese of Swansea and Brecon and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Menevia. The Catholic see is based in Swansea at St Joseph's Cathedral in the Greenhill area and the oldest Catholic church in the city is St David's Priory Church, built in 1847.\nSwansea, like Wales in general, has seen many Non-conformist religious revivals. In 1904, Evan Roberts, a miner from Loughor (Llwchwr), just outside Swansea, was the leader of what has been called one of the world's greatest Protestant religious revivals. Within a few months, about 100,000 people were converted. This revival in particular had a profound effect on Welsh society. Swansea is covered by the Swansea and Gower Methodist Circuit.\nThe Ebenezer Baptist Church dates from November 1875 when the foundation stone was laid for Tabernacle chapel in Skinner Street. The first pastor, the Rev. J. D. Jones, was called in February 1876 and the new building was opened in July that year. The church was served by a number of ministers until 1911 when the Rev. R. J. Willoughby came to the church. The church has an organ by Harrison &amp; Harrison.\nThe Norwegian Church is a Grade II listed building in the docklands area of the city. The church building was originally located at Newport Docks. The building consists of a Seaman's Mission to the west end and a single gothic church to the east end. It was originally built as a place of worship for Norwegian sailors when they visited the UK. It was relocated to Swansea in 1910 at a site directly opposite the Sainsbury's supermarket on the River Tawe.\nThe city is home to 10% of the total Welsh Muslim population; Swansea's Muslim community is raising money to open a new central mosque and community centre in the former St. Andrew's United Reformed Church. This would replace the existing central Mosque on St Helens Road and be in addition to the other three existing mosques (Swansea University Mosque, Hafod Mosque, Imam Khoei Mosque).\nSwansea is represented in Buddhism with the Dharmavajra Kadampa Buddhist Centre, Pulpung Changchub Dargyeling (Kagyu Tradition) and a branch of the international Dzogchen Community (Nyingma Tradition). Swansea Synagogue and Jehovah's Witness Kingdom Hall are both located in the Uplands area. Around 160 people in Swansea indicated they were Jewish in the 2011 census.\nThe following table shows the religious identity of residents residing in Swansea according to the 2001, 2011 and the 2021 censuses:\nTransport.\nRoad.\nThe M4 motorway, with junctions 44 to 47, bypasses Swansea, replacing the A48 as the main east\u2013west route. Both the M4 and the A48 connect with Neath, Port Talbot and Cardiff to the east and Carmarthen to the west. The A483 dual carriageway links the city centre with the motorway at junction 42 to the east and junction 47 to the north-west.\nOn departing Swansea to the north, the A483 multiplexes with the A48 before continuing through mid Wales and terminating at Chester. The A4067 connecting Mumbles with the city centre and continuing up the Swansea Valley towards Brecon is also a dual carriageway for much of its route through Swansea. Other notable local roads include the A484, which provides a link from Fforestfach west to Llanelli, and the A4118, the main route westwards from the city centre across Gower to Port Eynon.\nRailway.\nSwansea railway station is served by two train operating companies: \nBuses and coaches.\nBus routes in the area are operated predominantly by First Cymru, with smaller operators such as Adventure Travel, South Wales Transport and DANSA also operate some routes in the city, most of which serve Swansea bus station.\nLocal bus routes run throughout the city, including to Morriston Hospital, Singleton Hospital and Swansea University. Regional routes connect the area with Brecon, Bridgend, Mumbles and Cardiff.\nCoach services include:\nPark and ride.\nPark and ride services are operated from car parks at Landore and Fabian Way. During busy periods of the year, additional services are operated from the Brynmill recreation ground.\nSubsidised services to Fforestfach were cut in 2015 due to local authority financial constraints.\nAir.\nSwansea Airport is a minor aerodrome situated in the Gower providing recreational flights only. Further development of the airport is strongly resisted by the local communities and environmental groups.\nCardiff Airport, to the east in the Vale of Glamorgan, provides scheduled domestic and international flights. It is approximately 40 minutes away by road or 70 minutes by rail.\nPembrey Airport, to the west, is available for private flights.\nSea.\nSwansea Marina to the south of the city centre has berths for 410 leisure boats. An addition 200 berths for leisure boats are located near the mouth of the River Tawe. Further leisure boating berths are being constructed at the Prince of Wales Dock in the Swansea Docks complex. The Swansea Docks complex is owned and operated by Associated British Ports and is used to handle a range of cargo ranging from agribulks and coal to timber and steel. Swansea Docks consists of three floating docks and a ferry terminal.\nFastnet Line operated a Swansea Cork Ferry roll-on/roll-off service until November 2011, when the service was ended. A proposal for a catamaran-based passenger ferry service from Ilfracombe to Swansea, scheduled to begin in time for Easter in 2010, has yet to launch. It would have had two return trips a day taking around 50 minutes each way and carried cycles.\nCycling.\nThere are four dedicated cycle routes in the local authority's area:\nCity cruiser pedal vehicles are being introduced to the city centre in a joint venture between the council and Swansea Business Improvement District.\nIn November 2007, a new bridge was completed over the Fabian Way which provides a one way park and ride bus lane and a shared-use pedestrian and NCN route 4 cycleway. The leaf-shaped bridge was shortlisted for the 2008 British Constructional Steelwork Association Structural Steel Design Awards.\nCulture.\nThe Royal Institution of South Wales was founded in 1835 as the Swansea Literary and Philosophical Society.\nPerforming arts.\nThe Grand Theatre in the centre of the city is a Victorian theatre which celebrated its centenary in 1997 and which has a capacity of a little over a thousand people. It was opened by the celebrated opera singer Adelina Patti and was refurbished from 1983 to 1987. The annual programme ranges from pantomime and drama to opera and ballet.\nFluellen Theatre Company is a professional theatre company based in Swansea who perform at the Grand Theatre and the Dylan Thomas Centre. The Taliesin building on the university campus has a theatre, opened in 1984.\nOther theatres include the Dylan Thomas Theatre (formerly the Little Theatre), near the marina, and one in Penyrheol Leisure Centre near Gorseinon. In the summer, outdoor Shakespeare performances are a regular feature at Oystermouth Castle; Singleton Park is the venue for a number of parties and concerts, from dance music to outdoor Proms. A folk festival is held on Gower. Standing near Victoria Park on the coast road is the Patti Pavilion; this was the Winter Garden from Adelina Patti's Craig-y-Nos estate in the upper Swansea valley, which she donated to the town in 1918. It is used as a venue for music shows and fairs. The Brangwyn Hall is a multi-use venue, with events such as the graduation ceremonies for Swansea University. Every autumn, Swansea hosts a Festival of Music and the Arts, when international orchestras and soloists visit the Brangwyn Hall. The Brangwyn Hall is praised for its acoustics for recitals, orchestral pieces and chamber music alike.\nSwansea is home to the Palace Theatre. Located at 156 High Street, it is recognisable for its distinctive wedge shape. Originally built in 1888 as a traditional music hall, the building's original name was the \"Pavilion\". During its lifetime, the building has been used as a bingo hall as well as a nightclub.\nIn 2018, Singleton Park, Swansea was the home-city for BBC Music's 'Biggest Weekend' featuring Ed Sheeran, Taylor Swift, Sam Smith, Florence + The Machine and others. Priority was given to Swansea residents in purchasing tickets for this one-off 'day festival' (over 2 days); tickets were priced at \u00a318 a day and all 60,000 tickets (30,000 for each day) sold out almost instantly.\nFestivals.\nSwansea hosted the National Eisteddfod in 1863, 1891, 1907, 1926, 1964, 1982 and 2006. The 2006 event occupied the site of the former Felindre tinplate works to the north of the city and featured a strikingly pink main tent. In 2009 Swansea Council launched Wales's only week long St David's Week festival in venues throughout the city. \"The Beginning\" and \"Do Not Go Gentle\" are Festivals in the Uplands area of the city, where Dylan Thomas was born and lived for 23 years.\nSwansea is known for its celebration of Beaujolais Day, with people booking tables in restaurants and bars for the day up to a year in advance to ensure they can sample the year's newly released Beaujolais wine. Historian Peter Stead argues that its rise in popularity there can be traced to the city's \"No Sign Bar\", owned in the 1960s by former Wales rugby union captain Clem Thomas, who owned a house in Burgundy and could transport Beaujolais quickly and cheaply to south Wales, and suggests that it reflected Swansea's efforts to \"gentrify and intellectualise itself\" at the time. In 2015, it was estimated that Beaujolais Day contributed \u00a35\u00a0million to the local economy.\nWelsh language.\nThere are many Welsh language chapels in the area. Welsh-medium education is a popular and growing choice for both English- and Welsh-speaking families. Just over 1,600 secondary pupils were educated through the medium of Welsh in 2017. Nearly double this figure, 3,063 pupils, are currently educated through the medium of Welsh in the primary sector. The 2014 Swansea Pre-School survey showed that 35% of parents across the city and county of Swansea would select a Welsh education for their children if there was a local Welsh school available to them. 45% of the rural council ward Mawr are able to speak Welsh, as can 38% of the ward of Pontarddulais. Clydach, Kingsbridge and Upper Loughor all have levels of more than 20%. By contrast, the urban St. Thomas has one of the lowest figures in Wales, at 6.4%, a figure only barely lower than Penderry and Townhill wards.\nFood.\nLocal produce includes cockles and laverbread sourced from the Loughor estuary. Salt marsh lamb, raised in the salt marshes of the estuary, is also a local speciality.\nListed buildings.\nThe city has three Grade One listed buildings: Swansea Castle, the Tabernacle Chapel, Morriston and the Swansea Guildhall. Swansea Castle was an impressive building occupying a strategic position above the River Tawe. The ruins that are visible today date from the late 13th and early 14th centuries. Today, the castle is hemmed in by modern buildings. The Tabernacle Chapel at Morriston was built in 1872 by John Humphreys of Swansea. A unique feature is the use of semi-circular arches. The building has been described as the \"Nonconformist Cathedral of Wales\" and has been listed as Grade I on the basis that it is \"the most ambitious grand chapel in Wales, its interior and fittings remain virtually unaltered\". The Guildhall is one of the main office buildings in the centre of the city and was designed by Percy Thomas and opened in 1934. It is faced in white Portland stone and includes a tall clock-tower which makes it a landmark. The building comprises the City Hall, the Brangwyn Hall concert venue and the County Law Courts. It is considered \"the most important building in Wales of its period\".\nIn addition to these, there are a number of Grade II* listed buildings; Ebenezer Baptist Chapel and its Hall in Ebenezer Street; the Glynn Vivian Art Gallery; the Midland Bank building; the Mount Pleasant Baptist Church in Kingsway, along with its Hall and School blocks; the Offices of Associated British Ports in Pier Street; the Royal Institution of South Wales building, now Swansea Museum in Victoria Road; and the Old Guildhall in Somerset Place.\nSport.\nSwansea City A.F.C. was founded in 1912 and is the city's main football association team. Originally playing at the Vetch Field, they moved to the Swansea.com Stadium (then known as the Liberty Stadium) at the start of the 2005\u201306 season, winning promotion to League One in their final year at their old stadium. The team presently play in the English Championship, after spending seven seasons in the English Premier League. The Football Association of Wales had decided that for the Euro 2012 qualifying campaign, Wales would play all of their home ties at either the Cardiff City Stadium or the Liberty Stadium.\nSwansea has four association football clubs that play in the Welsh football league system: Swansea University F.C., Garden Village, South Gower and West End.\nSwansea is home to Swansea Rugby Football Club (Swansea RFC), a founder member of the Welsh Rugby Union and one of the most important teams in the early history of Welsh rugby union. Playing out of St Helens Rugby and Cricket Ground the club not only produced several of the greatest Welsh rugby superstars, including Billy Bancroft and Billy Trew, they also hosted national touring sides from Australia, South Africa and New Zealand. Known as the \"All Whites\", Swansea kept a constant supply of players that filled the Welsh ranks in the early history of the game. In 1935 Swansea became the first club side to beat the All Blacks.\nIn 2003, Swansea RFC merged with Neath RFC to form the \"Ospreys\". Swansea RFC remained at St Helen's in semi-professional form, but the Ospreys moved into the Liberty Stadium in Landore for the start of the 2005\u201306 season. Neath-Swansea rugby games used to be hotly contested matches, such that there was some debate about whether a team incorporating both areas was possible. The team came fifth in the Celtic League in their first year of existence and topped that league in their second year. By 2012, they had won the league a then-record four times.\nSt Helens Rugby and Cricket Ground is the home of Swansea RFC and Glamorgan County Cricket Club have previously played matches there. In this ground, Sir Garfield Sobers hit six sixes in one over; the first time this was achieved in a game of first-class cricket. The final ball landed on the ground past the Cricketers' pub just outside the ground. It is also the home of the tallest floodlight stand in Europe.\nSwansea's rugby league side plays from Swansea in the small town of Ystalyfera. They are known as the \"Swansea Valley Miners\", but were formed as the \"Swansea Bulls\" in 2002.\nThe Swansea Bowls Stadium opened in early 2008. The stadium hosted the World Indoor Singles and Mixed Pairs Championship in April 2008 and the Gravelles Welsh International Open Bowls Championships in 2009.\nFuture plans.\nSwansea city centre is undergoing a \u00a31\u00a0billion transformation scheme. A large area of the city is earmarked for redevelopment. A new city-centre retail precinct is planned involving demolition of the dilapidated St. David's Shopping Centre which has three or four traders, about 13% of the retail space in the centre and the Quadrant Shopping Centre. Including relocation of the Tesco Superstore near to the city's Sainsbury's store in Parc Tawe, the new retail precinct will be almost four times the size of the Quadrant Centre. The city centre is also being brightened up with street art and new walkways, along with the first phase of the David Evans\u00a0\u2013 Castle Street development. New green spaces will be provided in conjunction with the proposed Quadrant Square and Grand Theatre Square. Redevelopment of the Oxford Street car park and Lower Oxford Street arcades are also planned.\nAt the sea front, The Tower, Meridian Quay is now Wales's tallest building at a height of with a restaurant on the top (29th) floor. It was under construction adjacent Swansea Marina until 2010.\nEconomy.\nSwansea originally developed as centre for metals and mining, especially the copper industry, from the beginning of the 18th century. The industry reached its apogee in the 1880s, when 60% of the copper ores imported to Britain were smelted in the Lower Swansea valley. However, by the end of the Second World War these heavy industries were in decline, and over the post-war decades Swansea shared in the general trend towards a post-industrial, service sector economy.\nOf the 105,900 people estimated to work within the City and County of Swansea, over 90% are employed in the service sectors, with relatively high shares (compared to the Welsh and UK averages) in \"public administration, education &amp; health\" and \"banking, finance &amp; insurance\", and correspondingly high proportions of employment in occupations associated with the service sector, including professional, administrative/secretarial and sales/customer service occupations. The local authority believes this pattern reflects Swansea's role as a service centre for South West Wales.\nEconomic activity and employment rates in Swansea were slightly above the Welsh average in October 2008, but lower than the UK average. In 2005, GVA per head in Swansea was \u00a314,302\u00a0\u2013 nearly 4% above the Welsh average but 20% below the UK average. Median full-time earnings in Swansea were \u00a321,577 in 2007, almost identical to the Welsh average.\nSwansea is home to the DVLA headquarters in Morriston, which employs around 6,000 people in the city. Other major employers in the city are Admiral Group, HSBC, Virgin Media, Swansea Bay University Health Board, BT and Amazon.co.uk. Virgin Atlantic also maintains its largest worldwide contact centre in Swansea; including reservations, sales, baggage claims and customer relations.\nEducation.\nFurther and higher education.\nSwansea University has a campus in Singleton Park overlooking Swansea Bay. Its engineering department is recognised as a centre of excellence with work on computational techniques for solving engineering design problems. The department of physics is known for its research at the frontiers of theoretical physics, particularly in the areas of elementary particle physics and string theory. In 2015, Swansea University opened a new Bay Campus situated in the Jersey Marine area of Swansea. In 2017, Swansea University Medical School was ranked as the third best medical school in the United Kingdom, behind Oxford and Cambridge.\nOther institutions include the University of Wales Trinity Saint David, Gower College Swansea and Swansea College. Trinity Saint David was formed in 2010 through the merger of University of Wales Lampeter and Trinity University college Carmarthen under Lampeter's royal charter of 1828. In 2013, Swansea Metropolitan University became part of University of Wales Trinity Saint David (UWTSD). Swansea Metropolitan University was particularly well known for its Architectural Glass department, as well as its Teaching and Transport &amp; Logistics degrees. Trinity Saint David also took over the Swansea Business School, which was formerly part of the Metropolitan University. Swansea Sixth Form College Wales (\"sscwales\") was founded in 2013 and changed its name to Swansea College in 2021.\nSchools.\nIn the local authority area, there is one nursery school, six infant schools and five junior schools. There are 77 primary schools, ten of which are Welsh-medium, and six of which are voluntary aided. There are 14 comprehensive schools under the remit of the local education authority, of which two are Welsh-medium. In addition, there are six special schools.\nThe oldest school in Swansea is Bishop Gore School, founded in 1682. The largest comprehensive school is Olchfa School. There is one Roman Catholic comprehensive school\u00a0\u2013 Bishop Vaughan Catholic Comprehensive School. Other secondary schools include Birchgrove Comprehensive School, Cefn Hengoed Community School, Dylan Thomas School, Pentrehafod Comprehensive School, Morriston Comprehensive School and Gowerton School. There are 2 Welsh-medium secondary schools in Swansea: Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg G\u0175yr and Ysgol Gyfun Gymraeg Bryn Tawe.\nIndependent schools in Swansea include Ffynone House School and Oakleigh House School.\nMedia.\nThe local newspaper is the Swansea edition of the South Wales Evening Post. The Swansea Herald of Wales was a free newspaper which was distributed every week to residential addresses until 2011 when the paper ceased to be in print. The Cardiff edition of the free daily paper Metro is distributed throughout the city. The council also produces a free monthly newspaper called the Swansea Leader. Swansea Life is a monthly lifestyle magazine published and distributed in Swansea.\nSwansea is served by five Independent Local Radio stations: Hits Radio South Wales, its sister station Greatest Hits Radio South Wales, Swansea Bay Radio, Heart South Wales and Nation Radio Wales. A community radio station, Radio Tircoed, serves the city's western suburbs. Patients and staff at Singleton Hospital can listen to the hospital radio station, Radio City 1386AM, and Swansea University runs its own radio station, Xtreme Radio. Providing the DAB service, the local multiplex called Swansea SW Wales is broadcast from Kilvey Hill. This transmitter also provides digital terrestrial television in the Swansea area. As well as Kilvey Hill, the city is in the catchment areas of the Wenvoe transmitter (in the Vale of Glamorgan) and the Carmel transmitter in Carmarthenshire.\nThe local television service, That's Swansea Bay, went on air in July 2016, becoming the second local television station in Wales after Made in Cardiff. Bay TV Swansea is based near the University of Wales Trinity Saint David's primary campus in Swansea.\nSince 1924, the BBC has maintained a studio in the city; Dylan Thomas worked here in the interwar years, when the studio was used for the BBC Regional Programme. Currently it has facilities to broadcast live radio and television and is listed as a BBC regional studio.\nIn mid-2008, the BBC included Swansea in its \"Big Screen\" project and a large live permanent television screen has been sited in Castle Square.\nIndependent filmmakers Undercurrents and Studio8 are based in Swansea, and the city plays host to the BeyondTV Film Festival. Swansea has also hosted the annual Swansea Bay Film Festival, where past-winning directors have included Gareth Evans, Anthony James, Alun D Pughe and Andrew Jones.\nIn popular culture.\nSwansea has been used as a location for films such as \"Only Two Can Play\", \"Submarine\" and \"Twin Town\", the TV series \"Mine All Mine\" and in episodes of \"Doctor Who\".\nSwansea was the first city in Wales to feature in its own version of the board game Monopoly. The Swansea edition of Monopoly features 33 local landmarks, including the Mumbles Pier and the National Waterfront Museum; the game has been produced in both English and Welsh.\nSwansea was also featured in a television documentary, titled \"Swansea Love Story\", as part of the Rule Britannia series on VBS.tv. The film is of a rather graphic nature and features heroin users, as well as community members affected by the narcotic, while trying to provide some explanation for the increase in use.\nSwansea is the hometown of Edward Kenway, the main protagonist of the video game \"\". This is because Matt Ryan, the voice actor of Edward, is from Swansea.\nPublic services.\nSwansea is policed by the South Wales Police. The regional headquarters for the Swansea area is Swansea Central Police Station.\nAmbulance services are provided by the Welsh Ambulance Service, and fire services by the Mid and West Wales Fire and Rescue Service. Swansea Airport is one of the country's three Wales Air Ambulance bases, the others being Welshpool and Caernarfon.\nLocal public healthcare services are operated by Swansea Bay University Health Board, which operates two hospitals in Swansea: Singleton Hospital and Morriston Hospital; the latter provides Accident and Emergency services. Singleton Hospital has one of Wales's three radiotherapy departments.\nWaste management services are coordinated by the local council, which deals with refuse collection and recycling and operates five civic amenity sites.\nThe electricity distribution network operator supplying Swansea is Western Power Distribution.\nWelsh Water provides drinking water supply and wastewater services to Swansea. There is a water treatment works at Crymlyn Burrows. Reservoirs which supply Swansea include the Cray reservoir and the Lliw Reservoirs, which are operated by Welsh Water.\nThe Local Gas Distribution company is Wales and West Utilities.\nPublic order.\nThere was a high rate of car crime during the 1990s, with Swansea being dubbed as the \"car crime capital of the United Kingdom\". In 2002, the BBC described Swansea as a \"black spot for car crime\". Car crime is a central theme in the film \"Twin Town\", which was set in and around Swansea and Port Talbot.\nThe football violence that Swansea experienced during the 1970s\u20131990s has considerably reduced; the only major clashes occurring between Swansea City supporters and Cardiff City supporters. Many matches between these sides have ended in violence in both Swansea and Cardiff. These two clubs have a long history of intense rivalry, so much so that it is described in the media as \"tribal\".\nLeisure and tourism.\nA number of beaches around Gower are promoted to visitors. Surfing is possible at Langland Bay, Caswell Bay and Llangennith, with the latter winning accolades from two national newspapers for the quality of its waves. The promenade from the Marina to Mumbles offers views across Swansea Bay. The seaside village of Mumbles has a Victorian pier, small independent shops and boutiques, restaurants and cafes. The south coast of Gower is the chief magnet for walkers, with a path stretching from Mumbles Head across the cliff tops, beaches and coastal woodland to Rhossili.\nOn the waterfront, Swansea Bay has a sweep of coastline which features a beach, promenade, children's lido, leisure pool, marina and maritime quarter featuring the museums the National Waterfront Museum and Swansea Museum, the oldest museum in Wales. Also situated in the maritime quarter is the Dylan Thomas Centre, which celebrates the life and work of the author with its permanent exhibition 'Dylan Thomas\u00a0\u2013 Man and Myth', and Mission Gallery, a unique art gallery also in the heart of the Maritime Quarter which hosts a range of exhibitions from various art disciplines; it also host a craft space, with ranging works from local and international artists. The Dylan Thomas Centre is the focal point for the annual Dylan Thomas Festival (27 October\u00a0\u2013 9 November). There is a permanent exhibition at the \"Dylan Thomas Birthplace and Home\" for 23 years in Uplands, which has been restored to its condition as a new house when bought by the Thomas family in 1914, a few months before Dylan was born in the front bedroom. The SA1 Waterfront area is the latest development for living, dining and leisure.\nSwansea Bay, Mumbles and Gower are home to various parks and gardens and almost 20 nature reserves. Clyne Gardens is home to a collection of plants set in parkland and host to 'Clyne in Bloom' in May. Singleton Park has acres of parkland, a botanical garden, a boating lake with pedal boats, and crazy golf. Plantasia is a tropical hothouse pyramid featuring three climatic zones, housing a variety of unusual plants, including several species which are extinct in the wild, and monkeys, reptiles, fish and a butterfly house. Other parks include Cwmdonkin Park, where Dylan Thomas played as a child, and Victoria Park which is close to the promenade on the seafront.\nOxwich Bay on the Gower Peninsula was named the most beautiful beach in the United Kingdom by travel writers who visited more than 1,000 beaches around the world in search of the perfect sands (2007). \"The Travel Magazine\" praised Oxwich for \"magnificent and unspoilt\" scenery and as a \"great place for adults and children to explore\". It has over three miles (5\u00a0km) of sand and \"The Guardian\" named it one of Britain's blue-riband top 10 category beaches (2007). \"The Independent\" newspaper hailed Rhossili Bay as \"the British supermodel of beaches\" (2006) and the best beach in Britain for breathtaking cliffs (2007), whilst \"The Sunday Times\" listed it as one of the 25 best beaches in the world (2006). Thanks to its clear air and lovely golden sand, this romantic stretch of sand was voted the best place in the UK to watch the sun set (\"Country Living\" magazine 2005) and one of the top romantic spots in the country (\"The Guardian\" 2007).\nLlangennith Beach, with its soft sands, consistent beach break and great facilities, was listed as the best place to learn how to surf in Britain by The Observer (2006) and one of the 10 'classic surfing beaches by \"The Guardian\" (2007). Gower also claims Britain's Best Beach, Three Cliffs Bay. The Gower landmark topped the BBC Holiday Hit Squad nationwide competition (2006) and was voted Britain's best camping beach by \"The Independent\" thanks to its superb setting and quiet location (2007). Three Cliffs Bay also made the final of the ITV series \"Britain's Favourite View\"\u00a0\u2013 the only nomination in Wales and backed by singer Katherine Jenkins. Nearby Brandy Cove came sixth in an online poll to find the UK's top beach for the baby boomer generation (2006). Beaches which won 2006 Blue Flag Beach Awards are: Bracelet Bay, Caswell Bay, Langland Bay, Port Eynon Bay and Swansea Marina (one of the few Blue Flag Marinas in Wales). All of these beaches also won a Seaside Award 2006. Limeslade was awarded the Rural Seaside Award and the Green Coast Award. Other Green Coast Awards went to Pwll Du, Rhossili Bay and Tor Bay.\nActivities.\nSwansea has a range of facilities for activities including sailing, water skiing, surfing, walking and cycling. Part of the Celtic Trail and the National Cycle Network, Swansea Bay provides a range of traffic-free cycle routes including along the seafront and through Clyne Valley Country Park. The Cycling Touring Club CTC has a local group in the area. Swansea Bay, Mumbles and Gower have a selection of golf courses.\nPrior to closure in 2003, Swansea Leisure Centre was one of the top ten visitor attractions in the Wales; it has been redeveloped as an indoor waterpark, rebranded the \"LC\", and was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 7 March 2008. The Wales National Pool is in Swansea.\nNightlife.\nSwansea has a number of pubs, bars, clubs, restaurants and a casino. Swansea had two casinos until 30 August 2012 when Aspers closed. The majority of city centre bars are situated on Wind Street. Some venues feature live music. The Mumbles Mile, described by the BBC as \"one of Wales's best-known pub crawls\", declined in the early 21st century and a number of local pubs were converted into flats or restaurants.\nTwinning.\nSwansea is twinned with:\nIt also has a friendship link with Nantong, China.\nNotable people.\nPeople from Swansea are known locally as \"Swansea Jacks\", or just \"Jacks\"; the source of this nickname is not clear. Some attribute it to Swansea Jack, the life-saving dog.\nFreedom of the City.\nThe following people and military units have received the Freedom of the City of Swansea.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46396", "revid": "8155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46396", "title": "Ninja", "text": "Mercenary and spy in feudal Japan\nA , or was a spy and infiltrator in pre-modern Japan. Antecedents may have existed as early as the 12th century. There is little evidence that they were assassins.\nIn the unrest of the Sengoku period, \"jizamurai\" families, that is, elite peasant-warriors, in Iga Province and the adjacent K\u014dka District formed \"ikki\" \u2013 \"revolts\" or \"leagues\" \u2013 as a means of self-defense. They became known for their military activities in the nearby regions and sold their services as mercenaries and spies. Following the Tokugawa shogunate in the 17th century, the ninja faded into obscurity.\nEtymology.\n\"Ninja\" is the \"on'yomi\" (Early Middle Chinese\u2013influenced) reading of the two kanji \"\u5fcd\u8005\". In the native \"kun'yomi\" reading, it is pronounced \"shinobi\", a shortened form of \"shinobi-no-mono\" (\u5fcd\u3073\u306e\u8005).\nThe word \"shinobi\" appears in the written record as far back as the late 8th century in poems in the \"Man'y\u014dsh\u016b\". The underlying connotation of \"shinobi\" (\u5fcd) means \"to steal away; to hide\" and\u2014by extension\u2014\"to forbear\", hence its association with stealth and invisibility. \"Mono\" (\u8005) means \"a person\".\nHistorically, the word \"ninja\" was not in common use, and a variety of regional colloquialisms evolved to describe what would later be dubbed ninja. Along with \"shinobi\", these include \"monomi\" (\"one who sees\"), \"nokizaru\" (\"macaque on the roof\"), \"rappa\" (\"ruffian\"), \"kusa\" (\"grass\") and \"Iga-mono\" (\"one from Iga\"). In historical documents, \"shinobi\" is almost always used.\nIn modern fiction, is also another word used to describe \"ninja\", specifically female ones. It was originally argot for \"woman\". It supposedly comes from the characters \u304f (ku), \u30ce (no), and \u4e00 (ichi), which make up the three strokes that form the kanji for .\nIn English, the plural of \"ninja\" can be either unchanged as \"ninja\", reflecting the Japanese language's lack of grammatical number, or the regular English plural \"ninjas\".\nHistory.\nDespite many popular folktales, historical accounts of the ninja are scarce. The social origin of the ninja is seen as the reason they agree to operate in secret, trading their service for money without honor and glory. The first dubbed ninja was a man named Otomono Sahito, though historical evidence of his existence is scarce.\nHowever, some \"ninjutsu\" books described specifically what tactics ninja should use to fight, and the scenarios in which a ninja might find themselves can be deduced from those tactics. For example, in the manuscript of volume 2 of \"Kanrin Seiy\u014d\" (\u9593\u6797\u6e05\u967d) which is the original book of \"Bansensh\u016bkai\" (\u4e07\u5ddd\u96c6\u6d77), there are 48 points of ninja's fighting techniques, such as how to make \"makibishi\" from bamboo, how to make footwear that makes no sound, fighting techniques when surrounded by many enemies, precautions when using swords at night, how to listen to small sounds, \"kuji-kiri\" that prevents guard dogs from barking, and so on.\nPredecessors.\nThe title \"ninja\" has sometimes been attributed retrospectively to the semi-legendary 2nd-century prince Yamato Takeru.\nPrince Shotoku, who lived from 574-622 AD, was believed to have employed a ninja spy named Otomono Sahito.\nIn the \"Kojiki\", the young Yamato Takeru disguised himself as a charming maiden and assassinated two chiefs of the Kumaso people. However, these records take place at a very early stage of Japanese history, and they are unlikely to be connected to the \"shinobi\" of later accounts. The first recorded use of espionage was under the employment of Prince Sh\u014dtoku in the 6th century. Such tactics were considered unsavory even in early times, when, according to the 10th-century \"Sh\u014dmonki\", the boy spy Hasetsukabe no Koharumaru was killed for spying against the insurgent Taira no Masakado.\nThe history of Ninjitsu school recorded around 12th century, when Daisuke Togakure and Kain Doshi formalized the teaching of Chinese and native Japanese guerilla tactics to which somewhat considered as counter-culture of the time. As a samurai, Daisuke lost his lands and title after defeated in a regional conflict. Refused to committed Seppuku, Daisuke travelled to the mountains of southwest Honshu in 1162. Here, he met Doshi, a Chinese warrior-monk. Daisuke abandon his way of bushido, and worked with Doshi formulate the guerilla art of war called ninjutsu. Daisuke's descendants founded the first ninja-ryu, org ninja school, the \"Togakureryu\". \nLater, the 14th-century war chronicle \"Taiheiki\" contained many references to \"shinobi\" and credited the destruction of a castle by fire to an unnamed but \"highly skilled \"shinobi\"\".\nEarly history.\nIt was not until the 15th century that spies were specially trained for their purpose. It was around this time that the word \"shinobi\" appeared to define and clearly identify ninja as a secretive group of agents. Evidence for this can be seen in historical documents, which began to refer to stealthy soldiers as \"shinobi\" during the Sengoku period. Later manuals regarding espionage are often grounded in Chinese military strategy, quoting works such as \"The Art of War\" by Sun Tzu.\nBy the Sengoku period, the \"shinobi\" had several roles, including spy (\"kanch\u014d\"), scout (\"teisatsu\"), surprise attacker (\"kishu\"), and agitator (\"konran\"). The ninja families were organized into larger guilds, each with their own territories. A system of rank existed. A \"j\u014dnin\" (\"upper person\") was the highest rank, representing the group and hiring out mercenaries. This is followed by the \"ch\u016bnin\" (\"middle person\"), assistants to the \"j\u014dnin\". At the bottom was the \"genin\" (\"lower person\"), field agents drawn from the lower class and assigned to carry out actual missions.\nIga and K\u014dga clans.\nThe Iga and K\u014dga \"clans\" were \"jizamurai\" families living in the province of Iga (modern Mie Prefecture) and the adjacent region of K\u014dka (later written as \"K\u014dga\"), named after a village in what is now Shiga Prefecture. From these regions, villages devoted to the training of ninja first appeared. The remoteness and inaccessibility of the surrounding mountains in Iga may have had a role in the ninja's secretive development. The chronicle \"Go Kagami Furoku\" writes, of the two clans' origins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There was a retainer of the family of Kawai Aki-no-kami of Iga, of pre-eminent skill in \"shinobi\", and consequently for generations the name of people from Iga became established. Another tradition grew in K\u014dga.\nLikewise, a supplement to the \"Nochi Kagami\", a record of the Ashikaga shogunate, confirms the same Iga origin:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Inside the camp at Magari of the \"sh\u014dgun\" [Ashikaga] Yoshihisa there were \"shinobi\" whose names were famous throughout the land. When Yoshihisa attacked Rokkaku Takayori, the family of Kawai Aki-no-kami of Iga, who served him at Magari, earned considerable merit as \"shinobi\" in front of the great army of the \"sh\u014dgun\". Since then successive generations of Iga men have been admired. This is the origin of the fame of the men of Iga.\nThese professional ninja were actively hired by \"daimy\u014ds\" between 1485 and 1581. Specifically, the Iga professionals were sought after for their skill at siege warfare, or \"shirotori\", which included night attacks and ambush. By the 1460s, the leading families in the regions had established \"de facto\" independence from their \"shugo\". The K\u014dka \"ikki\" persisted until 1574, when it was forced to become a vassal of Oda Nobunaga. The Iga \"ikki\" continued until 1581, when Nobunaga invaded Iga Province and wiped out the organized clans. Survivors were forced to flee, some to the mountains of Kii, but others arrived before Tokugawa Ieyasu, where they were well treated. Some former Iga clan members, including Hattori Hanz\u014d, would later serve as Tokugawa's bodyguards. Prior to the conquest of K\u014dka in 1574, the two confederacies worked in alliance together. At an approximate date of 1560, the alliance between Iga and K\u014dka was formalized in constitutional document. \nFollowing the Battle of Okehazama in 1560, Tokugawa employed a group of eighty K\u014dga ninja, led by Tomo Sukesada. They were tasked to raid an outpost of the Imagawa clan. The account of this assault is given in the \"Mikawa Go Fudoki\", where it was written that K\u014dga ninja infiltrated the castle, set fire to its towers, and killed the castellan along with two hundred of the garrison.\nIga Ninja theory's controversy.\nAfter the assassination of Oda Nobunaga, Iga and K\u014dka ninja, according to tradition, helped Ieyasu undergo the famous \"Shinkun Iga-goe journey\" (according to one theory by researchers from Mie University, with helps of K\u014dka clan's Jizamurai militias instead of ninja.) to escape the enemies of Nobunaga in Sakai and return to Mikawa. However, their journey was very dangerous due to the existence of groups across the route. During this journey, Tokugawa generals such as Ii Naomasa, Sakai Tadatsugu and Honda Tadakatsu fought their way through raids and harassment from \"Ochimusha-gari\" outlaws to secure the way for Ieyasu, while sometimes advancing by usage of gold and silver bribes given to some of the more amenable Ochimusha-gari groups. As they reached Kada, an area between Kameyama town and Iga, The attacks from Ochimusha-gari finally ended as they reached the former territory of the K\u014dka ikki, who were friendly to the Tokugawa clan. The Koka clan assisted the Tokugawa escort group in eliminating the threats of Ochimusha-gari outlaws then escorting them until they reached Iga Province, where they were further protected by samurai clans from Iga ikki which accompanied the Ieyasu group until they safely reached Mikawa.\nIt was reported by Edo period traditional records that Hattori Hanz\u014d, a Tokugawa vassal from Iga, negotiated with Iga ninjas to hire them as guards along the way to avoid the ochimusha-gari. The local Koka-Ikki ninjas and Iga-Ikki ninjas under Hanzo who helped Ieyasu to travel into safety consisted of 300 Ninjas. Furthermore, Uejima Hidetomo, a researcher of Iga Ninja history, has stated there is research which revealed that Hattori Yasuji, one of the ninjas who accompanied Ieyasu on his journey in Iga province, also served as a bodyguard and espionage officer under Muromachi Shogun Ashikaga Yoshiaki.\nHowever, a modern scholar such as Tatsuo Fujita doubted the credibility of Hattori Hattori Hanz\u014d's ninja army theory, since it was first appeared in \"Iga-sha yuishogaki\" record which circulated in Edo period during the rule of Shogun Tokugawa Yoshimune. During his rule, Yoshimune were known for establishing the Oniwaban secret police institution whose members hailed from the confederation clans of Koka and Iga. It has been argued that the circulation of the myth about Hattori Hanz\u014d ninja army helping Ieyasu was created as propaganda to increase the prestige of the Iga and Koka clan confederations in Tokugawa Shogunate.\nActivities under Tokugawa.\nIn one notable incident from 1600, a ninja snuck through of Eastern Army defenders during the Siege of Hataya and planted the flag of the besieging army high on the front gate.\nIn 1608, a daimyo named T\u014dd\u014d Takatora was assigned by Ieyasu to control of Tsu, a newly established domain which covered portions of Iga and Ise Province. The domain at first worth of to the 220,000, then grow further in productivity to the total revenue of 320,000 koku under Takatora governance. It was reported that T\u014dd\u014d Takatora employs the Iga-ry\u016b Ninjas. Aside from Ninjas, he also employs local clans of Iga province as \"Musokunin\", which is a class of part time Samurai who has been allowed to retain their clan name but does not own any land or \"Han\". The Musokunin also worked as farmer during peace, while they are obliged to take arms in the time of war.\nIn 1614, The Iga province warriors saw action during the siege of Osaka. Takatora brought the Musokunin auxiliaries from Iga province to besiege the Osaka castle during the winter phase.\nShimabara rebellion.\nA final but detailed record of ninja employed in open warfare occurred during the Shimabara Rebellion (1637\u20131638). The K\u014dga ninja were recruited by \"sh\u014dgun\" Tokugawa Iemitsu against Christian rebels led by Amakusa Shir\u014d, who made a final stand at Hara Castle, in Hizen Province. A diary kept by a member of the Matsudaira clan, the \"Amakusa Gunki\", relates: \"Men from K\u014dga in \u014cmi Province who concealed their appearance would steal up to the castle every night and go inside as they pleased.\"\nThe Ukai diary, written by a descendant of Ukai Kanemon, has several entries describing the reconnaissance actions taken by the K\u014dga.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They [the K\u014dga] were ordered to reconnoitre the plan of construction of Hara Castle, and surveyed the distance from the defensive moat to the \"ni-no-maru\" (second bailey), the depth of the moat, the conditions of roads, the height of the wall, and the shape of the loopholes.\u2014\u200a\nSuspecting that the castle's supplies might be running low, the siege commander Matsudaira Nobutsuna ordered a raid on the castle's provisions. Here, the K\u014dga captured bags of enemy provisions, and infiltrated the castle by night, obtaining secret passwords. Days later, Nobutsuna ordered an intelligence gathering mission to determine the castle's supplies. Several K\u014dga ninja\u2014some apparently descended from those involved in the 1562 assault on an Imagawa clan castle\u2014volunteered despite being warned that chances of survival were slim. A volley of shots was fired into the sky, causing the defenders to extinguish the castle lights in preparation. Under the cloak of darkness, ninja disguised as defenders infiltrated the castle, capturing a banner of the Christian cross. The Ukai diary writes,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We dispersed spies who were prepared to die inside Hara castle.\u00a0... those who went on the reconnaissance in force captured an enemy flag; both Arakawa Shichirobei and Mochizuki Yo'emon met extreme resistance and suffered from their serious wounds for 40 days.\u2014\u200a\nAs the siege went on, the extreme shortage of food later reduced the defenders to eating moss and grass. This desperation would mount to futile charges by the rebels, where they were eventually defeated by the shogunate army. The K\u014dga would later take part in conquering the castle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;More and more general raids were begun, the K\u014dga ninja band under the direct control of Matsudaira Nobutsuna captured the \"ni-no-maru\" and the \"san-no-maru\" (outer bailey)\u2014\u200a\nWith the fall of Hara Castle, the Shimabara Rebellion came to an end, and Christianity in Japan was forced underground. These written accounts are the last mention of ninja in war.\nEdo period.\nAfter the Shimabara Rebellion, there were almost no major wars or battles until the \"bakumatsu\" era. To earn a living, ninja had to be employed by the governments of their \"Han\" (domain), or change their profession. Many lords still hired ninja, not for battle but as bodyguards or spies. Their duties included spying on other domains, guarding the daimy\u014d, and fire patrol. A few domains like Tsu, Hirosaki and Saga continued to employ their own ninja into the \"bakumatsu\" era, although their precise numbers are unknown.\nA number of \"shinobi\" manuals, often based on Chinese military philosophy, were written in the 17th and 18th centuries, most notably the \"Bansensh\u016bkai\" (1676).\nMany former ninja were employed as security guards by the Tokugawa shogunate, though the role of espionage was transferred to newly created organizations like the \"onmitsu\" and the \"oniwaban\". Others used their \"ninjutsu\" knowledge to become doctors, medicine sellers, merchants, martial artists, and fireworks manufacturers. Some unemployed ninja were reduced to banditry, such as F\u016bma Kotar\u014d and Ishikawa Goemon.\nNinja stereotypes in theatre.\nMany ubiquitous stereotypes about ninja were developed within Edo theatre. These include their black clothing, which was supposed to imitate the outfits worn by , stagehands meant to be ignored by the audience; and their use of , which was meant to contrast with the use of swords by onstage samurai. In kabuki theatre, ninja were \"dishonorable and often sorcerous counterparts\" to samurai, and possessed \"almost, if not outright, magical means of camouflage.\"\nContemporary.\nBetween 1960 and 2010 artifacts dating to the Siege of Odawara (1590) were uncovered which experts say are ninja weapons. Ninja were spies and saboteurs and likely participated in the siege. The Hojo clan failed to save the castle from Toyotomi Hideyoshi forces. The uncovered flat throwing stones are likely predecessors of the shuriken. The clay caltrops preceded makibishi caltrops. Archeologist Iwata Akihiro of Saitama Prefectural Museum of History and Folklore said the flat throwing stones \"were used to stop the movement of the enemy who was going to attack [a soldier] at any moment, and while the enemy freezed the soldier escaped,\". The clay caltrops could \"stop the movement of the enemy who invaded the castle,\" These weapons were hastily constructed yet effective and used by a \"battle group which can move into action as ninjas\".\nMie University founded the world's first research centre devoted to the ninja in 2017. A graduate master course opened in 2018. It is located in Iga (now Mie Prefecture). There are approximately 3 student enrollments per year. Students must pass an admission test about Japanese history and be able to read historical ninja documents. Scientific researchers and scholars of different disciplines study ancient documents and how it can be used in the modern world.\nOn June 19, 2022, K\u014dka city in Shiga Prefecture announced that a written copy of \"Kanrinseiyo\", which is the original source of a famous book on the art of ninja called \"Bansenshukai\" (1676) from the Edo period was discovered in a warehouse of Kazuraki Shrine. The handwritten reproduction was produced in 1748. The book describes 48 types of ninjutsu. It has information about specific methods such as attaching layers of cotton to the bottom of straw sandals to prevent noise when sneaking around, attacking to the right when surrounded by a large number of enemies, throwing charred owl and turtle powder when trying to hide, and casting spells. It also clarified methods and how to manufacture and use ninjutsu tools, such as cane swords and \"makibishi\" (Japanese caltrop).\nRoles.\nEspionage was the chief role of the ninja. With the aid of disguises, the ninja gathered information on enemy terrain and building specifications, as well as obtaining passwords and communiques. The aforementioned supplement to the \"Nochi Kagami\" briefly describes the ninja's role in espionage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Concerning ninja, they were said to be from Iga and K\u014dga, and went freely into enemy castles in secret. They observed hidden things, and were taken as being friends.\nLater in history, the K\u014dga ninja would become regarded as agents of the Tokugawa \"bakufu\", at a time when the \"bakufu\" used the ninja in an intelligence network to monitor regional \"daimy\u014ds\" as well as the Imperial court.\nSabotage.\nArson was the primary form of sabotage practiced by the ninja, who targeted castles and camps.\nThe \"Tamon-in Nikki\" (16th century)\u2014a diary written by abbot Eishun of K\u014dfuku-ji temple\u2014describes an arson attack on a castle by men of the Iga clans.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;This morning, the sixth day of the 11th month of Tenbun 10 [1541], the Iga-\"shu \"entered Kasagi castle in secret and set fire to a few of the priests' quarters. They also set fire to outbuildings in various places inside the \"San-no-maru\". They captured the \"ichi-no-maru\" (inner bailey) and the \"ni-no-maru\" (second bailey).\nIn 1558, Rokkaku Yoshikata employed a team of ninja to set fire to Sawayama Castle. A \"ch\u016bnin\" captain led a force of 48 ninja into the castle by means of deception. In a technique dubbed \"bakemono-jutsu\" (\"ghost technique\"), his men stole a lantern bearing the enemy's family crest (\"mon\"), and proceeded to make replicas with the same \"mon\". By wielding these lanterns, they were allowed to enter the castle without a fight. Once inside, the ninja set fire to the castle, and Yoshitaka's army would later emerge victorious. The mercenary nature of the \"shinobi\" is demonstrated in another arson attack soon after the burning of Sawayama Castle. In 1561, commanders acting under Kizawa Nagamasa hired three Iga ninja of \"genin\" rank to assist the conquest of a fortress in Maibara. Rokkaku Yoshitaka, the same man who had hired Iga ninja just years earlier, was the fortress holder\u2014and target of attack. The \"Asai Sandaiki\" writes of their plans: \"We employed \"shinobi-no-mono\" of Iga... They were contracted to set fire to the castle\". However, the mercenary \"shinobi\" were unwilling to take commands. When the fire attack did not begin as scheduled, the Iga men told the commanders, who were not from the region, that they could not possibly understand the tactics of the \"shinobi\". They then threatened to abandon the operation if they were not allowed to act on their own strategy. The fire was eventually set, allowing Nagamasa's army to capture the fortress in a chaotic rush.\nCountermeasures.\nA variety of countermeasures were taken to prevent the activities of the ninja. Precautions were often taken against assassinations, such as weapons concealed in the lavatory, or under a removable floorboard. Buildings were constructed with traps and trip wires attached to alarm bells.\nJapanese castles were designed to be difficult to navigate, with winding routes leading to the inner compound. Blind spots and holes in walls provided constant surveillance of these labyrinthine paths, as exemplified in Himeji Castle. Nij\u014d Castle in Kyoto is constructed with long \"nightingale\" floors, which rested on metal hinges (\"uguisu-bari\") specifically designed to squeak loudly when walked over. Grounds covered with gravel also provided early notice of unwanted intruders, and segregated buildings allowed fires to be better contained.\nFamous people.\nMany famous people in Japanese history have been associated or identified as ninja, but their status as ninja is difficult to prove and may be the product of later imagination. Rumors surrounding famous warriors, such as Kusunoki Masashige or Minamoto no Yoshitsune sometimes describe them as ninja, but there is little evidence for these claims.\nSome well known examples include:\nOn February 25, 2018, Yamada Y\u016bji, the professor of Mie University and historian Nakanishi G\u014d announced that they had identified three people who were successful in early modern Ureshino, including the ninja Benkei Mus\u014d (\u5f01\u6176\u5922\u60f3). Mus\u014d is thought to be the same person as Denrinb\u014d Raikei (\u4f1d\u6797\u574a\u983c\u6176), the Chinese disciple of Marume Nagayoshi.\nIn popular culture.\nThe image of the ninja entered popular culture in the Edo period, when folktales and plays about ninja were conceived. Stories about the ninja are usually based on historical figures. For instance, many similar tales exist about a \"daimy\u014d\" challenging a ninja to prove his worth, usually by stealing his pillow or weapon while he slept. Novels were written about the ninja, such as \"Jiraiya G\u014dketsu Monogatari\", which was also made into a kabuki play. Fictional figures such as Sarutobi Sasuke would eventually make their way into comics and television, where they have come to enjoy a culture hero status outside their original mediums.\nNinja appear in many forms of Japanese and Western popular media.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "46398", "revid": "11844353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46398", "title": "Rosary", "text": "Catholic sacramental and Marian devotion\nThe Rosary (; , in the sense of \"crown of roses\" or \"garland of roses\"), formally known as the Psalter of Jesus and Mary (Latin: Psalterium Jesu et Mariae), also known as the Dominican Rosary (as distinct from other forms of rosary such as the Franciscan Crown, Bridgettine Rosary, Rosary of the Holy Wounds, etc.), refers to a set of prayers used primarily in the Catholic Church, and to the physical string of knots or beads used to count the component prayers. When referring to the prayer, the word is usually capitalized (\"the Rosary\", as is customary for other names of prayers, such as \"the Lord's Prayer\", and \"the Hail Mary\"); when referring to the prayer beads as an object, it is written with a lower-case initial letter (e.g. \"a rosary bead\").\nThe prayers that compose the Rosary are arranged in sets of ten Hail Marys, called \"decades\". Each decade is preceded by one Lord's Prayer (\"Our Father\"), and traditionally followed by one Glory Be. Some Catholics also recite the \"O my Jesus\" prayer after the Glory Be; it is the best-known of the seven F\u00e1tima prayers that appeared in the early 20th century. Rosary prayer beads are an aid for saying these prayers in their proper sequence.\nUsually, five decades are recited in a session. Each decade provides an opportunity to meditate on one of the Mysteries of the Rosary, which recall events in the lives of Jesus Christ and his mother Mary.\nIn the 16th century Pope Pius V established a standard 15 Mysteries of the Rosary, based on long-standing custom. This groups the mysteries in three sets: the Joyful Mysteries, the Sorrowful Mysteries, and the Glorious Mysteries. In 2002, Pope John Paul II said it is fitting that a new set of five be added, termed the Luminous Mysteries, bringing the total number of mysteries to 20. The mysteries are prayed on specific days of the week; with the addition of the Luminous Mysteries on Thursday, the others are the Glorious on Sunday and Wednesday, the Joyful on Monday and Saturday, and the Sorrowful on Tuesday and Friday.\nOver more than four centuries, several popes have promoted the Rosary as part of the veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church, and consisting essentially in meditation on the life of Christ. The rosary also represents the Catholic emphasis on \"participation in the life of Mary, whose focus was Christ\", and the Mariological theme \"to Christ through Mary\".\nPraying the Rosary.\nBasic structure.\nThe structure of the Rosary prayer, recited using the rosary beads, is as follows:\nThe Rosary is begun on the short strand:\nThe praying of the decades then follows, repeating this cycle for each mystery:\nTo conclude:\nVariations and common additions.\nCommon pious additions to the Rosary are sometimes inserted after each decade and after recitation of the \"Salve Regina\". Instead of ending each decade with the \"Gloria Patri\", Pope Pius IX would add: \"May the souls of the faithful departed, through the mercy of God, rest in peace.\"\nSome Catholics piously add the Fatima Prayer after the \"Gloria Patri\", still on the large bead. Some add the Miraculous Medal prayer which begins \"O Mary, conceived without sin...\", while others add the Eucharistic prayer \"O Sacrament Most Holy, O Sacrament Divine, All praise and all thanksgiving be every moment Thine\" in honour of Jesus in the Blessed Sacrament. In the practice of the Brothers of the Christian Schools, there is a sixth decade for the intentions of the students, or the Virgin Mary.\nOther popular additions include the shorter form of the Prayer to Saint Michael; the \"Memorare\", and a prayer for the intentions of the Pope. In many cases, the Litany of Loreto is recited before the end.\nIn the practice of the Dominican Order, the beginning prayers of the rosary correspond to the preces that begin the Divine Office:\nGroup recitation of the Rosary.\nWhen a group recites the Rosary, it is customary that the prayers that constitute the decades are divided into two parts. The second part of the Our Father begins with \"Give us this day our daily bread\"; the second part of the Hail Mary begins with \"Holy Mary, Mother of God\"; and the second part of the Glory Be with \"As it was in the beginning\". This lends itself to antiphonal prayer.\nSometimes, a chosen leader will recite the first half of the prayer while other participants recite the second. In another style, recitation of the first part of the prayers is rotated among different persons while still maintaining the traditional Leader-Congregation alternation.\nMysteries of the Rosary.\nThe Mysteries of the Rosary are meditations on episodes in the life and death of Jesus from the Annunciation to the Ascension and beyond. These are traditionally grouped by fives into themed sets known as the \"Joyful\" (or \"Joyous\") \"Mysteries\", the \"Sorrowful Mysteries\", and the \"Glorious Mysteries\". Pope John Paul II recommended an additional set called the \"Luminous Mysteries\" (or the \"Mysteries of Light\") in his apostolic letter \"Rosarium Virginis Mariae\" (October 2002). The original \"Mysteries of Light\" were written by George Preca, the only Maltese official Catholic saint, and later reformed by the pope.\nTypically, a spiritual goal known as a \"fruit\" is also assigned to each mystery. Below are listed from the appendix of Louis Marie de Montfort's book \"Secret of the Rosary\" for the original 15 mysteries, with other possible fruits being listed in other pamphlets bracketed:\nMysteries prayer schedule.\nTraditionally the full Rosary consisted of praying all 15 traditional mysteries (Joyful, Sorrowful and Glorious) together. Alternatively, a single set of five mysteries can be prayed each day, according to the following convention:\nDuration.\nPraying the full Rosary typically takes about 20 to 30 minutes, but this can vary. A quicker pace might allow one to finish in around 15\u201320 minutes, while a slower, more meditative approach, especially in a group, could extend to 25\u201330 minutes or longer. Some people even pray just a single decade, which can take about 2\u20133 minutes.\nDevotions and spirituality.\nPope John Paul II placed the Rosary at the very center of Christian spirituality and called it \"among the finest and most praiseworthy traditions of Christian contemplation.\" Pope Pius XI is quoted as saying, for example, \"The Rosary is a powerful weapon to put the demons to flight.\"\nSaints and popes have emphasized the meditative and contemplative elements of the rosary and provided specific teachings for how the rosary should be prayed, for instance the need for \"focus\", \"respect\", \"reverence\" and \"purity of intention\" during rosary recitations and contemplations. Scriptural meditations concerning the rosary are based on the Christian tradition of \"Lectio Divina\" (literally \"divine reading\") as a way of using the Gospel to start a conversation between the person and Christ. Padre Pio, a rosary devotee, said: \"Through the study of books one seeks God; by meditation one finds him.\" From the sixteenth century onwards, Rosary recitations often involved \"picture texts\" that further assisted meditation. Such imagery continues to be used to depict the Mysteries of the rosary.\nReferences to the Rosary have been part of various reported Marian Apparitions spanning two centuries. The reported messages from these apparitions have influenced the spread of Rosary devotion worldwide. In \"Quamquam pluries,\" Pope Leo XIII related Rosary devotions to Saint Joseph and granted indulgences in favour of Christians who, in the month of October, would have added the Prayer to Saint Joseph at the end of the Holy Rosary.\nPraying the Rosary may be prescribed by priests as a type of penance after the Sacrament of Penance. Penance is not generally intended as a \"punishment\"; rather, it is meant to encourage meditation upon and spiritual growth from past sins.\nHistory.\nKnotted prayer ropes were used in early Christianity; the Desert Fathers are said to have created the first such, using knots to keep track of the number of times they said the Jesus prayer or the 150 psalms.\nAccording to tradition, the prayer of the Rosary was given to Dominic de Guzm\u00e1n in an apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary during the year 1208 in the church of Prouille. This Marian apparition received the title of Our Lady of the Rosary. This traditional origin for the Rosary has been generally accepted by the Church and by many popes, primarily before the 17th century, but also by later figures such as Pope Leo XIII and Pope Pius XI in official documents such as encyclicals. Louis De Montfort also affirmed this tradition in his writtings. According to Herbert Thurston, it is certain that in the course of the twelfth century and before the birth of Dominic, the practice of reciting the \"Ave Maria\" 50 or 150 times had become generally familiar. According to 20th century editions of the \"Catholic Encyclopedia\", the story of Dominic's devotion to the Rosary and supposed apparition of Our Lady of the Rosary does not appear in any documents of the Catholic Church or the Order of Preachers prior to the writings of the Dominican Alanus de Rupe, some 250 years after Dominic. However, recent scholarship by Donald H. Calloway seeks to refute this claim. Leonard Foley said that although Mary's giving the Rosary to Dominic is recognized as a legend, the development of this prayer form owes much to the Order of Preachers.\nThe practice of meditation during the praying of the Hail Mary is attributed to Dominic of Prussia (1382\u20131460), a Carthusian monk who termed it \"Life of Jesus Rosary\". The German monk from Trier added a sentence to each of the 50 Hail Marys, using quotes from scripture (which at that time followed the name \"Jesus,\" before the intercessory ending was added during the Counter-Reformation). In 1569, the papal bull \"Consueverunt Romani Pontifices\" by the Dominican Pope Pius V officially established the devotion to the Rosary in the Catholic Church.\nFrom the 16th to the early 20th century, the structure of the Rosary remained essentially unchanged. There were 15 mysteries, one for each of the 15 decades. According to John Henry Newman, Mariology is always Christocentric. During the 20th century, the addition of the Fatima Prayer to the end of each decade became common. There were no other changes until 2002, when John Paul II suggested the five optional Luminous Mysteries; variations of these had previously been proposed by George Preca, and were implemented during the mid-20th century by figures such as Patrick Peyton.\nDevotional growth.\nThrough the preaching of de Rupe, Rosary confraternities began to be erected shortly before 1475.\nWhen Penal Laws in Ireland restricted or banned the Mass, the Rosary became a substitute prayer ritual within private homes. During the 18th century, de Montfort elaborated on the importance of the rosary and emphasized that it should be prayed with attention, devotion, and modesty (reverence).\nIn Brazil, two million men engage in a movement called (\"Men's Rosary\"). It consists of weekly meetings to pray a set of mysteries. In neighboring Hispanic countries, the movement is called .\nThe theologian Romano Guardini described the Catholic emphasis on the Rosary as \"participation in the life of Mary, whose focus was Christ.\" This opinion was expressed earlier by Leo XIII who considered the rosary a way to accompany Mary in her contemplation of Christ.\nPapal endorsements.\nDuring the 16th century, Pope Pius V associated the rosary with the General Roman Calendar by instituting the Feast of Our Lady of Victory (later changed to Our Lady of the Rosary), which is celebrated on 7 October.\nPope Leo XIII issued twelve encyclicals and five apostolic letters concerning the rosary and added the invocation \"Queen of the Most Holy Rosary\" to the Litany of Loreto. Leo XIII explained the importance of the Rosary as the one road to God from the faithful to the mother and from her to Christ, and through Christ to the Father, and that the Rosary was a vital means to participate with the life of Mary and to find the way to Christ. Leo instituted the custom of praying the Rosary daily during the month of October.\nThe Rosary as a family prayer was endorsed by Pope Pius XII in his encyclical \"Ingruentium malorum\": \"In vain is a remedy sought for the wavering fate of civil life, if the family, the principle and foundation of the human community, is not fashioned after the pattern of the Gospel...We affirm that the custom of the family recitation of the Holy Rosary is a most efficacious means.\" Pope Pius XII and his successors actively promoted veneration of the Virgin in Lourdes and Fatima, which is credited with a new resurgence of the Rosary within the Catholic Church.\nPope John XXIII deemed the Rosary of such importance that on 28 April 1962, he issued an apostolic letter where he appealed for recitation of the Rosary in preparation for the Second Vatican Council.\nPope John Paul II issued the apostolic letter \"Rosarium Virginis Mariae\" which emphasized the Christocentric nature of the Rosary as a meditation on the life of Christ. He said: \"Through the Rosary the faithful receive abundant grace, as by the hands of the Mother of the Redeemer.\"\nOn 3 May 2008, Pope Benedict XVI stated that the Rosary was experiencing a new springtime: \"It is one of the most eloquent signs of love that the young generation nourish for Jesus and his Mother.\"\nThe Congregation for Divine Worship's directory of popular piety and the liturgy emphasizes the Christian meditation/meditative aspects of the rosary, and states that the Rosary is essentially a contemplative prayer which requires \"tranquility of rhythm or even a mental lingering which encourages the faithful to meditate on the mysteries of the Lord's life.\"\nIndulgence.\nThe \"Enchiridion Indulgentiarum\" of 2004 confirmed the partial indulgence for the Prayer to Saint Joseph. For the Marian Rosary he provided for plenary indulgence on condition that it is piously recited in a church or oratory (even alone), in a family, religious community, association of Christ's faithful or, more generally, in a meeting of a plurality of people who come together honourable for this purpose.\nRosary beads.\nRosary beads provide a physical method of keeping count of the number of Hail Marys said as the mysteries are contemplated. By not having to keep track of the count mentally, the mind is free to meditate on the mysteries. While most rosaries contain five groups of ten beads, called \"decades\", some other rosaries, particularly those used by religious orders, contain fifteen decades and since the early 20th century twenty decade rosaries have been manufactured.\nRosaries normally take the form of a loop from which hangs a short strand holding a crucifix or cross. The loop contains all the decades, the beads of which may be called Hail Mary beads as they are used for reciting the Hail Mary prayer, as well as one fewer Our Father beads, used for saying the Lord's Prayer, than there are decades. To make them stand out to the user's touch, Our Father beads are often larger, made of a different material, or spaced further apart from the Hail Mary beads. The pair of decades that do not have an Our Father bead between them instead have an attachment to a shorter strand of beads. This shorter strand has five beads on it and may connect to the main loop by a center medal, a knot or a large bead. The five beads are one Our Father bead, three Hail Mary beads, another Our Father bead then and finally a cross or crucifix. A five-decade rosary consists of a \"total\" of 59 beads.\nAlthough counting the prayers on a string of beads is customary, the prayers of the Rosary do not require beads, but can be said using any type of counting device, by counting on the fingers, or by counting mentally.\nSingle-decade rosaries.\nSingle-decade rosaries can also be used: the devotee counts the same ring of ten beads repeatedly for every decade. During religious conflict in 16th- and 17th-century Ireland severe legal penalties were prescribed against practising Catholics. Small, easily hidden rosaries were thus used to avoid identification and became known as Irish penal rosaries. Symbols of specific meanings were often carved onto the crucifixes such as: a hammer to signify the nails of the cross, cords to represent the scourging, a chalice to recall the Last Supper, or a crowing rooster signifying the denial of Peter.\nMaterials and distribution.\nThe beads can be made from any materials, including wood, bone, glass, crushed flowers, semi-precious stones such as agate, jet, amber, or jasper, or precious materials including coral, crystal, silver, and gold. Beads may be made to include enclosed sacred relics or drops of holy water. Rosaries are sometimes made from the seeds of the \"rosary pea\" or \"bead tree.\" Today, the vast majority of rosary beads are made of glass, plastic, or wood. It is common for beads to be made of material with some special significance, such as jet from the shrine of Saint James the Greater at Santiago de Compostela, or olive seeds from the Garden of Gethsemane. In rare cases, beads are made of expensive materials, from gold and silver, to mother of pearl and Swarovski black diamonds. Early rosaries were strung on thread, often silk, but modern ones are more often made as a series of chain-linked beads. Most rosaries used in the world today have simple and inexpensive plastic or wooden beads connected by cords or strings. Italy has a strong manufacturing presence in medium- and high-cost rosaries.\nThere are a number of rosary-making clubs around the world that make and distribute rosaries to missions, hospitals, prisons, etc. free of charge. Our Lady's Rosary Makers produce some 7 million rosaries annually that are distributed to those deemed to be in economic and spiritual need.\nWearing the rosary.\nWearing rosary beads.\nRosary beads are often worn by Christians as a sign of their faith in various parts of the world, including the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Honduras, India, Palestine, and Uganda.\nLouis-Marie Grignion de Montfort encouraged Christians to also wear the rosary beads, stating that doing so \"eased him considerably.\" Many religious orders wear the rosary as part of their habit. A rosary hanging from the belt often forms part of the Carthusian habit.\nCanon Law \u00a71171 provides that sacred objects, which are designated for divine worship by dedication or blessing, are to be treated reverently and are not to be employed for profane or inappropriate use even if they are owned by private persons. As such, according to Edward McNamara, professor of liturgy at the Regina Apostolorum University:\nIf the reason for wearing a rosary is as a statement of faith, as a reminder to pray it, or some similar reason \"to the glory of God\", then there is nothing to object to. It would not be respectful to wear it merely as jewelry. This latter point is something to bear in mind in the case of wearing a rosary around the neck. In the first place, while not unknown, it is not common Catholic practice. While a Catholic may wear a rosary around the neck for a good purpose, he or she should consider if the practice will be positively understood in the cultural context in which the person moves. If any misunderstanding is likely, then it would be better to avoid the practice ... Similar reasoning is observed in dealing with rosary bracelets and rings, although in this case there is far less danger of confusion as to meaning. They are never mere jewelry but are worn as a sign of faith.\nWearing rosary rings.\nA rosary ring is a finger ring with eleven knobs on it, ten round ones and one crucifix, representing one decade of a rosary. These and other kinds of religious rings were especially popular during the 15th and the 16th centuries. Rosary rings are sometimes given to Catholic nuns at the time of their solemn profession. Ring rosaries have also been used in cases of religious persecutions against Catholics, as they are small and can be easily hidden. An example is the Irish penal rosary also with 10 beads. However, they were also sometimes worn for protection and adornment at times when Catholicism was not persecuted, as it would be more difficult to break or wear down a rosary ring, rather than a traditional rosary threaded onto a string.\nWearing rosary bracelets.\nA rosary bracelet is one with ten beads and often a cross or medal. Another form is the rosary card. A rosary card is either one with a \"handle\" that moves like a slide rule to count the decade, or it has a whole rosary with bumps similar to Braille and ancient counting systems.\nUse in vehicles.\nMany Christians hang rosaries from the rear-view mirror of their automobiles as a witness of their faith and protection as they drive.\nUse in homes.\nSome households that cannot afford Christian artwork or a crucifix simply hang up a rosary as a focal point for prayer.\nRosary recordings and products.\nAudio recordings of the Rosary help with aspects of prayer such as pacing, memorization, and by providing inspirational meditations in the form of commentary. Some are sponsored by various groups such as the Knights of Columbus, and religious congregations. In 2008, Vatican Radio released a 4-CD set of Pope Benedict XVI praying the Rosary in Latin. Ecclesiastical Latin was used because \"we have received requests not only from Italy but from places such as Germany and other countries. So we have used this language for the Rosary which everyone understands easily and because it is the universal language of the Church.\"\nIn October 2019, the Vatican launched a US$109 \"electronic rosary\" with ten black agate and hematite beads, and a metal cross that detects movement. It is linked to the \"Click to Pray eRosary\" mobile app designed to help Catholic users pray for world peace and contemplate the Gospel. The rosary can be worn as a bracelet, and is activated by making the Sign of the cross. The app also gives visual and audio explanations of the Rosary.\nOther denominations.\nMany similar prayer practices exist in other Christian communities, each with its own set of prescribed prayers and its own form of prayer beads (known in some traditions as the \"Chotki\"), such as the prayer rope in Eastern Orthodox Christianity. These other devotions and their associated beads are usually referred to as \"chaplets\". The Rosary is sometimes prayed by other Christians, especially in Lutheranism, the Anglican Communion, and the Old Catholic Church.\nAnother example of Rosary-based prayers includes the non-denominational Ecumenical Miracle Rosary, \"a set of prayers and meditations which covers key moments in the New Testament.\"\nLutheranism.\nA minority of Lutherans pray the Rosary. However, while using the Catholic format of the Rosary, each \"Hail Mary\" is replaced with the \"Jesus Prayer\". The only time the \"Hail Mary\" is said is at the end of the Mysteries on the medal, where it is then replaced with the \"Pre-Trent\" version of the prayer (which omits \"Holy Mary, mother of God, pray for us sinners, now and at the hour of our death\"). The final \"Hail Mary\" can also be replaced by reciting of either the \"Magnificat\", or Martin Luther's \"Evangelical Praise of the Mother of God.\"\nThe Wreath of Christ is used in the Lutheran Church of Sweden. While an official order and rubric for its use exists, it is often used as a tool for reflection and meditation rather than recitation of specific prayers or devotions, often as part of Confirmation classes. Some members of the Church of Sweden of high-church or evangelical catholic churchmanship will pray the traditional rosary, sometimes in an ecumenical setting with Roman Catholics.\nAnglicanism.\nThe use of the Catholic Rosary is fairly common among Anglicans of Anglo-Catholic churchmanship. Many Anglo-Catholic prayer books and manuals of devotion, such as Saint Augustine's Prayer Book contain the Catholic Rosary along with other Marian devotions. The public services of the Anglican churches, as contained in the \"Book of Common Prayer\", do not directly invoke the Blessed Virgin or any other saint in prayer as the Thirty-Nine Articles reject the practice of praying to saints, but many Anglo-Catholics feel free to do so in their private devotions. Anglicans who pray the Catholic Rosary tend not to use the Luminous Mysteries or the F\u00e1tima decade prayer.\nAnglican prayer beads, also known informally as the \"Anglican rosary\", are a recent innovation created in the 1980s. They consist of four \"weeks\" (the equivalent of a decade) of seven beads each. The weeks are separated from each other by single beads termed \"cruciform beads\". A variety of different prayers may be said, the most common being the Jesus Prayer. Anglican Prayer Beads are not a Marian devotion, and there are no appointed meditations. Although it is sometimes called the \"Anglican rosary\", it is distinct from the Rosary of Our Lady as prayed by Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans, and other Western Christians.\nChurches named for the Holy Rosary.\nCatholic Marian church buildings around the world named in honor of the rosary include:\nIn Marian art.\nSince the 16th century, the rosary began to appear as an element in Catholic Marian art. One notable depiction of the rosary in Marian art is seen in Caravaggio's \"Madonna of the Rosary\" oil canvas painting in Vienna. Other depictions are shown below.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46400", "revid": "44029", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46400", "title": "Dutch Royal Marines", "text": ""}
{"id": "46401", "revid": "44520972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46401", "title": "Ionia", "text": "Region in Turkey\nIonia ( ) was an ancient region encompassing the central part of the western coast of Anatolia. It consisted of the northernmost territories of the Ionian League of Greek settlements. Never a unified state, it was named after the Ionians who had settled in the region before the archaic period.\nIonia proper comprised a narrow coastal strip from Phocaea in the north near the mouth of the river Hermus (now the Gediz), to Miletus in the south near the mouth of the river Maeander, and included the islands of Chios and Samos. It was bounded by Aeolia to the north, Lydia to the east and Caria to the south. The cities within the region figured significantly in the strife between the Persian Empire and the Greeks.\nIonian cities were identified by mythic traditions of kinship and by their use of the Ionic dialect, but there was a core group of twelve Ionian cities that formed the Ionian League and had a shared sanctuary and festival at Panionion. These twelve cities were (from south to north): Miletus, Myus, Priene, Ephesus, Colophon, Lebedos, Teos, Erythrae, Clazomenae and Phocaea, together with the islands of Samos and Chios. Smyrna, originally an Aeolic colony, was afterwards occupied by Ionians from Colophon, and became an Ionian city.\nThe Ionian school of philosophy, centered on 6th century BC Miletus, was characterized by a focus on non-supernatural explanations for natural phenomena and a search for rational explanations of the universe, thereby laying the foundation for scientific inquiry and rational thought in Western philosophy.\nGeography.\nIonia was of small extent, not exceeding in length from north to south, with the cities located on a narrow band between the sea and the mountains, which varies in width from . So intricate is the coastline that the voyage along its shores was estimated at nearly four times the direct distance. The location of the eastern border with Lydia and Caria was vague in antiquity.\nThe region comprised three extremely fertile valleys formed by the outflow of three rivers, among the most considerable in Asia Minor: the Hermus in the north, flowing into the Gulf of Smyrna, though at some distance from the city of that name; the Ca\u00ffster (modern K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Menderes River), which flowed past Ephesus; and the Maeander, which in ancient times discharged its waters into a deep gulf between Priene and Miletus, but which has been gradually filled up by this river's deposits.\nTwo east\u2013west mountain ranges divide the region and extend out into the Aegean as peninsulas. The first begins as Mount Sipylus between the Hermus and Ca\u00ffster river valleys and continues out as the Erythrae peninsula, which faces the island of Chios. The second is the Messogis range between the Ca\u00ffster and Maeander ranges, which becomes the Mycale peninsula, which reaches out towards the island of Samos. None of these mountain ranges exceed .\nIonia enjoyed the reputation in ancient times of being the most fertile region of Asia Minor. Herodotus declares \"in terms of climate and weather, there is no fairer region in the whole world.\"\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word () or () is uncertain. Various hypotheses have been proposed to explain its origins. Frisk suggests that it stems from an unknown root, *\"Ia\"-, which would be pronounced as *\"ya\"-. There are several alternative hypotheses as well:\nThe term () in turn became the source for words for Greeks in many languages of the Near East, compare Aramaic (*), Hebrew (), Arabic (), Demotic Egyptian () and Coptic ().\nHistory.\nFrom the 18th century BC the region was a part of the Hittite Empire with possible name Arzawa, which was destroyed by invaders during the 12th century BC together with the collapse of the Empire. Ionia was settled by the Greeks probably during the 11th century BC. The most important city was Miletus (the \"Millawanda/Milawata\" of Hittites). There is no record of any people named Ionians in Late Bronze Age Anatolia but Hittite texts record contact with Ahhiyawans (\"Achaeans\") without being clear on their location. Miletus and some other cities founded earlier by non-Greeks received populations of Mycenaean Greeks.\nSettlement.\nGreek settlement of Ionia seems to have accelerated following the Bronze Age collapse, but the lack of contemporary sources makes the sequence of events unclear.\nThe ancient Greeks believed that the Ionians were the descendants of Ion (either a son or grandson of Hellen, the mythical ancestor of the Greeks) and had migrated from Greece to Asia Minor in mythic times. The story is attested from the Classical period. Herodotus states that in Asia the Ionians kept the division into twelve cities that had prevailed in Ionian lands of the north Peloponnese, their former homeland, which became Achaea after they left. However, the story of the migration is recounted most fully by the Roman-period authors Strabo and Pausanias. They report that the Ionians were expelled from the Peloponnese by Achaians, and were granted refuge in Athens by King Melanthus. Later, when Medon was selected as King of Athens, his brothers, the \"sons of Codrus\", led a group of Ionians and others to Asia Minor. Simultaneously, the Aeolians of Boeotia settled the coast to the north of the Ionians and the Dorians settled in Crete, the Dodecanese and in Caria.\nAccording to Pausanias, the sons of Codrus were as follows:\nPausanias reports that other cities were founded or became Ionian later:\nArchaic period.\nIn the Archaic period, \"the Ionian poleis were among the cultural, intellectual, and political leaders of the Greek world.\" The region prospered economically due to the contributions of immigrants, traders, and other social classes from at least 750 BCE to well after 510 BCE.\nIonian League.\nThe twelve Ionian cities formed a religious and cultural (as opposed to a political or military) confederacy, the Ionian League, of which participation in the Pan-Ionic festival was a distinguishing characteristic. This festival took place on the north slope of Mt. Mycale in a shrine called the Panionium. The foundation took place late in the Archaic period, but the exact date is unclear. This is also when stories of the Ionian migration are first attested. All of these initiatives were probably aimed at emphasising Ionian distinctiveness from other Greeks in Asia.\nBut the Ionian League was primarily a religious organisation rather than a political one. Although they did sometimes act together, civic interests and priorities always trumped broader Ionian ones. They never formed a real confederacy. The advice of Thales of Miletus to combine in a political union was rejected. In inscriptions and literary sources from this period, Ionians generally identify themselves by their city of origin, not as \"Ionians.\"\nIonians overseas.\nThe cities became prosperous. Miletus especially was, in an early period, one of the most important commercial cities of Greece, and in its turn became the parent of numerous other colonies, which extended all around the shores of the Euxine Sea and the Propontis from Abydus and Cyzicus to Trapezus and Panticapaeum. Phocaea was one of the first Greek cities whose mariners explored the shores of the western Mediterranean. From an early period, Ephesus, though it did not send out any colonies of importance, became a flourishing city.\nIn the eighth century, Ionian Greeks are recorded in Near Eastern sources as coastal raiders: an inscription of Sargon II (ca 709\u201307, recording a naval expedition of 715) boasts \"in the midst of the sea\" he had \"caught the Ionians like fish and brought peace to the land of Que Cilicia and the city of Tyre\". For a full generation earlier, Assyrian inscriptions had recorded troubles with the Ionians, who escaped on their boats.\nLydian rule.\nAbout 700 BC Gyges, first Mermnad king of Lydia, invaded the territories of Smyrna and Miletus, and is said to have taken Colophon. His son Ardys conquered Priene. In the middle of the 7th century, the Cimmerii ravaged a great part of Asia Minor, including Lydia, and sacked Magnesia on the Maeander, but were defeated when they attacked Ephesus. It was not until the reign of Croesus (560\u2013545 BC) that the cities of Ionia fell completely under Lydian rule.\nFirst Achaemenid rule.\nThe defeat of Croesus by Cyrus the Great was followed by the conquest of all the Ionian cities in 547 BC. These became subject to the Persian monarchy with the other Greek cities of Asia, forming part of the satrapy of Lydia. In this position they enjoyed a considerable amount of autonomy, but were subject to local despots (called \"tyrants\"), who were loyal to the Persian king.\nArt and archaeology show that Ionia was characterised by \"openness and adaptability\" towards the Lydians, Persians, and their eastern neighbours in this period. Lydian products and luxury objects were widespread.\nThe Persians used \"Yaun\u0101\" (Ionian) as a catch-all term for all Greeks, dividing them into \"Yaun\u0101 of the mainland\" in Asia Minor, \"Yaun\u0101 dwelling by the sea\" in the Aegean islands, \"Yaun\u0101 dwelling across the sea\" in the Greek mainland, and \"Yaun\u0101 with shields on their heads\" in Macedonia.\nIonian revolt.\nIt was at the instigation of one of the tyrants, Histiaeus of Miletus, that in about 500 BC the principal cities ignited the Ionian Revolt against Persia. They were at first assisted by the Athenians and Eretria, with whose aid they penetrated into the interior and burnt Sardis, an event which ultimately led to the Persian invasion of Greece. But the fleet of the Ionians was defeated off the island of Lade, and the destruction of Miletus after a protracted siege was followed by the reconquest of all the Asiatic Greeks, insular as well as continental.\nAthenian empire.\nThe victories of the Greeks during the Persian invasion of Greece and the liberation of Thrace, Macedon, and Ionia from the Persian Empire had the effect of enfranchising their kinsmen on the other side of the Aegean, and the Battle of Mycale (479 BC), in which the defeat of the Persians was in great measure owing to the Ionians, secured their emancipation. They henceforth became the dependent allies of Athens within the Delian League. In the Athenian tribute lists, one of the regions of the empire is the \"Ionikos phoros\", a region that includes the cities of Ionia, but also Aeolis and Mysia to the north. Caria to the south was initially its own region, but was folded into the Ionikos phoros in 438 BC.\nThe Athenians advanced an expansive definition of Ionian identity, which included most of the communities under their control and emphasised common descent from Athens. This was probably intended to legitimise their rule over the region. It clashed with the restrictive definition of Ionian identity that was maintained by the Ionian League.\nHerodotus, who came from Halicarnassus, a Dorian city in southwestern Asia Minor which was also part of the Athenian Empire, writes in opposition to the Ionian League's claims that \"it would be stupid to say that they are more truly Ionian or better born ...\" He lists other ethnic populations among the settlers: Abantes from Euboea, Minyans from Orchomenus, Cadmeians, Dryopians, Phocians, Molossians, Arcadian Pelasgians, Dorians of Epidaurus, and others. Even \"the best born of the Ionians\" had married girls from Caria. He defines Ionians as all peoples who were descended from Athenians and celebrated the Apaturia festival, which aligns with the expansive Athenian definition of Ionian identity.\nSatrapy (387\u2013335 BC).\nThe Spartans dissolved the Athenian Empire at the end of the Peloponnesian War in 404 BC. The Spartans installed harmosts (governors) in the cities, but had to withdraw them because they had promised Ionia and the other Greek communities in Asia to the Persians. In 401, the Ionian cities and Sparta supported Cyrus the Younger, the Persian overlord of Asia Minor, in his attempt to seize the throne from his brother, King Artaxerxes II but he failed. Artaxerxes tasked Tissaphernes, the satrap of Lydia and Caria, with retaking the Ionian cities, and the Spartans opposed him.\nIn 396 BC, Agesilaus led a large expedition to Asia Minor to defend the cities and attack the Persians, which landed in Ephesus. From there he invaded Phrygia and Lydia, sacking Sardis in 395 BC. But the outbreak of the Corinthian War forced him to withdraw in 395 BC.\nThe region was under Persian control by about 390 BC, when the Persian satrap arbitrated a boundary dispute between Miletus and Myus. Sparta, Athens, and the other mainland Greek states formally acknowledged Persian possession of Ionia and the other Greek cities in Asia Minor in the Peace of Antalcidas in 387 BC. In this period, Ionia was a separate satrapy, rather than part of Lydia - the only time in the region's history that formed an administrative unit. Ionian cities appear to have retained a considerable amount of autonomy until the conquest of Asia Minor by Alexander the Great in 335 BC.\nHellenistic period.\nEphesus was conquered by Philip II of Macedon in 336 BC in preparation for the invasion of Persia, which took place under his son Alexander the Great. After the battle of the Granicus in 334 BC most of the Ionian cities submitted to Alexander, except for Miletus, which was taken only after a long siege. Alexander presented his invasion as a liberation of the Greeks of Asia and therefore treated the Ionians generously, granting them freedom, autonomy, and tax-free status.\nIn the conflict that broke out between Alexander's successors after his death in 323 BC and throughout the Hellenistic Age that followed, Ionia was a contested territory, divided between the Antigonid, Seleucid, and Ptolemaic kingdoms. Cities were regularly forced to switch allegiance from one monarch to another, but they were also able to play the kings off against one another in order to get better terms for themselves. Despite the political situation, the Ionian League continued to operate throughout the period.\nFollowing their victory in the War with Antiochus in 189 BC, the Romans placed Ionia under the control of the Attalid Kingdom, which retained the region until it was annexed by Rome in 133 BC.\nOne of the major theatrical associations of the Hellenistic period was the Synod of the Dionysiac Artists of Ionia and the Hellespont, which was established around 250 BC and had its headquarters successively in Teos, Ephesus, Myonnesus, and Lebedus.\nRoman empire.\nIonia became part of the Roman province of Asia in 133 BC, which had its capital at the Ionian city of Ephesus. Ionia had no formal place in the Roman administration of the province, which was divided into conventus districts that were totally distinct from the traditional ethnic divisions of the region. However, the Ionian League continued to function in this period.\nThe geographer Strabo treats Ionia as the narrow coastal strip from the Hermus river in the north to the Maeander river in the south (though noting that other authorities included the plain south of the river). He treats Ephesus as its most important city and presents an unbroken tradition of intellectual culture in the region stretching from the Archaic philosophers down to his own day - in contrast to the intellectual life of mainland Greece, which he presents as a thing of the past. Other authors sometimes use \"Ionia\" as a metonym for the whole province of Asia.\nDecreased political agency for the Greek cities under Rome, led to increased focus on cultural identity as a source of civic prestige. In the fierce rivalries that raged between the cities of the Province of Asia in the Roman Imperial period, Ionian cities emphasised their Ionian identity as \"one of the purest, 'primordial' forms of Greekness,\" while their rivals denounced Ionians as overly influenced by oriental luxury and recalled their support for the Persians in the late fifth and early fourth centuries BC. Most sources discussing Ionian founding myths belong to this period. Ionian cities retained local month names and continued to count years by eponymous magistrates rather than adopting era dating like most other cities in Asia Minor. Distinctive Ionian personal names remained common.\nMedieval and modern history.\nGreeks continued to live in Ionia through the Roman, Byzantine and Ottoman Empires but were forced to vacate the region in 1922 after the events of the Greek genocide which culminated with the population exchange between Turkey and Greece. The suburbs of Nea Ionia and Nea Smyrni were primarily settled by refugees from Ionia and still maintain an Ionian identity.\nLegacy.\nFrom the 7th century BC, Ionia, and in particular Miletus, was home to the Ionian school of philosophy. The Ionian school, founded by Thales and his student Anaximander, pioneered a revolution in traditional thinking about Nature. Instead of explaining natural phenomena by recourse to traditional religion/myth, the cultural climate was such that men began to form hypotheses about the natural world based on ideas gained from both personal experience and deep reflection. According to physicist Carlo Rovelli, this was the \"first great scientific revolution\" and the earliest example of critical thinking, which would come to define Greek, and subsequently modern, thought.\nIonia has a long roll of distinguished men of letters and science (notably the Ionian School of philosophy) and distinct school of art. This school flourished between 700 and 500 BC. The great names of this school are Theodorus and Rhoecus of Samos; Bathycles of Magnesia on the Maeander; Glaucus of Chios, Melas, Micciades, Archermus, Bupalus and Athenis of Chios. Notable works of the school still extant are the famous archaic female statues found on the Athenian Acropolis in 1885\u20131887, the seated statues of Branchidae, the Nike of Archermus found at Delos, and the objects in ivory and electrum found by D. G. Hogarth in the lower strata of the Artemision at Ephesus.\nThe Persian designation for Greek is \"Younan\" (\u06cc\u0648\u0646\u0627\u0646), a transliteration of \"Ionia\", through Old Persian \"Yauna\". The same is true for the Hebrew word, \"Yavan\" (\u05d9\u05d5\u05d5\u05df) and the Sanskrit word \"yavana\". The word was later adopted in Arabic, Turkish, and Urdu as well as in other places.\nLiterary references.\nIonia appears as the major setting in these novels:\nMany scholars believe the biblical Yavan refers to the alleged ancestor of the ancient peoples of Ionia.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "46402", "revid": "46992603", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46402", "title": "Jane Seymour (actress)", "text": "British actress (born 1951)\nJane Seymour (born Joyce Penelope Wilhelmina Frankenberg; 15 February 1951) is a British actress. After making her screen debut as an uncredited teenage extra in the 1969 musical comedy \"Oh! What a Lovely War\", Seymour moved to roles in film and television, including a leading role in the television series \"The Onedin Line\" (1972\u20131973) and the role of psychic Bond girl Solitaire in the James Bond film \"Live and Let Die\" (1973).\nCritical acclaim followed, with a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series for her role in \"Captains and the Kings\" (1976). In 1982, Seymour won her first Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television for her role in the miniseries \"East of Eden\" (1981). She received three additional Golden Globe nominations in that same category: one for her portrayal of Wallis Simpson, the twice-divorced American wife of the former King Edward VIII, in the television film \"The Woman He Loved\" (1988), and another two (in consecutive years) for her role in the miniseries \"War and Remembrance\" (1988-1989). Her \"War and Remembrance\" role also garnered her a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Special. \nSeymour also won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or Special for her portrayal of Maria Callas in \"\" (1988). \nIn 1993, Seymour was cast as Dr. Michaela Quinn in the television series \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\", a medical drama set in the Wild West. For her performance in this role, over the course of its six-season run she received nominations twice for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, twice for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series, and four times for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Television Series \u2013 Drama. She went on to win one of the latter awards.\nSeymour was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and, in 2000, was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire.\nSeymour also had roles in numerous films, including \"Somewhere in Time\" (1980), \"The Scarlet Pimpernel\" (1982), \"La R\u00e9volution fran\u00e7aise\" (1989), \"Wedding Crashers\" (2005), \"Love, Wedding, Marriage\" (2011), \"Little Italy\" (2018), \"The War with Grandpa\" (2020) and \"Friendsgiving\" (2020).\nIn addition to her acting career, Seymour established a nonprofit, the Open Hearts Foundation, co-authored several children's books and self-help books, and created jewellery, scarves, furniture, rugs, handbags, paintings and sculptures under the label \"Jane Seymour Designs\".\nEarly life.\nJoyce Penelope Wilhelmina Frankenberg was born on 15 February 1951 in Uxbridge, Middlesex (now part of Greater London), England, to Mieke van Tricht (1914\u20132007), a nurse, and Benjamin John Frankenberg FRCOG (1914\u20131990), a distinguished gynaecologist and obstetrician. Her father was Jewish; he was born in England to a family from Nowe Trzepowo, a village in Poland. Her mother was a Dutch Protestant (with family from Deventer) who was a prisoner of war during World War II and had lived in the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia). Seymour has stated she learned Dutch from her mother and her fellow survivors from the Japanese internment camp, who frequently spent holidays together in the Netherlands when she was a child. Encouraged by her parents (who sent her to live with family friends in Geneva to practise her languages), she learned to speak fluent French.\nSeymour's paternal grandfather Lee Grahame had come to live in the East End of London after escaping the Czarist pogroms when he was 14. He is listed in the 1911 census as living in Bethnal Green working as a hairdresser and went on to establish his own company. Seymour's father Benjamin qualified at the UCL Medical School in 1938. He joined the medical branch of the RAFVR after the outbreak of war, serving in England, Belgium, Italy and South Africa, ending his service as a squadron leader with a mention in despatches. After the war, Frankenberg continued his career at various London hospitals, including St Leonard's Hospital, Hackney, the East End Maternity Hospital, the City of London Maternity Hospital and finally Hillingdon Hospital, for which he designed the maternity unit. A close associate of Patrick Steptoe, he assisted in pioneering discussions on in-vitro fertilisation and published papers on adolescent and teenage sexual behaviours.\nSeymour was educated at Tring Park School for the Performing Arts in Hertfordshire. She chose the screen name Jane Seymour, after the English queen Jane Seymour, because it seemed more saleable. One of Seymour's notable features is heterochromia, making her right eye brown and her left eye green.\nActing career.\nIn 1969, Seymour appeared uncredited in her first film, Richard Attenborough's \"Oh! What a Lovely War\". In 1970, Seymour appeared in her first major film role in the war drama \"The Only Way\". She played Lillian Stein, a Jewish woman seeking shelter from Nazi persecution. In 1973, she gained her first major television role as Emma Callon in the successful 1970s series \"The Onedin Line\". During this time, she appeared as the female lead Prima in the two-part television miniseries \"Frankenstein: The True Story\". She appeared as Winston Churchill's girlfriend Pamela Plowden in \"Young Winston\", produced by her father-in-law Richard Attenborough.\nIn 1973, Seymour achieved international fame in her role as Bond girl Solitaire in the James Bond film \"Live and Let Die\". IGN ranked her as 10th in a Top 10 Bond Babes list. In 1975, Seymour was cast as Princess Farah in \"Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger\", the third part of Ray Harryhausen's \"Sinbad\" trilogy. Filmed in 1975, it was not released until its stop motion animation sequences had been completed in 1977. In 1978, she appeared as Serina in the \"Battlestar Galactica\" film and in the first five episodes of the television series. Seymour returned to the big screen in the comedy \"Oh Heavenly Dog\" opposite Chevy Chase.\nIn 1980, Seymour played the role on stage of Constanze in Peter Shaffer's play \"Amadeus\", opposite Ian McKellen as Salieri and Tim Curry as Mozart. The play premiered on Broadway in 1980, ran for 1,181 performances and was nominated for seven Tony Awards, of which it won five.\nAlso in 1980, Seymour was given the role of young theatre actress Elise McKenna in the period romance \"Somewhere in Time\". Though the film was made with a markedly limited budget, the role enticed Seymour with a character she felt she knew. The effort was a decided break from her earlier work and marked the start of her friendship with co-star Christopher Reeve.\nIn 1981, she appeared in the television film \"East of Eden\", based on the novel by John Steinbeck. Her portrayal of main antagonist Cathy Ames won her a Golden Globe. In 1982, she appeared in \"The Scarlet Pimpernel\" with Anthony Andrews and her \"Amadeus\" costar Ian McKellen. In 1984, Seymour appeared nude in the film \"Lassiter\", co-starring Tom Selleck, but the film was a box office flop. In 1987, Seymour was the subject of a pictorial in \"Playboy\" magazine, although she did not pose nude.\nIn 1988, Seymour got the female lead in the twelve-part television miniseries \"War and Remembrance\", the continued story from the miniseries \"The Winds of War\". She played Natalie Henry, an American Jewish woman trapped in Europe during World War II. That same year, she won an Emmy Award for playing Maria Callas in the television movie \"\".\nIn 1989, on the occasion of the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution, Seymour appeared in the television film \"La r\u00e9volution fran\u00e7aise\", filmed in both French and English. Seymour appeared as the doomed French queen, Marie Antoinette; Seymour's two children, Katherine and Sean, appeared as the queen's children.\nIn the 1990s, Seymour earned popular and critical praise for her role as Dr. Michaela \"Mike\" Quinn in the television series \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\" and its television sequels (1993\u20132001). Her work on the series earned her a second Golden Globe Award. While working on the series \"Dr. Quinn, Medicine Woman\", she met her fourth husband, actor-director James Keach.\nIn the 2000s, Seymour continued to work primarily in television. In 2004 and 2005, she made six guest appearances in The WB series \"Smallville\", playing Genevieve Teague, the wealthy, scheming mother of Jason Teague (Jensen Ackles). In 2005, Seymour returned to the big screen in the comedy \"Wedding Crashers\", playing Kathleen Cleary, wife of fictional United States Secretary of the Treasury William Cleary, played by Christopher Walken. In spring 2006, she appeared in the short-lived The WB series \"Modern Men\". Later that year, Seymour guest-starred as a law school professor on an episode of the CBS sitcom \"How I Met Your Mother\" and as a wealthy client on the Fox legal drama \"Justice\". In 2007, she guest-starred in the ABC sitcom \"In Case of Emergency\". She also appeared in ITV's \"Marple: Ordeal By Innocence\", based on the Agatha Christie novel. She was a contestant on season five of the US reality show \"Dancing with the Stars\"; she finished in sixth place, along with her partner Tony Dovolani. Seymour guest starred in \"One Life to Lose\", a soap opera-themed episode of the ABC crime dramedy \"Castle\".\nSeymour appeared in the Hallmark Channel film \"Dear Prudence\" (2008); the romantic comedy \"Love, Wedding, Marriage\" (2011); and the Hallmark Movie Channel film \"Lake Effects\" (2012).\nIn April 2016, she starred as Florence Lancaster in No\u00ebl Coward's play \"The Vortex\", presented in Singapore by the British Theatre Playhouse. In 2022, Seymour began playing the title role on the Irish&lt;ref name=\"variety/1234950720\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Acorn TV series \"Harry Wild.\"\nIn 2020, Jane starred in Ruby's Choice, an Australian comedy/drama produced and directed by Michael Budd. It follows Ruby (played by Seymour) as a woman with early dementia and its impact on her and her family when she is no longer able to live independently and moves in with her family. Jane won Australian screen industry Network Award for best actress.\nThe film was released theatrically across Australia and New Zealand on 3 March 2022. On 7 March 2022, Ruby's Choice premiered in Santa Barbara, California at the 37th Santa Barbara International Film Festival where it was a Nominee Best International Feature Film. Seymour's 'Ruby's Choice' makes U.S. premiere at SBIFF|first=Joe|last=Buttitta|date=March 8, 2022&lt;/ref&gt; On 24 September 2023, at the Burbank International Film Festival (BIFF), won Best Foreign Film and Best Feature Film with Ruby's Choice. The event coincided with the honouring of the legendary filmmaker Tim Burton. 'Ruby's Choice' will be released nationwide in North America on May 7th, 2024.\"\nSeymour appeared in the Netflix movie, \"Irish Wish, \" released on March 15, 2024, on Netflix. It debuted at number one on Netflix's most watched films list two days after its release.\nIn 2025, Seymour began hosting an Acorn TV/BBC America series called \"Relative Secrets\".\nPersonal life.\nSeymour has been married and divorced four times. Her first marriage was to Michael Attenborough. She was then briefly married to Geoffrey Planer.\nIn 1981, Seymour married David Flynn. The marriage produced two children: Katherine Flynn (born on 7 February 1982) and Sean Flynn (born on 31 July 1985). Flynn involved her in the housing market, which left her \"completely beyond bankrupt\". They divorced in 1992. The following year, Seymour married actor James Keach. Together they had twins, John Stacy and Kristopher Steven, born on 30 November 1995, and named after family friends Johnny Cash and Christopher Reeve and James's brother, actor Stacy Keach.\nIn February 2005, Seymour became a naturalised citizen of the United States.\nSeymour is a celebrity ambassador for Childhelp, a national nonprofit organisation dedicated to helping victims of child abuse and neglect. In 2007, she sponsored a children's Art Pillow contest as part of the Jane Seymour Collection, with the proceeds going to Childhelp.\nOn 12 April 2013, it was announced that Seymour was divorcing Keach. The divorce was finalized in December 2015.\nIn February 2018, she posed for \"Playboy\" for a third time, becoming at the age of 67 the oldest woman to be photographed for the magazine. In the \"Playboy\" interview, Seymour revealed that she briefly quit acting after being sexually harassed by an unnamed film producer in the early 1970s.after earlier referring to this in her 1986 book Jane Seymours Guide to romantic Living. Seymour's Malibu house almost burned during the 2018 fires, but was saved, according to her, \"by an incredibly devoted gardener and neighbour\".\nSince 2023, she has been in a relationship with musician John Zambetti.\nWriting and fashion career.\nIn the 1980s, Seymour began a parallel career as a writer of self-help and inspirational books, including \"Jane Seymour's Guide to Romantic Living\" (1986), \"Two at a Time: Having Twins\" (2002), \"Remarkable Changes\" (2003) and \"Among Angels\" (2010). She also co-wrote several children's books, with her then-husband James Keach, for the \"This One 'N That One\" series. \nIn 1985, Seymour appeared at Fashion Aid, a one-time fashion show fundraiser held at the Royal Albert Hall in London. An event organised by Bob Geldof to raise funds for the ongoing Ethiopian famine caused by the policies of dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam, the finale of the show saw her partake in a mock wedding with Freddie Mercury. Seymour wore a white lace wedding dress that was designed by David and Elizabeth Emanuel \u2013 who had previously created Princess Diana's wedding gown.\nIn 2008, Seymour replaced Selina Scott as the new face of fashion label CC (formerly known as Country Casuals) under the Austin Reed banner of retailers.\nLikewise in 2008, Seymour teamed up with and designed the \"Open Heart Collection\" for Kay Jewelers, which promoted it with the advice, \"Keep your heart open and love will \"always\" find its way in.\" Beginning that year, she saw to it that she would always be wearing one of the collection's necklaces whenever seen in public while not in character for any of her acting performances. In the same year, Seymour also wrote and published the books \"Open Hearts: If Your Heart Is Open, love Will Always Find Its Way In\" and \"Open Hearts Family.\"\nA 2.08-carat cushion-cut fancy vivid blue diamond in an 18-karat rose-gold-plated platinum setting was named \"The Jane Seymour\" in her honour by World of Diamonds Group, which had mined it in Russia, cut and set it. The ring was presented to Seymour in April 2016 in Singapore while she was there to star in \"The Vortex\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46403", "revid": "169132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46403", "title": "Passover Seder", "text": "Ritual feast that marks the beginning of Passover\nThe Passover Seder is a ritual feast at the beginning of the Jewish holiday of Passover. It is conducted throughout the world at the start of the 15th day of Nisan in the Hebrew calendar (at sunset, when a Hebrew day begins). The day falls in late March or in April of the Gregorian calendar. Passover lasts for seven days in Israel, and customarily usually eight days in the Jewish diaspora. A seder is held on the first night, the 15th of Nisan; where eight days are observed, a seder is often also held on the second night. \nThe Seder is a ritual involving a retelling of the story of the liberation of the Israelites from slavery in ancient Egypt, taken from the Book of Exodus () in the Torah. The Seder itself is based on the Biblical verse commanding Jews to retell the story of the Exodus from Egypt: \"You shall tell your child on that day, saying, 'It is because of what the LORD did for me when I came out of Egypt.'\" (Exodus 13:8) At the seder, Jews read the text of the Haggadah, an ancient Tannaitic work narrating the Israelite exodus from Egypt, with special blessings and rituals, Talmudic commentaries, and Passover songs.\nSeder customs include telling and discussing the story, drinking four cups of wine, eating matzah, partaking of symbolic foods, and reclining in celebration of freedom. The Seder is one of the most often celebrated Jewish rituals, performed by Jews all over the world.\nEtymology.\n\"Seder\" is a transliteration of the Hebrew \u05e1\u05d3\u05e8, which means 'order' or 'procedure'. The name also expresses the conduct of the meal, all the dishes, the blessings, the prayers, the stories and the songs, written in the Haggadah, a book that determines the order of Passover and tells the story of the Exodus from Egypt. And all the mitzvot (religious commandments or rites) in the \"order\" are done in a fixed order in every Jewish home.\nOverview.\nThe Seder is most often conducted in the family home, although communal Seders are also organized by synagogues, schools and community centers, some open to the general public. It is customary to invite guests, especially strangers and the needy. The Seder is integral to Jewish faith and identity: as explained in the Haggadah, if not for divine intervention and the Exodus, the Jewish people would still be slaves in Egypt. Therefore, the Seder is an occasion for praise and thanksgiving and for re-dedication to the idea of liberation. Furthermore, the words and rituals of the Seder are a primary vehicle for the transmission of the Jewish faith from grandparent to child, and from one generation to the next. Attending a Seder and eating matzah on Passover is a widespread custom even among those who are not religiously observant.\nFamily members come to the table dressed in their holiday clothes. There is an Orthodox Ashkenazi tradition for the person leading the Seder to wear a white robe called a kittel. For the first half of the Seder, each participant will only need a plate and a wine glass. At the head of the table is a Seder plate containing various symbolic foods that will be eaten or pointed out during the course of the Seder. Placed nearby is a plate with three matzot and dishes of salt water for dipping.\nEach participant receives a copy of the Haggadah: an ancient text that contains the complete Seder service. Men and women are equally obliged and eligible to participate in the Seder. Traditionally, each participant at the Seder table recites the Haggadah in the original Hebrew and Aramaic. Halakha (the collective body of Jewish religious laws) requires that certain parts be said in language the participants can understand, and critical parts are often said in both Hebrew and the native language. The leader will often interrupt the reading to discuss different points with his or her children, or to offer an insight into the meaning or interpretation of the words.\nIn some homes, participants take turns reciting the text of the Haggadah, in the original Hebrew or in translation. It is traditional for the head of the household and other participants to have pillows placed behind them for added comfort. At several points during the Seder, participants lean to the left \u2013 when drinking the four cups of wine, eating the Afikoman, and eating the korech sandwich.\nJews generally observe one or two seders: in Israel, one seder is observed on the first night of Passover; traditional Diaspora communities (to the general exception of Reform and Reconstructionist Jews) also hold a seder on the second night. Seders have been observed around the world, including in remote places such as high in the Himalaya mountains in Kathmandu, Nepal.\nThemes.\nSlavery and freedom.\nThe rituals and symbolic foods evoke the twin themes of the evening: slavery and freedom. It is stated in the Haggadah that \"In every generation everyone is obligated to see themselves as if they themselves came out of Egypt\" \u2013 i.e., out of slavery.\nThe rendering of time for Jews is that a day began at sunset and ended at sunset. According to the Exodus narrative, at the beginning of the 15th of Nisan in Ancient Egypt, the Jewish people were enslaved to Pharaoh. After the struck Egypt at midnight, killing all the first-born sons from the first-born of Pharaoh to the first-born of the lowest Egyptian to all the first-born of the livestock in the land (Exodus 12:29), Pharaoh let the Hebrew nation go, effectively making them free people for the second half of the night.\nThus, Seder participants recall the slavery that reigned during the first half of the night by eating matzah (the \"poor person's bread\"), maror (bitter herbs which symbolize the bitterness of slavery), and charoset (a sweet paste, possibly representing the mortar which the Jewish slaves used to cement bricks). Recalling the freedom of the second half of the night, they eat the matzah (the \"bread of freedom\" as well as the \"bread of affliction\") and 'afikoman', and drink the four cups of wine, in a reclining position, and dip vegetables into salt water (the dipping being a sign of royalty and freedom).\nThe Four Cups.\nThere is an obligation to drink four cups of wine during the Seder. The Mishnah says (Pesachim 10:1) that even the poor are obliged to drink the four cups. Each cup is imbibed at a specific point in the Seder. The first is for Kiddush (), the second is for 'Maggid' (), the third is for Birkat Hamazon () and the fourth is for Hallel ().\nThe Four Cups represent the four expressions of deliverance promised by God Exodus 6:6\u20137: \"I will bring out,\" \"I will deliver,\" \"I will redeem,\" and \"I will take.\"\nThe Vilna Gaon relates the Four Cups to four worlds: this world, the Messianic age, the world at the revival of the dead, and the world to come. The MaHaRaL connects them to the four Matriarchs: Sarah, Rebeccah, Rachel, and Leah. (The three matzot, in turn, are connected to the three Patriarchs: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.) Abarbanel relates the cups to the four historical redemptions of the Jewish people: the choosing of Abraham, the Exodus from Egypt, the survival of the Jewish people throughout the exile, and the fourth which will happen at the end of days.\nThe four cups might also reflect the Roman custom of drinking as many cups as there are letters in the name of the chief guest at a meal, which in the case of the Seder is God himself whose Hebrew name has four letters.\nSeder plate.\nThe special Passover Seder plate () is the special plate containing symbolic foods used during the Passover Seder. Each of the six items arranged on the plate has special significance to the retelling of the story of the Exodus from Egypt. The seventh symbolic item used during the meal \u2013 a stack of three matzot \u2013 is placed on its own plate on the Seder table.\nThe six items on the Seder plate are:\nFocus on the children.\nSince the retelling of the Exodus to one's child is the object of the Seder experience, much effort is made to arouse the interest and curiosity of the children and keep them awake during the meal. To that end, questions and answers are a central device in the Seder ritual. By encouraging children to ask questions, they will be more open to hearing the answers.\nThe most famous question which the youngest child asks at the Seder is the \u2013 'Why is this night different from all other nights?' After the asking of the questions, the main portion of the Seder, \"Magid\", discusses the answers in the form of a historical review. Also, at different points in the Seder, the leader of the Seder will cover the matzot and lift their cup of wine; then put down the cup of wine and uncover the matzot \u2013 all to elicit questions from the children.\nIn some traditions, the questions are asked by the assembled company in chorus rather than by a child, and are put to the leader of the seder, who either answers the question or may direct the attention of the assembled company to someone who is acting out that particular part of the Exodus. Physical re-enactment of the Exodus during the Passover seder is common in many families and communities.\nFamilies follow the Haggadah's lead by asking their own questions at various points in the Haggadah, and offering prizes such as nuts and candies for correct answers. The \"afikoman\", which is hidden away for the \"dessert\" after the meal, is another device used to encourage children's participation. In most families, the leader of the Seder hides the \"afikoman\" and the children must find it, whereupon they receive a prize or reward. In other homes, the children hide the \"afikoman\" and a parent must look for it; when the parents give up, the children demand a prize (often money) for revealing its location.\nOrder and procedures.\nThe order and procedures of the Seder are stated and printed in the text of the Passover Haggadah, a copy of which is in front of all participants. Jewish children learn the following words, denoting the order of the Seder, with a rhyme and tune at their Jewish schools:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n(blessings and the first cup of wine).\n () is the Hebrew imperative for . It should be recited as soon as the synagogue services are over but not before nightfall. This is similar to that which is recited on all of the Three Pilgrimage Festivals, but also refers to matzot and the exodus from Egypt. Acting in a way that shows freedom and majesty, many Jews have the custom of filling each other's cups at the Seder table. The is traditionally said by the father of the house, but all Seder participants may participate by reciting the and drinking at least most of the first cup of wine. On Shabbat, it is preceded by a reading from the Book of Genesis recounting God's rest on the seventh day of creation, and includes an extended doxology on the blessings of Shabbat.\n(wash hands).\nTechnically, according to Jewish law, whenever one partakes of fruits or vegetables dipped in liquid while remaining wet, one must wash one's hands if the fruit or vegetable remains wet. However, at other times of the year, one has either already washed their hands before eating bread, or dry the fruit or vegetable, in which case one need not wash their hands before eating the fruit or vegetable.\nAccording to most traditions, no blessing is recited at this point in the Seder, unlike the blessing recited over the washing of the hands before eating bread. However, followers of Rambam or the Gaon of Vilna do recite a blessing.\n(appetizer).\nEach participant dips a vegetable into either salt water (an Ashkenazi custom; said to serve as a reminder of the tears shed by their enslaved ancestors), vinegar (a Sephardi custom) or charoset (an older Sephardi custom, still common among Yemenite Jews). Another custom mentioned in some Ashkenazi sources and probably originating with Meir of Rothenburg, was to dip the karpas in wine.\n(breaking of the middle matzah).\nThree matzot are stacked on the seder table; at this stage, the middle matzah of the three is broken in half. The larger piece is hidden, to be used later as the \"afikoman\", the \"dessert\" after the meal. The smaller piece is returned to its place between the other two matzot.\nMoroccan Jewish custom is that when the matzah is split, a passage is recited describing how \"in this manner God split the Red Sea\" in the aftermath of the Exodus.\nBefore Magid, some Sephardi families have a custom to sing (translated: 'In haste we left Egypt'). While this is being sung, the head of the household walks around the table with the Seder plate and waves it over each individual's head.\n(relating the Exodus).\nThe story of Passover, and the change from slavery to freedom is told. At this point in the Seder, Moroccan Jews have a custom of raising the Seder plate over the heads of all those present while chanting ('In haste we went out of Egypt [with our] bread of affliction, [now we are] free people').\n(invitation to the Seder).\nThe matzot are uncovered, and referred to as the \"bread of affliction\". Participants declare (in Aramaic) an invitation to all who are hungry or needy to join in the Seder. Halakha requires that this invitation be repeated in the native language of the country.\n(The Four Questions).\nThe Mishna details questions one is obligated to ask on the night of the seder. It is customary for the youngest child present to recite the four questions. Some customs hold that the other participants recite them quietly to themselves as well. In some families, this means that the requirement remains on an adult \"child\" until a grandchild of the family receives sufficient Jewish education to take on the responsibility. If a person has no children capable of asking, the responsibility falls to their spouse, or another participant. The need to ask is so great that even if a person is alone at the seder they are obligated to ask themselves and to answer their own questions.\nRoasted sacrifices were no longer possible after the destruction, and roasted meat was therefore disallowed on seder night, to avoid ambiguity.\nThe four questions have been translated into over 300 languages.\nThe Four Sons.\nThe traditional Haggadah speaks of \"four sons\" \u2013 one who is wise, one who is wicked, one who is simple, and one who does not know to ask. This is based upon the rabbis of the Jerusalem Talmud finding four references in the Torah to responding to your son who asks a question. Each of these sons phrases his question about the seder in a different way. The Haggadah recommends answering each son according to his question, using one of the three verses in the Torah that refer to this exchange.\nThe wise son asks \"What are the statutes, the testimonies, and the laws that God has commanded us to do?\" One explanation for why this very detailed-oriented question is categorized as wise, is that the wise son is trying to learn how to carry out the seder, rather than asking for someone else's understanding of its meaning. He is answered fully:\n\"You should reply to him with [all] the laws of pesach: one may not eat any dessert after the paschal sacrifice.\"\nThe wicked son, who asks, \"What is this service to you?\", is characterized by the Haggadah as isolating himself from the Jewish people, standing by objectively and watching their behavior rather than participating. Therefore, he is rebuked by the explanation that \"It is because God acted for my sake when I left Egypt.\" (This implies that the Seder is not for the wicked son because the wicked son would not have deserved to be freed from Egyptian slavery.) Where the four sons are illustrated in the Haggadah, this son has frequently been depicted as carrying weapons or wearing stylish contemporary fashions.\nThe simple son, who asks, \"What is this?\" is answered with \"With a strong hand the Almighty led us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage.\"\nThe one who does not know to ask is told, \"It is because of what the Almighty did for me when I left Egypt.\"\nSome modern Haggadahs mention \"children\" instead of \"sons\", and some have added a fifth child. The fifth child can represent the children of the Shoah who did not survive to ask a question or represent Jews who have drifted so far from Jewish life that they do not participate in a Seder.\nFor the former, tradition is to say that for that child one asks \"Why?\" and, like the simple child, has no answer.\n\"Go and learn\".\nFour verses in Deuteronomy (26:5\u20138) are then expounded, with an elaborate, traditional commentary based on the Sifre. (\"And thou shalt speak and say before the Lord thy God: 'A wandering Aramean was my parent, and they went down into Egypt, and sojourned there, few in number; and became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous. And the Egyptians dealt ill with us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage. And we cried unto the Lord, the God of our parents, and the Lord heard our voice, and saw our affliction, and our toil, and our oppression. And the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders.\")\nThe Haggadah explores the meaning of those verses, and elaborates on the story. This telling describes the slavery of the Jewish people and their miraculous salvation by God. This culminates in an enumeration of the Ten Plagues:\nWith the recital of the Ten Plagues, there is a late custom, which arose in German-Jewish circles, that each participant removes a drop of wine from their cup using a fingertip at the mention of each of the ten plagues. Although this night is one of salvation, Don Isaac Abravanel explains that one cannot be completely joyous when some of God's creatures had to suffer. A mnemonic acronym for the plagues is also introduced: , while similarly spilling a drop of wine for each word.\nAt this part in the Seder, songs of praise are sung, including the song \"Dayenu\", which proclaims that had God performed any single one of the many deeds performed for the Jewish people, it would have been enough to obligate us to give thanks. Some sing instead \"The Women's Dayenu\", a feminist variant of \"Dayenu\", by Michele Landsberg.\nAfter \"Dayenu\" is a declaration (mandated by Rabban Gamliel) of the reasons of the commandments of the Paschal lamb, Matzah, and Maror, with scriptural sources. Then follows a short prayer, and the recital of the first two psalms of Hallel (which will be concluded after the meal). A long blessing is recited, and the second cup of wine is drunk.\n(ritual washing of hands).\nThe ritual hand-washing is repeated, this time with all customs including a blessing.\n(blessings over the Matzah).\nTwo blessings are recited.\nFirst one recites the standard blessing before eating bread, which includes the words \"who brings forth\" ( in Hebrew).\n\"Matzah\".\nThen one recites the blessing regarding the commandment to eat Matzah.\nAn olive-size piece (some say two) is then eaten while reclining to the left.\n\"Maror\" (bitter herbs).\nThe blessing for the eating of the maror (bitter herbs) is recited and then it is to be eaten.\n\"Korech\" (sandwich).\nThe maror (bitter herb) is placed between two small pieces of matzo, similarly to how the contents of a sandwich are placed between two slices of bread, and eaten. This follows the tradition of Hillel, who did the same at his Seder table 2000 years ago (except that in Hillel's day the Paschal sacrifice, matzo, and maror were eaten together.)\n\"Shulchan Orech\" (the meal).\nThe festive meal is eaten. Traditionally it begins with a hard boiled egg dipped in salt water, referencing the charred egg on the Seder plate. In Yiddish, there is a saying: , which means \"We set the table and eat the fish\".\n\"Tzafun\" (eating of the \"afikoman\").\nThe \"afikoman\", which was hidden earlier in the Seder, is traditionally the last morsel of food eaten by participants in the Seder.\nEach participant receives an olive-sized portion of matzo to be eaten as \"afikoman\". After the consumption of the \"afikoman\", traditionally, no other food may be eaten for the rest of the night. Additionally, no intoxicating beverages may be consumed, with the exception of the remaining two cups of wine.\n\"Bareich\" (Grace after Meals).\nThe recital of Birkat Hamazon.\n\"Kos Shlishi\" (the Third Cup of Wine).\nThe drinking of the Third Cup of Wine.\nNote: The Third Cup is customarily poured before the Grace after Meals is recited because the Third Cup also serves as a Cup of Blessing associated with the Grace after Meals on special occasions.\n\"Kos shel Eliyahu ha-Navi\" (cup of Elijah the Prophet); Miriam's cup.\nIn many traditions, the front door of the house is opened at this point. Psalms 79:6\u20137 is recited in both Ashkenazi and Sephardi traditions, plus Lamentations 3:66 among Ashkenazim.\nMost Ashkenazim have the custom to fill both a fourth and a fifth cup at this point. This relates to a Talmudic discussion that concerns the number of cups that are supposed to be drunk. Given that the four cups are in reference to the four expressions of redemption in Exodus 6:6\u20137, some rabbis felt that it was important to include a fifth cup for the fifth expression of redemption in Exodus 6:8. All agreed that five cups should be poured but the question as to whether or not the fifth should be drunk, given that the fifth expression of redemption concerned being brought into the Land of Israel, which \u2013 by this stage \u2013 was no longer possessed of an autonomous Jewish community, remained insoluble. The rabbis determined that the matter should be left until Elijah (in reference to the notion that Elijah's arrival would precipitate the coming of the Moshiach (Jewish Messiah), at which time all halakhic questions will be resolved) and the fifth cup came to be known as the \"Kos shel Eliyahu\" (\"Cup of Elijah\"). Over time, people came to relate this cup to the notion that Elijah will visit each Jewish home on Seder night as a foreshadowing of his future arrival at the end of the days, when he will come to announce the coming of the Moshiach, and that the door is opened for him to enter.\nSome seders (including the original Women's Seder, but not limited to women-only seders) now set out a cup for the prophet Miriam as well as the traditional cup for the prophet Elijah, sometimes accompanied by a ritual to honor Miriam. Miriam's cup originated in the 1980s in a Boston Rosh Chodesh group; it was invented by Stephanie Loo, who filled it with mayim hayim (living waters) and used it in a feminist ceremony of guided meditation. Miriam's cup is linked to the \"midrash\" of Miriam's well, which \"is a rabbinic legend that tells of a miraculous well that accompanied the Israelites during their 40 years in the desert at the Exodus from Egypt\".\n\"Hallel\" (songs of praise).\nThe entire order of Hallel which is usually recited in the synagogue on Jewish holidays is also recited at the Seder table, albeit sitting down. The first two psalms, 113 and 114, were recited before the meal. The remaining psalms 115\u2013118, are recited at this point. Psalm 136 (the Great Hallel) is then recited, followed by \"Nishmat\", a portion of the morning service for Shabbat and festivals.\nThere are a number of opinions concerning the paragraph \"Yehalelukha\" which normally follows Hallel, and \"Yishtabakh\", which normally follows \"Nishmat\". Most Ashkenazim recite \"Yehalelukha\" immediately following the Hallel proper, i.e. at the end of Psalm 118, except for the concluding words. After Nishmat, they recite \"Yishtabakh\" in its entirety. Sephardim recite \"Yehalelukha\" alone after Nishmat.\nAfterwards the Fourth Cup of Wine is drunk and a brief blessing for the \"fruit of the vine\" is said.\n\"Nirtzah\".\nThe Seder concludes with a prayer that the night's service be accepted. A hope for the Messiah is expressed: \"\"L'shanah haba'ah b'Yerushalayim!\" \u2013 Next year in Jerusalem!\" Jews in Israel, and especially those in Jerusalem, recite instead \"\"L'shanah haba'ah b'Yerushalayim hab'nuyah!\" \u2013 Next year in the rebuilt Jerusalem!\" Jerusalem is the holiest city in the Bible; it has become symbolic of the idea of spiritual perfection. The tradition of saying \"Next year in Jerusalem\" is similar to the tradition of opening the door for Elijah: it recognizes that \u201cthis year\u201d we live in an imperfect world outside of \u201cJerusalem,\u201d but we patiently await a time, hopefully \u201cnext year,\u201d in which we live in spiritual perfection.\nAlthough the 15 orders of the Seder have been complete, the Haggadah concludes with additional songs which further recount the miracles that occurred on this night in Ancient Egypt as well as throughout history. Some songs express a prayer that the Beit Hamikdash will soon be rebuilt. The last song to be sung is \"Chad Gadya\" (\"One Kid Goat\"). This seemingly childish song about different animals and people who attempted to punish others for their crimes and were in turn punished themselves, was interpreted by the Vilna Gaon as an allegory to the retribution God will levy over the enemies of the Jewish people at the end of days.\nFollowing the Seder, those who are still awake may recite the Song of Songs, engage in Torah learning, or continue talking about the events of the Exodus until sleep overtakes them.\nNon-traditional Seders.\nFeminist Seders.\nIn 1976, the first of a series of women-only Passover seders was held in Esther M. Broner's New York City apartment and led by her, with 13 women attending, including Gloria Steinem, Letty Cottin Pogrebin, and Phyllis Chesler. Esther Broner and Naomi Nimrod created a women's haggadah for use at this seder. In the spring of 1976 Esther Broner published this \"Women's Haggadah\" in Ms. Magazine, later publishing it as a book in 1994; this haggadah is meant to include women where only men had been mentioned in traditional haggadahs, and it features the Wise Women, the Four Daughters, the Women's Questions, the Women's Plagues, and a women-centric \"Dayenu\". The original Women's Seder has been held with the Women's Haggadah every year since 1976, and women-only seders are now held by some congregations as well. Some seders (including the original Women's Seder, but not limited to women-only seders) now set out a cup for the prophet Miriam as well as the traditional cup for the prophet Elijah, accompanied by a ritual to honor Miriam. Miriam's cup originated in the 1980s in a Boston Rosh Chodesh group; it was invented by Stephanie Loo, who filled it with mayim hayim (living waters) and used it in a feminist ceremony of guided meditation. Miriam's cup is linked to the \"midrash\" of Miriam's well, which \"is a rabbinic legend that tells of a miraculous well that accompanied the Israelites during their 40 years in the desert at the Exodus from Egypt\". Furthermore, some Jews include an orange on the seder plate. The orange represents the fruitfulness for all Jews when all marginalized peoples are included, particularly women and gay people. An incorrect but common rumor says that this tradition began when a man told Susannah Heschel that a woman belongs on the bimah as an orange on the seder plate; however, it actually began when in the early 1980s, while speaking at Oberlin College Hillel, Susannah Heschel was introduced to an early feminist Haggadah that suggested adding a crust of bread on the seder plate, as a sign of solidarity with Jewish lesbians (as some would say there's as much room for a lesbian in Judaism as there is for a crust of bread on the seder plate). Heschel felt that to put bread\u2014forbidden at Passover\u2014on the seder plate would be to accept that Jewish lesbians and gay men violate Judaism like chametz violates Passover, so at her next seder, she chose an orange as a symbol of inclusion of gays, lesbians, and others who are marginalized within the Jewish community. In addition, the orange had seeds that had to be spat out \u2013 a gesture of spitting out and repudiating what they saw as the homophobia of traditional Judaism.\nMany Haggadah now use gender-neutral English translations.\nPublic Seders.\nThe group of people who hold a Passover Seder together is referred to in the Talmud (tractate Pesachim) as a \"chavurah\" (group). In the Far East, for example, Chabad-Lubavitch emissaries regularly conduct Seders for hundreds of visiting students, businesspeople and Jewish travelers. The Chabad Seder in Kathmandu regularly attracts more than 1,200 participants. In 2006, the Federation of Jewish Communities of the CIS and Baltic Countries organized over 500 public Seders throughout the former Soviet Union, led by local rabbis and Chabad rabbinical students, attended by more than 150,000 people.\nIn Israel, where permanent residents observe only one Seder, overseas students learning in yeshivas and women's seminaries are often invited in groups up to 100 for \"second-day Seders\" hosted by outreach organizations and private individuals.\nChristian Seders.\nSome Christians, especially but not only Evangelical Protestants, have recently taken great interest in performing Seders according to the ancient rubric. Many churches host Seders, usually adding a Messianic Christian Passover message, and many times inviting Messianic Jews to lead and teach on it. The Christian Gospels place the Last Supper at Passover, so that some Christians have interpreted it as a Seder; in consequence some Christian Seders are on Maundy Thursday as part of commemorating the Last Supper. Many Christians cite the meal as a way to connect with the heritage of their own religion and to see how the practices of the ancient world are still relevant to Christianity today. However, the current form of the Passover Seder dates from the Rabbinic period, after Christianity and Judaism had already gone their separate ways. Some Jews and Christians consider Christian Seders an inappropriate cultural appropriation of Jewish ritual for non-Jewish purposes.\nInterfaith Seders.\nA number of churches hold interfaith Seders where Jews and non-Jews alike are invited to share in the story and discuss common themes of peace, freedom, and religious tolerance. During the American civil rights movement of the 1960s, interfaith Seders energized and inspired leaders from various communities who came together to march for equal protection for all. The first of these, the \"Freedom Seder,\" was written by Arthur Waskow, published in \"Ramparts\" magazine and in a small booklet by the Micah Press and in a later edition (1970) by Holt-Rinehart-Winston, and was actually performed on April 4, 1969, the first anniversary of the death of Martin Luther King, Jr. and the third night of Passover, at Lincoln Memorial Temple in Washington, DC. It celebrated the liberation struggle of Black America alongside that of ancient Israel from Pharaoh, and was the first Haggadah to go beyond the original Biblical story. It sparked a large number of Haggadahs celebrating various other forms of liberation \u2013 feminism, vegetarianism, the liberation movements in Latin America in the 1970s, ecological healing, etc.. Today, many Unitarian Universalist congregations hold annual interfaith community Seders. A number of interfaith Passover Seder Haggadahs have been written especially for this purpose.\nWhite House Passover Seder.\nIn 2009 US President Barack Obama began conducting an annual Passover seder in the Old Family Dining Room of the White House, marking the first time that a sitting president hosted a Seder in the White House. The private dinner for about 20 guests, both Jewish and non-Jewish \u2013 including the President and his family, members of the president's and first lady's staffs, and friends and their families \u2013 features the reading of the Haggadah, traditional rituals such as the hiding of the afikoman and the cup of Elijah, and the reading of the Emancipation Proclamation.\nVirtual Seders.\nWhen people wish to participate in a shared Seder but are unable to be physically together, technology such as videoconferencing software can be used to facilitate a \"virtual\" Seder. In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a surge of virtual Seders, as many Jews sought to practice social distancing during the holiday, or lived in jurisdictions where they were legally required to do so. The website OneTable saw a fourfold increase in the number of virtual seders it hosted from 2019 to 2020, and Zoom videoconferencing software was widely used to host virtual Seders. Virtual seders were endorsed by Progressive rabbis but eschewed by Orthodox rabbis. The Rabbinical Assembly of Conservative Judaism issued guidance (though not an official Conservative responsum) specific to 2020 on using videoconferencing to facilitate Seders while avoiding or minimizing violations of Yom Tov restrictions on the use of electrical devices on holidays.\nSeder in space.\nIn 2022, the Israeli astronaut Eytan Stibbe participated in the first privately sponsored trip to the International Space Station as part of the \"Rakia\" mission to conduct science and technology experiments for a number of universities and startups in Israel. As part of the \u201cRakia\u201d mission, Stibbe held the first Seder in space on the first night of the holiday. This included reciting kiddush, drinking grape juice, eating matzah, and relating to his fellow astronauts about the values that the Seder tradition and the reading of the Haggadah can teach, noting that the story of the exodus from Egypt of the people of Israel \"from slavery into freedom\" shows that \"no dream is beyond reach\".\nIn popular culture.\nIn the second season of the television series Peaky Blinders, there is a scene in which Arthur Shelby is invited to celebrate the Passover Seder at the home of Alfie Solomons as part of a truce negotiation. The depiction of the Seder contains several inaccuracies, such as the presence of leavened bread (chametz), strictly forbidden during Passover, on the table. Additionally, Solomons is shown slaughtering a goat and claiming this is a Jewish tradition. In reality, in antiquity Jewish practice involved the ritual sacrifice of a lamb rather than a goat, and only at the Temple in Jerusalem, not private homes .\nThe film \"Uncut Gems\" by Josh and Benny Safdie, starring Adam Sandler, features a scene depicting a typical American Passover Seder.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46404", "revid": "50880149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46404", "title": "Nisan", "text": "1st month of the Hebrew calendar\nNisan (; ) or Nissan (; from ) is the month of the barley ripening and the first month of spring in the Babylonian and Hebrew calendars. The name of the month is an Akkadian borrowing, although it is ultimately derived from Sumerian \"nisag\" 'first fruits'. In the Hebrew calendar, it is the first month of the ecclesiastical year, called the \"first of the months of the year\" (Exodus 12:1-2), \"first month\" (Ex 12:14), and the month of \"Aviv\" (Ex 13:4; \"\u1e25\u014d\u1e0fe\u0161 h\u0101\u02be\u0101\u1e07\u00ee\u1e07\"). It is called \"Niss\u0101n\" in the Book of Esther. It is a month of 30 days. In the year 2025, 1 Nisan will occur on 30 March. Counting from 1 Tishrei, the civil new year, it would be the seventh month (eighth, in leap year), but in contemporary Jewish culture, both months are viewed as the first and seventh simultaneously, and are referred to as one or the other depending on the specific religious aspects being discussed.\nName and origin.\nThe biblical Hebrew months were given enumerations instead of names. The new moon of Aviv, which in Hebrew means 'barley ripening' and by extension 'spring season' (Exodus 9:31) is one of the few called both by name and by its number, the first. Nisan and other Akkadian-origin names for the equivalent lunar months in the Babylonian calendar came to be applied to the Hebrew calendar during the Babylonian captivity, in which the month of Aviv's name was \"Ara\u1e2b Niss\u0101nu\" ('month of the beginning').\nTable of civil dates when 1 Nisan occurs.\nThe list below gives a time which can be used to determine the day the Jewish ecclesiastical (spring) year starts over a period of nineteen years. These are not Nisan \"molad\" times, although the offset necessarily remains constant. (The fractions shown are fractions of a minute.)\n17:49 Wednesday, 22 March 2023\n15:21 formula_1 Tuesday, 9 April 2024\n00:10 formula_2 Sunday, 30 March 2025\n08:59 formula_3 Thursday, 19 March 2026\n06:31 formula_4 Wednesday, 7 April 2027\n15:20 formula_5 Sunday, 26 March 2028\n00:09 formula_6 Friday, 16 March 2029\n21:41 formula_7 Wednesday, 3 April 2030\n06:30 formula_8 Monday, 24 March 2031\n15:19 formula_9 Friday, 12 March 2032\n12:51 formula_10 Thursday, 31 March 2033\n21:40 formula_11 Monday, 20 March 2034\n19:13 formula_12 Sunday, 8 April 2035\n04:01 formula_13 Friday, 28 March 2036\n12:50 formula_14 Tuesday, 17 March 2037\n10:23 formula_15 Monday, 5 April 2038\n19:12 Friday, 25 March 2039\n04:00 formula_16 Wednesday, 14 March 2040\n01:33 formula_2 Tuesday, 2 April 2041\nEvery nineteen years this time is 2 days, 16 hours, 33 1/18 minutes later in the week. That is either the same or the previous day in the civil calendar, depending on whether the difference in the day of the week is three or two days. If 29 February is included fewer than five times in the nineteen \u2013 year period the date will be later by the number of days which corresponds to the difference between the actual number of insertions and five. If the year is due to start on Sunday, it actually begins on the following Tuesday if the following year is due to start on Friday morning. If due to start on Monday, Wednesday or Friday it actually begins on the following day. If due to start on Saturday, it actually begins on the following day if the previous year was due to begin on Monday morning.\nThe table below lists, for a Jewish year commencing on 23 March, the civil date of the first day of each month. If the year does not begin on 23 March, each month's first day will differ from the date shown by the number of days that the start of the year differs from 23 March. The correct column is the one which shows the correct starting date for the following year in the last row. If 29 February falls within a Jewish month the first day of later months will be a day earlier than shown.\nFor long period calculations, dates should be reduced to the Julian calendar and converted back to the civil calendar at the end of the calculation. The civil calendar used here (Exigian) is correct to one day in 44,000 years and omits the leap day in centennial years which do not give remainder 200 or 700 when divided by 900. It is identical to the Gregorian calendar between 15 October 1582 CE and 28 February 2400 CE (both dates inclusive).\nTo find how many days the civil calendar is ahead of the Julian in any year from 301 BCE (the calendar is proleptic [assumed] up to 1582 CE) add 300 to the year, multiply the hundreds by 7, divide by 9 and subtract 4. Ignore any fraction of a day. When the difference between the calendars changes the calculated value applies on and from 1 March (civil date) for conversions to Julian. For earlier dates reduce the calculated value by one. For conversions to the civil date the calculated value applies on and from 29 February (Julian date). Again, for earlier dates reduce the calculated value by one. The difference is applied to the calendar one is converting into. A negative value indicates that the Julian date is ahead of the civil date. In this case it is important to remember that when calculating the civil equivalent of 29 February (Julian), 29 February is discounted. Thus if the calculated value is \u22124 the civil equivalent of this date is 24 February. Before 1 CE use astronomical years rather than years BCE. The astronomical year is (year BCE) \u2013 1.\nUp to the 4th century CE, these tables give the day of the Jewish month to within a day or so and the number of the month to within a month or so. From the 4th century, the number of the month is given exactly and from the 9th century the day of the month is given exactly as well.\nIn the Julian calendar, every 76 years the Jewish year is due to start 5h 47 14/18m earlier, and 3d 18h 12 4/18m later in the week.\nOn what civil date does the eighth month begin in CE 20874\u20135?\n20874=2026+(248\u00d776). In (248\u00d776) Julian years the Jewish year is due to start (248\u00d73d 18h 12 4/18m) later in the week, which is 932d 2h 31 2/18m or 1d 2h 31 2/18m later after removing complete weeks. Allowing for the current difference of thirteen days between the civil and Julian calendars, the Julian date is 13+(248\u00d70d 5h 47 4/18m) earlier, which is 72d 21h 28 16/18m earlier. Convert back to the civil calendar by applying the formula.\n20874+300=21174\n211\u00d77=1477\n1477/9=164 remainder 1\n164\u22124=160.\n160d\u221272d 21h 28 16/18m=87d 2h 31 2/18m.\nSo, in 20874 CE, the Jewish year is due to begin 87d 2h 31 2/18m later than in 2026 CE and 1d 2h 31 2/18m later in the week. In 20874 CE, therefore, the Jewish year is due to begin at 11.30 3/18 am on Friday, 14 June. Because of the displacements, it actually begins on Saturday, 15 June. Odd months have 30 days and even months 29, so the starting dates are 2, 15 July; 3, 13 August; 4, 12 September; 5, 11 October; 6, 10 November; 7, 9 December, and 8, 8 January.\nThe rules are based on the theory that Maimonides explains in his book \"Rabbinical Astronomy\". The times in the list are those calculated by Gauss with an offset of \u221214 days as his calculation gives the civil date of Passover rather than the start of the month. Gauss's calculation has been rigorously proved.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46405", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46405", "title": "Pesach", "text": ""}
{"id": "46406", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46406", "title": "Hubert van Eyck", "text": "Early Netherlandish painter (c. 1385 \u2013 1426)\nHubert van Eyck (; c.\u20091385/90 \u2013 18 September 1426) was an Early Netherlandish painter and older brother of the renowned Jan van Eyck, as well as Lambert and Margareta, also painters. The absence of any single work that he can clearly be said to have completed continues to make an assessment of his achievement highly uncertain, although for centuries he had the reputation of being an outstanding founding artist of Early Netherlandish painting.\nToday he is attributed to having at least begun the Ghent Altarpiece and The Three Marys at the Tomb, although both were likely completed by his brother Jan.\nLife and career.\nHe was probably born in Maaseik, in what is now the Belgian province of Limburg, into a family in the gentry. As the name was not very common, he is probably the \"Magister Hubertus, Pictor\" recorded as having been paid in 1409 for panels in the church of Onze Lieve Vrouwe, Tongeren. He is probably also Master Hubert who had painted a panel bequeathed in 1413 by Jan de Visch van der Capelle to his daughter, a Benedictine nun near Grevelingen; however he does not appear in guild records, and his heirs did not include any children, so it has been suggested that he may have been in minor orders, perhaps attached to what was then the abbey, now the cathedral, of St Bavo at Ghent, where his \"Ghent Altarpiece\" still remains, settling in Ghent by c.\u20091420.\nAround the time of his settlement, or shortly afterward, he began his only surviving documented work, the \"Ghent Altarpiece\" in St Bavo's. However, the painting was not finished until six years after his death, in 1432, so the degree to which the surviving altarpiece reflects his work, rather than that of Jan who took it over, remains much discussed. An inscription on the frame, which was destroyed in the \"beeldenstorm\" in 1566, stated that Hubert van Eyck \"maior quo Nemo reports\" (greater than anyone) started the altarpiece, but that Jan van Eyck \u2013 calling himself \"arte Secundus\" (second-best in the art) \u2013 completed it in 1432.\nWriting in 1933, art historian Bryson Burroughs, who at that time attributed to Hubert the \"Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych\", describing him as \"the fountainhead of northern painting\", suggests he did the underdrawing for the \"Ghent Altarpiece\" with Jan painting in after his brother's death; some form of this view remains common among specialists. Modern scientific investigation reveals various changes between the finished work and the lower painted levels and the underdrawing. Today the inscription is often regarded as an overgenerous fraternal tribute. Given the circumstances, the Ghent Altarpiece is a difficult work to use for comparison when assessing other attributions, especially as several other artists from the brothers' workshops probably worked on it as well.\nThe town magistrates of Ghent visited his workshop in 1425; the city had commissioned two designs for a painting from him. He died on or before 18 September 1426, probably still in his thirties, and was buried in Saint Bavo's Cathedral, next to his sister Margareta according to the 16th-century writer van Vaernewijck, who says she was also a painter and unmarried. His heirs paid taxes relating to properties in Ghent. \nA copper inscription recording his date of death was engraved on the tombstone, but is now missing. According to a tradition from the 16th century, his arm was preserved as a relic in a casket above the portal of Saint Bavo of Ghent. Van Vaernewijck also records the local tradition that Jan van Eyck was trained by his brother, though when Jan is first documented in August 1422 he was already a \"master\" and working in The Hague.\nLegacy.\nThe division of surviving works between Hubert, early Jan van Eyck, and other painters has been the subject of great debate among art historians, involving the \"Ghent Altarpiece\", the many different hands that can be detected in the Turin-Milan Hours, and other pieces. In the 19th and early 20th centuries the inscription on the \"Ghent Altarpiece\" was usually taken at face value, and most unsigned works now given to the early years of his brother Jan were attributed to Hubert. After a period in the mid-20th century when there was a strong tendency to attribute work away from Hubert, he has made something of a comeback in recent decades, but there is still a wide range of opinion among specialists. He is likely to have begun The Three Marys at the Tomb now in the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen in Rotterdam, but this seems to have been finished by another artist some decades later and has suffered from the restoration. Drawings in the Albertina, Vienna of the Apostles have been attributed to him and the British Museum has a drawing copying a lost \"Capture of Christ\" that relates to parts of the \"Ghent Altarpiece\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46407", "revid": "50393845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46407", "title": "Shemini Atzeret", "text": "Jewish holiday\nShemini Atzeret (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05e9\u05b0\u05c1\u05de\u05b4\u05d9\u05e0\u05b4\u05d9 \u05e2\u05b2\u05e6\u05b6\u05e8\u05b6\u05ea\u200e\u2014\"Eighth [day] of Assembly\") is a Jewish holiday. It is celebrated on the 22nd day of the Hebrew month of Tishrei, which usually coincides with late September or early October. It directly follows the festival of Sukkot, which is celebrated for \"seven\" days; thus, Shemini Atzeret is literally the \"eighth\" day [of assembly]. It is a separate\u2014yet connected\u2014holy day devoted to the spiritual aspects of the festival of Sukkot. Part of its duality as a holy day is that it is simultaneously considered connected to Sukkot and a separate festival in its own right.\nOutside the Land of Israel, this is further complicated by the additional day added to all biblical holidays except Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. Shemini Atzeret is thus sometimes wrongly regarded as the eighth day of Sukkot outside the Land of Israel, leading to sometimes involved analysis as to which practices of each holiday are to apply.\nThe celebration of Simchat Torah is the most distinctive feature of the holiday, but it is a later rabbinical innovation. In the Land of Israel, the celebrations of Shemini Atzeret and Simchat Torah are combined on a single day, and the names are used interchangeably. In the Diaspora, the celebration of Simchat Torah is deferred to the second day of the holiday. Commonly, only the first day is referred to as \"Shemini Atzeret\", while the second is called \"Simchat Torah\".\nKaraite Jews and Samaritans also observe Shemini Atzeret, as they do all biblical holidays. However, due to differences in calendar calculations, it may occur on a different day from the conventional Jewish celebration. Karaites and Samaritans do not include the rabbinical innovation of Simchat Torah in their observance of the day and do not observe a second day\u2014of any holiday\u2014in the Diaspora.\nBiblical origins.\nAccording to \"The Jewish Encyclopedia\", \"atzeret\" () is the name given to this day in four different locations in the Hebrew Bible. It is not mentioned in Deuteronomy 16, and is found only in those parts of the Bible known as the Priestly Code. Like \"atzarah,\" \"atzeret\" denotes \"day of assembly\", from \"atzar\" (\"to hold back\" or \"keep in\"); hence the name \"atzeret\" given to the seventh day of Pesa\u1e25. Owing, however, to the fact that both Shemini Atzeret and the seventh day of Pesa\u1e25 are described as \"atzeret\", the name was taken to mean \"the closing festival\".\nSignificance.\n\"Shemini:\" \"Eighth Day\" of Sukkot.\nWhen Shemini Atzeret is mentioned in the Torah (known in Greek as the \"Pentateuch\"), it is always mentioned in the context of the seven-day festival of Sukkot: the holiday Shemini Atzeret immediately follows. For example, Sukkot is described in detail in . Shemini Atzeret is mentioned in only verses 36 and 39.\nThe Hebrew word \"shemini\" means \"eighth\". This refers to the date of Shemini Atzeret relative to Sukkot; it falls on the latter's eighth day. It is often assumed that Shemini Atzeret is simply the eighth day of Sukkot. That characterization, however, is only partly accurate.\nThe celebration of Sukkot is characterized by the use of the \"sukkah\" (booth or tabernacle) and the Four Species (tree branches and fruit used in the celebration). However, the Torah specifies using those objects for only seven days, not eight. The observance of Shemini Atzeret, therefore, differs in substantial ways from that of Sukkot. The Talmud describes Shemini Atzeret with the words \"a holiday in its own right\" (\"regel bifnei atzmo\").\nThe Talmud describes six ways in which Shemini Atzeret differs from Sukkot. Four of these relate principally to the Temple service, but two others remain relevant to the modern celebration of the holiday. First, the blessing known as \"Shehecheyanu\" is recited on the night of Shemini Atzeret just as it is on the first night of all other major Jewish holidays. Second, the holiday is referred to distinctively as \"Shemini Atzeret\" and not as \"Sukkot\" in the prayer service.\nImmediately following that discussion, however, the Talmud describes Shemini Atzeret as the \"end holiday of the festival [of Sukkot]\". The context here is that the Sukkot obligations of joy and recitation of Hallel (Psalms 113\u2013118) last eight days. This is also why one of Sukkot's liturgical aliases, \"Time of Our Happiness\" (\"zman sim\u1e25atenu\"), continues to be used to describe Shemini Atzeret\u2014and, by extension, Simchat Torah\u2014in the liturgy.\nShemini Atzeret is, in conclusion, simultaneously \"a holiday in its own right\" and the \"end holiday of [Sukkot]\".\n\"Atzeret:\" A day for assembly\u2014or pause.\nSpiritually, Shemini Atzeret can also be seen to \"guard the seven days of Sukkot\". The Hebrew word \"atzeret\" is generally translated as \"assembly\", but shares a linguistic root with the word \"atzor\", meaning \"stop\" or \"tarry\". Shemini Atzeret is characterized as a day when the Jewish People \"tarries\" to spend an additional day with God at the end of Sukkot. Rashi cites the parable of a king who invites his sons to dine with him for a number of days, but when the time comes for them to leave, he asks them to stay for another day, since it is difficult for him to part from them. According to this idea, Sukkot is a universal holiday, but Shemini Atzeret is for only the Jewish People. Moreover, Shemini Atzeret is a modest holiday intended to honor [God's] special relationship with his beloved nation.\nA different but related interpretation is offered by Yaakov Tzvi Mecklenburg, who translates \"atzeret\" as \"retain\": \"During the holiday season, we have experienced a heightened religious fervor and a most devout spirit. This last day is devoted to a recapitulation of the message of these days, with the hope that it will be retained the rest of the year\".\nConnections to the prior Jewish holy days.\nThe day before Shemini Atzeret is the last day of Sukkot. It is called Hoshana Rabbah and is unique and different from the other days of Sukkot. While it is part of the \"intermediate\" days of Sukkot known as \"Chol HaMoed\", Hoshana Rabbah has extra prayers and rituals and is treated and practised much more seriously and festively than are the previous days of \"Chol HaMoed\". In particular, during the morning prayer service of Hoshana Rabbah, there are seven \"hoshanot\" with their own seven \"hakafot\" or \"seven processions\". That sets the stage for the ritual, mood, tenor, and heightened sense of festivity for the days that follow it\u2014namely, of Shemini Atzeret when seven \"hakafot\" are again performed. The \"hakafot\" of Shemini Atzeret are the same as those used in the Simchat Torah celebration, which is observed in Israel in tandem with Shemini Atzeret. Outside the Land of Israel, the \"hakafot\" are performed by some congregations on the evening preceding Shemini Atzeret, and then by all on both the night and during the day of Simchat Torah.\n\"The Jewish Encyclopedia\" states that during the time of the Second Temple, the festival of Shavuot received the specific name of \"'Atzarta\" as cited by Josephus in Antiquities of the Jews (iii. 10, \u00a7 6) and in the Talmud's tractate Pesahim (42b, 68b), signifying \"the closing feast\" of Passover. Commenting on this, the Rabbis in Tractate Pesahim say that:\nThe closing feast of Sukkot (i.e., Shemini Atzeret) ought rightly to have been, like that of Passover (i.e., Shavuot) on the fiftieth day, but, in order not to force the people to make another journey to Jerusalem in the rainy season, God fixed it as early as the eighth day.\nShemini Atzeret thus concludes the process of judgment, repentance, and atonement begun on Rosh Hashanah: the Jewish New Year. Four days after the conclusion of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, Sukkot begins and is regarded as the celebration of the anticipated Divine \"good judgment\" that was, religious Jews hope, granted while observing the High Holy Days. (Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, and the week between them are known as the Ten Days of Repentance.) Hoshana Rabbah, Shemini Atzeret, and Simchat Torah then culminate the process with open celebration and festivity with joyous prayers, festive meals, and dancing, with the Torah scrolls held as the center of attention during the \"hakafot\" in the synagogue.\nEvolution of observances and customs.\nThe Torah explicitly mentions Shemini Atzeret three times, all in the context of Sukkot. Only two observances are specified for Shemini Atzeret. One relates to the Temple service, and is not relevant to modern observance. The other is the avoidance of \"servile labor\" \"(melechet avodah),\" as on other major Jewish holidays. \"(See also Jewish holidays \u2014 \"Work\" on Sabbath and biblical holidays.)\" No other specific rituals or ritual objects are specified, making Shemini Atzeret unique in that regard among the festivals mentioned in the Torah.\nTwo observances of Shemini Atzeret are mentioned in the Prophets and Writings portions of the Tanakh (Hebrew Bible). The first occurred at the time of the dedication of the First Temple by Solomon. The second came at the time of the Jews' return from the Babylonian exile. In both cases, however, the mention is limited to the observation that an \"assembly \"[atzeret]\" was held on the eighth day\".\nAccording to the Apocryphal Second Book of Maccabees, the first celebration of Hanukkah mimicked that of Sukkot, which the Maccabees and their followers had been unable to celebrate earlier that year. However, the only allusion to Shemini Atzeret in that narrative is that the Hanukkah celebration was fixed for eight days\u2014in remembrance of both the seven days of Sukkot and the additional day of Shemini Atzeret.\nLike most Jewish holidays of Biblical origin, Shemini Atzeret is observed for one day within the Land of Israel, and traditionally for two days outside Israel. Reform and Reconstructionist communities generally celebrate this and most Biblical holidays for one day, even outside Israel. The second day observed outside Israel is called \"Simchat Torah\" (see next section).\nSimchat Torah.\nThe practice of reading the Ve-zot ha-berakhah, the last of the weekly Torah portions on Shemini Atzeret is documented in the Talmud. That Talmudic source does not refer to the occasion as \"Simchat Torah\", but simply as [the second day of] Shemini Atzeret, and it is also not clear from that source if it is read as the last Torah portion (as is our custom) or as a special Festival reading.\nThe Simchat Torah celebration of today is of later rabbinic and customary origin. The day (but not the name) is mentioned in the \"siddur\" of Rav Amram Gaon (9th century CE); the assignment of the first chapter of Joshua as the \"haftarah\" of the day is mentioned there. The reading of the first section of Genesis immediately upon the conclusion of the last section of Deuteronomy\u2014as well as the name \"Simchat Torah\"\u2014can be found in the 14th century \"halachic\" work \"Arba'ah Turim.\" By the 16th century CE, most of the features of the modern celebration of Simchat Torah were in place in some form. The Simchat Torah celebration is now the most distinctive feature of this festival\u2014so much so that in the Land of Israel, where Shemini Atzeret lasts only one day, it is more common to refer to the day as \"Simchat Torah\" than as \"Shemini Atzeret\".\nIn the 20th century, Simchat Torah came to symbolize the public assertion of Jewish identity. The Jews of the Soviet Union, in particular, would celebrate the festival \"en masse\" in the streets of Moscow. On October 14, 1973, more than 100,000 Jews took part in a post-Simchat Torah rally in New York city on behalf of refuseniks and Soviet Jewry. Dancing in the street with the Torah has become part of the holiday's ritual in various Jewish congregations in the United States as well. In Israel, many communities conduct \"Hakafot shniyot,\" or \"Second \"hakafot\",\" on the day after Shemini Atzeret. In part, this shows solidarity with Jewish communities outside Israel, which are still celebrating Simchat Torah (on the second day of the festival). At the same time, it allows for a Simchat Torah celebration unconstrained by festival work restrictions, since the festival is over in Israel according to Jewish law.\nOutside Israel, where Shemini Atzeret is observed for two days, Simchat Torah is deferred to the second day, when all agree there is no obligation of \"sukkah\".\nCarryover of Sukkot observances outside the Land of Israel.\nIn Israel\u2014and for different reasons in Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism\u2014none of the unique observances of Sukkot (\"sukkah\", \"lulav\" and \"etrog\") carry over to Shemini Atzeret. \nShemini Atzeret is a holiday in its own right, without \"sukkah\", \"lulav\" and \"etrog\". At the same time, by the rabbinic decree to add one day to all holidays outside the Land of Israel, both Passover and Sukkot, although described in the Torah as seven-day holidays, are observed outside the Land of Israel for eight days. Accordingly, the \"eighth day of Sukkot\" outside Israel coincides with the separate holiday of Shemini Atzeret.\nPsalm 27, which is recited in most communities twice daily starting at the beginning of Elul, continues to be recited on Shemini Atzeret outside the Land of Israel. When Shemini Atzeret falls on the Shabbat, the Scroll of Ecclesiastes, or Kohelet (, otherwise read in Ashkenazi synagogues on the Shabbat of Sukkot), is read on that day outside the Land of Israel. In the Land of Israel, it would have been read on the first day of Sukkot, which would also have been on Shabbat. The Torah reading (Deuteronomy 14:22\u201316:17) is the same as on the Final Day of Passover and Second Day of Shavuot. However, in the Eastern Ashkenazic rite, unlike Passover and Shavuot, the longer version of the Torah reading is included on Shemini Atzeret even when the day does not fall on the Shabbat because the reading refers to separation of agricultural gifts (like tithes and \"terumah\"), which are due at this time of the year; in the Western Ashkenazic rite, as well as in most Sephardic communities, the short reading is read on Shemini Atzeret when it falls on a weekday. The Haftarah describes the people's blessing of King Solomon at the end of the dedication of the First Temple.\nTaking the\" lulav\" and \"etrog\" and sleeping in the \"sukkah\".\nThe prevalent practice is that one eats in the \"sukkah\" on the eighth day, but without reciting the blessing (\"berakhah\") for sitting in a \"sukkah\". However, one does not take the \"lulav\" and \"etrog\" (nor does one sleep in the \"sukkah\" according to most opinions) on the eighth day. If someone sees a neighbor on the street with a \"lulav\" and \"etrog\" on the eighth day, the rabbis reason, they might mistakenly assume that it is still the seventh day (\"\u1e25ol hamoed\"), when the \"lulav\" and \"etrog\" are still needed. They might then violate prohibitions of the \"yom tov\" of the eighth day. For that reason, the rabbis ruled that one should not take the \"lulav\" and \"etrog\" on the eighth day, even outside the Land of Israel. They are therefore \"muktzah\"; that is, one may not even move them on a holiday where they are not needed. Sleeping in the \"sukkah\" brings a similar discussion. Additionally, most people would prefer to sleep indoors at this point in the year due to the weather, so sleeping in the \"sukkah\" may impinge on one's own joy during the festival. This is why many rabbis ruled that one does not sleep in the \"sukkah\" on Shemini Atzeret, even outside the Land of Israel. Other rabbis, such as the Vilna Gaon, ruled that one should sleep in the \"sukkah\" on Shemini Atzeret outside the Land of Israel.\nEating in the \"sukkah\".\nEating in the \"sukkah\" does not cause a parallel problem because many people simply enjoy eating outdoors in the shade of a \"sukkah\". Hence, seeing someone eating in a \"sukkah\" does not \"per se\" lead one to assume it is still \"\u1e25ol hamoed\". Likewise, eating in the \"sukkah\" does not \"per se\" impinge on one's own celebration of Shemini Atzeret. Therefore, the prevalent practice is to eat in the \"sukkah\" on Shemini Azeret outside the Land of Israel, but not to recite the \"berakhah\" for sitting in a \"sukkah\", as reciting it would \"impinge\" on the unique status of Shemini Atzeret.\nThere are, however, those who have different \"minhagim\" (customs). Many Hasidic groups have a tradition to recite the morning \"kiddush\" and then have refreshments (such as cake) in the \"sukkah\", but to eat both the evening and morning main meals inside, notwithstanding the Talmudic ruling to the contrary. Others eat the evening meal of Shemini Atzeret indoors but the day meal in the \"sukkah\". Each of these approaches addresses aspects of the dual nature of Shemini Atzeret.\nOther customs.\nThe Land of Israel's agriculture depends heavily on rains that come only seasonally, so Jewish prayers for rain, such as \"Tefillat Geshem\" or \"Tikun Geshem\" (Rain Prayer) are prominent during the Land of Israel's rainy (winter) half of the year. The rainy season starts just after the fall Jewish holidays. Because of that, and because the \"sukkah\" (and, by extension, pleasant weather) is no longer required on Shemini Atzeret, Jews begin to praise God for making rain starting with the Musaf \"amidah\" prayer of Shemini Atzeret. In the Ashkenazic tradition, this prayer is recited in a traditional, distinctive, plaintive melody during the cantor's repetition of the \"amidah\"; according to the original custom, there are also many silent piyyutim, which today are omitted in most communities but still maintained in some communities. In some Ashkenazi synagogues, the cantor is clad in a white \"kittel,\" a symbol of piety, owing to the vitality of a positive judgment for rain. A brief mention of rain continues to be inserted in the \"amidah\" until Passover. The Yizkor memorial service is also recited in the Eastern Ashkenazic rite on this day, and it was adopted in some Western Ashkenazic communities.\nRecital of the Yizkor prayer is said to bring the person \"closer to the cold and brittle part of mourning\", and is necessary to promote the healing of a broken heart.\nObservance in non-rabbinical Jewish traditions.\nAs a biblically-mentioned holiday, Shemini Atzeret is also observed by Karaites and Samaritans:\nIn Karaite Judaism.\nFor Karaites, followers of a branch of Judaism that accepts the Written Law, but not the Oral Law, Shemini Atzeret is observed as a single day of rest, not associated with the practices of \"Simchat Torah,\" which are a rabbinic innovation. Nevertheless, the Karaite cycle of weekly Torah reading, like the Rabbinic cycle, reaches its conclusion on Shemini Atzeret. Accordingly, in at least some Karaite circles, this day is referred to by the name of \"Simchat Torah.\" \nAdditionally, calculation of the Karaite calendar is not based on astronomical calculations, but only on direct observation of the New Moon and the ripening of barley. Because of that, the 22nd day of the 7th month does not necessarily fall on the same date as 22 Tishrei in the (conventional, Rabbinic) Jewish calendar. In 2015, Shemini Atzeret fell on October 7 for Karaites, two days later than in the conventional Jewish calendar. In 2016, Shemini Atzeret fell on the same day according to both calendars.\nIn the Samaritan tradition.\nSamaritans, i.e. the northern Israelites who split from Jews during the reign of King Rehoboam, recognise only the first five (or six) books of the Bible as canonical, and thus celebrate only one day of Shemini A\u1e63ereth. \nShortly after midnight, prayers are made in the synagogue for more than ten hours. No work is permitted on this day. At the end of the holiday, the succahs are dismantled. Their poles and nets will be stored until the next Harvest Festival. The fruits will be squeezed into sweetened juice and some will be eaten by the children.\n2023 Hamas-led attack.\nOn October 07, 2023, 06:29, on the morning of Shemini Atzeret, Hamas launched an attack on Israeli army installations and civilian communities near the Gaza border. Around 1,140 Israelis were killed and over 250 were kidnapped and taken to Gaza as hostages, most of them unarmed civilians. This event marked the starting point of the Gaza war.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46408", "revid": "1319561364", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46408", "title": "Magenta", "text": "Color\nMagenta is a purplish red color. On color wheels of the RGB and CMYK color models, it is located directly midway between blue and red. It is one of the 4 colors of substractive ink used in color printing by most color printers, also known as CMYK along with yellow, cyan, and black to make all the other colors and hues. The tone of magenta used in printing, printer's magenta, is redder than the magenta of the RGB (additive) model, the former being closer to rose.\nMagenta took its name from an aniline dye made and patented in 1859 by the French chemist Fran\u00e7ois-Emmanuel Verguin, who originally called it \"fuchsine\". \nIt was renamed to celebrate the French-Sardinian victory under French Emperor Napoleon III at the Battle of Magenta against the larger army of the Austrian Empire on 4 June 1859 near the Italian town of Magenta, at the time in Austria. This battle was decisive in liberating Italy from Austrian domination. \nA virtually identical color, called roseine, was created in 1860 by two British chemists, Edward Chambers Nicholson, and George Maule.\nThe web color magenta is sometimes also called fuchsia.\nMagenta is a bright pink-like color used more like a RGB hue.\nIt also came with a Colourblocks called Magenta, it is a character in Colourblocks.\nIn optics and color science.\nMagenta is an extra-spectral color, meaning that no color of the visible spectrum has magenta's hue. Magenta is associated with perception of spectral power distributions concentrated mostly in two bands: longer wavelength reddish components and shorter wavelength blueish components.\nMagenta is the complementary color of green; thus, mixing one specific shade of magenta light and one specific shade of green light will result in white light.\nIn the RGB color system, used to create all the colors on a television or computer display, magenta is a secondary color, made by combining equal amounts of red and blue light at a high intensity.\nIn the CMYK color model, used in color printing, it is one of the three primary colors, along with cyan and yellow, used to print all the rest of the colors. If magenta, cyan, and yellow are printed on top of each other on a page, they make black. If combined, magenta ink plus ink of its complementary color, green, will result in a dark brown or black.\nIn terms of physiology, the color is stimulated in the brain when the eye reports input from short wave blue cone cells along with a sub-sensitivity of the long wave cones which respond secondarily to that same deep blue color, but with little or no input from the middle wave cones. The brain interprets that combination as some hue of magenta or purple, depending on the relative strengths of the cone responses.\nIn the Munsell color system, magenta is called \"red-purple\".\nFuchsia and magenta.\nThe web colors fuchsia and magenta are identical, made by mixing the same proportions of blue and red light. In design and printing, there is more variation. The French version of fuchsia in the RGB color model and in printing contains a higher proportion of red than the American version of fuchsia.\nHistory.\nFuchsine and magenta dye (1859).\nThe color magenta was the result of the industrial chemistry revolution of the mid-nineteenth century. It began with the invention of mauveine by William Perkin in 1856, the first synthetic aniline dye. The enormous commercial success of the dye and the new color it produced, mauve, inspired other chemists in Europe to develop new colors made from aniline dyes.\nIn France, Fran\u00e7ois-Emmanuel Verguin, the director of the chemical factory of Louis Rafard near Lyon, tried many different formulae before finally in late 1858 or early 1859, mixing aniline with carbon tetrachloride, producing a reddish-purple dye which he called \"fuchsine\", after the color of the flower of the fuchsia plant. He quit the Rafard factory and took his color to a firm of paint manufacturers, Francisque and Joseph Renard, who began to manufacture the dye in 1859.\nIn the same year, two British chemists, Edward Chambers Nicholson and George Maule, working at the laboratory of the paint manufacturer George Simpson, located in Walworth, south of London, made another aniline dye with a similar red-purple color, which they began to manufacture in 1860 under the name \"roseine\". In 1860, they changed the name of the color to \"magenta\", in honor of the Battle of Magenta fought by the armies of France and Sardinia against Austrians at Magenta, Lombardy the year before, and the new color became a commercial success.\nStarting in 1935, the family of quinacridone dyes was developed. These have colors ranging from red to violet, so nowadays a quinacridone dye is often used for magenta. Various tones of magenta\u2014light, bright, brilliant, vivid, rich, or deep\u2014may be formulated by adding varying amounts of white to quinacridone artist's paints.\nAnother dye used for magenta is Lithol Rubine BK. One of its uses is as a food coloring.\nProcess magenta (pigment magenta; printer's magenta) (1890s).\nIn color printing, the color called process magenta, pigment magenta, or printer's magenta is one of the three primary pigment colors which, along with yellow and cyan, constitute the three subtractive primary colors of pigment. (The secondary colors of pigment are blue, green, and red.) As such, the hue magenta is the complement of green: magenta pigments absorb green light; thus magenta and green are opposite colors.\nThe CMYK printing process was invented in the 1890s, when newspapers began to publish color comic strips.\nProcess magenta is not an RGB color, and there is no fixed conversion from CMYK primaries to RGB. Different formulations are used for printer's ink, so there may be variations in the printed color that is pure magenta ink.\nWeb colors magenta and fuchsia.\nThe web color magenta is one of the three secondary colors in the RGB color model.\nOn the , magenta is the color between rose and violet, and halfway between red and blue.\nThis color is called \"magenta\" in X11 and \"fuchsia\" in HTML. In the RGB color model, it is created by combining equal intensities of red and blue light. The two web colors magenta and fuchsia are exactly the same color. Sometimes the web color magenta is called \"electric magenta\" or \"electronic magenta\".\nWhile the magenta used in printing and the web color have the same name, they have important differences. Process magenta (the color used for magenta printing ink\u2014also called printer's or pigment magenta) is much less vivid than the color magenta achievable on a computer screen. CMYK printing technology cannot accurately reproduce on paper the color on the computer screen. When the web color magenta is reproduced on paper, it is called fuchsia and it is physically impossible for it to appear on paper as vivid as on a computer screen.\nColored pencils and crayons called \"magenta\" are usually colored the color of \"process magenta\" (\"printer's magenta\").\nIn science and culture.\nIn botany.\nMagenta is a common color for flowers, particularly in the tropics and sub-tropics. Because magenta is the complementary color of green, magenta flowers have the highest contrast with the green foliage, and therefore are more visible to the animals needed for their pollination.\nIn business.\nThe German telecommunications company Deutsche Telekom uses a magenta logo. It has sought to prevent use of any similar color by other businesses, even those in unrelated fields, such as the insurance company Lemonade.\nIn public transport.\nMagenta was the English name of Tokyo's Oedo subway line color. It was later changed to \"ruby\".\nIt is also the color of the Metropolitan line of the London Underground.\nIn transportation.\nIn aircraft autopilot systems, the path that pilot or plane should follow to its destination is usually indicated in cockpit displays using the color magenta.\nIn numismatics.\nThe Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued a Magenta colored banknote of \u20b92000 denomination on 8 November 2016 under Mahatma Gandhi New Series. This is the highest currency note printed by RBI that is in active circulation in India.\nIn vexillology and heraldry.\nMagenta is an extremely rare color to find on heraldic flags and coats of arms, since its adoption dates back to relatively recent times. However, there are some examples of its use:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46410", "revid": "30453732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46410", "title": "YMCK", "text": "Japanese chiptune band\nYMCK is a Japanese chiptune band, composed of Midori Kurihara (vocals), Takeshi Yokemura (music, lyrics, arrangement), and Tomoyuki Nakamura (composition, music video).\nTheir work has not been confined to Japan, having released albums in Korea, Thailand and the United States as well as appearing at various events around East Asia and Europe.\nYMCK's name is derived from the CMYK subtractive color model.\nHistory.\nYMCK was formed in May 2003 when Kurihara joined Yokemura and Nakamura. They soon released their first work; a CD-R containing 6 tracks.\nIn 2004, YMCK appeared at Microdisko in Stockholm, Sweden. In the same year they released their first full album, \"Family Music\".\nIn 2005, YMCK again appeared outside Japan, this time at the Formoz Festival in Taipei, Taiwan and at the Fat Festival in Bangkok, Thailand. This year also marks the first release of the \"Magical 8bit Plug\", a synthesizer developed by Yokemura himself, motivated by frustration with the quality of game sounds available in the synthesizers used for Family Music. Now making use of the Magical 8bit Plug, they released their second album: \"Family Racing\".\nIn 2006, they again appeared at the Formoz Festival in Taiwan.\nIn 2008, YMCK released their third album \"Family Genesis\", now under pop label Avex Trax, made available for the first time on the iTunes Store in the United States. Later that year and under the same label, they would release their first cover album, the \"YMCK Songbook\", a collection of covers of Japanese music from the era before the NES.\nIn January 2009, they appeared in Sweden once again, this time at UppCon] in Uppsala, and also played in the opening ceremonies for Katsucon 15 in Arlington, Virginia (DC). In that same month they also released \"Family Cooking\". In 2009, YMCK also remixed the No. 1 hit song Days by Japanese mega-star Ayumi Hamasaki.\nDuring 2013, YMCK released \"Family Days\", this time through not records. The theme of this album was said to be YMCK describing their own ordinary lives.\nIn 2015, they released \"Family Dancing\".\nIn 2017, \"Family Swing\" was released, and for the first time they also released through Bandcamp, under U.K. chiptune label Hyperwave.\nDiscography.\nNote: The English is not necessarily a direct translation of the Japanese. The English titles are taken from the English version of the website. For example, track one on \"FAMILY RACING\" was actually titled \"FAMILY RACING\" instead of \"Opening\" on the Japanese release.\nStudio albums.\nFAMILY MUSIC (CD-R edition) (2003, self-released)\nFamily Music (2004, Usagi-Chang (Japan)/Pastel (South Korea)/Records of the Damned (United States))\nFamily Racing (2005, Usagi-Chang (Japan)/Pastel (South Korea)/smallroom (Thailand)\nFamily Genesis (2008, avex Group (Japan)/Records of the Damned (United States))\nYMCK SONGBOOK: songs before 8bit (2008, avex Group (Japan) - Covers album; original artists listed in parentheses)\nFamily Cooking (2009, Avex Group (Japan))\nFamily Days (2013, not records (Japan))\nFamily Dancing (2015, not records (Japan))\nFamily Swing (2017, not records (Japan))\nFamily Circus (2019, not records (Japan))\n[\"Note: Some of the names listed are a direct translation as the official English Names couldn't be found. Those with a directly translated name will be marked with an asterisk (*) and have the original name beside it in parentheses separated by a line.\"]\nPiCTOBiTS.\nYMCK composed the music for the DSiWare downloadable puzzle game \"PiCTOBiTS\", which features 8-bit music from Nintendo games.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46412", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46412", "title": "Yes, Prime Minister", "text": ""}
{"id": "46413", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46413", "title": "Executive producer", "text": "Profession\nExecutive producer (EP) is one of the top positions in the production of media such as films, television, music, radio, or video games. In films, the executive producer generally contributes to the film's budget and their involvement depends on the project, with some simply securing funds and others being involved in the filmmaking process. In general, the film producer is more involved in the hands-on production of the film. In television, executive producers are sometimes involved with the production in a hands-on capacity, but their roles are highly variable. In music, the executive producer is responsible for business decisions. Depending on the medium, the executive producer may also be concerned with legal issues.\nFilm.\nIn films, the executive producer generally contributes to the film's budget and their involvement depends on the project, with some simply securing funds and others being involved in the filmmaking process. Executive producers may finance the film, participate in the creative effort, and/or work on set. Their responsibilities vary from funding or attracting investors into the movie project to legal, scripting, marketing, advisory and supervising capacities.\nExecutive producers vary in involvement, responsibility and power. Some executive producers have hands-on control over every aspect of production, some supervise the producers of a project, while others are involved in name only. In the UK, \"An executive producer is the person who generally brings the concept to the commissioners... makes sure finance is there and so on, but doesn't have a hand in the day-to-day running. They are ultimately being a figurehead for the programme, so the buck should stop with them\".\nThe crediting of executive producers in the film industry has risen over time. In the mid-to-late 1990s, there were an average of just under two executive producers per film. In 2000, the number jumped to 2.5 (more than the number of standard \"film producers\"). In 2013, there were an average of 4.4 executive producers per film. One reason for the increase in executive producers per film is the desire to spread risk, whether due to increasing cost of film making for larger budget films, often met by multiple studios banding together, or alternatively the need to attract multiple smaller investors for lower budget independent films.\nTelevision.\nIn television, the executive producer credit is often applied to individuals who are involved with the production in a hands-on capacity; an executive producer usually supervises the creative content, plans and schedules the filming with the producer and team, and may be involved in the financial budgeting of a production. Many writers, like Aaron Sorkin, Stephen J. Cannell, Tina Fey, and Ryan Murphy, have worked as both the creator and the producer of the same show. \nAs in film, executive producer credits in television are also commonly applied to individuals who are involved in the production in a more hands-off capacity, such as the owner of the show's production company. Their degree of power and influence over the development of a product varies, with some more hands-on than others, and their legal responsibilities for the shows are highly variable. The title is sometimes nothing more than a \"vanity title\".\nIn the case of multiple executive producers on a television show, the one responsible for day-to-day production is usually called the showrunner, or the leading executive producer.\nMusic.\nIn recorded music, record labels distinguish between an executive producer and a record producer. The executive producer is responsible for business decisions and more recently, organizing the recordings along with the music producer, whereas the record producer makes the music. Sometimes the executive producer organizes the recording and selects recording-related crew, such as sound engineers and session musicians.\nRadio.\nAn executive radio producer helps create, develop, and implement strategies to improve product and ratings.\nVideo games.\nIn the video game industry, the title \"executive producer\" is not well-defined. It may refer to an external producer working for the publisher, who works with the developers. For example, in 2012, Jay-Z was announced as executive producer for \"NBA 2K13\". His role consisted of appearing in an introduction, picking songs for the game's soundtrack and contributing to the designs of its in-game menus \"and other visual elements\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46415", "revid": "44573150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46415", "title": "Crayon", "text": "Stick made up of pigmented wax, used for writing or drawing\nA crayon (or wax pastel) is a stick of pigmented wax used for writing or drawing. Wax crayons differ from pastels, in which the pigment is mixed with a dry binder such as gum arabic, and from oil pastels, where the binder is a mixture of wax and oil.\nCrayons are available in a range of prices, and are easy to work with. They are less messy than most paints and markers, blunt (removing the risk of sharp points present when using a pencil or pen), typically non-toxic, and available in a wide variety of colors. These characteristics make them particularly good instruments for teaching small children to draw in addition to being used widely by student and professional artists.\nComposition.\nIn the modern English-speaking world, the term crayon is commonly associated with the standard wax crayon, such as those widely available for use by children. Such crayons are usually approximately in length and made mostly of paraffin wax. Paraffin wax is heated and cooled to achieve the correct temperature, at which a usable wax substance can be dyed, manufactured and then shipped for use around the world. Paraffin waxes are used for cosmetics, candles, for the preparation of printing ink, fruit preserving, in the pharmaceutical industry, for lubricating purposes, and for manufacturing crayons.\nColin Snedeker, a chemist for Binney &amp; Smith (the then-parent company of Crayola), developed the first washable crayons in response to consumer complaints regarding stained fabrics and walls. A patent for the washable solid marking composition utilized in the washable crayons was awarded to Snedeker in 1990.\nHistory.\nThe history of the crayon is not entirely clear. The French word \"crayon\", originally meaning \"chalk pencil\", dates to around the 16th century, and is derived from the word \"craie\" (chalk), which comes from the Latin word \"creta\" (Earth). The meaning later changed to simply \"pencil\", which it still means in modern French.\nThe notion to combine a form of wax with pigment goes back thousands of years. Encaustic painting is a technique that uses hot beeswax combined with colored pigment to bind color into stone. A heat source was then used to \"burn in\" and fix the image in place. Pliny the Elder, a Roman scholar, was thought to describe the first techniques of wax crayon drawings.\nThis method, employed by the Egyptians, Romans, Greeks, and indigenous people in the Philippines, is still used today. However, the process was not used to make crayons into a form intended to be held and colored with and was therefore ineffective for use in a classroom or as crafts for children.\nContemporary crayons are purported to have originated in Europe, where some of the first cylinder shaped crayons were made with charcoal and oil. Pastels are an art medium sharing roots with the modern crayon and date back to Leonardo da Vinci in 1495. Cont\u00e9 crayons, out of Paris, are a hybrid between a pastel and a conventional crayon, used since the late 1790s as a drawing crayon for artists. Later, various hues of powdered pigment eventually replaced the primary charcoal ingredient found in most early 19th century products. References to crayons in literature appear as early as 1813 in Jane Austen's \"Pride and Prejudice\". French lithographer Joseph Lemercier was also one of the inventors of the modern crayon. Through his Paris business circa 1828, he produced a variety of crayon and color related products. But even as those in Europe were discovering that substituting wax for the oil strengthened the crayon, various efforts in the United States were also developing.\nThe initial era of wax crayons saw several companies and products competing for the lucrative education and artist markets. The Franklin Mfg. Co, founded in 1876 in Rochester, New York, was one of the first companies to make and sell wax crayons, and in 1883 they appeared with a display of crayons at the World's Columbian Exposition that year.\nSome of the earliest records of the modern paraffin wax crayon comes from Charles A. Bowley of Massachusetts, who developed wax coloring crayons in the late 1880s. Bowley had been selling various stationery items in the vicinity of Danvers and had developed clumps of colored wax designed for marking leather. With the need for more accuracy, he went back to his home and formed the wax crayons into more manageable cylinder shapes similar to that of a pencil. He packaged his crayons into decorative boxes and offered them through stationer clients he knew. The demand for his crayons soon exceeded his ability to keep up with production and he partnered with the American Crayon Company, who had been producing chalk crayons, in 1902.\nEdwin Binney and C. Harold Smith had been long established in the coloring marketplace through Binney's Peekskill, New York, chemical works making lampblack by burning whale and carbon black, as well as their chalk products. In 1902, they developed and introduced the Staonal marking crayon. A year later in 1903, Edwin Binney's wife, Alice Stead Binney, coined the name Crayola by combining the French word for chalk, \"craie\", with the first part of \"oleaginous\", another name for the paraffin wax used to make the crayon. Binney and Smith were quick to capitalize on their creation, selling boxes of various sizes and color pallets. The Rubens Crayola line started in 1903 as well, aimed at artist and designed to compete with the Raphael brand of crayons from Europe.\nTheir most recognizable brand was the Crayola \"Gold Medal\" line in yellow boxes, which referred to one the company earned with their An-du-Septic dustless chalk during the March 1904 St. Louis World's Fair. They used the award to design a new line of crayons featuring the medal on the front of their box. Initially, they developed and introduced the No. 8 box of eight assorted colors, which became an immediate success; it was even featured on a postage stamp in early 1905. From there they began to phase out other Crayola crayon boxes until their line of Crayola crayons featured the Gold Medal design.\nHundreds of companies entered the crayon market, but only a few exist today, with Crayola dominating the market in the United States. That brand become a generic trademark also used to describe other brands' crayons. In all, there were over 300 documented crayon manufacturers in the United States and many more in other countries.\nToday.\nBeyond Crayola, other brand name crayon manufacturers today include Rose Art Industries and Dixon Ticonderoga, the successor to the American Crayon Company. Numerous suppliers create generic brand or store brand crayons. These are typically found in supermarkets.\nIn 2000, there was concern about potential contamination of asbestos in many popular brands of crayons after the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\" reported in May of that year that they had tests performed finding that three brands of crayons contained asbestos. In a follow-up study released in June the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) found traces of asbestos fibers in three crayons and larger amounts of transitional fibers which can be misinterpreted as asbestos as a result of using talc as a binding agent in additional crayons. CPSC declared the risk to be low, but said that because of the concerns it had asked manufacturers to reformulate the concerned crayons and commended them for their swift agreement to do so.\nArtists.\nEarly French artists, including Fran\u00e7ois Clouet (1510\u20131572) and Nicholas L'agneau (1590\u20131666), used crayons in their early art projects. Clouet used crayons for his modeled portraits, which were so elaborate that he caught the attention of Henry V, who knighted him. He became a court painter for the royalty, and his entire art career began with and consisted of wax crayon art. L'agneau illustrated his portraits with outlines in wax crayons, and with tints of watercolor. His portraits were often of people who looked surprised or unaware of their surroundings.\nSister Gertrude Morgan was most known for preaching the Gospel around New Orleans with simple and easy-to-understand crayon drawings. Morgan caught the eye of a gallery owner E. Lorenz Borenstein, and was allowed to show her work, play her music and spread her word of God at the gallery. Her early drawings were that of just very modest and simple crayon drawings, depicting biblical text to provide a clearer image to those who were unfamiliar with the Bible. Morgan went on to publish a record of her biblical songs and has artwork featured in the American Folk Art Museum in New York.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46417", "revid": "44092845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46417", "title": "West Ham United F.C.", "text": "Association football club in England\nFootball club\nWest Ham United Football Club is a professional football club based in Stratford, East London, England. The club competes in the Premier League, the top tier of English football. The club plays at the London Stadium, having moved from their former home, the Boleyn Ground, in 2016.\nWest Ham United was founded in 1895 as Thames Ironworks and reformed in 1900 as West Ham United. It moved to the Boleyn Ground, which remained its home ground for more than a century, in 1904. The team initially competed in the Southern League and Western League before joining the Football League in 1919. It was promoted to the top flight in 1923, when it was also losing finalist in the first FA Cup final held at Wembley. In 1940, the club won the inaugural Football League War Cup.\nWest Ham United has won five major honours in its history. Domestically, it has been winner of the FA Cup three times (1964, 1975 and 1980) and runner-up twice (1923 and 2006). In European competitions, the club has reached three major European finals winning the European Cup Winners' Cup in 1965, finishing runner-up in the same competitions in 1976, and winning the second edition of the Conference League in 2023. The club has also won one minor European trophy by winning the Intertoto Cup in 1999. West Ham United is one of eight clubs never to have fallen below the second tier of English football, spending 66 of 98 league seasons in the top flight, up to and including the 2023\u201324 season. The club's highest league position to date came in 1985\u201386, when it achieved third place in the then First Division.\nThree West Ham players were members of the 1966 World Cup finals-winning England team: captain Bobby Moore and goalscorers Geoff Hurst and Martin Peters. The club has a long-standing rivalry with Millwall, and the fixture has gained notoriety for frequent incidents of football hooliganism. West Ham adopted their claret, sky blue and white colour scheme in the early 1900s, with the most common iteration of a claret shirt and sky blue sleeves first emerging in 1904.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe earliest generally accepted incarnation of West Ham United was founded in 1895 as Thames Ironworks F.C., the works team of the largest and last surviving shipbuilder on the Thames, Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Company, by foreman and local league referee Dave Taylor and owner Arnold Hills and was announced in the \"Thames Ironworks Gazette\" of June 1895. Thames Ironworks was based in Leamouth Wharf in Blackwall and Canning Town on both banks of the River Lea, where the Lea meets the Thames. Thames Ironworks built many ships and other structures, the most famous being . The last ship built there was the dreadnought in 1912 and the yard shut soon after.\nThe repair yard of the Castle Shipping Line was a very near neighbour and their work team, initially known as the Castle Swifts, would informally merge with the Thames Ironworks own team.\nThe team played on a strictly amateur basis for 1895 at least, with a team featuring a number of works employees. Thomas Freeman was a ships fireman and Walter Parks, a clerk. Johnny Stewart, Walter Tranter and James Lindsay were all boilermakers. Other employees included William Chapman, George Sage and Fred Chamberlain, as well as apprentice riveter Charlie Dove, who was to have a great influence on the club's future at a later date.\nThames Ironworks won the West Ham Charity Cup, contested by clubs in the West Ham locality, in 1895, then won the London League in 1897. They turned professional in 1898 upon entering the Southern League Second Division, and were promoted to the First Division at the first attempt. The following year they came second from bottom, but had established themselves as a fully-fledged competitive team. They comfortably fended off the challenge of local rivals Fulham in a relegation play-off, 5\u20131 in late April 1900 and retained their First Division status.\nThe team initially played in full dark blue kits, as inspired by Mr. Hills, who had been an Oxford University \"Blue\", but changed the following season by adopting the sky blue shirts and white shorts combination worn from 1897 to 1899.\nFollowing growing disputes over the running and financing of the club, in June 1900 Thames Ironworks F.C. was disbanded, then almost immediately relaunched as West Ham United F.C. \u2013 reflecting the West Ham, London district where they played \u2013 on 5 July 1900 with Syd King as their manager and future manager Charlie Paynter as his assistant. Because of the original \"works team\" roots and links (still represented upon the club badge), they are still known as \"the Irons\" or \"the Hammers\" amongst fans and the media.\nBirth of West Ham United (1901\u20131961).\nWest Ham United joined the Western League for the 1901 season while also continuing to play in the Southern Division 1. In 1907, West Ham were crowned the Western League Division 1B Champions, and then defeated 1A champions Fulham 1\u20130 to become the Western League Overall Champions. The reborn club continued to play their games at the Memorial Grounds in Plaistow (funded by Arnold Hills) but moved to a pitch in the Upton Park area in the guise of the Boleyn Ground stadium in 1904. West Ham's first game in their new home was against fierce rivals Millwall (themselves an Ironworks team, albeit for a rival company) drawing a crowd of 10,000 and with West Ham running out 3\u20130 winners, and as the \"Daily Mirror\" wrote on 2 September 1904, \"Favoured by the weather turning fine after heavy rains of the morning, West Ham United began their season most auspiciously yesterday evening; when they beat Millwall by 3 goals to 0 on their new enclosure at Upton Park.\"\nIn 1919, still under King's leadership, West Ham gained entrance to the Football League Second Division, their first game being a 1\u20131 draw with Lincoln City, and were promoted to the First Division in 1923, also making it to the first ever FA Cup final to be held at the old Wembley Stadium. Their opponents were Bolton Wanderers. This was also known as the \"White Horse final\", where nearly 300,000 people (according to Police estimates) came to see the match. Overcrowding led to the crowd spilling out on to the pitch, which had to be cleared prior to kick-off by \"Billie\", a giant white horse (actually grey) being ridden by PC George Scorey. The cup final match itself ended 2\u20130 to Bolton. The team enjoyed mixed success in the First Division but retained their status for ten years and reached the FA Cup semi-final in 1933.\nIn 1932, the club was relegated to the Second Division and long-term custodian Syd King was sacked after serving the club in the role of manager for 32 years, and as a player from 1899 to 1903. Following relegation, King had mental health problems. He appeared drunk at a board meeting and killed himself soon after. He was replaced with his assistant manager Charlie Paynter, who himself had been with West Ham in a number of roles since 1897 and who went on to serve the team in this role until 1950 for a total of 480 games. \nAt the start of the 1939-1940 season, the club has assembled a group of players that Charlie Paynter believed was the most talented he'd managed. This included local men brought through the youth team such as Len Goulden, an England regular, and successful signings from the English and Scottish Leagues. There was hope for promotion and a successful new era until war broke out three matches into the season and league football was suspended for six years.\nAlthough league competition was suspended, the War Cup was played in place of the FA Cup for the duration of hostilities. In June 1940 the club won its first major trophy, winning the War Cup by beating first division Blackburn Rovers 1-0 at Wembley Stadium. The club spent most of the next thirty years in the second division, first under Paynter and then later under the leadership of former player Ted Fenton.\nFenton succeeded in getting the club promoted back to the top level of English football in 1958. With the considerable input of player Malcolm Allison, Fenton helped develop both the initial batch of future West Ham stars and West Ham's approach to the game.\nGlory years (1961\u20131986).\nRon Greenwood was appointed as Fenton's successor in 1961 and soon led the club to two major trophies, winning the 1964 FA Cup Final. The team was led by the young Bobby Moore. West Ham also won the European Cup Winners' Cup the following year. During the 1966 World Cup, key members of the tournament winners England were West Ham players, including the captain, Bobby Moore; Martin Peters (who scored in the final); and Geoff Hurst, who scored the first hat-trick in a World Cup final. All three players had come through the youth team at West Ham. \nThere is a \"Champions\" statue in Barking Road, opposite The Boleyn Tavern, commemorating West Ham's \"three sons\" who helped win the 1966 World Cup: Bobby Moore, Geoff Hurst and Martin Peters. Also included on the statue is Everton's Ray Wilson.\nAfter a difficult start to the 1974\u201375 season, Greenwood moved himself \"upstairs\" to become general manager and, without informing the board, appointed his assistant John Lyall as team manager. The result was instant success \u2013 the team scored 20 goals in their first four games and won the FA Cup, becoming the last team to win the FA Cup with an all-English side when they beat Fulham 2\u20130 in the 1975 final. The Fulham team included two former England captains, Alan Mullery and West Ham legend Bobby Moore. Lyall then guided West Ham to another European Cup Winners' Cup final in 1976, though the team lost the match 4\u20132 to Belgian side Anderlecht. Greenwood's tenure as general manager lasted less than three years, as he was appointed to manage England in the wake of Don Revie's resignation in 1977.\nIn 1978, West Ham were again relegated to the Second Division, but Lyall was retained as manager and led the team to victory in the 1980 FA Cup final with a 1\u20130 win against Arsenal, the most recent time a team from outside the top flight has won the FA Cup. They reached the final by defeating Everton in the semi-final. West Ham were promoted to the First Division in 1981, and finished in the top ten of the First Division for the next three seasons before achieving their highest-ever league finish of third in 1985\u201386; a group of players which came to be known as The Boys of 86.\nUps and downs (1986\u20132005).\nHowever, the \"Hammers\" suffered relegation again in 1989, which resulted in Lyall's sacking. He was awarded an \"ex gratia\" payment of \u00a3 () but left the club in what Lyall described as \"upsetting\" circumstances, meriting only 73 words in a terse acknowledgement of his service in the club programme. Lyall left West Ham after 34 years' service.\nAfter Lyall, Lou Macari briefly led the team, though he resigned after less than a single season in order to clear his name of allegations of illegal betting while manager of Swindon Town. He was replaced by former player Billy Bonds. In Bonds' first full season, 1990\u201391, West Ham again secured promotion to the First Division. Now back in the top flight, Bonds saw West Ham through one of their most controversial seasons. With the club planning to introduce a bond scheme, there was crowd unrest. West Ham finished last and were relegated back to the Second Division after only one season. However, they rebounded strongly in 1992\u201393. With Trevor Morley and Clive Allen scoring 40 goals, they guaranteed themselves second place on the last day of the season with a 2\u20130 home win against Cambridge United, and with it promotion to the Premier League.\nWith the team in the Premier League, there was a need to rebuild the team. Oxford United player Joey Beauchamp was recruited for a fee of \u00a31.2\u00a0million (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023). Shortly after arriving at the club, however, he became unhappy, citing homesickness from his native Oxford as the reason. Bonds in particular found this attitude hard to understand compared to his own committed, never-say-die approach; providing for Bonds' further evidence of the decay in the modern game and modern player. Fifty-eight days later, Beauchamp was signed by Swindon Town for a club-record combined fee of \u00a3800,000 (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023), which included defender Adrian Whitbread going in the opposite direction. Whitbread was valued at \u00a3750,000 (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023) in the deal.\nAssistant manager Harry Redknapp was also now taking a bigger role in the transfer of players, with the club's approval. With rumours of his old club AFC Bournemouth being prepared to offer him a position, the West Ham board and their managing director, Peter Storrie, made a controversial move. The board were anxious not to lose Redknapp's services and offered Bonds a place away from the day-to-day affairs of the club on the West Ham board. This would have allowed them to appoint Redknapp as manager. Bonds refused the post offered and walked away from the club. His accusations of deceit and manipulation by the board and by Redknapp have continued to cause ill-feeling. Peter Storrie claimed that they had handled the situation correctly, saying, \"If Harry had gone to Bournemouth, there was a good chance Bill would have resigned anyway, so we were in a no-win situation. We're sad that Bill is going, and it's a big blow but it's time to move on and we have appointed a great manager.\"\nRedknapp became manager on 10 August 1994.\nRedknapp's seven years as manager was notable for the turnover of players during his tenure and for the level of attractive football and success which had not been seen since the managership of John Lyall. Over 134 players passed through the club while he was manager, producing a net transfer fee deficit of \u00a316\u00a0million, despite the \u00a318\u00a0million sale (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023) of Rio Ferdinand to Leeds United in 2000. Some were notably successful, such as the signings of Stuart Pearce, Trevor Sinclair, Paolo Di Canio, John Hartson, Eyal Berkovic and Ian Wright. Meanwhile, some were expensive, international players who failed at West Ham, such as Florin Raducioiu; Davor \u0160uker, who earned as much in wages as the revenue gained from one entire stand and yet made only eight appearances; Christian Bassila, who cost \u00a3720,000 (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023) and played only 86 minutes of football; Titi Camara; Gary Charles, whose wages amounted to \u00a34.4\u00a0million (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023) but made only three starts for the club; Rigobert Song; Paulo Futre; and Marco Boogers, a player often quoted as one of the biggest failures in the Premier League. His first season in charge saw West Ham fighting the threat of relegation until the last few weeks, while his third season would also see another relegation battle. Always willing to enter the transfer market, Redknapp bought in the winter transfer window John Hartson and Paul Kitson, who added the impetus needed at the season's end.\nIn 1999, West Ham finished fifth, their highest position in the top flight since 1986. They also won the Intertoto Cup beating French club Metz to qualify for the 1999\u20132000 UEFA Cup. Things began to falter for Redknapp with the sale of Ferdinand to Leeds in November 2000. Redknapp used the transfer money poorly with purchases such as Ragnvald Soma, who cost \u00a3800,000 (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023) and played only seven league games, Camara, and Song. Redknapp felt he needed more funds with which to deal in the transfer market. Chairman Brown lost patience with Redknapp due to his demands for further transfer funds. In June 2001, called to a meeting with Brown expecting to discuss contracts, he was fired. His assistant Frank Lampard left too, making the sale of his son, Frank Lampard Jr., inevitable; in the summer of 2001, he joined Chelsea for \u00a311\u00a0million (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023).\nWith several names, such as former player Alan Curbishley, now linked with the job, Chairman Brown recruited from within the club, appointing reserve team coach Glenn Roeder as manager on 9 May 2001. He had already failed in management with Gillingham, where he lost 22 of the 35 games he managed, and Watford. His first big signings were the return of Don Hutchison for \u00a35\u00a0million (equivalent to \u00a3\u00a0million in 2023) and Czech centre back Tom\u00e1\u0161 \u0158epka. Finishing seventh in his first season Roeder, in his office at Upton Park, suffered a blocked blood vessel in his brain. As Roeder needed medical help and recuperation, former stalwart Trevor Brooking stood in as caretaker manager. Despite not losing another game, the Hammers were relegated on the last day of the season at Birmingham City, with a record high for a relegated club of 42 points from a 38-game season. Ten seasons of top-tier football were over. Many top players, including Joe Cole, Di Canio and Kanout\u00e9, all left the club.\nThe next season, now in the second tier, Roeder resumed his stint as manager. Results were still poor, however, and after an away defeat to Rotherham United, he was sacked on 24 August 2003. Brooking again took over as caretaker. He lost only one game, a 2\u20130 away defeat to Gillingham and is known as \"the best manager West Ham never had.\"\nFormer Crystal Palace player and manager of Reading, Alan Pardew was lined up to be the next bench boss. Reading and their chairman, John Madejski, however, were reluctant to let him leave. After serving a period of notice and gardening leave, and with West Ham paying Reading \u00a3380,000 () in compensation, he was appointed manager on 18 October 2003, their tenth manager. Pardew set out to rebuild the side bringing in Nigel Reo-Coker, Marlon Harewood and Brian Deane. In his first season in charge, they made the playoff final only to lose to Crystal Palace. His signings of Bobby Zamora, Matthew Etherington and veterans Chris Powell and Teddy Sheringham saw West Ham finishing sixth and subsequently beat Preston North End 1\u20130 thanks to a Zamora goal in the 2005 playoff final, securing a return to the Premier League. After ensuring promotion, Pardew said, \"It's a team effort. We defended well and we're back where we belong.\"\nFinal years at the Boleyn (2005\u20132016).\nOn their return to the top division, West Ham finished in ninth place,&lt;ref name=\"Final 2005/2006 English Premier Table\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The highlight of the 2005\u201306 season, however, was reaching the FA Cup final and taking favourites Liverpool to a penalty shootout after a 3\u20133 draw. West Ham lost the shootout, but nonetheless gained entry to the following season's UEFA Cup as Liverpool had already qualified for the Champions League. In August 2006, West Ham completed a major coup on the last day of the transfer window after completing the signings of Carlos Tevez and Javier Mascherano. The club was eventually bought by an Icelandic consortium, led by Eggert Magn\u00fasson, in November 2006. Manager Alan Pardew was sacked after poor form during the season and was replaced by former Charlton Athletic manager Alan Curbishley.\nThe signings of Mascherano and Tevez were investigated by the Premier League, who were concerned that details of the transfers had been omitted from official records. The club was found guilty and fined \u00a35.5\u00a0million in April 2007. However, West Ham avoided a points deduction which ultimately became critical in their avoidance of relegation at the end of the 2006\u201307 season. Following on from this event, Wigan Athletic chairman Dave Whelan, supported by other sides facing possible relegation, including Fulham and Sheffield United, threatened legal action. West Ham escaped relegation by winning seven of their last nine games, including a 1\u20130 win over Arsenal, and on the last day of the season defeated newly crowned League Champions Manchester United 1\u20130 with a goal by Tevez to finish 15th.\nIn the 2007\u201308 season, West Ham remained reasonably consistently in the top half of the league table, with Freddie Ljungberg in the team, despite a slew of injuries; new signing Craig Bellamy missed most of the campaign, while Kieron Dyer was out from August 2007. The last game of the season, at the Boleyn Ground, saw West Ham draw 2\u20132 against Aston Villa, ensuring a tenth-place finish three points ahead of rivals Tottenham Hotspur. It was a five-place improvement on the previous season, and most importantly West Ham were never under any realistic threat of relegation.\nAfter a row with the board over the sale of defenders Anton Ferdinand and George McCartney to Sunderland, manager Alan Curbishley resigned on 3 September 2008. His successor was former Chelsea striker Gianfranco Zola, who took over on 11 September 2008 to become the club's first non-British manager. In the 2008\u201309 season, West Ham finished ninth, a single place improvement.\nIn the 2009\u201310 season, West Ham started strongly with a 2\u20130 win over newly promoted Wolverhampton Wanderers, with goals from Mark Noble and newly appointed captain Matthew Upson. A League Cup match against old rivals Millwall brought about violent riots outside the ground as well as pitch invasions and crowd trouble inside Upton Park. In August 2009, the financial concerns of Icelandic owners parent companies left the current owners unable to provide any funds until a new owner was found. The club's shirt sponsor SBOBET provided the club with help to purchase a much needed striker, the Italian Alessandro Diamanti.\nWest Ham had a poor season which involved a prolonged battle against relegation. They finally secured their survival with two games remaining by defeating Wigan 3\u20132. The club managed to take 35 points from 38 games, seven fewer than the total they had when relegated seven years prior.\nOn 11 May 2010, two days after the end of the 2009\u201310 season, West Ham announced the termination of Zola's contract with immediate effect. On 3 June 2010, Avram Grant signed a four-year deal to become the next manager of West Ham subject to a work permit. West Ham's form continued to be poor with the team seldom outside the relegation zone, placing Grant's future as manager under serious doubt. A 4\u20130 Football League Cup quarter-final win over Manchester United was an otherwise bright spot in a disappointing season. West Ham's form in the Premier League did not affect their form in the two domestic cups. The Hammers reached the semi-final of the League Cup before being eliminated by eventual winners Birmingham City as well as the quarter-final of the FA Cup before a 2\u20131 defeat at eventual runners-up Stoke City.\nOn 15 May 2011, West Ham's relegation to the Championship was confirmed after a comeback from Wigan at the DW Stadium. With West Ham leading 2\u20130 at half-time through two Demba Ba goals, Wigan battled back to win 3\u20132 thanks to an added-time strike from Charles N'Zogbia. Following the loss, West Ham announced the sacking of manager Avram Grant just one season into his tenure. On 1 June 2011, Sam Allardyce was appointed as manager as Grant's replacement.\nThe club finished third in the 2011\u201312 Football League Championship with 86 points and took part in the play-offs. They beat Cardiff City in the play-off semi-final 5\u20130 on aggregate to reach the final against Blackpool at Wembley on 19 May 2012. Carlton Cole opened the scoring, and although Blackpool equalised early in the second half, Ricardo Vaz T\u00ea scored the winner for West Ham in the 87th minute.\nWest Ham, on their return to the Premier League, signed former players James Collins and George McCartney on permanent deals, as well as record signing Matt Jarvis and Andy Carroll on loan. They won their first game of the season, on 18 August 2012, 1\u20130 against Aston Villa thanks to a Kevin Nolan goal. The highlight of the first half of the season was a 3\u20131 home win against reigning European champions Chelsea on 1 December 2012 which saw them in eighth position and 12th at the end of the year. On 22 March 2013, West Ham secured a 99-year lease deal on the Olympic Stadium, with it planned to be used as their home ground from the 2016\u201317 season. Tenth place was secured at the end of the season with nine home wins and only three away from home. Only 11 away goals were scored, the lowest of the entire league.\nIn 2013\u201314, West Ham finished 13th in the Premier League. They also reached the semi-finals of the League Cup before losing 9\u20130 on aggregate to eventual cup-winners Manchester City. A feature of the season were the criticisms of manager Sam Allardyce by supporters relating to his perceived negative playing tactics. West Ham finished 12th in the 2014\u201315 Premier League, one place higher than the previous season. Minutes after the last game of the season, on 24 May 2015, the club announced that Allardyce's contract would not be renewed and that they were seeking a new manager. By winning the Premier League Fair Play table for 2014\u201315, West Ham qualified for the 2015\u201316 UEFA Europa League, entering at the first qualifying round.\nOn 9 June 2015, former West Ham player Slaven Bili\u0107 was appointed as manager on a three-year contract. In Bili\u0107's fourth game in charge, the team won at Anfield for the first time in 52 years, beating Liverpool 0\u20133, with goals from Manuel Lanzini, Mark Noble and Diafra Sakho. At the end of the season, West Ham finished 7th in the Premier League. The team broke several records for the club in the Premier League era, including the highest number of points (62), the highest number of goals in a season (65), the fewest games lost in a season (8) and the lowest number of away defeats (5). The season also marked the last season where the team played at the Boleyn Ground, with them moving to the London Stadium from next season \u2013 ending their 112-year stay at the stadium.\nMove to London Stadium and European success (2016\u2013present).\nFollowing Manchester United's win in the 2016 FA Cup final, West Ham took their Europa League place and qualified for the third qualifying round of the 2016\u201317 edition. At the end of the first season at the London Stadium, the team finished 11th, along with having to deal with the departure of star man Dimitri Payet. However, the team suffered a poor start to the following season, taking only two wins in their opening 11 games. Following a 4\u20131 defeat to Liverpool at home and with the team threatened by relegation, Bili\u0107 was sacked on 6 November 2017. He was replaced by former Sunderland boss David Moyes on a contract until the end of the season. The team battled inconsistent form for the rest of the season but managed to avoid relegation and finish 13th. Moyes was not offered a new contract and left the club on the expiration of it on 16 May 2018.\nOn 22 May 2018, the club appointed former Manchester City boss Manuel Pellegrini as the new manager on a three-year contract. In his first season in charge, the Hammers finished 10th, once again suffering from inconsistent form. However, after a poor first half to the following season, Pellegrini was sacked in December 2019 with the team only one point above the relegation zone. His last game in charge was a 2\u20131 home loss to Leicester City. He was replaced by David Moyes, who returned for a second spell in charge a day later.\nOn 22 July 2020, the club secured their Premier League status for another season, following a 1\u20131 draw away to Manchester United. Ahead of the 2020\u201321 season, West Ham's ownership attracted criticism, including from club captain Mark Noble who publicly criticized the sale of academy graduate Grady Diangana. Despite losing the opening two games of the season, West Ham's form improved and by the end of November, the club sat in fifth place. The club would not drop out of a European spot for the rest of the season and went on to qualify for the 2021\u201322 UEFA Europa League group stages after finishing in 6th. Moyes signed a new three-year contract on 12 June 2021.\nWest Ham won their first three games of the year 2022, temporarily elevating the club to fourth place in the Premier League. The team beat Sevilla 2\u20131 on aggregate to reach a first European quarter-final in 41 years, followed by a 4\u20131 aggregate win over Lyon for a first such semi-final since 1976. Playing the same opposition they met in their 1976 European Cup Winners' Cup semi-final, Eintracht Frankfurt, the \"Hammers\" were knocked out of the Europa League, following a 3\u20131 aggregate loss to the German side. At the end of the 2021\u201322 Premier League season, West Ham confirmed a second successive season of European football, qualifying for the UEFA Europa Conference League after finishing seventh. The season was also notable for being Mark Noble's final as a West Ham player, with the midfielder retiring from football after 18 years as a first team player at the club, making 550 appearances in all competitions, scoring 62 times. By finishing 7th in the 2021\u201322 Premier League, West Ham qualified for the 2022\u201323 Europa Conference League, entering at the play-off stage.\nThe 2022\u201323 campaign was a mixed bag for the \"Hammers\". The club finished 14th in the Premier League, only securing their Premier League status with two games remaining and exiting the League Cup to lower league opposition in a season that saw manager David Moyes come under pressure. In January 2023, Mark Noble returned to the club as sporting director. Despite the troubles in West Ham's domestic campaign, they excelled in the Europa Conference League. The club progressed to the final unbeaten, winning 13 games and drawing just once. They went on to win the competition, defeating Fiorentina 2\u20131 in the final to claim their first major trophy since 1980 and their first European trophy in 58 years. Moyes was not offered a new contract in 2024, having led West Ham to three consecutive European seasons for the first time in their history, reaching at least the quarter-finals of each. On 23 May the club named Julen Lopetegui as his replacement.\nHe was sacked on 8 January 2025 with the team in 14th position, seven points above the relegation positions; during his tenure, they lost nine of 20 Premier League games. On 9 January Graham Potter was appointed as head coach signing a two\u2013and\u2013a\u2013half year contract. On 27 September 2025, Potter was sacked by West Ham United following poor results and performances over the course of the second half of the 2024\u201325 season and the start of the 2025\u201326 season. At the time, West Ham were 19th in the league having won one of their opening five league games. Nuno Esp\u00edrito Santo took charge of the team.\nCrest.\nThames Ironworks FC.\nThe Thames Ironworks Team (1895\u20131900) used the Union Flag as its badge.\nRivet Hammers.\nThe principal element of the badge is the crossed pair of rivet hammers, tools that were used in the shipbuilding industry. The Blackwall and Canning Town neighbourhoods surrounding the Thames Ironworks echoed to the sound of hammers; steam hammers, sledge hammers and rivet hammers.\nSeven large mechanical steam hammers would punch small holes near the edges of the iron plates which would be joined to build the ships. The plates would be put in place and fixed together with rivets by teams of five, three inside the emerging vessel and two outside.\nInside the ship one member of the team would heat the rivets till they were white hot and, using \"Iron Fingers\" (blacksmith's tongs), throw them to a second person, known as a \"catch-boy\" or \"putter-in\", who would pick the rivet up and place it the hole, also using tongs. The third person was known as the \"holder-on\" and he would then smash the rivet home with a sixteen-pound sledgehammer and then use his sledgehammer to hold the rivet in place while the men on the other side flattened the other end of the rivet.\nOutside the ship, exposed to the elements, two men with rivet hammers \u2013 one right-handed, one left-handed \u2013 would hammer the protruding and still glowing rivet flat, so securing one of the many points necessary to link each of the ship's large plates.\nThe crossed hammers were also incorporated into the coat of arms of the County Borough of West Ham and those of its successor, the modern London Borough of Newham. The Thames Ironworks lay partly within what is now the London Borough of Tower Hamlets. However, the blacksmith's tongs in that Borough's coat of arms represent the local saint, Dunstan, the patron saint of Stepney and metalworkers, rather than the Ironworks.\nTower.\nA yellow or white tower was added, intermittently, from the 1950s onwards. The primary reason for this seems to be to represent \"Anne Boleyn's Tower\", the most notable feature of Green Street House, an originally Tudor group of buildings which stood next to the Boleyn Ground until demolished in 1955. Green Street House was also known as \"Boleyn Castle\" through an association with Anne Boleyn. The manor was reputedly one of the sites at which Henry VIII courted his second queen, though there is no documentary evidence to support the tradition.\nThere are a number of other factors which may have influenced the inclusion of the stylised castle feature, for instance:\nShield.\nA shield has been used in many iterations of the club badge, and the shape of the 2016 version matches the cross-section on the hull of HMS Warrior, the most famous ship built by the Thames Ironworks.\nIterations.\nThe crest was redesigned and updated in the late 1990s, featuring a wider yellow castle with fewer cruciform \"windows\" along with the peaked roofs being removed; the tops of the towers had previously made the castle appear more akin to Disneyland's Sleeping Beauty's Castle than a functioning fortress. The designer also altered other details to give a more substantial feel to the iconography.\nWhen the club rebuilt the west stand of the Boleyn Ground (construction finished 2001\u201302) the \"castle\" from the redesigned badge was incorporated into the structure at the main entrance to the ground. A pair of towers were prominent features of the ground's appearance, both bearing large club badges.\nA new badge was introduced following the end of the 2015\u201316 season, when the club moved into the Olympic Stadium. It removes the Boleyn Castle due to the club moving away, leaving just the crossed hammers, which the club says is inspired by the crest before and during the career of Bobby Moore. The word \"London\" was introduced below to \"establish the club firmly on the international stage\", and the more minimalist approach is to give a \"strong statement that is instantly West Ham United\". The shape of the crest is that of the hull of , the first ironclad warship in the Royal Navy, which was built by Thames Ironworks.\nColours.\nThe club originally wore navy blue, the sporting colours of Harrow School and Oxford University (see Oxford blue), both of which Thames Ironworks chairman Arnold Hills had attended and represented. However, the team used a variety of kits including the claret and sky blue house colours of Thames Ironworks, as well as sky blue or white kit.\nThe Irons permanently adopted claret and blue for home colours in 1903.\nOne story suggests that Thames Ironworks right-half Charlie Dove received the Aston Villa kit from William Belton, who was a professional sprinter of national repute, as well as being involved with the coaching at Thames Ironworks. Belton had been at a fair in Birmingham, close to Villa Park, the home ground of Aston Villa and was challenged to a race against four Villa players, who wagered money that one of them would win. Belton defeated them and, when they were unable to pay the bet, one of the Villa players who was responsible for washing the team's kit offered a complete team's \"football kits\" to Belton in payment. The Aston Villa player subsequently reported to his club that the kit was \"missing\". This, however, is often disputed.\nThames Ironworks, and later West Ham United, retained the claret yoke/blue sleeves design, but also continued to use their previously favoured colours for their away kits.\nTerms and phrases.\nWest Ham United does not have a club motto, but there are a number of well known inter-related phrases which capture the club\u2019s culture and philosophy:\nSupporters, hooliganism and rivalries.\nSupporter Songs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nThe team's supporters are famous for their rendition of the chorus of their team's anthem, \"I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles\" introduced to the club by former manager Charlie Paynter in the late 1920s. A Pears soap commercial featuring the curly haired child in the Millais' \"Bubbles\" was well known at the time. The child resembled a player, Billy J. \"Bubbles\" Murray, from local schoolboy team, Park School, where the headmaster was Cornelius Beal. Beal was known locally for his music and rhyme and wrote special words to the tune of \"I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles\" whenever any player was having a good game.\nBeal was a friend of Paynter, while Murray was a West Ham trialist and played football at schoolboy level with a number of West Ham players such as Jim Barrett. Through this contrivance of association the club's fans took it upon themselves to begin singing the popular music hall tune before home games, sometimes reinforced by the presence of a house band requested to play the refrain by Charlie Paynter.\nThe 1975 FA Cup version \u2013 which contains the original lyrics, and features vocals from the team's then-current players \u2013 is always played before home games, with the home crowd joining in and carrying the song on after the music stops at the verse line \"Fortune's always hiding\". Bubbles was published as a waltz whereas during the game the crowd sing it in common time.\nWhen the players come onto the pitch, and at other times of celebration, as the song \"I'm forever blowing bubbles\" is being sung, around 60 bubble machines produce copious bubbles that rise high into the stadium.\nSince the 1950s, fans have also sung the East London pub song Knees Up Mother Brown. The song title is also the name of an internet forum related to the club.\nLike other teams, the team also have a history of adopting or adapting popular songs of the day to fit particular events, themes, players or personas. These have included serious renditions of theatre and movie classics such as \"The Bells are Ringing\", along with more pun-laden or humorous efforts, such as chanting former player Paolo Di Canio's name to the canzone \"La donna \u00e8 mobile\" by Giuseppe Verdi, or D.I. Canio to the tune of Ottawan's \"D.I.S.C.O.\", or the chant of \"Who Let The Potts Out?\" to the tune of Baha Men's \"Who Let the Dogs Out?\" when Steve Potts could be seen warming up to come on as substitute late on in his career, or \"That's Zamora\" to the tune of Dean Martin's 1953 \"That's Amore\" in honour of former striker Bobby Zamora. Other former players to be serenaded include Christian Dailly with vastly-altered lyrics to Frankie Valli's \"Can't Take My Eyes Off You\", Joe Cole and Carlton Cole with Spandau Ballet's \"Gold\" song title sung as \"Cole\" and Lud\u011bk Miklo\u0161ko. A song for West Ham favourite Bobby Moore, \"Viva Bobby Moore\", is also sung based on The Business's \"Oi!\" rendition of the song, based on the Equals' 1969 release \"Viva Bobby Joe\". In 2016, supporters adapted the lyrics of Billy Ray Cyrus' \"Achy Breaky Heart\" in honour of Dimitri Payet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nSupporters.\nFans gained national attention after giving a torrid time to David Beckham in his first away match of 1998\u201399 the season after the England midfielder was sent off for a petulant foul on Diego Simeone. Coinciding with the game, there were claims (and an image taken) that fans, organised by a hardcore, had hung an effigy of the player outside a local pub. Although it was later revealed that the pub was in South-East London, the heartland of West Ham's greatest rivals Millwall. The West Ham fans did, however, boo Beckham's every touch of the ball during the game.\nFans have barracked former players perceived to have abandoned the club or performed some disservice. Paul Ince, Frank Lampard, Jermain Defoe, Nigel Reo-Coker, Jesse Lingard and Mohammed Kudus have borne the brunt of verbal assaults. However, players such as Joe Cole, Michael Carrick, Rio Ferdinand, Bobby Zamora and Carlos Tevez who left on good terms received applause or standing ovations in recognition of their contributions to the club. Joe Cole subsequently rejoined West Ham from Liverpool midway through the 2012\u201313 season.\nHooliganism.\nThe origins of West Ham's links with hooliganism starts in the 1960s with the establishment of The Mile End Mob (named after an area of the East End of London). During the 1970s and 1980s (the main era for organised football-related violence), West Ham gained further notoriety for the levels of hooliganism in their fan base and antagonistic behaviour towards both their own and rival fans, and the police. During the 1970s in particular, rival groups of West Ham fans from neighbouring areas often did battle with each other at games, most often groups from the neighbouring districts of Barking and Dagenham.\nThe Inter City Firm were one of the first \"casuals\", so called because they avoided police supervision by not wearing football-related clothing and travelled to away matches on regular InterCity trains, rather than on the cheap and more tightly policed \"football special\" charter trains. The group were an infamous West Ham-aligned gang. As the firm's moniker \"inter city\" suggests violent activities were not confined to local derbies \u2013 the hooligans were content to cause trouble at any game, though nearby teams often bore the brunt.\nBoth the 1989 film \"The Firm\" (starring Gary Oldman), and the 2005 film \"Green Street\" (starring Elijah Wood and Charlie Hunnam) are based upon West Ham hooligan firms.\nRivalries.\nWest Ham have strong rivalries with several other clubs. Most of these are with other London clubs, especially with Tottenham Hotspur in an East versus North London derby and with Chelsea in an East versus West London rivalry. The rivalry between West Ham and Tottenham has been fuelled by players such as Michael Carrick, Martin Peters, Paul Allen, Jermain Defoe and Scott Parker leaving the Hammers to join Tottenham. The rivalry deepened with the appointment of former Hammers manager Harry Redknapp as Tottenham's manager. Since the 2006\u201307 Premier League season, West Ham have developed a strong rivalry with Yorkshire club Sheffield United due to the dubious circumstances surrounding the transfer of Carlos Tevez, who helped West Ham avoid relegation at Sheffield United's expense.\nThe oldest and fiercest rivalry is with Millwall. The two sides are local rivals, having both been founded by employees of local companies, with players living in the same localities. The early history of both clubs are intertwined, with West Ham proving to be the more successful in a number of meetings between the two teams at the time, resulting in West Ham being promoted at the expense of Millwall. Millwall later declined to join the fledgling Football League while West Ham went on to the top division and an FA Cup final. Later in the 1920s, the rivalry was intensified during strike action which Isle of Dogs-based companies (i.e., Millwall fans) refused to support, breeding ill will between the two camps, the bitterness of this betrayal enduring for years. In 1972, a Millwall supporter died at New Cross station after falling out of a train during a fight with West Ham fans.\nThe rivalry between West Ham and Millwall has involved considerable violence and is one of the most notorious within the world of football hooliganism. The teams were drawn against each other in the second round of the 2009\u201310 League Cup and met on 25 August 2009 at Upton Park. This was the first time in four years that the two clubs had played each other, and the first ever in the League Cup. Clashes between fans occurred outside the ground, resulting in violence erupting up to half a mile away from the stadium, with serious injuries, including the stabbing of a Millwall supporter, damage to property and several arrests reported by police. There were also several pitch invasions by West Ham supporters which brought a temporary halt to the game. In January 2010, West Ham were fined after being found guilty of violent, threatening, obscene and provocative behaviour and of failing to prevent their fans entering the field of play. Millwall were cleared of all charges.\nNicknames.\nThe team and supporters are known as The Hammers, in part because of the club's origins as Thames Ironworks. They are also known as The Irons.\nStadium.\nUntil 2016, West Ham were based at the Boleyn Ground, commonly known as Upton Park, in Newham, East London. The capacity of the Boleyn Ground was 35,016, and had been West Ham's ground since 1904. Prior to this, in their previous incarnation of Thames Ironworks, they played at Hermit Road in Canning Town and briefly at Browning Road in East Ham, before moving to the Memorial Grounds in Plaistow in 1897. They retained the stadium during their transition to becoming West Ham United and were there for a further four seasons before moving to the Boleyn Ground in 1904.\nFormer chairman Eggert Magn\u00fasson made clear his ambition for West Ham to move to the Olympic Stadium after the 2012 Summer Olympics, a desire reiterated by current chairmen Gold and Sullivan when they assumed control of the club stating that they felt it was a logical move for the government as it was in the borough of Newham.\nIn February 2010, however, the British Olympic Minister stated that West Ham would not get the stadium, and it would instead be used for track and field. On 17 May 2010, West Ham and Newham London Borough Council submitted a formal plan to the Olympic Park Legacy Company for the use of the Olympic Stadium following the 2012 Summer Olympics. The proposal was for a stadium with a capacity of 60,000 which would retain a competition athletics track. The proposal was welcomed by the chairman of UK athletics, Ed Warner, who said, \"I think it will feel great as a football stadium and I speak as a football fan as well the chairman of UK Athletics. I think you'd find West Ham would cover the track in the winter season so it wouldn't look like you had a track between you and the pitch.\"\nOn 30 September 2010, the club formally submitted its bid for the Olympic Stadium with a presentation at 10 Downing Street, and on 8 October 2010 the world's largest live entertainment company, Live Nation, endorsed the club's Olympic Stadium plans. Three days after Live Nation's backing, UK Athletics confirmed its formal support for West Ham United and Newham Council in their joint bid to take over the Olympic Stadium in legacy mode. In November 2010, West Ham began a search for potential developers for \"informal discussions\" about what would happen to the ground if it were to win its bid to take over the Olympic Stadium after the 2012 Games. According to the club, the site could be vacated and open to redevelopment by summer 2014. On 11 February 2011, the Olympic Park Legacy Committee selected West Ham as the preferred club to move into the Olympic Stadium after the 2012 Games.\nThe decision in favour of West Ham's bid was unanimous, although controversial as local Premier League rivals Tottenham Hotspur had also been bidding for the venue. Hopes of moving to the stadium, however, were since placed under doubt following a legal challenge by Tottenham and Leyton Orient, with Leyton Orient\u00a0\u2013 a perennial (since 1980) tier 3 to tier 5 club\u00a0\u2013 fearful that having West Ham playing less than a mile away from their Brisbane Road ground could steal support from the club and put them out of business. Both clubs' appeals for a judicial review, however, were rejected on 23 June 2011. On 3 March 2011, West Ham's proposed move to the Olympic Stadium was formally approved by the British government and then-Mayor of London Boris Johnson.\nOn 8 June 2011, it was confirmed that the Westfield Shopping Centre had been in detailed talks with West Ham for naming rights of the new Olympic stadium which could be called the Westfield Stadium. West Ham announced plans to move from the Boleyn Ground from the 2014\u201315 season. In August 2011, an independent investigation initiated by the Olympic Park Legacy Company upheld the decision to award West Ham the Olympic Stadium after the 2012 Games. On 29 June 2011, however, Tottenham announced that they were returning to the High Court again to fight the decision to award West Ham the stadium, in an oral hearing, to try to overturn the original High Court appeal being rejected. On 25 August 2011, Tottenham and Leyton Orient were in fact granted a judicial review by the High Court into the Olympic Stadium bidding process. On 11 October 2011, the deal to award West Ham the Olympic Stadium collapsed over concerns of legal pressure, with the government deciding that the stadium will stay in public ownership. Six days later, Tottenham and Leyton Orient announced they had ended their legal challenge after the deal collapsed.\nOnce the original deal collapsed, a new process to select a tenant was begun. West Ham immediately announced plans to become tenants of the stadium. By March 2012, West Ham was one of the four bidders for the stadium. With a decision due by the Olympic Park Legacy Company in May 2012, Mayor of London Boris Johnson delayed the final selection of future tenants until completion of the 2012 Summer Olympics, stating that it was \"overwhelmingly likely\" that the tenants would be West Ham.\nIt was announced on 22 March 2013 that West Ham had signed a 99-year lease for the Olympic Stadium after the government agreed to put in an extra \u00a31\u00a0million towards the costs of converting the site. The club's plan was to move into the stadium prior to the start of the 2016\u201317 season. Supporters of rival clubs had pressed for an inquiry into the granting of West Ham's tenancy, arguing that West Ham were being given an unfair advantage by the arrangement. In September 2015, however, the government rejected holding such an inquiry.\nThe Academy of Football.\nThe club promotes the popular idea of West Ham being \"The Academy of Football\", with the moniker adorning the ground's new stadium fa\u00e7ade. The comment predominantly refers to the club's youth development system which was established by manager Ted Fenton during the 1950s, that has seen a number of international players emerge through the ranks. Most notably, the club contributed three players to the World Cup-winning England side of 1966, including club icon Bobby Moore, as well as Martin Peters and Geoff Hurst who between them scored all of England's goals in the eventual 4\u20132 victory. Other academy players that have gone on to play for England have included Trevor Brooking, Alvin Martin, Tony Cottee, Paul Ince, and Declan Rice.\nSince the late 1990s, Rio Ferdinand, Frank Lampard, Joe Cole, Michael Carrick and Glen Johnson began their careers at West Ham and all went on to play for other clubs. Most recently, the likes of first teamers Mark Noble and James Tomkins, as well as Welsh international Jack Collison, have emerged through the Academy. Frustratingly for fans and managers alike, the club has struggled to retain many of these players due to (predominantly) financial reasons. West Ham, during the 2007\u201308 season, had an average of 6.61 English players in the starting line up, higher than any other Premier League club, which cemented their status as one of the few Premier League clubs left that were recognised to be bringing through young English talent and were recognised as having \"homegrown players\". Between 2000 and 2011, the club produced eight England players, as many as Manchester United and one fewer than Arsenal. Much of the success of the academy has been attributed to Tony Carr, who was West Ham youth coach between 1973 and 2014.\n \"As of 29 November 2025\"\nPlayers.\nCurrent squad.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOut on loan.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Football squad player/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWest Ham dream team.\nIn the 2003 book \"The Official West Ham United Dream Team\", 500 fans were quizzed for who would be in their all time Hammers Eleven. The voting was restricted to players from the modern era.\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Parkes\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Martin\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Moore\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Stewart\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Dicks\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Bonds\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Peters\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Devonshire\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Brooking\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Hurst\nem; top:-0.65em; width:10em; line-height:1.4em; white-space:nowrap\"&gt; Di Canio\nHammer of the Year.\nThe following is a list of recipients of the 'Hammer of the Year' award. The first award, to Andy Malcolm in 1957\u201358, was nominated by a journalist at \"The Stratford Express\". Subsequent recipients would be awarded the title after a vote by supporters. Trevor Brooking was the first player for West Ham United to have been honoured with the title of Hammer of the Year three times in a row in 1976, 1977 and 1978. Scott Parker repeated this feat between 2009 and 2011. Brooking has won the award the most times, on five occasions: 1972, 1976, 1977, 1978 and 1984. Bobby Moore, Billy Bonds and Julian Dicks have each won it four times.\nBobby Moore has been runner-up four times, while Billy Bonds and Tony Cottee have both been runners-up three times.\nBilly Bonds and Trevor Brooking's wins are notable in the amount of time between first and last Hammer of the Year award. Bonds has 16 years separating his wins whilst Brooking has 12.\nLifetime Achievement Award.\nIn 2013, West Ham United introduced a new annual award, the West Ham United Lifetime Achievement Award.\nThe first award was presented to club-record appearance maker Billy Bonds, who picked up the award on the pitch at Upton Park before kick-off against Cardiff City on the opening day of the 2013\u201314 season.\nThe 2014 award was presented to Sir Trevor Brooking, a record five-time winner of the Hammer of the Year award. Brooking received the award before the 2014\u201315 season curtain-raiser against Tottenham Hotspur on 16 August 2014. Brooking had already had the Centenary Stand at the Boleyn ground named after him in 2009.\nThe 2015 award was awarded to Martin Peters.\nOn 3 May 2016, it was announced via the club's official website that the fourth recipient of the award would be Sir Geoff Hurst, the club's second all-time leading goalscorer, and scorer of a hat-trick in the 1966 World Cup Final. Hurst would be honoured at the club's 2015/16 Player Awards Ceremony. Ken Brown became the sixth recipient of the award, in April 2018. The 2019 honour was awarded to midfielder Ronnie Boyce who made his debut for West Ham in 1960.\nMark Noble Young Hammer of the Year Award.\nIn honour of Mark Noble, who was also the award winner in 2004, and had been serving the club since 2000 and retired in 2022, the Young Hammer of the Year award was renamed to Mark Noble Young Hammer of the Year Award on 9 May 2022.\n \"As of 12 October 2025\"\nCurrent staff.\nStaff and directors\nCoaching staff\nManagers.\nWest Ham United have had 20 permanent managers in their history and an additional three caretaker managers.\nOwnership and chairmen.\nIn January 2010, David Sullivan and David Gold acquired a 50% share in West Ham, given them overall operational and commercial control. At the end of May 2010, Gold and Sullivan purchased a further 10% stake in the club at a cost of \u00a38 million. Taking their controlling stake to 60%, they announced that they could open up shares for fans to purchase. On 9 August 2010, Gold and Sullivan increased their shares up to 30.6% each with \"minority investors\", (which included former owner Terry Brown, purchasing a further 3.8% of the club at a cost of around \u22124\u00a0million) leaving Icelandic Straumur Investment Bank owning 35% of the club.\nOn 2 July 2013, Sullivan acquired a further 25% of shares after restructuring the debt of the club, leaving Straumur Bank with just 10%. In order to clear club debts before a move to the Olympic Stadium in 2016, in December 2014 Sullivan announced the availability for sale of 20% of the club. The clearing of club debts, given in July 2013 as \u00a370 million, was given as a pre-condition to a move to the Olympic Stadium.\nIn September 2017, American billionaire J. Albert \"Tripp\" Smith, senior management director of Blackstone Inc., bought 10% of the shares of the club. On 10 November 2021, the club announced Czech billionaire Daniel K\u0159et\u00ednsk\u00fd had acquired 27% of the shares of the club, reducing Gold and Sullivan's shares.\nCo-chairman David Gold died on 4 January 2023, leaving Sullivan as the sole chairman. Seven months later, Gold's daughter Vanessa became joint-chair with Sullivan.\nHonours.\nSources:\nDomestic.\nLeague\nCups\nRecords and statistics.\nClub league highs and lows.\nHighest league finish\nClub goal records.\n\"Follow link to Official West Ham United Records Page\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46420", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46420", "title": "Parkinson's Disease", "text": ""}
{"id": "46425", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46425", "title": "Substantia nigra", "text": "Structure in the basal ganglia of the brain\nThe substantia nigra (SN) is a basal ganglia structure located in the midbrain that plays an important role in reward and movement. \"Substantia nigra\" is Latin for \"black substance\", reflecting the fact that parts of the substantia nigra appear darker than neighboring areas due to high levels of neuromelanin in dopaminergic neurons. Parkinson's disease is characterized by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta.\nAlthough the substantia nigra appears as a continuous band in brain sections, anatomical studies have found that it actually consists of two parts with very different connections and functions: the pars compacta (SNpc) and the pars reticulata (SNpr). The pars compacta serves mainly as a projection to the basal ganglia circuit, supplying the striatum with dopamine. The pars reticulata conveys signals from the basal ganglia to numerous other brain structures.\nStructure.\nThe substantia nigra, along with four other nuclei, is part of the basal ganglia. It is the largest nucleus in the midbrain, lying dorsal to the cerebral peduncles. Humans have two substantiae nigrae, one on each side of the midline.\nThe SN is divided into two parts: the pars reticulata (SNpr) and the pars compacta (SNpc), which lies medial to the pars reticulata. Sometimes, a third region, the pars lateralis, is mentioned, though it is usually classified as part of the pars reticulata. The (SNpr) and the internal globus pallidus (GPi) are separated by the internal capsule.\nPars reticulata.\nThe pars reticulata bears a strong structural and functional resemblance to the internal part of the globus pallidus. The two are sometimes considered parts of the same structure, separated by the white matter of the internal capsule. Like those of the globus pallidus, the neurons in pars reticulata are mainly GABAergic.\nAfferent connections.\nThe main input to the SNpr derives from the striatum. It comes by two routes, known as the direct and indirect pathways. The direct pathway consists of axons from medium spiny cells in the striatum that project directly to pars reticulata. The indirect pathway consists of three links: a projection from striatal medium spiny cells to the external part of the globus pallidus; a GABAergic projection from the globus pallidus to the subthalamic nucleus, and a glutamatergic projection from the subthalamic nucleus to the pars reticulata. Thus, striatal activity via the direct pathway exerts an inhibitory effect on neurons in the (SNpr) but an excitatory effect via the indirect pathway. The direct and indirect pathways originate from different subsets of striatal medium spiny cells: They are tightly intermingled, but express different types of dopamine receptors, as well as showing other neurochemical differences.\nEfferent connections.\nSignificant projections occur to the thalamus (ventral lateral and ventral anterior nuclei), superior colliculus, and other caudal nuclei from the pars reticulata (the nigrothalamic pathway), which use GABA as their neurotransmitter. In addition, these neurons form up to five collaterals that branch within both the pars compacta and pars reticulata, likely modulating dopaminergic activity in the pars compacta.\nFunction.\nThe substantia nigra is an important player in brain function, in particular, in eye movement, motor planning, reward-seeking, learning, and addiction. Many of the substantia nigra's effects are mediated through the striatum. The nigral dopaminergic input to the striatum via the nigrostriatal pathway is intimately linked with the striatum's function. The co-dependence between the striatum and substantia nigra can be seen in this way: when the substantia nigra is electrically stimulated, no movement occurs; however, the symptoms of nigral degeneration due to Parkinson's is a poignant example of the substantia nigra's influence on movement. In addition to striatum-mediated functions, the substantia nigra also serves as a major source of GABAergic inhibition to various brain targets.\nPars reticulata.\nThe pars reticulata of the substantia nigra is an important processing center in the basal ganglia. The GABAergic neurons in the pars reticulata convey the final processed signals of the basal ganglia to the thalamus and superior colliculus. In addition, the pars reticulata also inhibits dopaminergic activity in the pars compacta via axon collaterals, although the functional organization of these connections remains unclear.\nThe GABAergic neurons of the pars reticulata spontaneously fire action potentials. In rats, the frequency of action potentials is roughly 25\u00a0Hz. The purpose of these spontaneous action potentials is to inhibit targets of the basal ganglia, and decreases in inhibition are associated with movement. The subthalamic nucleus gives excitatory input that modulates the rate of firing of these spontaneous action potentials. However, lesion of the subthalamic nucleus leads to only a 20% decrease in pars reticulata firing rate, suggesting that the generation of action potentials in the pars reticulata is largely autonomous, as exemplified by the pars reticulata's role in saccadic eye movement. A group of GABAergic neurons from the pars reticulata projects to the superior colliculus, exhibiting a high level of sustained inhibitory activity. Projections from the caudate nucleus to the superior colliculus also modulate saccadic eye movement.\nAltered patterns of pars reticulata firing such as single-spike or burst firing are found in Parkinson's disease and epilepsy.\nPars compacta.\nThe most prominent function of the pars compacta is motor control, though the substantia nigra's role in motor control is indirect; electrical stimulation of the substantia nigra does not result in movement, due to mediation of the striatum in the nigral influence of movement. The pars compacta sends excitatory input to the striatum via D1 pathway that excites and activates the striatum, resulting in the release of GABA onto the globus pallidus to inhibit its inhibitory effects on the thalamic nucleus. This causes the thalamocortical pathways to become excited and transmits motor neuron signals to the cerebral cortex to allow the initiation of movement, which is absent in Parkinson's disease. However, lack of pars compacta neurons has a large influence on movement, as evidenced by the symptoms of Parkinson's. The motor role of the pars compacta may involve fine motor control, as has been confirmed in animal models with lesions in that region.\nThe pars compacta is heavily involved in learned responses to stimuli. In primates, dopaminergic neuron activity increases in the nigrostriatal pathway when a new stimulus is presented. Dopaminergic activity decreases with repeated stimulus presentation. However, behaviorally significant stimulus presentation (i.e. rewards) continues to activate dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Dopaminergic projections from the ventral tegmental area (bottom part of the \"midbrain\" or mesencephalon) to the prefrontal cortex (mesocortical pathway) and to the nucleus accumbens (mesolimbic pathway \u2013 \"meso\" referring to \"from the mesencephalon\"... specifically the ventral tegmental area) are implicated in reward, pleasure, and addictive behavior. The pars compacta is also important in spatial learning, the observations about one's environment and location in space. Lesions in the pars compacta lead to learning deficits in repeating identical movements, and some studies point to its involvement in a dorsal striatal-dependent, response-based memory system that functions relatively independent of the hippocampus, which is traditionally believed to subserve spatial or episodic-like memory functions.\nThe pars compacta also plays a role in temporal processing and is activated during time reproduction. Lesions in the pars compacta leads to temporal deficits. As of late, the pars compacta has been suspected of regulating the sleep-wake cycle, which is consistent with symptoms such as insomnia and REM sleep disturbances that are reported by patients with Parkinson's disease. Even so, partial dopamine deficits that do not affect motor control can lead to disturbances in the sleep-wake cycle, especially REM-like patterns of neural activity while awake, especially in the hippocampus.\nClinical significance.\nThe substantia nigra is critical in the development of many diseases and syndromes, including parkinsonism and Parkinson's disease. There exists a study showing that high-frequency stimulation delivery to the left substantia nigra can induce transient acute depression symptoms.\nParkinson's disease.\nParkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disease characterized, in part, by the death of dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc. The major symptoms of Parkinson's disease include tremor, akinesia, bradykinesia, and stiffness. Other symptoms include disturbances to posture, fatigue, sleep abnormalities, and depressed mood.\nThe cause of death of dopaminergic neurons in the SNpc is unknown. However, some contributions to the unique susceptibility of dopaminergic neurons in the pars compacta have been identified. For one, dopaminergic neurons show abnormalities in mitochondrial complex 1, causing aggregation of alpha-synuclein; this can result in abnormal protein handling and neuron death. Secondly, dopaminergic neurons in the pars compacta contain less calbindin than other dopaminergic neurons. Calbindin is a protein involved in calcium ion transport within cells, and excess calcium in cells is toxic. The calbindin theory would explain the high cytotoxicity of Parkinson's in the substantia nigra compared to the ventral tegmental area. Regardless of the cause of neuronal death, the plasticity of the pars compacta is very robust; Parkinsonian symptoms do not generally appear until at least 30% of pars compacta dopaminergic neurons have died. Most of this plasticity occurs at the neurochemical level; dopamine transport systems are slowed, allowing dopamine to linger for longer periods of time in the chemical synapses in the striatum.\nMenke, Jbabdi, Miller, Matthews and Zari (2010) used diffusion tensor imaging, as well as T1 mapping to assess volumetric differences in the SNpc and SNpr, in participants with Parkinson's compared to healthy individuals. These researchers found that participants with Parkinson's consistently had a smaller substantia nigra, specifically in the SNpr. Because the SNpr is connected to the posterior thalamus, ventral thalamus and specifically, the motor cortex, and because participants with Parkinson's disease report having a smaller SNprs (Menke, Jbabdi, Miller, Matthews and Zari, 2010), the small volume of this region may be responsible for motor impairments found in Parkinson's disease patients. This small volume may be responsible for weaker and/or less controlled motor movements, which may result in the tremors often experienced by those with Parkinson's.\nOxidative stress and oxidative damage in the SNpc are likely key drivers in the etiology of Parkinson's disease as individuals age. DNA damages caused by oxidative stress can be repaired by processes modulated by alpha-synuclein. Alpha synuclein is expressed in the substantia nigra, but its DNA repair function appears to be compromised in Lewy body inclusion bearing neurons. This loss may trigger cell death.\nSchizophrenia.\nIncreased levels of dopamine have long been implicated in the development of schizophrenia. However, much debate continues to this day surrounding this dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia. Despite the controversy, dopamine antagonists remain a standard and successful treatment for schizophrenia. These antagonists include first generation (typical) antipsychotics such as butyrophenones, phenothiazines, and thioxanthenes. These drugs have largely been replaced by second-generation (atypical) antipsychotics such as clozapine and paliperidone. In general, these drugs do not act on dopamine-producing neurons themselves, but on the receptors on the post-synaptic neuron.\nOther, non-pharmacological evidence in support of the dopamine hypothesis relating to the substantia nigra include structural changes in the pars compacta, such as reduction in synaptic terminal size. Other changes in the substantia nigra include increased expression of NMDA receptors in the substantia nigra, and reduced dysbindin expression. Increased NMDA receptors may point to the involvement of glutamate-dopamine interactions in schizophrenia. Dysbindin, which has been (controversially) linked to schizophrenia, may regulate dopamine release, and low expression of dysbindin in the substantia nigra may be important in schizophrenia etiology. Due to the changes to the substantia nigra in the schizophrenic brain, it may eventually be possible to use specific imaging techniques (such as neuromelanin-specific imaging) to detect physiological signs of schizophrenia in the substantia nigra.\nWooden Chest Syndrome.\nWooden chest, also called fentanyl chest wall rigidity syndrome, is a rare side effect of synthetic opioids such as Fentanyl, Sulfentanil, Alfentanil, Remifentanil. It results in a generalised increase in skeletal muscle tone. The mechanism is thought to be via increased dopamine release and decreased GABA release in the nerves of the substantia nigra/striatum. The effect is most pronounced on the chest wall muscles and can lead to impaired ventilation. The condition is most commonly observed in anaesthesia where rapid and high doses of these drugs are given intravenously. \nMultiple system atrophy.\nMultiple system atrophy characterized by neuronal degeneration in the striatum and substantia nigra was previously called \"striatonigral degeneration\".\nChemical modification of the substantia nigra.\nChemical manipulation and modification of the substantia nigra is important in the fields of neuropharmacology and toxicology. Various compounds such as levodopa and MPTP are used in the treatment and study of Parkinson's disease, and many other drugs have effects on the substantia nigra.\nAmphetamine and trace amines.\nStudies have shown that, in certain brain regions, amphetamine and trace amines increase the concentrations of dopamine in the synaptic cleft, thereby heightening the response of the post-synaptic neuron. The various mechanisms by which amphetamine and trace amines affect dopamine concentrations have been studied extensively, and are known to involve both DAT and VMAT2. Amphetamine is similar in structure to dopamine and trace amines; as a consequence, it can enter the presynaptic neuron via DAT as well as by diffusing through the neural membrane directly. Upon entering the presynaptic neuron, amphetamine and trace amines activate TAAR1, which, through protein kinase signaling, induces dopamine efflux, phosphorylation-dependent DAT internalization, and non-competitive reuptake inhibition. Because of the similarity between amphetamine and trace amines, it is also a substrate for monoamine transporters; as a consequence, it (competitively) inhibits the reuptake of dopamine and other monoamines by competing with them for uptake, as well.\nIn addition, amphetamine and trace amines are substrates for the neuronal vesicular monoamine transporter, vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2). When amphetamine is taken up by VMAT2, the vesicle releases (effluxes) dopamine molecules into the cytosol in exchange.\nCocaine.\nCocaine's mechanism of action in the human brain includes the inhibition of dopamine reuptake, which accounts for cocaine's addictive properties, as dopamine is the critical neurotransmitter for reward. However, cocaine is more active in the dopaminergic neurons of the ventral tegmental area than the substantia nigra. Cocaine administration increases metabolism in the substantia nigra, which can explain the altered motor function seen in cocaine-using subjects. The inhibition of dopamine reuptake by cocaine also inhibits the firing of spontaneous action potentials by the pars compacta. The mechanism by which cocaine inhibits dopamine reuptake involves its binding to the dopamine transporter protein. However, studies show that cocaine can also cause a decrease in DAT mRNA levels, most likely due to cocaine blocking dopamine receptors rather than direct interference with transcriptional or translational pathways.\nInactivation of the substantia nigra could prove to be a possible treatment for cocaine addiction. In a study of cocaine-dependent rats, inactivation of the substantia nigra via implanted cannulae greatly reduced cocaine addiction relapse.\nLevodopa.\nThe substantia nigra is the target of chemical therapeutics for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. Levodopa (commonly referred to as L-DOPA), the dopamine precursor, is the most commonly prescribed medication for Parkinson's disease, despite controversy concerning the neurotoxicity of dopamine and L-DOPA. The drug is especially effective in treating patients in the early stages of Parkinson's, although it does lose its efficacy over time. Levodopa can cross the blood\u2013brain barrier and increases dopamine levels in the substantia nigra, thus alleviating the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. The drawback of levodopa treatment is that it treats the symptoms of Parkinson's (low dopamine levels), rather than the cause (the death of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra).\nMPTP.\nMPTP, is a neurotoxin specific to dopaminergic cells in the brain, specifically in the substantia nigra. MPTP was brought to the spotlight in 1982 when heroin users in California displayed Parkinson's-like symptoms after using MPPP contaminated with MPTP. The patients, who were rigid and almost completely immobile, responded to levodopa treatment. No remission of the Parkinson's-like symptoms was reported, suggesting irreversible death of the dopaminergic neurons. The proposed mechanism of MPTP involves disruption of mitochondrial function, including disruption of metabolism and creation of free radicals.\nSoon after, MPTP was tested in animal models for its efficacy in inducing Parkinson's disease (with success). MPTP induced akinesia, rigidity, and tremor in primates, and its neurotoxicity was found to be very specific to the substantia nigra pars compacta. In other animals, such as rodents, the induction of Parkinson's by MPTP is incomplete or requires much higher and frequent doses than in primates. Today, MPTP remains the most favored method to induce Parkinson's disease in animal models.\nHistory.\nThe substantia nigra was discovered in 1784 by F\u00e9lix Vicq-d'Azyr, and Samuel Thomas von S\u00f6mmerring alluded to this structure in 1791. The differentiation between the substantia nigra pars reticulata and compacta was first proposed by Sano in 1910. In 1963, Oleh Hornykiewicz concluded from his observation that \"cell loss in the substantia nigra (of Parkinson's disease patients) could well be the cause of the dopamine deficit in the striatum.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46426", "revid": "39939561", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46426", "title": "Basil II", "text": "Byzantine emperor from 976 to 1025\nBasil II Porphyrogenitus (; 958 \u2013 15 December 1025), nicknamed the Bulgar Slayer (, , ), was the senior Byzantine emperor from 976 to 1025. He and his brother Constantine VIII were crowned before their father Romanos II died in 963, but they were too young to rule. The throne thus went to two generals, Nikephoros Phokas (r.963\u2013969) and John Tzimiskes (r. 969\u2013976) before Basil became senior emperor, though his influential great-uncle Basil Lekapenos remained as the \"de facto\" ruler until 985. His reign of 49 years and 11 months was the longest of any Roman emperor.\nThe early years of Basil's reign were dominated by civil wars against two powerful generals from the Byzantine Anatolian aristocracy: first Bardas Skleros and later Bardas Phokas, which ended shortly after Phokas' death and Skleros' submission in 989. Basil then oversaw the stabilization and expansion of the eastern frontier of the Byzantine Empire and the complete subjugation of the First Bulgarian Empire, its foremost European foe, after a long struggle. Although the Byzantines had made a truce with the Fatimid Caliphate in 987\u2013988, Basil led a campaign against the Caliphate that ended with another truce in 1000. He also conducted a campaign against the Khazar Khaganate that gained the Byzantine Empire part of Crimea and a series of successful campaigns against the Kingdom of Georgia.\nDespite near-constant warfare, Basil distinguished himself as an administrator, reducing the power of the great land-owning families who dominated the Empire's administration and military, filling its treasury, and leaving it with its greatest expanse in four centuries. Although his successors were largely incapable rulers, the Empire flourished for decades after Basil's death. One of the most important decisions taken during his reign was to offer the hand of his sister Anna Porphyrogenita to Vladimir I of Kiev in exchange for military support, thus forming the Byzantine military unit known as the Varangian Guard. The marriage of Anna and Vladimir led to the Christianization of the Kievan Rus' and the incorporation of later successor states of Kievan Rus' within the Byzantine cultural and religious tradition. Basil is seen as a Greek national hero but is a despised figure among Bulgarians.\nPhysical appearance and personality.\nThe courtier and historian Michael Psellos, who was born towards the end of Basil's reign, gives a description of Basil in his \"Chronographia\". Psellos describes him as a stocky man of shorter-than-average stature who nevertheless was an impressive figure on horseback. He had light-blue eyes, strongly arched eyebrows, luxuriant side whiskers\u2014which he had a habit of rolling between his fingers when deep in thought or angry\u2014and in later life a scant beard. Psellos also states that Basil was not an articulate speaker and had a loud laugh that convulsed his whole frame. Basil is described as having ascetic tastes and caring little for the pomp and ceremony of the Imperial court, typically wearing a sombre, dark-purple robe furnished with few of the gems that usually decorated imperial costumes. He is also described as a capable administrator who left a well-stocked treasury upon his death. Basil supposedly despised literary culture and affected scorn for the learned classes of Byzantium.\nEarly life and rule (960\u2013976).\nBasil II was born in 958. He was a \"porphyrogennetos\" (\"born into the purple\"), as were his father Romanos II and his grandfather Constantine VII; this was the appellation used for children who were born to a reigning emperor. Basil was the eldest son of Romanos and his Laconian Greek second wife Theophano, who was the daughter of a poor tavern-keeper named Krateros and may have originated from the city of Sparta. He may have had an elder sister named Helena (born c. 955). Romanos succeeded Constantine VII as sole emperor upon the latter's death in 959. Basil's father crowned him as co-emperor on 22 April 960, and his brother Constantine (born 960 or 961, eventually to rule as sole emperor Constantine VIII in 1025\u20131028) in 962 or 963. Only two days after the birth of his youngest child Anna, Romanos II died on 15 March 963 at 24 years of age. His unexpected death was commonly thought at the time to be the result of poisoning with hemlock; the chroniclers Leo the Deacon and John Skylitzes imply that Theophano was responsible, and according to Skylitzes, she had been complicit in an earlier attempt by Romanos II to poison Constantine VII.\nBasil and Constantine were too young to rule in their own right when Romanos died in 963. Therefore, although the Byzantine Senate confirmed them as emperors with their mother as the nominal regent, \"de facto\" power passed for the time into the hands of the \"parakoimomenos\" Joseph Bringas. Theophano did not trust Bringas, however, and another enemy of the powerful \"parakoimomenos\" was Basil Lekapenos, an illegitimate, eunuch son of Emperor Romanos I \u2013 Basil's great-grandfather. Lekapenos himself had been \"parakoimomenos\" to Constantine VII and \"megas baioulos\" to Romanos II. Yet another enemy of Bringas was the successful and widely popular general Nikephoros Phokas, who had just returned from his conquest of the Emirate of Crete and a highly successful raid into Cilicia and Syria, which culminated in the sack of Aleppo. Phokas was proclaimed emperor by his men in July and marched on Constantinople. Bringas tried to bring in troops to stop his rival's advance, but the capital's populace supported Nikephoros. Bringas fled, leaving his post to Lekapenos, and on 16 August 963 Nikephoros Phokas was crowned emperor.\nOn 20 September, Phokas married Theophano, but problems resulted; it was a second marriage for each spouse and Nikephoros was thought to be the godfather of one or both of Theophano's sons. Although Polyeuctus, the patriarch of Constantinople, disapproved of the marriage, the Church declared it to be valid. With it, Nikephoros secured his legitimacy and became the guardian of Basil and Constantine. He was murdered in December 969 by Theophano and his nephew John Tzimiskes, who then became emperor John I and exiled Theophano. John married Theodora, a sister of Romanos II. Basil II acceded to the throne as effective ruler and senior emperor when John died on 10 January 976. He immediately had his mother brought back from her convent.\nSole emperor (976\u20131025).\nRebellions in Anatolia and alliance with Rus'.\nBasil was a very successful soldier on horseback and through his achievement he proved himself to be an able general and a strong ruler. In the early years of his reign, administration remained in the hands of Basil Lekapenos. As president of the Byzantine Senate, Lekapenos was a wily, gifted politician who hoped the young emperors would be his puppets. The younger Basil waited and watched without interfering, devoting himself to learning the details of administrative business and military science. \nNikephoros II and John I were brilliant military commanders but proved to be poor administrators. Towards the end of his reign, John had belatedly planned to curb the power of the great landowners; his death, which occurred soon after he spoke out against them, led to rumors that he had been poisoned by Lekapenos, who had illegally acquired vast estates and feared an investigation and punishment. At the start of his reign, the failures of his immediate predecessors left Basil II with a serious problem: Bardas Skleros and Bardas Phokas, members of the wealthy military elite of Anatolia, had sufficient means to undertake open rebellion against his authority.\nSkleros and Phokas, both of whom were experienced generals, wanted to assume the Imperial position that Nikephoros II and John I had held, and thus return Basil to the role of impotent cypher. Basil, showing a penchant for ruthlessness, took to the field himself and suppressed the rebellions of both Skleros (979) and Phokas (989) with the help of 12,000 Georgians of Tornikios and David III Kuropalates of Tao. The fall of Lekapenos occurred between the rebellions in 985; he was accused of plotting with the rebels and was punished with exile and the confiscation of his property.\nThe relationship between the two generals was complicated; Phokas was instrumental in defeating the rebellion of Skleros but when Phokas later rebelled, Skleros returned from exile to support him. When Phokas died in battle, Skleros, whom Phokas had imprisoned, assumed the leadership of the rebellion. Basil's brother Constantine\u2014who had no interest in politics, statecraft, or the military\u2013led troops alongside Basil; this was the only military command Constantine would hold. The campaign ended without combat when Skleros was forced to surrender to Basil in 989. Skleros was allowed to live but he died blind, either through disease or from being blinded as punishment for his insurrection.\nThese rebellions had a profound effect on Basil's outlook and methods of governance. Psellos describes the defeated Skleros giving Basil the following advice, which he took to heart: \"Cut down the governors who become over-proud. Let no generals on campaign have too many resources. Exhaust them with unjust exactions, to keep them busied with their own affairs. Admit no woman to the imperial councils. Be accessible to no-one. Share with few your most intimate plans.\"\nTo defeat these dangerous revolts, Basil formed an alliance with Prince Vladimir I of Kiev, who in 988 had captured Chersonesos, the Empire's main base in the Crimean Peninsula. Vladimir offered to evacuate Chersonesos and to supply 6,000 of his soldiers as reinforcements to Basil. In exchange, he demanded to be married to Basil's younger sister Anna. At first, Basil hesitated. The Byzantines viewed all of the peoples of Northern Europe\u2014namely Franks and Slavs\u2014as barbarians. Anna objected to marrying a barbarian ruler because such a marriage would have no precedent in Imperial annals.\nVladimir had researched various religions, having sent delegates to various countries. Marriage was not his main reason for choosing Christianity. When Vladimir promised to baptize himself and to convert his people to Christianity, Basil finally agreed. Vladimir and Anna were married in Crimea in 989. The Rus' warriors taken into Basil's army were instrumental in ending the rebellion; they were later organized into the Varangian Guard. This marriage had important long-term implications, marking the beginning of the process by which the Grand Duchy of Moscow many centuries later would proclaim itself \"The Third Rome\", and claim the political and cultural heritage of the Byzantine Empire.\nCampaigns against the Fatimid Caliphate.\nOnce the internal strife was quelled, Basil turned his attention to the Empire's other enemies. The Byzantine civil wars had weakened the Empire's position in the east, and the gains of Nikephoros II and John I had nearly been lost to the Fatimid Caliphate. In 987\u2013988, a seven-year truce with the Fatimids was signed; it stipulated an exchange of prisoners, the recognition of the Byzantine emperor as protector of Christians under Fatimid rule and of the Fatimid Caliph as protector of Muslims under Byzantine rule, and the replacement of the name of the Abbasid caliph with that of the Fatimid caliph in the Friday prayer in the mosque at Constantinople. This lasted until the long-time vizier Yaqub ibn Killis died in 991. Fatimid caliph Al-Aziz Billah chose to pursue a more aggressive stance in Syria and appointed Manjutakin as governor of Damascus.\nManjutakin's attacks, and Basil's first expedition to Syria.\nEncouraged by the defectors after the death of emir Sa'd al-Dawla, Al-Aziz decided to renew his attacks on the Hamdanid Emirate of Aleppo, a Byzantine protectorate, perhaps expecting Basil would not interfere. Manjutakin invaded the emirate, defeated a Byzantine force under the \"doux\" of Antioch Michael Bourtzes in June 992, and laid siege to Aleppo. The city easily resisted. In early 993, after thirteen months of campaigning, a lack of supplies forced Manjutakin to return to Damascus.\nIn 994, Manjutakin resumed his offensive and in September scored a major victory at the Battle of the Orontes against Bourtzes. Bourtzes' defeat forced Basil to intervene personally in the East; with his army, he rode through Asia Minor to Aleppo in sixteen days, arriving in April 995. Basil's sudden arrival and the exaggeration of his army's strength circulating in the Fatimid camp caused panic in the Fatimid army, especially because Manjutakin, expecting no threat, had ordered his cavalry horses to be dispersed around the city for pasture. Despite having a considerably larger and well-rested army, Manjutakin was at a disadvantage. He burned his camp and retreated to Damascus without battle. The Byzantines besieged Tripoli unsuccessfully and occupied Tartus, which they refortified and garrisoned with Armenian troops. Al-Aziz now prepared to take to the field in person against the Byzantines and initiated large-scale preparations but they were abandoned upon his death.\nSecond expedition to Syria, and peace.\nWarfare between the two powers continued as the Byzantines supported an anti-Fatimid uprising in Tyre. In 998, the Byzantines under Damian Dalassenos, the successor of Bourtzes, launched an attack on Apamea but the Fatimid general Jaysh ibn al-Samsama defeated them in battle on 19 July 998. This defeat drew Basil back into the conflict; he arrived in Syria in October 999 and remained there for three months. Basil's troops raided as far as Heliopolis, placed a garrison at Larissa, and burnt three minor forts in the vicinity of Abu Qubais, Masyath and Arca. The siege of Tripoli in December failed while Emesa was not threatened. Basil's attention was diverted to developments in Georgia following the murder of David III Kuropalates; he departed for Cilicia in January and dispatched another embassy to Cairo.\nIn 1000, a ten-year truce was concluded between the two states. For the remainder of the reign of Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah (r. 996\u20131021), relations remained peaceful as al-Hakim was more interested in internal affairs. Even the acknowledgement of Fatimid suzerainty by Abu Muhammad Lu'lu' al-Kabir of Aleppo in 1004 and the Fatimid-sponsored installment of Aziz al-Dawla as the city's emir in 1017 did not lead to a resumption of hostilities, especially because al-Kabir continued to pay tribute to the Byzantines and al-Dawla quickly began acting as an independent ruler. Al-Hakim's persecution of Christians in his realm and especially the 1009 destruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at his orders strained relations and, along with Fatimid interference in Aleppo, provided the main focus of Fatimid\u2013Byzantine diplomatic relations until the late 1030s.\nConquest of Bulgaria.\nBasil sought to restore former territories of the Byzantine Empire. At the start of the second millennium, he fought Samuel of Bulgaria, his greatest adversary. Bulgaria had been partly subjugated by John I after the invasion of Svyatoslav I of Kiev but parts of the country had remained outside Byzantine control under the leadership of Samuel and his brothers.\nBecause the Bulgars had been raiding Byzantine lands since 976, the Byzantine government sought to cause dissension among them by allowing the escape of their captive emperor Boris II of Bulgaria. This ploy failed so Basil used a respite from his conflict with the nobility to lead a 30,000-strong army into Bulgaria and besiege Sredets (Sofia) in 986. Taking losses and worried about the loyalty of some of his governors, Basil lifted the siege and returned for Thrace but he fell into an ambush and suffered a serious defeat at the Battle of the Gates of Trajan. Basil escaped with the help of his Varangian Guard and attempted to recover his losses by turning Samuel's brother Aron against him. Aron was tempted by Basil's offer of his sister Anna in marriage, but the negotiations failed when Aron discovered the bride he was sent was an imposter. By 987, Samuel had eliminated Aron. Another brother of Samuel, called David, was killed in 976 by the Vlachs, the guards of caravans, between Prespa and Kastoria. Although the titular emperor Roman of Bulgaria was captured in 991, Basil lost Moesia to the Bulgarians.\nWhile Basil was distracted with internal rebellions and recovering the military situation on his eastern frontier, Samuel had extended his rule from the Adriatic Sea to the Black Sea, recovering most of the territory that was controlled by Bulgaria before the invasion of Svyatoslav. He also conducted damaging raids into Byzantine territory as far as central Greece. In 996, the Byzantine general Nikephoros Ouranos defeated a Bulgarian army raid at the Battle of Spercheios in Thessaly. Samuel and his son Gabriel narrowly escaped capture.\nBeginning in 1000, Basil was free to focus on a war of conquest against Bulgaria, which he fought with grinding persistence and strategic insight. In 1000, the Byzantine generals Nikephoros Xiphias and Theodorokanos took the former Bulgarian capital Great Preslav, and the towns Lesser Preslav and Pliskova. In 1001, Basil, operating from Thessalonica, regained control of Vodena, Verrhoia and Servia. The following year, he based his army in Philippopolis and occupied the length of the military road from the western Haemus Mountains to the Danube, cutting off communications between Samuel's Macedonian heartland and Paristrion (the lands south of the lower Danube). Following this success, Basil laid siege to Vidin, which fell after a prolonged resistance. Samuel reacted to the Byzantine campaign by launching a large-scale raid into the heart of Byzantine Thrace and took the major city of Adrianople by surprise.\nAfter turning homeward with his extensive plunder, Samuel was intercepted near Skopje by a Byzantine army commanded by Basil, whose forces stormed the Bulgarian camp, defeating the Bulgarians and recovering the plunder from Adrianople. Skopje surrendered shortly after the battle, and Basil treated its governor Romanos with overt kindness. In 1005, the governor of Dyrrhachium Ashot Taronites surrendered his city to the Byzantines. The defection of Dyrrhachium completed the isolation of Samuel's core territories in the highlands of western Macedonia. Samuel was forced into an almost entirely defensive stance; he extensively fortified the passes and routes from the coastlines and valleys held by the Byzantines to the territory remaining in his possession. During the next few years, the Byzantine offensive slowed and no significant gains were made, although an attempt by the Bulgarians to counter-attack in 1009 was defeated at the Battle of Kreta, to the east of Thessalonica.\nIn 1014, Basil was ready to launch a campaign aimed at destroying Bulgarian resistance. On 29 July 1014, in the Battle of Kleidion, he and his general Nikephoros Xiphias outmaneuvered the Bulgarian army, which was defending one of the fortified passes. Samuel avoided capture through the valor of his son Gabriel. Having crushed the Bulgarians, Basil exacted his vengeance cruelly\u2014he was said to have captured 15,000 prisoners and fully blinded 99 of every 100 men, leaving one one-eyed man in each cohort to lead the rest back to their ruler. A possible reason for this vengeance was that, in Byzantine eyes, the Bulgarians were rebels against their authority, and blinding was the usual punishment meted out to rebels. Samuel was struck down by the sight of his blinded army and died two days later on 6 October 1014 after suffering a stroke.\nBulgaria fought on for four more years, its resistance fired by Basil's cruelty, but it submitted in 1018. This submission was the result of continued military pressure and a successful diplomatic campaign aimed at dividing and suborning the Bulgarian leadership. This victory over the Bulgarians and the later submission of the Serbs fulfilled one of Basil's goals; the Empire regained its ancient Danubian frontier for the first time in 400 years.\nThe rulers of neighbouring Croatia, Kre\u0161imir III and Gojslav, who were previously allies of Bulgaria, accepted Basil's supremacy to avoid the same fate as Bulgaria; Basil warmly received their offers of vassalage and awarded them the honorary title of \"patrikios\". Croatia remained a tributary state to Basil until his death in 1025. Before returning to Constantinople, Basil celebrated his triumph in Athens. He showed considerable statesmanship in his treatment of the defeated Bulgarians, giving many former Bulgarian leaders court titles, positions in provincial administration, and high commands in the army. In this way, he sought to absorb the Bulgarian elite into Byzantine society. Because Bulgaria did not have a monetary economy to the same extent as Byzantium, Basil decided to accept Bulgarian taxes in kind. Basil's successors reversed this policy, a decision that led to considerable Bulgarian discontent and rebellion later in the 11th century.\nKhazar campaign.\nAlthough the Kievan Rus' had broken the power of the Khazar Khaganate in the 960s, the Byzantines had not been able to fully exploit the power vacuum and restore their dominion over Crimea and other areas around the Black Sea. In 1016, Byzantine armies in conjunction with Mstislav of Chernigov attacked the Crimea, much of which had fallen under the control of the Khazar successor kingdom of George Tzoul based at Kerch. Kedrenos reports that Tzoul was captured and the Khazar successor kingdom was destroyed. Subsequently, the Byzantines occupied southern Crimea.\nCampaigns against Georgia.\nThe integrity of the Byzantine Empire was threatened after a full-scale rebellion led by Bardas Skleros broke out in 976. After winning a series of battles, the rebels conquered Asia Minor. In the urgency of the situation, Georgian prince David III of Tao aided Basil; after a decisive loyalist victory at the Battle of Pankaleia, he was rewarded by lifetime rule of key imperial territories in eastern Asia Minor. David's rebuff of Basil in Bardas Phokas' revolt of 987, however, evoked Constantinople's distrust of the Georgian rulers. After the revolt's failure, David was forced to make Basil the legatee of his extensive possessions. In 1001, after the death of David of Tao, Basil inherited Tao, Phasiane and Speri. These provinces were then organized into the theme of Iberia with the capital at Theodosiopolis. This forced the successor Georgian Bagratid ruler Bagrat III to recognize the new rearrangement. Bagrat's son George I, however, inherited a longstanding claim to David's succession. George, who was young and ambitious, launched a campaign to restore the Kuropalates's succession to Georgia and occupied Tao in 1015\u20131016. He entered in an alliance with the Fatimid caliph of Egypt, al-Hakim, forcing Basil to refrain from an acute response to George's offensive. The Byzantines were also involved in a relentless war with the Bulgarians, limiting their actions to the west. As soon as Bulgaria was conquered in 1018 and al-Hakim was dead, Basil led his army against Georgia. Preparations for a larger-scale campaign against the Kingdom of Georgia were set, beginning with the re-fortification of Theodosiopolis.\nIn late 1021, Basil, at the head of a large Byzantine army reinforced by the Varangian Guard, attacked the Georgians and their Armenian allies, recovering Phasiane and continuing beyond the frontiers of Tao into inner Georgia. King George burned the city of Oltisi to prevent it falling to the enemy and retreated to Kola. A bloody battle was fought near the village Shirimni at Lake Palakazio on 11 September; the emperor won a costly victory, forcing George I to retreat northwards into his kingdom. Basil plundered the country and withdrew for winter to Trebizond.\nSeveral attempts to negotiate the conflict failed. George received reinforcements from the Kakhetians and allied himself with the Byzantine commanders Nikephoros Phokas Barytrachelos and Nikephoros Xiphias in their abortive insurrection in the emperor's rear. In December, George's ally the Armenian king Senekerim of Vaspurakan, who was being harassed by the Seljuk Turks, surrendered his kingdom to the emperor. During early 1022, Basil launched a final offensive, defeating the Georgians at the Battle of Svindax. Menaced both by land and sea, George agreed to a treaty that handed over Tao, Phasiane, Kola, Artaan and Javakheti, and left his infant son Bagrat as Basil's hostage.\nFiscal policies.\nIn 992, Basil concluded a treaty with the Doge of Venice Pietro II Orseolo under terms reducing Venice's custom duties in Constantinople from 30 \"nomismata\" to 17 \"nomismata\". In return, the Venetians agreed to transport Byzantine troops to southern Italy in times of war. According to one estimate, a Byzantine landowning farmer might expect a profit of 10.2 \"nomismata\" after paying dues for half of his best-quality land. Basil was popular with the country farmers, the class that produced most of his army's supplies and soldiers. To assure this continued, Basil's laws protected small agrarian property owners and lowered their taxes. Despite the almost constant wars, Basil's reign was considered an era of relative prosperity for the class.\nSeeking to protect the lower and middle classes, Basil made ruthless war upon the system of immense estates in Asia Minor\u2014which his predecessor Romanos I had endeavored to check\u2014by executing a legal decree in January 996 that limited rights to property ownership. If the owner of an estate could prove that he claimed his estate prior to the Novels of Romanos, he would be allowed to keep it. If a person had illegally seized an estate following the Novels of Romanos, he would have his rights to the estate declared null and the legal owners could reclaim it. In 1002, Basil also introduced the \"allelengyon\" tax as a specific law obliging the \"dynatoi\" (wealthy landholders) to cover for the arrears of poorer tax-payers. Though it proved unpopular with the wealthier sections of Byzantine society, Basil did not abolish the tax; the emperor Romanos III abolished the \"allelengyon\" in 1028. By 1025, Basil\u2014with an annual revenue of 7 million \"nomismata\"\u2014was able to amass 14.4 million \"nomismata\" (or 200,000 pounds/90 tonnes of gold) for the Imperial treasury due to his prudent management. Despite his attempts to control the power of the aristocracy, they again took control of the government following his death.\nMilitary policies.\nBasil II was praised by his army because he spent most of his reign campaigning with it rather than sending orders from Constantinople, as had most of his predecessors. This allowed his army to be largely supportive of him, often making his stance in political and church matters unquestionable. He lived the life of a soldier to the point of eating the same daily rations as the rest of the army. He also took the children of dead army officers under his protection and offered them shelter, food and education. Many of these children became his soldiers and officers, taking the places of their fathers. One of them, Isaac Komnenos, later became emperor himself.\nBasil did not innovate in terms of military organization: in the conquered territories he introduced both the small themes or \"strategiai\", centred around a fortress town, that were such a common feature of the 10th-century reconquests of the East under Phokas and Tzimiskes, as well as the extensive regional commands under a \"doux\" or \"katepano\" (Iberia in 1000, Asprakania or Upper Media in 1019/22, Paristrion in 1000/20, Bulgaria in 1018, and Sirmium in 1019). The exact size of the army under Basil II is unknown, but estimates put it as high as 110,000 men, excluding the imperial \"tagmata\" in Constantinople; a considerable force, compared with the nominal establishment force of c. 120,000 in the 9th\u201310th centuries, or the 150,000\u2013160,000 of the field armies under Justinian I. At the same time, however, under Basil the practice began of relying on allied states\u2014most notably Venice\u2014for naval power, beginning the slow decline of the Byzantine navy during the 11th century.\nLater life, death and burial.\nBasil II later secured the annexation of the sub-kingdoms of Armenia and a promise that its capital and surrounding regions would be willed to Byzantium following the death of its king Hovhannes-Smbat. In 1021, he also secured the cession of the Kingdom of Vaspurakan by its king Seneqerim-John, in exchange for estates in Sebasteia. Basil created a strongly fortified frontier in those highlands. Other Byzantine forces restored much of Southern Italy, which had been lost during the previous 150 years.\nBasil was preparing a military expedition to recover the island of Sicily when he died on 15 December 1025, having had the longest reign among any Byzantine or Roman emperor. At the time of his death, the Empire stretched from southern Italy to the Caucasus and from the Danube to the Levant, which was its greatest territorial extent since the Muslim conquests four centuries earlier. Basil was to be buried in the last sarcophagus available in the rotunda of Constantine I in the Church of the Holy Apostles but he later asked his brother and successor Constantine VIII to be buried in the Church of St. John the Theologian (\"i.e.\", the Evangelist) at the Hebdomon Palace complex outside the walls of Constantinople. The epitaph on Basil's tomb celebrated his campaigns and victories. His final resting place carried the following inscription: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From the day that the King of Heaven called upon me to become the Emperor, the great overlord of the world, no one saw my spear lie idle. I stayed alert throughout my life and protected the children of the New Rome, valiantly campaigning both in the West and at the outposts of the East\u00a0... O, man, seeing now my tomb here, reward me for my campaigns with your prayers. In 1260, during the unsuccessful Nicean Byzantine siege of Constantinople, then held by the Latin Empire, a corpse was found, upright in a corner of the Church of St. John the Evangelist, with a shepherd's flute placed in its mouth. An inscription allowed the Nicaean soldiers to identify the corpse as the remains of Basil II. The body of Basil II was transferred to the Monastery of the Saviour at Selymbria. The following year Constantinople was recovered by the Byzantines.\nLegacy.\nAssessment.\nAn assessment of the reign in the eyes of the subsequent generations is given by Psellos:He crushed rebellions, subdued the feudal landowners, conquered the enemies of the Empire, notably in the Danubian provinces and the East. Everywhere the might of Roman arms was respected and feared. The treasury was overflowing with the accumulated plunder of Basil's campaigns. Even the lamp of learning, despite the emperor's known indifference, was burning still, if somewhat dimly. The lot of ordinary folk in Constantinople must have been pleasant enough. For most of them life was gay and colourful, and if the city's defensive fortifications were at some points in disrepair they had no cause to dread attacks.\nBasil II's reign is one of the most significant in Byzantine history. His constant military campaigns led to the zenith of Byzantine power in the Middle Ages. The restoration of the Danubian frontier helped establish a more stable and secure border for the empire in Europe, maintaining a stronger barrier against Hungarian and Pecheneg raiders. The conquest of Bulgaria and the submission of the South Slavs created relative peace for the empire's Balkan lands, keeping larger cities\u2014including Constantinople\u2014safe from the previously frequent sieges and looting. Basil's military experience that allowed him to eventually turn the war against Bulgaria in the Byzantine Empire's favor were gained through the revolts of Phokas and Skleros in Anatolia that challenged his throne and sometimes got close to deposing him. Basil's creation of the Varangian Guard provided him and his successors with an elite mercenary force capable of changing battle outcomes and boosting morale that became feared by the emperor's enemies.\nAt this time, the Macedonian Renaissance was taking effect, seeing the rise of classical Greek scholarship being assimilated into Christian art and the study of ancient Greek philosophy being widespread. The studies of these subjects, and the enlargement projects of the emperors, greatly expanded the library of the University of Constantinople, which again established itself as the main source of learning for its day. Though he was not a man of literature, Basil was a relatively pious ruler who involved himself in the construction of churches, monasteries and, to some extent, cities.\nLiterary works, eulogies and poems were made by the great cities of the Byzantine Empire that mostly tried to juxtapose the classic past of kingdoms and empires with the new expansion of Basil II in which he was compared with many important figures of the east such as Cyrus the Great and Artaxerxes. He was also particularly compared with Alexander the Great who was believed to be Basil's ancestor. Classical works such as \"The Persians\" by the ancient Greek tragedian Aeschylus were among the most recited in the empire during the expansion given the different confrontations against the caliphates that the Byzantines indiscriminately and classically called \"Medes\". Despite the great expansion during his reign, his military and non-scholastic character led him to be criticized and related to the ancient Spartan monarchs or tyrants who at that time were remembered for being men of action, cruelty and decision who, like Basil, paid little attention to promoting the arts or literary culture and preferred a military environment.\nBasil II lacked heirs due to the \"dearth of cousins found within the Macedonian dynasty\", so he was succeeded by his brother Constantine and his family, who proved to be ineffective rulers. Nevertheless, fifty years of prosperity and intellectual growth followed because the funds of state were full, the borders were safe from intruders, and the Empire remained the most powerful political entity of the age. At the end of Basil II's reign, the Byzantine Empire had a population of approximately 12 million people.\nAlthough they were beneficial, Basil's achievements were reversed very quickly. Many of the Georgian, Armenian and Fatimid campaigns were undone after the succession crisis and eventual civil war after the Battle of Manzikert in 1071. Because many of the empire's governors went to the capital with their soldiers to seize power after the capture of emperor Romanos IV, the Anatolian frontier was largely left undefended against the Seljuk Empire. The Normans permanently pushed the Byzantines from Southern Italy in April 1071.\nAccording to the 19th century historian George Finlay, Basil saw himself as \"prudent, just, and devout; others considered him severe, rapacious, cruel, and bigoted. For Greek learning he cared little, and he was a type of the higher Byzantine moral character, which retained far more of its Roman than its Greek origin\". The modern historian John Julius Norwich wrote of Basil: \"No lonelier man ever occupied the Byzantine throne. And it is hardly surprising: Basil was ugly, dirty, coarse, boorish, philistine and almost pathologically mean. He was in short deeply un-Byzantine. He cared only for the greatness of his Empire. No wonder that in his hands it reached its apogee\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "46427", "revid": "1317015206", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46427", "title": "Inspector Clouseau", "text": "Fictional character created by Blake Edwards\nInspector Jacques Clouseau (), later granted the rank of Chief Inspector, is a fictional character in Blake Edwards' farcical \"The Pink Panther\" series. Clouseau's immense ego, eccentricity, exaggerated French accent, and prominent mustache are all a parody of Hercule Poirot, the fictional Belgian detective created by Agatha Christie. He is portrayed by Peter Sellers in the original series, and also by Alan Arkin in the 1968 film \"Inspector Clouseau\" and, in a cameo, by Roger Moore (credited as Turk Thrust II) in the 1983 film \"Curse of the Pink Panther\". In the 2006 reboot and its 2009 sequel, Clouseau is portrayed by Steve Martin. Clouseau's likeness also appears in the Pink Panther animated cartoon shorts and segments, where he is known as simply \"the Inspector\".\nCharacter.\nOverview.\nClouseau is an inept and incompetent police detective in the French S\u00fbret\u00e9, whose investigations quickly turn to chaos. His absent-mindedness and extreme clumsiness almost always lead to destruction of property: while interviewing witnesses in \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\", he falls down a set of stairs, gets his hand caught in a medieval knight's gauntlet, then in a vase; knocks a witness senseless and voiceless, destroys a priceless piano, and accidentally causes a Scotland Yard superintendent to be shot in the buttocks, all within nearly five minutes. Despite his lack of judgment and skill, Clouseau always manages to solve his cases and finds the correct culprits, almost entirely by accident. \nClouseau is promoted to Chief Inspector over the course of the series, and is regarded in other countries as France's greatest detective, until they encounter him directly. His incompetence, combined with his luck and his occasionally correct interpretations of the situation, frustrate his direct superior, former Chief Inspector Charles Dreyfus so intensely, Dreyfus is eventually driven to insanity. \nWhile Clouseau is generally oblivious to his own ineptitude and genuinely believes he possesses superior expertise and intelligence, he occasionally appears to recognize his limitations. As a police detective, Clouseau also insists upon wearing ridiculously elaborate disguises and aliases that range from the mundane (a telephone company repairman) to the ludicrously preposterous (a buck-toothed hunchback with an oversized nose); but even in these absurd disguises he cannot hide his characteristic inanity.\nClouseau is a patriotic Frenchman; later films reveal he had fought in the French Resistance during the Second World War. He is repeatedly perplexed by transvestites, to the extent that he addresses them as \"Sir or Madam\". He has been prone to infatuation (often reciprocated) ever since the first film, in which his antagonist cuckolds him. \nClouseau's faux French accent became much more exaggerated in the later films (for example, pronouncing \"room\" as \"reum\"; \"Pope\" as \"Peup\"; \"bomb\" as \"beumb\"; and \"bumps\" as \"beumps\"), and a frequent running gag in the movies was that even French characters had difficulty understanding what he was saying. In his earliest appearances, Clouseau appears slightly less inept than in the later films; but even in his first appearance he believes himself a skilled violinist, but plays out of tune, and often appears clumsy at moments of highest seriousness. Sellers maintained that Clouseau's oversized ego made his klutziness even funnier, particularly in his regular attempts to remain dignified, elegant, and refined while causing comic chaos.\nFilms.\n\"The Pink Panther\" (1963).\nJacques Clouseau makes his first appearance as the Inspector in the 1963 film \"The Pink Panther\", which was released in the United States in March 1964. The movie is centered on David Niven's role as Sir Charles Lytton, the infamous jewel thief nicknamed \"the Phantom\", and his plan to steal the Pink Panther diamond from a vacationing princess. The Clouseau character was a supporting, comedic role as Lytton's incompetent and oblivious antagonist. Clouseau's wife Simone (Capucine), is secretly Sir Charles's lover and accomplice, and departs with him at the end of the film after they have framed Clouseau for the theft of the Pink Panther.\n\"A Shot in the Dark\" (1964).\n\"A Shot in the Dark\" (1964) was based upon a stage play that originally did not include the Clouseau character. In this film, Sellers began to develop the exaggerated French accent that later became a hallmark of the character. The film also introduces two of the series' regular characters: his superior, Commissioner Dreyfus (Herbert Lom), who is driven mad by Clouseau's blundering in the investigation; and his long-suffering Chinese manservant, Cato (Burt Kwouk), who is expected to improve Clouseau's martial arts skills by attacking him at random.\n\"Inspector Clouseau\" (1968).\nIn \"Inspector Clouseau\", the character was portrayed by American actor Alan Arkin; Blake Edwards was not involved in this production. The film's opening credits, animated by TVC London for DePatie-Freleng Enterprises, feature their Inspector character from the series of cartoon shorts under that title. Sellers declined to appear as Clouseau in \"Inspector Clouseau\" (1968) but he returned for \"The Return of the Pink Panther\" (1975) and its sequels.\n\"The Return of the Pink Panther\" (1975).\nThe 1968 film does appear to have influenced the Clouseau character when Sellers returned to the role in \"The Return of the Pink Panther\" (1975), particularly in the character's mode of dress. According to DVD liner notes for \"The Return of the Pink Panther\", Sellers and Edwards originally planned to produce a British television series centered on Clouseau, but this film was made instead. The opening credits were animated by Richard Williams. The plot centers on Clouseau once again seeking to retrieve the stolen Pink Panther diamond. David Niven was unavailable to reprise the role of Sir Charles Lytton, so Christopher Plummer was cast. Catherine Schell appears as Lady Lytton.\nThe film was a financial success and led to Edwards quickly developing a sequel.\n\"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" (1976).\n\"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" continues the story from the end of \"The Return of the Pink Panther\", featuring the now-insane Dreyfus creating a crime syndicate and constructing a doomsday weapon with the intention of using it to blackmail world leaders to assassinate Clouseau. Like the previous film, it was a box office success. Unused footage from this film was used to include Sellers in \"Trail of the Pink Panther\". The opening credits were again animated by Richard Williams.\n\"Revenge of the Pink Panther\" (1978).\nAfter the success of \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\", Edwards and Sellers reunited for their final film, \"Revenge of the Pink Panther\" which has Clouseau investigating a plot to kill him by a prominent businessman who is head of the French Connection. The movie was another box office success and led to several more sequels after Sellers death in July, 1980. Biographies of Sellers such as \"Peter Sellers\u2014A Celebration\" reveal that he was involved in the pre-production of another Clouseau film, \"Romance of the Pink Panther\", at the time of his death.\n\"Trail of The Pink Panther\" (1982).\nBlake Edwards attempted to continue telling Clouseau's story despite the death of his lead actor. The 1982 film \"Trail of the Pink Panther\" utilized outtakes and alternative footage of Sellers as Clouseau in a new storyline in which a reporter (played by Joanna Lumley) investigates Clouseau's disappearance. In the process, she interviews characters from past Clouseau films (including the Lyttons, played by the returning David Niven and Capucine), and also meets Clouseau's equally inept father (played by Richard Mulligan).\n\"Curse of the Pink Panther\" (1983).\nThe immediate sequel to \"Trail\", \"Curse of the Pink Panther\", reveals that Clouseau underwent plastic surgery to change his appearance; the character appears on screen briefly in the form of a joke cameo appearance by Roger Moore, billed as \"Turk Thrust II\". David Niven and Capucine again reprise their original \"Pink Panther\" roles as the Lyttons, now also joined by the returning Robert Wagner as nephew George Lytton. Neither \"Trail\" nor \"Curse\" were box office moneymakers, and the series was retired for about a decade due to a lengthy period of litigation between Edwards and MGM over the film's release date.\n\"Son of the Pink Panther\" (1993).\nDespite the failure of \"Curse\", Edwards attempted to revive the series a decade later with \"Son of the Pink Panther\", in which it is revealed that Clouseau had illegitimate children by Maria Gambrelli (played by Elke Sommer in \"A Shot in the Dark\", although recast in this film as Claudia Cardinale, who played the Princess in \"The Pink Panther\"). Clouseau's son, Jacques Jr., was portrayed by Roberto Benigni, and has a twin sister, Jacqueline, played by Nicoletta Braschi. Jacques Jr. attempts to follow in his father's police footsteps, but is revealed to have inherited his ineptitude. Herbert Lom and Burt Kwouk made their final appearances as Dreyfus and Cato in this film.\n\"The Pink Panther\" (2006).\nSteve Martin's portrayal of Clouseau in the reboot 2006 film has Clouseau as a bumbling Gendarme hired by Chief Inspector Dreyfus to serve as the visible face of a high-profile murder investigation, so that Dreyfus can carry out his own investigation without risking repercussions of failure; but Martin's Clouseau is considerably older than Sellers'. Although foolish, Martin's Clouseau is generally more intelligent and competent than Sellers' version, as he is able to locate the Pink Panther diamond and solve the case by knowledge, and observation, of obscure data. A running gag in this and the following film has Clouseau randomly attacking his partner, Gilbert Ponton, only to be countered each time. This is a mirror image of the running gag in the original films wherein Clouseau's original sidekick, Cato Fong, attacked Clouseau in order to keep Clouseau's skills sharp.\n\"The Pink Panther 2\" (2009).\nWhen a series of rare and historical artifacts are stolen by the mysterious jewel thief \"The Tornado\", Clouseau is assigned to a \"dream team\" of international investigators to recover the artifacts and the Pink Panther. Despite appearing to be bumbling and clumsy as usual, Clouseau once again displays surprising cleverness through his unorthodox methods. For example, he replaces the Pink Panther with a near perfect fake, reasoning that if The Tornado were the culprit, he would have been able to tell that the Pink Panther was a fake. He also causes several problems for Dreyfus, as usual. The film culminates in his marriage to Nicole Durant, Dreyfus's secretary.\nFuture.\nOn July 28, 2025, Eddie Murphy confirmed reports that he would play Clouseau to be true.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46428", "revid": "39371672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46428", "title": "Assassination market", "text": "Type of market that incentivizes assassination\nAn assassination market is a prediction market where any party can place a bet (using anonymous electronic money and pseudonymous remailers) on the date of death of a given individual. This incentivises assassination of the individual, as parties with advance knowledge of an assassination plot can profit by betting accurately on the date of the death. Because the payoff is for accurately picking the date rather than performing the assassination, it is substantially more difficult to assign criminal liability.\nHistory.\nEarly uses of the terms \"assassination market\" and \"market for assassinations\" can be found (in both positive and negative lights) in 1994's \"The Cyphernomicon\" by Timothy C. May, a cypherpunk. The concept and its potential effects are also referred to as assassination politics, a term popularized by Jim Bell in his 1995\u201396 essay of the same name.\nEarly in part 1, Jim Bell describes the idea as:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The organization set up to manage such a system could, presumably, make up a list of people who had seriously violated the NAP (Non-aggression Principle), but who would not see justice in our courts due to the fact that their actions were done at the behest of the government. Associated with each name would be a dollar figure, the total amount of money the organization has received as a contribution, which is the amount they would give for correctly \"predicting\" the person's death, presumably naming the exact date. \"Guessers\" would formulate their \"guess\" into a file, encrypt it with the organization's public key, then transmit it to the organization, possibly using methods as untraceable as putting a floppy disk in an envelope and tossing it into a mailbox, but more likely either a cascade of encrypted anonymous remailers, or possibly public-access Internet locations, such as terminals at a local library, etc.\nIn order to prevent such a system from becoming simply a random unpaid lottery, in which people can randomly guess a name and date (hoping that lightning would strike, as it occasionally does), it would be necessary to deter such random guessing by requiring the \"guessers\" to include with their \"guess\" encrypted and untraceable \"digital cash,\" in an amount sufficiently high to make random guessing impractical.\nBell then goes on to further specify the protocol of the assassination market in more detail. In the final part of his essay, Bell posits a market that is largely non-anonymous. He contrasts this version with the one previously described. Carl Johnson's attempt to popularise the concept of assassination politics appeared to rely on the earlier version. There followed an attempt to popularise the second in 2001 that is ongoing today.\nTechnologies such as Tor and bitcoin have enabled online assassination markets, as described in parts one to nine of \"Assassination Politics\".\nAssassination Market website.\nThe first prediction market entitled \"Assassination Market\" was created by a self-described crypto-anarchist in 2013. Utilising Tor to hide the site's location and bitcoin-based bounties and prediction technology, the site lists bounties on former US President Barack Obama, economist Ben Bernanke and former justice minister of Sweden Beatrice Ask (all of whom are still alive as of November 2025). In 2015, the site was suspected to be defunct, but the deposited bitcoins were cashed out in 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46433", "revid": "45697095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46433", "title": "Fun", "text": "Pleasure, enjoyment, or amusement\nFun is defined by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" as \"light-hearted pleasure, enjoyment, or amusement; boisterous joviality or merrymaking; entertainment\".\nEtymology and usage.\nThe word \"fun\" is associated with sports, entertaining media, high merriment, and amusement. Although its etymology is uncertain, it has been speculated that it may be derived from Middle English ' (fool) and ' (the one fooling the other). An 18th century meaning (still used in Orkney and Shetland) was \"cheat, trick, hoax\", a meaning still retained in the phrase \"to make fun of\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \"The landlady was going to reply, but was prevented by the peace-making sergeant, sorely to the displeasure of Partridge, who was a great lover of what is called fun, and a great promoter of those harmless quarrels which tend rather to the production of comical than tragical incidents.\" Henry Fielding, \"The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling\" (1749) \nThe way the word \"fun\" is used demonstrates its distinctive elusiveness and happiness. Expressions such as \"Have fun!\" and \"That was fun!\" indicate that fun is pleasant, personal, and to some extent unpredictable. Expressions such as \"I was making fun of myself\" convey the sense that fun is something that can be amusing and not to be taken seriously. The adjective \"funny\" has two meanings, which often need to be clarified between a speaker and listener. One meaning is \"amusing, jocular, droll\" and the other meaning is \"odd, quirky, peculiar\". These differences indicate the evanescent and experiential nature of fun and the difficulty of distinguishing \"fun\" from \"enjoyment\".\nFun's evanescence can be seen when an activity regarded as fun becomes goal-oriented. Many physical activities and individual sports are regarded as fun until the participant seeks to win a competition, at which point, much of the fun may disappear as the individual's focus tightens. Surfing is an example. If you are a \"mellow soul\" (not in a competition or engaging in extreme sport) \"once you're riding waves, you're guaranteed to be having fun\".\nThe pleasure of fun can be seen by the numerous efforts to harness its positive associations. For example, there are many books on serious subjects, about skills such as music, mathematics and languages, normally quite difficult to master, which have \"fun\" added to the title.\nActivities.\nMany physical activities provide opportunities to play and have fun. Not only can these activities be fun, but they can also improve physical and mental states.\nPsychology.\nAccording to Johan Huizinga, fun is \"an absolutely primary category of life, familiar to everybody at a glance right down to the animal level.\" Psychological studies reveal both the importance of fun and its effect on time perception, which is sometimes said to be shortened when one is having fun. As the adage states: \"Time flies when you're having fun\".\nIt has been suggested that games, toys, and activities perceived as fun are often challenging in some way. When a person is challenged to think consciously, overcome challenge and learn something new, they are more likely to enjoy a new experience and view it as fun. A change from routine activities appears to be at the core of this perception, since people spend much of a typical day engaged in activities that are routine and require limited conscious thinking. Routine information is processed by the brain as a \"chunked pattern\": \"We rarely look at the real world\", according to game designer Raph Koster, \"we instead recognize something we have chunked, and leave it at that. [...] One might argue that the essence of much of art is in forcing us to see things as they really are rather than as we assume them to be\". Since it helps people to relax, fun is sometimes regarded as a \"social lubricant\", important in adding \"to one's pleasure in life\" and helping to \"act as a buffer against stress\".\nFor children, fun is strongly related to play and they have great capacity to extract the fun from it in a spontaneous and inventive way. Play \"involves the capacity to have fun \u2013 to be able to return, at least for a little while, to never-never land and enjoy it.\"\nPhysiology.\nSome scientists have identified areas of the brain associated with the perception of novelty, which are stimulated when faced with \"unusual or surprising circumstances\". Information is initially received in the hippocampus, the site of long-term memory consolidation, where the brain attempts to match the new information with recognizable patterns stored in long-term memory. When it is unable to do this, the brain releases dopamine, a chemical which stimulates the amygdala, the site of emotion, and creates a pleasurable feeling that is associated with the new memory. In other words, fun is created by stimulating the brain with novelty.\nIn popular culture.\nWith the emergence of entertainment industry, fun is sold as a consumer product in the form of games, novelties, television, toys and other amusements. Marxist sociologists such as the Frankfurt School criticise mass-manufactured fun as too calculated and empty to be fully satisfying. Bill Griffith satirises this dysphoria when his cartoon character Zippy the Pinhead asks mechanically, \"Are we having fun yet?\" In The Beatles song \"She's Leaving Home\" fun is called \"the one thing that money can't buy.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46434", "revid": "5984052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46434", "title": "Hashishim", "text": ""}
{"id": "46435", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46435", "title": "Order of Assassins", "text": "1090\u20131275 Nizari Isma'ili religious sect\nThe Order of Assassins (; ) was a Nizari Isma'ili religious order of that existed between 1090 and 1275 AD, founded by Hasan al-Sabbah, that was responsible for various high-profile assassinations in the Levant during the time of the crusader states.\nDuring that time, the members lived in the mountain castles in Persia and the Levant, and held a strict subterfuge policy throughout the Middle East, posing a substantial strategic threat to Fatimid, Abbasid, and Seljuk authority, and killing several Christian leaders. Over the course of nearly 200 years, they killed hundreds who were considered leading enemies of the Nizari Isma'ili state. The modern term assassination is believed to stem from the tactics used by the Assassins.\nContemporaneous historians include ibn al-Qalanisi, Ali ibn al-Athir, and Ata-Malik Juvayni. The former two referred to the Assassins as \"batiniyya\", an epithet widely accepted by Isma'ilis themselves.\nOverview.\nThe Assassins were founded by Hassan-i Sabbah. The state was formed in 1090 after the capture of Alamut Castle in the Alborz mountain range of Persia, which served as the Assassins' headquarters. The Alamut and Lambsar castles became the foundation of a network of Isma'ili fortresses throughout Persia and Syria that formed the backbone of Assassin power, and included Syrian strongholds at Masyaf, Abu Qubays, al-Qadmus and al-Kahf. The Western world was introduced to the Assassins by the works of Marco Polo who understood the name as deriving from the word hashish. The Assassins posed a substantial strategic threat to Fatimid, Abbasid, and Seljuk authority. Over the course of nearly 200\u00a0years, they killed hundreds \u2013 including three caliphs, a ruler of Jerusalem and several Muslim and Christian leaders.\nNotable victims of the Assassins include Janah ad-Dawla, emir of Homs, (1103), Mawdud ibn Altuntash, atabeg of Mosul (1113), Fatimid vizier Al-Afdal Shahanshah (1121), Seljuk atabeg Aqsunqur al-Bursuqi (1126), Fatimid caliph al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah (1130), Taj al-Mulk Buri, atabeg of Damascus (1132), and Abbasid caliphs al-Mustarshid (1135) and ar-Rashid (1138). Saladin, a major foe of the Assassins, escaped assassination twice (1175\u20131176). The first Frank known to have been killed by the Assassins was Raymond II, Count of Tripoli, in 1152. The Assassins were acknowledged and feared by the Crusaders, losing the \"de facto\" King of Jerusalem, Conrad of Montferrat, to an Assassin's blade in 1192 and Lord Philip of Montfort of Tyre in 1270. The Ismaili Assassins were created to revive the Shi'a Ismaili Fatimid Caliphate in Egypt, which had been destroyed by the Sunni Seljuks.\nAccounts of the Assassins were preserved within Western, Arabic, Syriac, and Persian sources where they are depicted as trained killers, responsible for the systematic elimination of opposing figures. European orientalists in the 19th\u00a0and 20th centuries also referred to the Isma'ili Assassins in their works, writing about them based on accounts in seminal works by medieval Arab and Persian authors, particularly ibn al-Qalanisi's \"Mudhayyal Ta'rikh Dimashq\" (\"Continuation of the Chronicle of Damascus\"), ibn al-Athir's \"al-K\u0101mil fit-T\u0101r\u012bkh\" (\"The Complete History\"), and Juvayni's \"Tar\u012bkh-i Jah\u0101n-gush\u0101\" (\"History of the World Conqueror\"). The Order would finally come to an end during the rule of Imam Rukn al-Din Khurshah when the Isma'ili State was eventually destroyed as Khurshah surrendered the castles after the Mongol invasion of Persia. Khurshah died in 1256 and, by 1275, the Mongols had destroyed and eliminated the order of Assassins.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nHassan-i Sabbah was born in Qom, ca. 1050, and did his religious studies in Cairo with the Fatimids. Sabbah's father was a Qahtanite Arab, said to be a descendant of Himyaritic kings, having emigrated to Qom from Kufa. He made his way to Persia where, through subterfuge, he and his followers captured Alamut Castle in 1090. Sabbah adapted the fortress to suit his needs not only for defense from hostile forces, but also for indoctrination of his followers. After laying claim to the fortress at Alamut, Sabbah began expanding his influence outwards to nearby towns and districts, using his agents to gain political favour and to intimidate the local populations. Spending most of his days at Alamut producing religious works and developing doctrines for his order, Sabbah would never again leave his fortress.\nShortly after establishing their headquarters at Alamut Castle, the sect captured Lambsar Castle, to be the largest of the Isma'ili fortresses and confirming the Assassins' power in northern Persia. The estimated date of the capture of Lambsar varies between 1096 and 1102. The castle was taken under the command of Kiya Buzurg Ummid, later Sabbah's successor, who remained commandant of the fortress for twenty years. No interactions between the Christian forces of the First Crusade and the Assassins have been noted, with the latter concentrating on the Muslim enemies of the former. Other than a mention of Tancred's 1106 taking of Apamea (see below) in \"Gesta Tancredi\",\nOne of Sabbah's disciples named Dihdar Bu-Ali from Qazvin rallied local supporters to deflect the Seljuks. Their attack on Alamut Castle and surrounding areas was canceled upon the death of the sultan. The new sultan Berkyaruq, son of Malik Shah I, did not continue the direct attack on Alamut, concentrating on securing his position against rivals, including his half-brother Muhammad I Tapar, who eventually settled for a smaller role, becoming \"malik\" (translated as \"king\") in Armenia and Azerbaijan. Sabbah is reputed to have remarked, \"the killing of this devil is the beginning of bliss\". Of the 50 assassinations conducted during Sabbah's reign, more than half were Seljuk officials, many of whom supported Muhammad I Tapar.\nThe Assassins seized Persian castles of Rudkhan and Gerdkuh in 1096, before turning to Syria. Gerdkuh was re-fortified by Mu'ayyad al-Din Muzaffar ibn Ahmad Mustawfi, a Seljuk who was a secret Isma'ili convert, and his son Sharaf al-Din Muhammad. There they occupied the fortress at Shaizar held by the Banu Munqidh, using it to spread terror to Isfahan, the heart of the Seljuk Empire. A rebellion by the local population drove the Assassins out, but they continued to occupy a smaller fortress at Khalinjan. In 1097, Berkyaruq associate Bursuq was killed by Assassins.\nBy 1100, Berkyaruq had consolidated his power, and the Assassins increased their presence by infiltrating the sultan's court and army. Day-to-day functions of the court were frequently performed while armored and with weapons. The next year, he tasked his brother Ahmad Sanjar, then ruler of Khorasan, to attack Assassin strongholds in Quhistan. The siege at Tabas was at first successful, with the walls of the fortress breached, but then was lifted, possibly because the Seljuk commander had been bribed. The subsequent attack was devastating to the Assassins, but the terms granted were generous and they were soon reestablished at both Quhistan and Tabas. In the years following, the Assassins continued their mission against religious and secular leaders. Given these successes, they began expanding their operations into Syria.\nExpansion into Syria.\nThe first \"da'i\" Hassan-i dispatched to Syria was al-Hakim al-Munajjim, a Persian known as the physician-astrologer, establishing a cell in Aleppo in the early 12th century. Ridwan, the emir of Aleppo, was in search of allies and worked closely with al-Hakim. The alliance was first shown in the assassination in 1103 of Janah ad-Dawla, emir of Homs and a key opponent of Ridwan. He was murdered by three Assassins at the Great Mosque of al-Nuri in Homs. Al-Hakim died a few weeks later and was succeeded by Abu Tahir al-Sa'igh, a Persian known as the goldsmith.\nWhile successful in cleaning the Assassins, they remained untouchable in their strongholds in the north. An eight-year war of attrition was initiated by the son of the first Assassin victim. The mission had some successes, negotiating a surrender of Khalinjan with local Assassin leader Ahmad ibn 'Abd al-Malik ibn Att\u0101sh, with the occupants allowed to go to Tabas and Arrajan. During the siege of Alamut, a famine resulted and Hassan had his wife and daughters sent to the fortress at Gerdkuh. After that time, Assassins never allowed their women to be at their fortresses during military campaigns, both for protection and secrecy. In the end, ibn Att\u0101sh did not fulfill his commitment and was flayed alive, his head delivered to the sultan.\nIn Syria, Abu Tahir al-Sa'igh, Ridwan and Abu'l Fath of Sarmin conspired in 1106 to send a team of Assassins to murder Khalaf ibn Mula'ib, emir of Apamea (Qalaat al-Madiq). Some of Khalaf's sons and guards were also killed and, after the murder, Ridwan became overlord of Apamea and its fortress Qal'at al-Madiq, with Abu'l Fath as emir. A surviving son of Khalaf escaped and turned to Tancred, who was at first content to leave the city in the hands of the Isma'ilis and simply collect tribute. Later, he returned and captured the city for Antioch, as the town's residents overwhelmingly approved of Frankish rule. Abu'l Fath was tortured to death, while Abu Tahir ransomed himself and returned to Aleppo. This encounter, the first between the Crusaders and the Assassins, did not deter the latter from their prime mission against the Seljuks.\nNot so lucky were Ubayd Allah al-Khatib, \"qadi\" of Isfahan, and a \"qadi\" of Nishapur, both of whom succumbed to the Assassins' blade.\nThe Assassins wreaked havoc on the Syrian rulers, with their first major kill being that of Mawdud, atabeg of Mosul, in 1113. Mawdud was felled by Assassins in Damascus while a guest of Toghtekin, atabeg of Damascus. He was replaced at Mosul by al-Bursuqi, who himself would be a victim of the Assassins in 1126. Toghtekin's son, the great Buri, founder of the Burid dynasty, would fall victim to the Assassins in 1131, dying a year later due to his injuries.\nRidwan died in 1113 and was succeeded as ruler of Aleppo by his son Alp Arslan al-Akhras. Alp Arslan continued his father's conciliatory approach to the Assassins. A warning from Muhammad I Tapar and a prior attempt of the assassination of Abu Harb Isa ibn Zayd, a wealthy Persian merchant, led to a wholescale expulsion of the Assassins from Aleppo in that same year. Led by militia commander S\u0101\u02bfid ibn Bad\u012b, the attack resulted in the execution of Abu Tahir al-Sa'igh and the brother of al-Hakim al-Munajjim, with 200 other Assassins killed or imprisoned, some thrown from the top of the citadel. Many took refuge with the Banu Munqidh at Shaizar. Revenge was slow but sure, taken out on S\u0101\u02bfid ibn Bad\u012b in 1119. The shiftless Arp Arslan had exiled S\u0101\u02bfid to Qal\u02bfat Ja\u02bfbar, where he was murdered along with two of his sons by Assassins.\nThe Assassins struck again in Damascus in 1116. While a guest of Toghtekin's, Kurdish emir Ahmad-Il ibn Ibr\u0101him ibn Wahs\u016bd\u0101n was sitting next to his host when a grieving man approached with a petition he wished be conveyed to Muhammad I Tapar. When Ahmad-Il accepted the document, he was stuck with a dagger, then again and again by a second and third accomplice. It was thought that the real target may have been Toghtekin, but the attackers were discovered to be Assassins, likely after Ahmad-Il, the foster brother of sultan.\nIn 1118, Muhammad I Tapar died and his brother Ahmad Sanjar became Seljuk sultan, and Hassan sent ambassadors to seek peace. When Sanjar rebuffed these ambassadors, Hassan then sent his Assassins to the sultan. Sanjar woke up one morning with a dagger stuck in the ground beside his bed. Alarmed, he kept the matter a secret. A messenger from Hassan arrived and stated, \"Did I not wish the sultan well that the dagger which was struck in the hard ground would have been planted on your soft breast\". For the next several decades there ensued a ceasefire between the Isma'ilis and the Seljuks. Sanjar himself pensioned the Assassins on taxes collected from the lands they owned, gave them grants and licenses, and even allowed them to collect tolls from travelers.\nBy 1120, the Assassins' position in Aleppo had improved to the point that they demanded the small citadel of Qal'at ash-Sharif from Ilghazi, then Artuqid emir of Aleppo. Rather than refuse, he had the citadel demolished. The Assassins' influence in Aleppo came to an end in 1124 when they were expelled by Belek Ghazi, a successor to Ilghazi. Nevertheless, the \"qadi\" ibn al-Khashahab who had overseen the demolition of Qal'at ash-Sharif was killed by Assassins in 1125. At the same time, the Assassins of Diyarbakir were set upon by the locals, resulting in hundreds killed.\nIn 1121, Al-Afdal Shahanshah, the vizier of the Fatimid Caliphate, was murdered by three Assassins from Aleppo, causing a seven-day celebration among the Isma'ilis and no great mourning among the court of Fatimid caliph al-Amir bi-Ahkam Allah who resented his growing boldness. Al-Afdal Shahanshah was replaced as vizier by al-Ma'mum al-Bata'ihi who was instructed to prepare a letter of rapprochement between Cairo and Alamut. Upon learning of a plot to kill both al-Amir and al-Ma'mum, such ideas were disbanded, and severe restrictions on dealing with the Assassins were instead put in place.\nThe next generation.\nIn 1124, Hassan-i Sabbah died, leaving a legacy that reverberated throughout the Middle East for centuries. He was succeeded at Alamut by Kiya Buzurg Ummid.\nThe appointment of a new \"da'i\" at Alamut may have led the Seljuks to believe the Assassins were in a weakened position, and Ahmad Sanjar launched an attack on them in 1126. Led by Sanjar's vizier Mu'in ad-Din Kashi, the Seljuks again struck at Quhistan and also Nishapur in the east, and at Rudbar to the north. In the east, the Seljuks had minor successes at a village near Sabzevar, where the population was destroyed, their leader leaping from the mosque's minaret, and at Turaythirth in Nishapur, where the attackers \"killed many, took much booty, and then returned.\" At best, the results were not decisive, but superior to the routing the Seljuks received in the north, with one expedition driven back, losing their previous booty, and another having a Seljuk commander captured. In the end, the Isma'ili position was better than before the offensive. In the guise of a peace offering of two Arabian horses, Assassins gained the confidence of Mu'in ad-Din Kashi and killed him in 1127.\nAt the same time, in Syria, a Persian named Bahram al-Da'i, the successor to Abu Tahir al-Sa'igh who had been executed in Aleppo in 1113, appeared in Damascus reflecting cooperation between the Assassins and Toghtekin, including a joint operation against the Crusaders. Bahram, a Persian from Asterabad (present-day Gorgan), had lived in secrecy after the expulsion of the Assassins from Aleppo and was the nephew of the Assassin Abu Ibrahim al-Asterbadi who had been executed by Berkyaruq in 1101. Bahram was most likely behind the murder of al-Bursuqi in 1126, whose assassination may have been ordered by the Seljuk sultan Mahmud II. He later established a stronghold near Banias. During an attack on the Lebanese valley of Wadi al-Taym, Bahram captured and tortured to death a local chieftain named Baraq ibn Jandal. In retaliation, his brother Dahhak ibn Jandal killed Bahram in 1127. So great was the fear and hatred of the Assassins that the messenger delivering Bahram's head and hands to Cairo was rewarded with a robe of honor. That fear was justified as caliph al-Amir bi-Ahkam Allah was murdered at court in 1130 by ten Assassins.\nThe Isma'ili response to the Seljuk invasion of 1126 was multi-faceted. In Rudbar, a new and powerful fortress was built at Maymundiz and new territories acquired. To the east, the Seljuk stronghold of Sistan was raided in 1129. That same year, Mahmud II, son of Muhammad I Tapar, and sultan of Isfahan, decided to sue for peace with Alamut. Unfortunately, the Isma'ili envoys to Mahmud II were lynched by an angry mob following their audience with the sultan. The demand by Kiya Buzurg Ummid for punishment of the perpetrators was refused. That prompted an Assassin attack on Qazvin, resulting in the loss of 400 lives in addition to a Turkish emir. A counterattack on Alamut was inconclusive.\nIn Syria, Assassin leader Bahram was replaced by another mysterious Persian named Isma'il al-'Ajami who, like Bahram, was supported by al-Mazdaghani, the pro-Isma'ili vizier to Toghtekin. After the death of Toghtekin in 1128, his son and successor Taj a-Mulk Buri began working to free Damascus of the Assassins, supported by his military commander Yusuf ibn Firuz. al-Mazdaghani was murdered and his head publicly displayed. The Damascenes turned on the Assassins, leaving \"dogs yelping and quarreling over their limbs and corpses.\" At least 6000 Assassins died, and the rest, including Isma'il (who had turned Banias over to the Franks), fled to Frankish territory. Isma'il was killed in 1130, temporarily disabling the Assassins' Syrian mission. Nevertheless, Alamut organized a counterstrike, with two Persian Assassins disguised as Turkish soldiers striking down Buri in 1131. The Assassins were hacked to pieces by Buri's guards, but Buri died of his wounds the following year.\nMahmud II died in 1131 and his brother Ghiyath ad-Din Mas'ud (Mas'ud) was recognized as successor by Abbasid caliph al-Mustarshid. The succession was contested by Mahmud's son and other brothers, and al-Mustarshid was drawn into the conflict. The caliph al-Mustarshid was taken prisoner by Seljuk forces in 1135 near Hamadan and pardoned with the proviso that he abdicate. Left in his tent studying the Quran, he was murdered by a large group of Assassins. Some suspected Mas'ud and even Ahmad Sanjar with complicity, but the chronicles of contemporaneous Arab historians ibn al-Athir and ibn al-Jawzi do not bear that out. The Isma'ilis commemorated the caliph's death with seven days and nights of celebration.\nThe reign of Buzurg Ummid ended with his death in 1138, showing a relatively small list of assassinations. He was succeeded by his son Muhammad Buzurg Ummid, sometimes referred to as Kiya Muhammad.\nThe Abbasids' celebration of the death of the Assassin leader Buzurg Ummid was short-lived. The son and successor of the last high-profile victim of the Assassins, al-Mustarshid, was ar-Rashid. Ar-Rashid was deposed by his uncle al-Muqtafi in 1136 and, while recovering from an illness in Isfahan, was murdered by Assassins. The addition of a second caliph to the Assassins' so-called \"roll of honor\" of victims again resulted in a week of celebration at Alamut. Another significant success was the assassination of the son of Mahmud II, Da'ud, who ruled in Azerbaijan and Jibal. Da'ud was felled by four Assassins in Tabriz in 1143, rumored to have been dispatched by Zengi, atabeg of Mosul.\nExpansion in Syria.\nThe decades after the assassination of al-Mustarshid showed an expansion of Assassin castles in Jabal Bahr\u0101', to the northwest of their Syrian fortresses in Jabal as-Summaq. In 1132, Saif al-Mulk ibn Amrun, emir of al-Kahf, recovered the fortress of al-Qadmus from the Franks, known to them as \"Bokabeis.\" He then sold the fortress to the Assassins in 1133. This was followed by the ceding of al-Kahf Castle itself to Assassin control in 1138 by Saif's son Musa in the midst of a succession struggle. These were followed by the acquisition of the castle at Masyaf in 1140 and of Qala'at al-Khawabi, known to the Crusaders as \"La Coible\", in 1141.\nRelatively little is recorded concerning Assassin activity during this period until the Second Crusade. In 1149, an Assassin named Ali ibn-Wafa allied with Raymond of Poitiers, son of William IX of Aquitaine, to defend the borders of the Principality of Antioch against Zengid expansion. The forces met at the battle of Inab, with Zengi's son and heir Nur ad-Din defeating the Franks, killing both Raymond and ibn-Wafa. Nur ad-Din would again foil the Assassins in 1158, incorporating a castle at Shaizar that they had occupied after the 1157 earthquake into his territory. Two assassinations are known from this period. In a revenge attack, Dahhak ibn Jandal, the Wadi al-Taym chieftain who had killed Assassin \"da'i\" Bahram in 1127, died from an Assassin's blade in 1149. A few years later in 1152, possibly in retaliation to the establishment of the Knights Templar at Tartus, Raymond II, count of Tripoli, was killed by Assassins. This marked the first known Christian victim.\nHassan II and Rashid ad-Din Sinan.\nThe fourteen known assassinations during the reign of Kiya Muhammad was a far cry from the tally of his predecessors, representing a significant decline in the power of the Isma'ilis. This was exemplified by the governors of Mazandaran and of Rayy who were said to have built towers out of Isma'ili skulls.\nIn the middle of Ramadan in 559 AH, Hassan II gathered his followers and announced to \"jinn, men and angels\" that the Hidden Imam had freed them \"from the burden of the rules of Holy Law\". With that, the assembled took part in a ritual violation of Sharia, a banquet with wine, in violation of the Ramadan fast, with their backs turned towards Medina. Observance of Islamic rites (fasting, salat prayer, etc.) was punishable by the utmost severity. (According to Sh\u012b\u02bfa hadiths, when the Hidden Imam/mahdi reappears, \"he will bring a new religion, a new book and a new law\").\nResistance was nonetheless deep, and Hasan was stabbed to death by his own brother-in-law.\nHassan II shifted the focus of his followers from the exoteric to the esoteric (batin). He abrogated the exoteric practice of Sharia and stressed on the esoteric (batini) side of the laws. And \"while outwardly he was known as the grandson of Buzurgumid\", in this esoteric reality, Lewis writes, Hasan claimed \"he was the Imam of the time\" (the last Imam of Shia Islam before the end of the world). The impact of these changes on Isma'ili life and politics were vast and continued after Hassan II's death in 1166 by his son N\u016br al-D\u012bn Muhammad, known as the Imam Muhammad II, who ruled from 1166 to 1210. It is in this context and the changes in the Muslim world brought about by the disintegration of the Seljuk empire that a new chief \"da'i\" of the Assassins was thrust: Rashid ad-Din Sinan, referred to as Sin\u0101n.\nRashid ad-Din Sinan, an alchemist and schoolmaster, was dispatched to Syria by Hassan II as a messenger of his Islamic views and to continue the Assassins' mission. Known as the greatest of the Assassin chiefs, Sin\u0101n first made headquarters at al-Kahf Castle and then the fortress of Masyaf. At al-Kahf, he worked with chief \"da'i\" Abu-Muhammad, who was succeeded at his death by Khwaja Ali ibn Mas'ud without authority from Alamut. Khwaja was murdered by Abu-Muhammad's nephew Abu Mansur, causing Alamut to reassert control. After seven years at al-Kahf, Sin\u0101n assumed that role, operating independently of and feared by Alamut, relocating the capital to Masyaf. Among his first tasks were the refurbishing of the fortress of ar-Rusafa and of Qala'at al-Khawabi, constructing a tower at the citadel of the latter. Sin\u0101n also captured the castle of al-'Ullaiqah at Aleika, near Tartus.\nOne of the first orders of business that Sin\u0101n confronted was the continuing threat from Nur ad-Din as well as the Knights Templar's presence at Tartus. In 1173, Sin\u0101n proposed to Amalric of Jerusalem an alliance against Nur ad-Din in exchange for the cancellation of the tribute imposed upon Assassin villages near Tartus. The Assassin envoys to the king were ambushed and slain by a Templar knight named Walter du Mesnil near Tripoli while returning from the negotiations, an act apparently sanctioned by the Templar Grand Master Odo de Saint Amand. Amalric demanded that the knight be surrendered, but Odo refused, claiming only the pope had the authority to punish du Mesnil. Amalric had du Mesnil kidnapped and imprisoned at Tyre. Sin\u0101n accepted the king's apology, assured that justice had been done. The point of the alliance became moot as both Nur ad-Din and Amalric died of natural causes soon thereafter.\nThese developments could not have been better for Saladin who wished to expand beyond Egypt into Jerusalem and Syria, first taking Damascus. With the Kingdom of Jerusalem being led by the 13-year old leperous Baldwin IV and Syria by the 11-year old as-Salih Ismail al-Malik, son of Nur ad-Din, he continued his campaign in Syria, moving against Aleppo. While besieging Aleppo in late 1174 or early 1175, the camp of Saladin was infiltrated by Assassins sent by Sin\u0101n and As-Salih's regent G\u00fcm\u00fcshtigin. Nasih al-Din Khumartekin, emir of Abu Qubays, was killed in the attack which left Saladin unscathed. The next year, after taking Azaz, the Assassins again struck, wounding Saladin. G\u00fcm\u00fcshtigin was again believed to be complicit in the assassination attempt. Turning his attention to Aleppo, the city was soon conquered, and Saladin allowed as-Salih and G\u00fcm\u00fcshtigin to continue to rule, but under his sovereignty. Saladin then turned his attention back to the Assassins, besieging Masyaf in 1176. Failing to capture the stronghold, he settled for a truce. Accounts of a mystical encounter between Saladin and Sin\u0101n have been offered :\nSaladin had his guards supplied with link lights and had chalk and cinders strewed around his tent outside Masyaf\u2014which he was besieging\u2014to detect any footsteps by the Assassins. According to this version, one night Saladin's guards noticed a spark glowing down the hill of Masyaf and then vanishing among the Ayyubid tents. Presently, Saladin awoke to find a figure leaving the tent. He saw that the lamps were displaced and beside his bed laid hot scones of the shape peculiar to the Assassins with a note at the top pinned by a poisoned dagger. The note threatened that he would be killed if he did not withdraw from his assault. Saladin gave a loud cry, exclaiming that Sinan himself was the figure that had left the tent.\nAnother version claims that Saladin hastily withdrew his troops from Masyaf because they were urgently needed to fend off a Crusader force in the vicinity of Mount Lebanon. In reality, Saladin sought to form an alliance with Sinan and his Assassins, consequently depriving the Crusaders of a potent ally against him. Viewing the expulsion of the Crusaders as a mutual benefit and priority, Saladin and Sinan maintained cooperative relations afterwards, the latter dispatching contingents of his forces to bolster Saladin's army in a number of decisive subsequent battlefronts.\nBy 1177, the conflict between Sin\u0101n and as-Salih continued with the assassination of Shihab ad-Din abu-Salih, vizier to both as-Salih and Nur ad-Din. A letter from as-Salih to Sin\u0101n requesting the murder was found to be a forgery by G\u00fcm\u00fcshtigin, causing his removal. As-Salih seized the village of al-Hajira from the Assassins, and in response Sin\u0101n's followers burned the marketplace in Aleppo.\nIn 1190, Isabella I was Queen of Jerusalem and the Third Crusade had just begun. The daughter of Amalric, she married her first husband Conrad of Montferrat, who became king by virtue of marriage, not yet crowned. Conrad was of royal blood, the cousin of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and Louis VII of France. Conrad had been in charge of Tyre during the siege of Tyre in 1187 launched by Saladin, successfully defending the city. Guy of Lusignan, married to Isabella's half-sister Sybilla of Jerusalem, was king of Jerusalem by right of marriage and had been captured by Saladin during the battle of Hattin in that same year, 1187. When Guy was released in 1188, he was denied entry to Tyre by Conrad and launched the siege of Acre in 1189. Queen Sybilla died of an epidemic sweeping her husband's military camp in 1190, negating Guy's claim to the throne and resulting in Isabella becoming queen.\nAssassins disguised as Christian monks had infiltrated the bishopric of Tyre, gaining the confidence of both the archbishop Joscius and Conrad of Montferrat. There in 1192, they stabbed Conrad to death. The surviving Assassin is reputed to have named Richard I of England as the instigator, who had much to gain as demonstrated by the rapidity at which the widow married Henry II of Champagne. That account is disputed by ibn al-Athir who names Saladin in a plot with Sin\u0101n to kill both Conrad and Richard. Richard I was captured by Leopold V, Duke of Austria, and held by Henry VI, who had become Holy Roman Emperor in 1191, accused of murder. Sin\u0101n wrote to Leopold V absolving Richard I of complicity in the plot. Regardless, Richard I was released in 1194 after England paid his ransom and the murder remains unsolved. Adding to the continued cold case is the belief by modern historians that Sinan's letter to Leopold V is a forgery, written by members of Richard I's administration.\nConrad was Sin\u0101n's last assassination. The great Assassin Rashid ad-Din Sinan, the Old Man of the Mountain, died in 1193, the same year that claimed Saladin. He died of natural causes at al-Kahf Castle and was buried at Salamiyah, which had been a secret hub of Isma'ili activity in the 9th and 10th centuries. His successor was Nasr al-'Ajami, under the control of Alamut, who reportedly met with emperor Henry VI in 1194. Later successors through 1227 included Kam\u0101l ad-Din al-Hasan and Majd ad-Din, again under the control of Alamut. Saladin left his Ayyubid dynasty under his sons al-Aziz Uthman, sultan of Egypt, al-Afdal ibn Salah ad-Din, emir of Damascus, and az-Zahir Ghazi, emir of Aleppo. Al-Aziz died soon thereafter, replaced by Saladin's brother al-Adil I.\n13th century.\nIn 1210, Muhammad III died and his son Jal\u0101l al-Din Hasan (known as Hassan III) became Imam of the Isma'ili State. His first actions included the return to the Islamic orthodoxy by practising Taqiyyah to ensure safety of the Ismailis in the hostile environment. He claimed allegiance to the Sunnis to protect himself and his followers from further persecution. He had a Sunni mother and four Sunni wives. Hassan III recognized the Abbasid caliph al-Nasir who in turn granted a diploma of investiture. The Alamuts had a previous history with al-Nasir, supplying Assassins to attack a Kwarezm representative of shah Ala ad-Din Tekish, but that was more of an action of convenience than formal alliance. Maintaining ties to western Christian influences, the Alamuts became tributaries to the Knights Hospitaller beginning at the Isma'ili stronghold Abu Qubays, near Margat.\nThe count of Tripoli in 1213 was Bohemond IV, the fourth prince of Antioch of that name. That year his 18-year-old son Raymond, namesake of his grandfather, was murdered by the Assassins under Nasr al-'Ajami while at church in Tartus. Suspecting both Assassin and Hospitaller involvement, Bohemond and the Knights Templar laid siege to Qala'at al-Khawabi, an Isma'ili stronghold near Tartus, Appealing to the Ayyubids for help, az-Zahir Ghazi dispatched a relief force from Aleppo. His forces were nearly destroyed at Jabal Bahra. Az-Zahir's uncle al-Adil I, emir of Damascus, responded and the Franks ended the siege by 1216. Bohemond IV would again fight the Ayyubids in the Fifth Crusade.\nMajd ad-Din was the new chief \"da'i\" in Syria in 1220, assuming that role from Kam\u0101l ad-Din al-Hasan of whom very little is known. At that time the Seljuk sultanate of R\u00fbm paid an annual tribute to Alamut, and Majd ad-Din notified the sultan Kayqubad I that henceforth the tribute was to be paid to him. Kayqubad I requested clarification from Hassan III who informed him that the monies had indeed been assigned to Syria.\nHassan III died in 1221, likely from poisoning. He was succeeded by his 9-year-old son Imam 'Al\u0101 ad-Din Muhammad, known as Muhammad III, and was the penultimate Isma'ili ruler of Alamut before the Mongol conquest. Because of his age, Hassan's vizier served as regent to the young Imam, and put Hassan's wives and sister to death for the suspected poisoning. Muhammad III reversed the Sunni course his father had set, returning to Shi'ite orthodoxy. His attempts to accommodate the advancing Mongols failed.\nIn 1225, Frederick II was Holy Roman Emperor, a position his father Henry VI had held until 1197. He had committed to prosecuting the Sixth Crusade and married the heiress to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, Isabella II. The next year, the once and future king sent envoys to Majd ad-Din with significant gifts for the imam to ensure his safe passage. Khwarezm had collapsed under the Mongols, but many of the Kwarezmians still operated as mercenaries in northern Iraq. Under the pretense that the road to Alamut was unsafe due to these mercenaries, Majd ad-Din kept the gifts for himself, and provided the safe passage. As a precaution, Majd ad-Din informed al-Aziz Muhammad, emir of Aleppo and son of az-Zahir Ghazi, of the emperor's embassy. In the end, Frederick did not complete that trip to the Holy Land due to illness, being excommunicated in 1227. The Knights Hospitaller were not as accommodating as Alamut, demanding their share of the tribute. When Majd ad-Din refused, the Hospitallers attacked and carried off the majority of the booty. Majd ad-Din was succeeded by Sir\u0101j ad-Din Muzaffa ibn al-Husain in 1227, serving as chief \"da'i\" until 1239.\nTaj ad-Din Abu'l-Fut\u016bh ibn Muhammad was chief \"da'i\" in Syria in 1239, succeeding Sir\u0101j ad-Din Muzaffa. At this point, the Assassins were an integral part of Syrian politics. The Arab historian Ibn Wasil had a friendship with Taj ad-Din and writes of Badr ad-Din, \"qadi\" of Sinjar, who sought refuge with Taj ad-Din to escape the wrath of Egyptian Ayyubid ruler as-Salih Ayyub. Taj ad-Din served until at least 1249 when he was replaced by Radi ad-Din Abu'l-Ma'\u0101li.\nIn that same year, Louis IX of France embarked on the Seventh Crusade in Egypt. He captured the port of Damietta from the aging al-Salih Ayyub which he refused to turn over to Conrad II, who had inherited the throne of Jerusalem from his parents Frederick II and Isabella II. The Frankish Crusaders were soundly defeated by Abu Futuh Baibars, then a commander in the Egyptian army, at the battle of al-Mansurah in 1250. Saint Louis, as Louis IX was known, was captured by the Egyptians and, after a handsome reward was paid, spent four years in Acre, Caesarea and Jaffa. One of the captives with Louis was Jean de Joinville, biographer of the king, who reported the interaction of the monarch with the Assassins. While at Acre, emissaries of Radi ad-Din Abu'l-Ma'\u0101li met with him, demanding a tribute be paid to their chief \"as the emperor of Germany, the king of Hungary, the sultan of Egypt and the others because they know well they can only live as long as it please him.\" Alternately, the king could pay the tribute the Assassins paid the Templars and Hospitallers. Later the king's Arabic interpreter Yves the Breton met personally with Radi ad-Din and discussed the respective beliefs. Afterwards, the chief \"da'i\" went riding, with his valet proclaiming: \"Make way before him who bears the death of kings in his hands!\"\nThe Egyptian victory at al-Mansurah led to the establishment of the Mamluk dynasty in Egypt. Muhammad III was murdered in 1255 and replaced by his son Rukn al-Din Khurshah, the last Imam to rule Alamut. Najm ad-Din later became chief \"da'i\" of the Assassins in Syria, the last to be associated with Alamut. Louis IX returned to north Africa during the Eighth Crusade where he died of natural causes in Tunis.\nDownfall and aftermath.\nThe Assassins suffered a significant blow at the hands of the Mongol Empire during the well-documented invasion of Khwarazm. A decree was handed over to the Mongol commander Kitbuqa who began to assault several Assassin fortresses in 1253 before Hulagu's advance in 1256. During the siege of Maymun-Diz, the last Ismaili Imam capitulated to the Mongols. The Imam ordered his subordinates to surrender and demolish their fortresses likewise. The subsequent capitulation of the symbolic stronghold of Alamut marked the end of the Nizari state in Persia. Lambsar fell in 1257, Masyaf in 1267. The Assassins recaptured and held Alamut for a few months in 1275, but they were crushed and their political power was lost forever. Rukn al-Din Khurshah was put to death shortly thereafter. Some strongholds continued to resist for many years, notably Gerdkuh.\nThough the Mongol massacre at Alamut was widely interpreted to be the end of Isma'ili influence in the region, various sources say that the Isma'ilis' political influence continued. In 1275, a son of Imam Rukn al-Din Khurshah managed to recapture Alamut, though only for a few years. Isma'ili political activity in the region also seems to have continued under the leadership of Sultan Muhammad b. Jahangir and his son, until the latter's execution in 1597.\nIn Syria, the Assassins joined with other Muslim groups to oppose the Mongols and courted the Mamluks and Baibars. Baibars entered into a truce with the Hospitallers in 1266 and stipulated that the tribute paid by the Assassins be halted. The tribute once paid to the Franks was to come instead to Cairo. As early as 1260, Baibars' biographer ibn Abd al-Zahir reported that he was granting Assassin lands in \"iqta\"' to his generals, and in 1265 began to tax the \"gifts\" the Assassins received from various princes that apparently included Louis IX of France, Rudolph I of Germany, Alphonso X of Castile, and the Rasulid sultan of Yemen al-Muzaffar Yusuf. The Syrian branch of the Assassins was taken over by Baibars by 1270, recognizing the threat of an independent force with his sultanate.\nNajm ad-Din was replaced by Baibars' son-in-law Sarim al-Din Mubarak, governor of al-'Ullaiqah in 1270. Sarim was soon deposed and sent as a prisoner to Cairo, and Najm ad-Din was restored at chief \"da'i\" at Masyaf. His son Shams ad-Din joined him in service, but owing a tribute to the sultan. The next year, in the midst of the siege of Tripoli, two Assassins were sent by Bohemond VI of Antioch, then Count of Tripoli, to murder his attacker Baibars. Shams ad-Din was arrested in the plot, but released when his father argued his case. The Isma'ili leaders were eventually implicated and agreed to surrender their castles and live at Baibars' court. Najm ad-Din died in Cairo in 1274.\nIn 1271, Baibars' forces seized al-'Ullaiqah and ar-Rusafa, after taking Masyaf the year before. Later in the year, Shams ad-Din surrendered and was deported to Egypt. Qala'at al-Khawabi fell that year and within two years Gerdkuh and all of the Assassin fortresses were held by the sultan. With the Assassins under his control, Baibars was able to use them to counter the forces arriving in the Ninth Crusade. The sultan threatened Bohemond VI, and the Assassins attacked future king Edward I of England unsuccessfully, with Edward killing the Assassin.\nThe last known victim of the Assassins was Philip of Montfort, lord of Tyre, long an enemy of Baibars. Philip helped negotiate the truce following the capture of Damietta by Louis IX and had lost the castle at Toron to Baibars in 1266. Despite his advanced age, Philip was murdered by Baibars' Assassins in 1270.\nThe last of the Assassin strongholds was al-Kahf in the Syrian coastal mountains in 1273. The Mamluks reportedly continued to use the services of the remaining Assassins, and the 14th-century scholar ibn Battuta reported their fixed rate of pay per murder, with his children getting the fee if the Assassin did not survive the attack. There are, nevertheless, no recorded instances of Assassin activity after the later 13th century. They unremarkably settled near Salamiyah, with a still-large Isma'ili population that recognizes the Aga Khan as their Imam.\nEtymology.\nThe Arabic word \"as\u0101s\" means \u201cprinciple\u201d, and \"As\u0101siyy\u016bn\" (a literary Arabic plural) therefore designates \u201cthe people of principle.\u201d The term \"assassin\" likely has roots in \"hashsh\u0101sh\u012bn\" (\"hashish smokers or users\"), a mispronunciation of the original As\u0101siyy\u016bn, but not a mispronunciation of \"Assasiyeen\" (pronounced \"As\u0101siyyeen\", the plural of \"Asasi\"). Originally referring to the methods of political control exercised by the Assasiyuun, one can see how it became \"assassin\" in several languages to describe similar activities anywhere.\nThe Assassins were first linked to the Arabic word hashish by the 19th-century orientalist Silvestre de Sacy, who noted their variants \"assassin\" and \"assissini.\" Citing the example of one of the first written applications of the Arabic term \"hashish\" to the Ismailis by 13th-century historian Abu Shama, de Sacy demonstrated its connection to the name given to the Ismailis throughout Western scholarship. Following de Sacy's account, various popularizers of the \"Hashishi myth\" \u2013 including self-proclaimed Sufi scholar Idries Shah (who, in fact, never belonged to any Sufi tariqa nor even graduated from any university) \u2013 continue to pejoratively describe the Assassins (and, by extension, Ismailis in general) as 'druggers' who used hashish \"in stupefying candidates for the ephemeral visit to \"paradise\"\". However, the first known usage of the term \"hashishi\" has been traced back to 1122 when the Fatimid caliph al-Amir bi-Ahkami'l-Lah, himself later assassinated, employed it in derogatory reference to the Syrian. Used figuratively, the term \"hashishi\" connoted meanings such as outcasts or rabble. Without actually accusing the group of using the hashish drug, the caliph used the term in a pejorative manner. This label was quickly adopted by anti-Isma'ili historians and applied to the Isma'ilis of Syria and Persia. The spread of the term was further facilitated through military encounters, whose chroniclers adopted the term and disseminated it across Europe. The Crusaders and other European travelers accepted and spread myths such as the 'paradise legend', the 'leap of faith' legend, and the 'hashish legend', sewn together in the writings of Marco Polo.\nDuring the medieval period, Western scholarship on the Isma'ilis contributed to the popular view of the community as a radical sect of assassins, believed to be trained for the precise murder of their adversaries. By the 14th century, European scholarship on the topic had not advanced much beyond the work and tales from the Crusaders. The origins of the word forgotten, across Europe the term assassin had taken the meaning of \"professional murderer\". In 1603, the first Western publication on the topic of the Assassins was authored by a court official for King Henry IV of France and was mainly based on the narratives of Marco Polo from his visits to the Near East. While he assembled the accounts of many Western travellers, the author failed to explain the etymology of the term Assassin.\nAccording to the Lebanese writer Amin Maalouf, based on texts from Alamut, Hassan-i Sabbah tended to call his disciples \"As\u0101s\u012by\u016bn\" (, meaning \"people who are faithful to the foundation [of the faith]\"), and derivation from the term \"hashish\" is a misunderstanding by foreign travelers.\nAnother modern author, Edward Burman, states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Many scholars have argued, and demonstrated convincingly, that the attribution of the epithet \"hashish eaters\" or \"hashish takers\" is a misnomer derived from enemies of the Isma'ilis and was never used by Muslim chroniclers or sources. It was therefore used in a pejorative sense of \"enemies\" or \"disreputable people\". This sense of the term survived into modern times with the common Egyptian usage of the term Hashasheen in the 1930s to mean simply \"noisy or riotous\". It is unlikely that the austere Hassan-i Sabbah indulged personally in drug taking\u00a0... there is no mention of that drug hashish in connection with the Persian Assassins \u2013 especially in the library of Alamut (\"the secret archives\").\nThe name \"Assassin\" is often said to derive from the Arabic word \"Hashishin\" or \"users of hashish\", which was originally applied to the Assassins Isma'ilis by the rival Mustali Isma'ilis during the fall of the Isma'ili Fatimid Empire and the separation of the two Isma'ili streams. There is little evidence hashish was used to motivate the Assassins, contrary to the beliefs of their Medieval enemies. It is possible that the term \"hashishiyya\" or \"hashishi\" in Arabic sources was used metaphorically in its abusive sense relating to use of hashish, which due to its effects on the mind state is outlawed in Islam. The term hashashin was (and still is) used to describe absent minded criminals and is used derogatorily in all the Muslim sources referring to the Assassins as such.\nThe Sunni Muslims also used the term \"mulhid\" to refer to the Assassins, which is also recorded by the traveller and Franciscan William of Rubruck as \"\".\nMilitary tactics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"They call him Shaykh-al-Hashishin. He is their Elder, and upon his command all of the men of the mountain come out or go in\u00a0...\nthey are believers of the word of their elder and everyone everywhere fears them, because they even kill kings.\"\n \u2014Benjamin of Tudela\nIn pursuit of their religious and political goals, the Isma'ilis adopted various military strategies popular in the Middle Ages. One such method was that of assassination, the selective elimination of prominent rival figures. The murders of political adversaries were usually carried out in public spaces, creating resounding intimidation for other possible enemies. Throughout history, many groups have resorted to assassination as a means of achieving political ends. The assassinations were committed against those whose elimination would most greatly reduce aggression against the Ismailis and, in particular, against those who had perpetrated massacres against the community. A single assassination was usually employed in contrast to the widespread bloodshed which generally resulted from factional combat. \nWhile the Seljuks and Crusaders both employed murder as a military means of disposing high-profile enemies, during the Alamut period almost any murder of political significance in the Islamic lands was attributed to the Isma'ilis. So inflated had this association grown that the group became nearly synonymous with such methods of warfare, even to others who were just as radical and heretical. It was generally believed by historians, including Bernard Lewis, that Isma'ilis didn't utilize poison due to the sacred nature of their missions. While such rule must have applied during their earliest operations, historian James Waterson believed that the Assassins began using poison-coated daggers as they devolved into hit men during the Mamluke dynasty. Additionally, another historian, Peter Harrison, theorized that the long curved Jambiya dagger was the preferred main killing tool of the \"fida'is\". Codes of conduct were followed, and the Assassins were taught in the art of war, linguistics and strategies, to the point that they became nearly specialized in assassination for two centuries. \nFortresses.\nThe military approach of the Assassins Isma'ili state was largely a defensive one, with strategically chosen sites that appeared to avoid confrontation wherever possible without the loss of life. The defining characteristic of the Assassins Isma'ili state was that it was scattered geographically throughout Persia and Syria. Alamut Castle therefore was only one of a nexus of strongholds throughout the regions where Isma'ilis could retreat to safety if necessary. West of Alamut in the Shahrud Valley, the major fortress of Lambsar served as just one example of such a retreat. In the context of their political uprising, the various spaces of Isma'ili military presence took on the name \"dar al-hijra\" (; land of migration, place of refuge). \nThe notion of the \"dar al-hijra\" originates from the time of Muhammad, who migrated with his followers from persecution to a safe haven in \"Yathrib\" (Medina). In this way, the Fatimids found their \"dar al-hijra\" in North Africa. From 1101 to 1118, attacks and sieges were made on the fortresses, conducted by combined forces of the Seljuks Berkyaruq and Ahmad Sanjar. Although with the cost of lives and the capture and execution of Assassin \"da'i\" Ahmad ibn Attash, the Assassins managed to hold their ground and repel the attacks until the Mongol invasion. Likewise, during the revolt against the Seljuks, several fortresses served as spaces of refuge for the Isma'ilis.\nDuring the mid-12th century the Assassins captured or acquired several fortresses in the Nusayriyah Mountain Range in coastal Syria, including Masyaf, Rusafa, al-Kahf, al-Qadmus, Khawabi, Sarmin, Quliya, Ulayqa, Maniqa, and Abu Qubays. For the most part, the Assassins maintained full control over these fortresses until 1270\u20131273 when the Mamluk sultan Baibars annexed them. Most were dismantled afterwards, while those at Masyaf and Ulayqa were later rebuilt. From then on, the Ismailis maintained limited autonomy over those former strongholds as loyal subjects of the Mamluks.\nLegends and folklore.\nThe legends of the Assassins had much to do with the training and instruction of Assassins \"fida'i\"s, famed for their public missions during which they often gave their lives to eliminate adversaries. Some historians have contributed to the tales of \"fida'i\"s being fed with hashish as part of their training, but these are only, in reference to the travels of Marco Polo and polemics by enemies. Scholars including Vladimir Ivanov purport that the assassinations of key figures including Seljuk vizier al-Mulk likely provided encouraging impetus to others in the community who sought to secure the Assassins' protection from political aggression. Originally a \"local and popular term\" first applied to the Isma'ilis of Syria, the label was orally transmitted to Western historians and thus found itself in their histories of the Assassins.\nIt is unknown how Hassan-i-Sabbah was able to get the Assassins to perform with such fervent loyalty. One theory, possibly the best known but also the most criticized, comes from the reports of Marco Polo during his travels to the Orient. He recounts a story he heard that Muhammad III of Alamut would drug his young followers with hashish, lead them to a \"paradise\", and then claim that only he had the means to allow for their return. Perceiving that Muhammad III was either a prophet or magician, his disciples, believing that only he could return them to \"paradise\", were fully committed to his cause and willing to carry out his every request.\nThe tales of the \"fida'i\"s' training collected from anti-Ismaili historians and orientalist writers were compounded and compiled in Marco Polo's account, in which he described a \"secret garden of paradise\". After being drugged, the Ismaili devotees were said to be taken to a paradise-like garden filled with attractive young maidens and beautiful plants in which these \"fida'i\"s would awaken. Here, they were told by an \"old\" man that they were witnessing their place in Paradise and that should they wish to return to this garden permanently, they must serve the Assassins cause. So went the tale of the \"Old Man in the Mountain\", assembled by Marco Polo and accepted by Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall, an 18th-century Austrian orientalist writer responsible for much of the spread of this legend. Until the 1930s, von Hammer's retelling of the Assassin legends served as the standard account of the Assassins across Europe.\nA well-known legend tells how Count Henry II of Champagne, returning from Armenia, spoke with Grand Master Rashid ad-Din Sinan at al-Kahf. The count claimed to have the most powerful army and at any moment he claimed he could defeat the Hashashin, because his army was 10 times larger. Rashid replied that his army was instead the most powerful, and to prove it he told one of his men to jump off from the top of the castle in which they were staying. The man did. Surprised, the count immediately recognized that Rashid's army was indeed the strongest, because it did everything at his command, and Rashid further gained the count's respect.\nThe Ismaili began establishing themselves in the Indian subcontinent in the 19th century, where they largely reside today. This shift began under the leadership of the 46th Imam, Hasan Ali Shah, who was the first to be styled as Aga Khan. Modern works on the Assassins have elucidated their history and, in doing so, dispelled popular histories from the past as mere legends. In 1933, under the direction of the Imam Sultan Muhammad Shah, Aga Khan III, the Islamic Research Association was developed. Historian Vladimir Ivanov was central to both this institution and the 1946 Ismaili Society of Bombay. Cataloguing a number of Ismaili texts, Ivanov provided the ground for great strides in modern Isma'ili scholarship.\nIn recent years, Peter Willey has provided interesting evidence that goes against the Assassin folklore of earlier scholars. Drawing on its established esoteric doctrine, Willey asserts that the Ismaili understanding of Paradise is a deeply symbolic one. While the Qur'anic description of Heaven includes natural imagery, Willey argues that no Assassins \"fida'i\" would seriously believe that he was witnessing Paradise simply by awakening in a beauteous garden. The Assassins' symbolic interpretation of the Qur'anic description of Paradise serves as evidence against the possibility of such an exotic garden used as motivation for the devotees to carry out their armed missions. Furthermore, Willey points out that a courtier of Hulagu Khan, Juvayni, surveyed the Alamut castle just before the Mongol invasion. In his reports about the fortress, there are elaborate descriptions of sophisticated storage facilities and the famous Alamut library. However, even this anti-Ismaili historian makes no mention of the gardens on the Alamut grounds. Having destroyed a number of texts in the library's collection which he deemed to be heretical, it would be expected that Juvayni would pay significant attention to the Assassins' gardens, particularly if they were the site of drug use and temptation. Having not once mentioned such gardens, Willey concludes that there is no sound evidence in favor of these legends.\nIn popular culture.\nThe Assassins were part of Medieval culture, and they were either demonized or romanticized. The Hashashin frequently appeared in the art and literature of the Middle Ages. Sometimes, they were portrayed as one of the knight's archenemies, and they were also portrayed as a quintessential villain during the crusades.\nThe word Assassin, in variant forms, had already passed into European usage as a term for a hired professional murderer in this general sense. The Italian chronicler Giovanni Villani, who died in 1348, tells how the lord of Lucca sent 'his assassins' (i suoi assassini) to Pisa to kill a troublesome enemy there. Even earlier, Dante, in a passing reference in the 19th canto of the \"Inferno\", completed in 1320, speaks of 'the treacherous assassin' (lo perfido assassin); his fourteenth-century commentator Francesco da Buti, explaining a term which for some readers at the time may still have been strange and obscure, remarks: 'Assassino \u00e8 colui che uccide altrui per danari' (An assassin is one who kills others for money).\nThe most widespread awareness of the Assassins in modern Europe, and their incorporation into the Romantic tradition, was created by the Austrian historian and Orientalist Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall in his 1818 book, \"Die Geschichte der Assassinen aus morgenl\u00e4ndischen Quellen\" (translated into English in 1835 as \"The History of the Assassins\"). This work was the standard one on the history of the Assassins in the West until the 1930s.\nThe Assassins appear in many role-playing games and video games, especially in massively multiplayer online games, in addition to shows and books. The assassin character class is a common feature of many such games, usually specializing in single combat and stealth skills, often combined in order to defeat an opponent without exposing the assassin to counter-attack.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46438", "revid": "45558566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46438", "title": "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously", "text": "Syntactically well-formed, semantically incongruous phrase\nColorless green ideas sleep furiously was composed by Noam Chomsky in his 1957 book \"Syntactic Structures\" as an example of a sentence that is grammatically well-formed, but semantically nonsensical. The sentence was originally used in his 1955 thesis \"The Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory\" and in his 1956 paper \"Three Models for the Description of Language\". There is no obvious understandable meaning that can be derived from it, which demonstrates the distinction between syntax and semantics, and the idea that a syntactically well-formed sentence is not guaranteed to also be semantically well-formed. As an example of a category mistake, it was intended to show the inadequacy of certain probabilistic models of grammar, and the need for more structured models.\nSenseless but grammatical.\nChomsky wrote in his 1957 book \"Syntactic Structures\": &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;# Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.\nIt is fair to assume that neither sentence (1) nor (2) had ever previously occurred in an English discourse. Hence, in any statistical model that accounts for grammaticality, these sentences will be ruled out on identical grounds as equally \"remote\" from English. Yet (1), though nonsensical, is grammatical, while (2) is not grammatical.\n\"Colorless green ideas\" \u2013 which functions as the subject of the sentence \u2013 is an anomalous string for at least two reasons:\n\"Sleep furiously\" \u2013 which functions as the predicate of the sentence \u2013 is structurally well-formed; in other words, it is grammatical. However, the meaning that it expresses is peculiar, as the activity of sleeping is not generally taken to be something that can be done in a furious fashion. Nevertheless, \"sleep furiously\" is both grammatical and interpretable, though its interpretation is unusual.\nCombining \"Colorless green ideas\" with \"sleep furiously\" creates a sentence that some believe to be nonsensical. On the one hand, an abstract noun like \"idea\" is taken to not have the ability to engage in an activity like sleeping. On the other hand, some think it possible for an idea to sleep.\nLinguists account for the unusual nature of this sentence by distinguishing two types of selection: semantic selection (s-selection) and categorical selection (c-selection). Relative to s-selection, the sentence is semantically anomalous \u2013 senseless \u2013 for three reasons:\nHowever, relative to c-selection, the sentence is structurally well-formed:\nThis leads to the conclusion that although meaningless, the structural integrity of this sentence is high.\nAttempts at meaningful interpretations.\nPolysemy.\nThe mechanism of polysemy \u2013 where a word has multiple meanings \u2013 can be used to create an interpretation for an otherwise non-sensical sentence. For example, the adjectives \"green\" and \"colorless\" both have figurative meanings. \"Green\" has a wide range of figurative meanings, including \"immature\", \"pertaining to environmental consciousness\", \"newly formed\", and \"naive\". And \"colorless\" can be interpreted as \"nondescript\". Likewise the verb \"sleep\" can have the figurative meaning of \"being in dormant state\", and the adverb \"furiously\" can have the figurative meaning \"to do an action violently or quickly\".\nWhen these figurative meanings are taken into account the sentence \"Colorless green ideas sleep furiously\" can have legitimate meaning, with less oblique semantics, and so is compatible with the following interpretations:\nIn popular culture.\nChomsky's \"colorless green\" inspired written works, which all try to create meaning from the semantically meaningless utterance through added context. In 1958, linguist and anthropologist Dell Hymes presented his work to show that nonsense words can develop into something meaningful when in the right sequence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nHued ideas mock the brain,\nNotions of color not yet color,\nOf pure, touchless, branching pallor\nOf invading, essential Green\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nRussian-American linguist and literary theorist Roman Jakobson (1959) interpreted \"colorless green\" as a pale green, and \"sleep furiously\" as the wildness of \"a state-like sleep, as that of inertness, torpidity, numbness.\" Jakobson gave the example that if \"[someone's] hatred never slept, why then, cannot someone's ideas fall into sleep?\" John Hollander, an American poet and literary critic, argued that the sentence operates in a vacuum as it is without context. He went on to write a poem based on that idea, entitled \"Coiled Alizarine\" that was included in his book, \"The Night Mirror\" (1971).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nCuriously deep, the slumber of crimson thoughts:\nWhile breathless, in stodgy viridian\nColorless green ideas sleep furiously.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nYears later, Hollander contacted Chomsky about whether the color choice of 'green' was intentional; however, Chomsky denied any intentions or influences, especially the hypothesized influence from Andrew Marvell's lines from \"The Garden\" (1681). \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Annihilating all that's made / To a green thought in a green shade\"\nOne of the first writers to have attempted to provide the sentence meaning through context is Chinese linguist Yuen Ren Chao (1997). Chao's poem, entitled \"Making Sense Out of Nonsense: The Story of My Friend Whose \"Colorless Green Ideas Sleep Furiously\" (after Noam Chomsky)\" was published in 1971. This poem attempts to explain what \"colorless green ideas\" are and how they are able to \"sleep furiously\". Chao interprets \"colorless\" as plain, \"green\" as unripened, and \"sleep furiously\" as putting the ideas to rest; sleeping on them overnight whilst having internal conflict with these ideas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have a friend who is always full of ideas, good ideas and bad ideas, fine ideas and crude ideas, old ideas and new ideas. Before putting his new ideas into practice, he usually sleeps over them to let them mature and ripen. However, when he is in a hurry, he sometimes puts his ideas into practice before they are quite ripe, in other words, while they are still green. Some of his green ideas are quite lively and colorful, but not always, some being quite plain and colorless. When he remembers that some of his colorless ideas are still too green to use, he will sleep over them, or let them sleep, as he puts it. But some of those ideas may be mutually conflicting and contradictory and when they sleep together in the same night they get into furious fights and turn the sleep into a nightmare. Thus my friend often complains that his colorless green ideas sleep furiously.\nBritish linguist Angus McIntosh was unable to accept that Chomsky's utterance was entirely meaningless because to him, \"colorless green ideas may well sleep furiously\". As if to prove that the sentences are in fact meaningful, McIntosh wrote two poems influenced by Chomsky's utterance, one of which was entitled \"Nightmare I\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;poem&gt;\nTortured my mind's eye at its small peephole\nsees through the virid glass\nthe endless ghostly oscillographic stream\nFuriously sleep ideas green colorless\nMadly awake am I at my small window\n&lt;/poem&gt;\u2014\u200a\nStanford 1985 competition.\nIn 1985, a literary competition was held at Stanford University in which the contestants were invited to make Chomsky's sentence meaningful using not more than 100 words of prose or 14 lines of verse.\nAn example entry from the competition, by C. M. Street, is:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It can only be the thought of verdure to come, which prompts us in the autumn to buy these dormant white lumps of vegetable matter covered by a brown papery skin, and lovingly to plant them and care for them. It is a marvel to me that under this cover they are labouring unseen at such a rate within to give us the sudden awesome beauty of spring flowering bulbs. While winter reigns the earth reposes but these colourless green ideas sleep furiously.\nExperimental usage.\nResearch has been done by implementing this into conversations on text. Research led by Bruno Galantucci at Yeshiva University has implemented the meaningless sentence into real conversations to test reactions. They ran 30 conversations with 1 male and 1 female slipping \"colorless green ideas sleep furiously\" eight minutes into the conversation during silence. After the conversation, the experimenters did a post-conversation questionnaire, mainly asking if they thought the conversation was unusual. Galantucci concluded that there was a trend of \"insensitivity\" to conversational coherence. \nThere are two general theories that were garnered from this experiment. The first theory is that people tend to ignore the inconsistency of speech to protect the quality of the conversation. In particular, face-to-face conversation has a 33.33% lower detection rate of nonsensical sentences than online messaging. The authors further explain how humans often disregard some contents of every conversation. The second theory the authors deduced is that effective communication may be subconsciously undermined when dealing with \"conversational\" coherence. These conclusions support the idea that phatic communication plays a key role in social life.\nStatistical challenges.\nIn 2000, Fernando Pereira of the University of Pennsylvania fitted a simple statistical Markov model to a body of newspaper text, and showed that under this model, \"Furiously sleep ideas green colorless\" is about 200,000 times less probable than \"Colorless green ideas sleep furiously\".\nThis statistical model defines a similarity metric, whereby sentences which are more like those within a corpus in certain respects are assigned higher values than sentences less alike. Pereira's model assigns an ungrammatical version of the same sentence a lower probability than the syntactically well-formed structure demonstrating that statistical models can identify variations in grammaticality with minimal linguistic assumptions. However, it is not clear that the model assigns every ungrammatical sentence a lower probability than every grammatical sentence. That is, \"colorless green ideas sleep furiously\" may still be statistically more \"remote\" from English than some ungrammatical sentences. To this, it may be argued that \"no\" current theory of grammar is capable of distinguishing \"all\" grammatical English sentences from ungrammatical ones.\nRelated and similar examples.\nIn other languages.\nThe French syntactician Lucien Tesni\u00e8re came up with the following two sentences to demonstrate the contrast between syntax and meaning:\nIn Russian schools of linguistics, the \"glokaya kuzdra\" example has similar characteristics.\nIn games.\nThe game of \"exquisite corpse\" is a method for generating nonsense sentences. It was named after the first sentence generated in the game in 1925: \"Le cadavre exquis boira le vin nouveau\" (the exquisite corpse will drink the new wine).\nIn the popular game of \"Mad Libs\", a chosen player asks each other player to provide parts of speech without providing any contextual information (e.g., \"Give me a proper noun\", or \"Give me an adjective\"), and these words are inserted into pre-composed sentences with a correct grammatical structure, but in which certain words have been omitted. The humor of the game is in the generation of sentences which are grammatical but which are meaningless or have absurd or ambiguous meanings (such as 'loud sharks'). The game also tends to generate humorous double entendres.\nIn philosophy.\nThere are likely earlier examples of such sentences, possibly from the philosophy of language literature, but not necessarily uncontroversial ones, given that the focus has been mostly on borderline cases. For example, followers of logical positivism hold that \"metaphysical\" (i.e. not empirically verifiable) statements are simply meaningless; e.g. Rudolf Carnap wrote an article in which he argued that almost every sentence from Heidegger was grammatically well-formed, yet meaningless.\nThe philosopher Bertrand Russell used the sentence \"Quadruplicity drinks procrastination\" in his \"An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth\" from 1940, to make a similar point; W.V. Quine took issue with him on the grounds that for a sentence to be false is nothing more than for it not to be true; and since quadruplicity does not drink \"anything\", the sentence is simply false, not meaningless.\nOther arguably \"meaningless\" utterances are ones that make sense, are grammatical, but have no reference to the present state of the world, such as Russell's \"The present King of France is bald\" (France does not presently have a king) from \"On Denoting\" (also see definite description).\nIn literature and entertainment.\nAnother approach is to create a syntactically-well-formed, easily parsable sentence using nonsense words; a famous such example is \"The gostak distims the doshes\". Lewis Carroll's Jabberwocky is also famous for using this technique, although in this case for literary purposes; similar sentences used in neuroscience experiments are called Jabberwocky sentences.\nIn a sketch about linguistics, British comedy duo Fry and Laurie used the nonsensical sentence \"Hold the newsreader's nose squarely, waiter, or friendly milk will countermand my trousers.\"\nThe \"\" episode \"Darmok\" features a race that communicates entirely by referencing folklore and stories. While the vessel's universal translator correctly translates the characters and places from these stories, it fails to decipher the intended meaning, leaving Captain Picard unable to understand the alien.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46439", "revid": "48181213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46439", "title": "Philosophy of mathematics", "text": " \nPhilosophy of mathematics is the branch of philosophy that deals with the nature of mathematics and its relationship to other areas of philosophy, particularly epistemology and metaphysics. Central questions posed include whether or not mathematical objects are purely abstract entities or are in some way concrete, and in what the relationship such objects have with physical reality consists.\nMajor themes that are dealt with in philosophy of mathematics include:\nMajor themes.\nLogic and rigor.\nMathematical reasoning requires rigor. This means that the definitions must be absolutely unambiguous and the proofs must be reducible to a succession of applications of syllogisms or inference rules, without any use of empirical evidence and intuition.\nThe rules of rigorous reasoning have been established by the ancient Greek philosophers under the name of \"logic\". Logic is not specific to mathematics, but, in mathematics, the standard of rigor is much higher than elsewhere.\nFor many centuries, logic, although used for mathematical proofs, belonged to philosophy and was not specifically studied by mathematicians. Circa the end of the 19th century, several paradoxes made questionable the logical foundation of mathematics, and consequently the validity of the whole of mathematics. This has been called the foundational crisis of mathematics. Some of these paradoxes consist of results that seem to contradict the common intuition, such as the possibility to construct valid non-Euclidean geometries in which the parallel postulate is wrong, the Weierstrass function that is continuous but nowhere differentiable, and the study by Georg Cantor of infinite sets, which led to consider several sizes of infinity (infinite cardinals). Even more striking, Russell's paradox shows that the phrase \"the set of all sets\" is self contradictory.\nSeveral methods have been proposed to solve the problem by changing of logical framework, such as constructive mathematics and intuitionistic logic. Roughly speaking, the first one consists of requiring that every existence theorem must provide an explicit example, and the second one excludes from mathematical reasoning the law of excluded middle and double negation elimination. \nThese logics have less inference rules than classical logic. On the other hand classical logic was a first-order logic, which means roughly that quantifiers cannot be applied to infinite sets. This means, for example that the sentence \"every set of natural numbers has a least element\" is nonsensical in any formalization of classical logic. This led to the introduction of higher-order logics, which are presently used commonly in mathematics.\nThe problems of foundation of mathematics has been eventually resolved with the rise of mathematical logic as a new area of mathematics. In this framework, a mathematical or logical theory consists of a formal language that defines the well-formed assertions, a set of basic assertions called axioms and a set of inference rules that allow producing new assertions from one or several known assertions. A \"theorem\" of such a theory is either an axiom or an assertion that can be obtained from previously known theorems by the application of an inference rule. The Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice, generally called \"ZFC\", is a higher-order logic in which all mathematics have been restated; it is used implicitly in all mathematics texts that do not specify explicitly on which foundations they are based. Moreover, the other proposed foundations can be modeled and studied inside ZFC.\nIt results that \"rigor\" is no more a relevant concept in mathematics, as a proof is either correct or erroneous, and a \"rigorous proof\" is simply a pleonasm. Where a special concept of rigor comes into play is in the socialized aspects of a proof. In particular, proofs are rarely written in full details, and some steps of a proof are generally considered as \"trivial\", \"easy\", or \"straightforward\", and therefore left to the reader. As most proof errors occur in these skipped steps, a new proof requires to be verified by other specialists of the subject, and can be considered as reliable only after having been accepted by the community of the specialists, which may need several years.\nAlso, the concept of \"rigor\" may remain useful for teaching to beginners what is a mathematical proof.\nRelationship with sciences.\nMathematics is used in most sciences for modeling phenomena, which then allows predictions to be made from experimental laws. The independence of mathematical truth from any experimentation implies that the accuracy of such predictions depends only on the adequacy of the model. Inaccurate predictions, rather than being caused by invalid mathematical concepts, imply the need to change the mathematical model used. For example, the perihelion precession of Mercury could only be explained after the emergence of Einstein's general relativity, which replaced Newton's law of gravitation as a better mathematical model.\nThere is still a philosophical debate whether mathematics is a science. However, in practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists, and mathematics shares much in common with the physical sciences. Like them, it is falsifiable, which means in mathematics that if a result or a theory is wrong, this can be proved by providing a counterexample. Similarly as in science, theories and results (theorems) are often obtained from experimentation. In mathematics, the experimentation may consist of computation on selected examples or of the study of figures or other representations of mathematical objects (often mind representations without physical support). For example, when asked how he came about his theorems, Gauss once replied \"durch planm\u00e4ssiges Tattonieren\" (through systematic experimentation). However, some authors emphasize that mathematics differs from the modern notion of science by not relying on empirical evidence.\nUnreasonable effectiveness.\nThe unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics is a phenomenon that was named and first made explicit by physicist Eugene Wigner. It is the fact that many mathematical theories (even the \"purest\") have applications outside their initial object. These applications may be completely outside their initial area of mathematics, and may concern physical phenomena that were completely unknown when the mathematical theory was introduced. Examples of unexpected applications of mathematical theories can be found in many areas of mathematics.\nA notable example is the prime factorization of natural numbers that was discovered more than 2,000 years before its common use for secure internet communications through the RSA cryptosystem. A second historical example is the theory of ellipses. They were studied by the ancient Greek mathematicians as conic sections (that is, intersections of cones with planes). It was almost 2,000 years later that Johannes Kepler discovered that the trajectories of the planets are ellipses.\nIn the 19th century, the internal development of geometry (pure mathematics) led to definition and study of non-Euclidean geometries, spaces of dimension higher than three and manifolds. At this time, these concepts seemed totally disconnected from the physical reality, but at the beginning of the 20th century, Albert Einstein developed the theory of relativity that uses fundamentally these concepts. In particular, spacetime of special relativity is a non-Euclidean space of dimension four, and spacetime of general relativity is a (curved) manifold of dimension four.\nA striking aspect of the interaction between mathematics and physics is when mathematics drives research in physics. This is illustrated by the discoveries of the positron and the baryon formula_1 In both cases, the equations of the theories had unexplained solutions, which led to conjecture of the existence of an unknown particle and the search for these particles. In both cases, these particles were discovered a few years later by specific experiments.\nHistory.\nThe origin of mathematics is of arguments and disagreements. Whether the birth of mathematics was by chance or induced by necessity during the development of similar subjects, such as physics, remains an area of contention.\nA perennial issue in the philosophy of mathematics concerns the relationship between logic and mathematics at their joint foundations. While 20th-century philosophers continued to ask the questions mentioned at the outset of this article, the philosophy of mathematics in the 20th century was characterized by a predominant interest in formal logic, set theory (both naive set theory and axiomatic set theory), and foundational issues.\nIt is a profound puzzle that on the one hand mathematical truths seem to have a compelling inevitability, but on the other hand the source of their \"truthfulness\" remains elusive. Investigations into this issue are known as the foundations of mathematics program.\nAt the start of the 20th century, philosophers of mathematics were already beginning to divide into various schools of thought about all these questions, broadly distinguished by their pictures of mathematical epistemology and ontology. Three schools, formalism, intuitionism, and logicism, emerged at this time, partly in response to the increasingly widespread worry that mathematics as it stood, and analysis in particular, did not live up to the standards of certainty and rigor that had been taken for granted. Each school addressed the issues that came to the fore at that time, either attempting to resolve them or claiming that mathematics is not entitled to its status as our most trusted knowledge.\nSurprising and counter-intuitive developments in formal logic and set theory early in the 20th\u00a0century led to new questions concerning what was traditionally called the \"foundations of mathematics\". As the century unfolded, the initial focus of concern expanded to an open exploration of the fundamental axioms of mathematics, the axiomatic approach having been taken for granted since the time of Euclid around 300\u00a0BCE as the natural basis for mathematics. Notions of axiom, proposition and proof, as well as the notion of a proposition being true of a mathematical object &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;, were formalized, allowing them to be treated mathematically. The Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms for set theory were formulated which provided a conceptual framework in which much mathematical discourse would be interpreted. In mathematics, as in physics, new and unexpected ideas had arisen and significant changes were coming. With G\u00f6del numbering, propositions could be interpreted as referring to themselves or other propositions, enabling inquiry into the consistency of mathematical theories. This reflective critique in which the theory under review \"becomes itself the object of a mathematical study\" led Hilbert to call such study \"metamathematics\" or \"proof theory\".\nAt the middle of the century, a new mathematical theory was created by Samuel Eilenberg and Saunders Mac Lane, known as category theory, and it became a new contender for the natural language of mathematical thinking. As the 20th\u00a0century progressed, however, philosophical opinions diverged as to just how well-founded were the questions about foundations that were raised at the century's beginning. Hilary Putnam summed up one common view of the situation in the last third of the century by saying:\nWhen philosophy discovers something wrong with science, sometimes science has to be changed\u2014Russell's paradox comes to mind, as does Berkeley's attack on the actual infinitesimal\u2014but more often it is philosophy that has to be changed. I do not think that the difficulties that philosophy finds with classical mathematics today are genuine difficulties; and I think that the philosophical interpretations of mathematics that we are being offered on every hand are wrong, and that \"philosophical interpretation\" is just what mathematics doesn't need.\nPhilosophy of mathematics today proceeds along several different lines of inquiry, by philosophers of mathematics, logicians, and mathematicians, and there are many schools of thought on the subject. The schools are addressed separately in the next section, and their assumptions explained.\nContemporary schools of thought.\nContemporary schools of thought in the philosophy of mathematics include: artistic, Platonism, mathematicism, logicism, formalism, conventionalism, intuitionism, constructivism, finitism, structuralism, embodied mind theories (Aristotelian realism, psychologism, empiricism), fictionalism, social constructivism, and non-traditional schools. \nHowever, many of these schools of thought are mutually compatible. For example, most living mathematicians are together Platonists and formalists, give a great importance to aesthetic, and consider that axioms should be chosen for the results they produce, not for their coherence with human intuition of reality (conventionalism).\nArtistic.\nThe view that claims that mathematics is the aesthetic combination of assumptions, and then also claims that mathematics is an art. A famous mathematician who claims that is the British G. H. Hardy. For Hardy, in his book, \"A Mathematician's Apology\", the definition of mathematics was more like the aesthetic combination of concepts.\nMathematicism.\nMax Tegmark's mathematical universe hypothesis (or mathematicism) goes further than Platonism in asserting that not only do all mathematical objects exist, but nothing else does. Tegmark's sole postulate is: \"All structures that exist mathematically also exist physically\". That is, in the sense that \"in those [worlds] complex enough to contain self-aware substructures [they] will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically 'real' world\".\nLogicism.\nLogicism is the thesis that mathematics is reducible to logic, and hence nothing but a part of logic. Logicists hold that mathematics can be known \"a priori\", but suggest that our knowledge of mathematics is just part of our knowledge of logic in general, and is thus analytic, not requiring any special faculty of mathematical intuition. In this view, logic is the proper foundation of mathematics, and all mathematical statements are necessary logical truths.\nRudolf Carnap (1931) presents the logicist thesis in two parts:\nGottlob Frege was the founder of logicism. In his seminal \"Die Grundgesetze der Arithmetik\" (\"Basic Laws of Arithmetic\") he built up arithmetic from a system of logic with a general principle of comprehension, which he called \"Basic Law V\" (for concepts \"F\" and \"G\", the extension of \"F\" equals the extension of \"G\" if and only if for all objects \"a\", \"Fa\" equals \"Ga\"), a principle that he took to be acceptable as part of logic.\nFrege's construction was flawed. Bertrand Russell discovered that Basic Law V is inconsistent (this is Russell's paradox). Frege abandoned his logicist program soon after this, but it was continued by Russell and Whitehead. They attributed the paradox to \"vicious circularity\" and built up what they called ramified type theory to deal with it. In this system, they were eventually able to build up much of modern mathematics but in an altered, and excessively complex form (for example, there were different natural numbers in each type, and there were infinitely many types). They also had to make several compromises in order to develop much of mathematics, such as the \"axiom of reducibility\". Even Russell said that this axiom did not really belong to logic.\nModern logicists (like Bob Hale, Crispin Wright, and perhaps others) have returned to a program closer to Frege's. They have abandoned Basic Law V in favor of abstraction principles such as Hume's principle (the number of objects falling under the concept \"F\" equals the number of objects falling under the concept \"G\" if and only if the extension of \"F\" and the extension of \"G\" can be put into one-to-one correspondence). Frege required Basic Law V to be able to give an explicit definition of the numbers, but all the properties of numbers can be derived from Hume's principle. This would not have been enough for Frege because (to paraphrase him) it does not exclude the possibility that the number 3 is in fact Julius Caesar. In addition, many of the weakened principles that they have had to adopt to replace Basic Law V no longer seem so obviously analytic, and thus purely logical.\nFormalism.\nFormalism holds that mathematical statements may be thought of as statements about the consequences of certain string manipulation rules. For example, in the \"game\" of Euclidean geometry (which is seen as consisting of some strings called \"axioms\", and some \"rules of inference\" to generate new strings from given ones), one can prove that the Pythagorean theorem holds (that is, one can generate the string corresponding to the Pythagorean theorem). According to formalism, mathematical truths are not about numbers and sets and triangles and the like\u2014in fact, they are not \"about\" anything at all.\nAnother version of formalism is known as deductivism. In deductivism, the Pythagorean theorem is not an absolute truth, but a relative one, if it follows deductively from the appropriate axioms. The same is held to be true for all other mathematical statements.\nFormalism need not mean that mathematics is nothing more than a meaningless symbolic game. It is usually hoped that there exists some interpretation in which the rules of the game hold. (Compare this position to structuralism.) But it does allow the working mathematician to continue in his or her work and leave such problems to the philosopher or scientist. Many formalists would say that in practice, the axiom systems to be studied will be suggested by the demands of science or other areas of mathematics.\nA major early proponent of formalism was David Hilbert, whose program was intended to be a complete and consistent axiomatization of all of mathematics. Hilbert aimed to show the consistency of mathematical systems from the assumption that the \"finitary arithmetic\" (a subsystem of the usual arithmetic of the positive integers, chosen to be philosophically uncontroversial) was consistent. Hilbert's goals of creating a system of mathematics that is both complete and consistent were seriously undermined by the second of G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorems, which states that sufficiently expressive consistent axiom systems can never prove their own consistency. Since any such axiom system would contain the finitary arithmetic as a subsystem, G\u00f6del's theorem implied that it would be impossible to prove the system's consistency relative to that (since it would then prove its own consistency, which G\u00f6del had shown was impossible). Thus, in order to show that any axiomatic system of mathematics is in fact consistent, one needs to first assume the consistency of a system of mathematics that is in a sense stronger than the system to be proven consistent.\nHilbert was initially a deductivist, but, as may be clear from above, he considered certain metamathematical methods to yield intrinsically meaningful results and was a realist with respect to the finitary arithmetic. Later, he held the opinion that there was no other meaningful mathematics whatsoever, regardless of interpretation.\nOther formalists, such as Rudolf Carnap, Alfred Tarski, and Haskell Curry, considered mathematics to be the investigation of formal axiom systems. Mathematical logicians study formal systems but are just as often realists as they are formalists.\nFormalists are relatively tolerant and inviting to new approaches to logic, non-standard number systems, new set theories, etc. The more games we study, the better. However, in all three of these examples, motivation is drawn from existing mathematical or philosophical concerns. The \"games\" are usually not arbitrary.\nThe main critique of formalism is that the actual mathematical ideas that occupy mathematicians are far removed from the string manipulation games mentioned above. Formalism is thus silent on the question of which axiom systems ought to be studied, as none is more meaningful than another from a formalistic point of view.\nRecently, some formalist mathematicians have proposed that all of our \"formal\" mathematical knowledge should be systematically encoded in computer-readable formats, so as to facilitate automated proof checking of mathematical proofs and the use of interactive theorem proving in the development of mathematical theories and computer software. Because of their close connection with computer science, this idea is also advocated by mathematical intuitionists and constructivists in the \"computability\" tradition\u2014&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nConventionalism.\nThe French mathematician Henri Poincar\u00e9 was among the first to articulate a conventionalist view. Poincar\u00e9's use of non-Euclidean geometries in his work on differential equations convinced him that Euclidean geometry should not be regarded as \"a priori\" truth. He held that axioms in geometry should be chosen for the results they produce, not for their apparent coherence with human intuitions about the physical world.\nIntuitionism.\nIn mathematics, intuitionism is a program of methodological reform whose motto is that \"there are no non-experienced mathematical truths\" (L. E. J. Brouwer). From this springboard, intuitionists seek to reconstruct what they consider to be the corrigible portion of mathematics in accordance with Kantian concepts of being, becoming, intuition, and knowledge. Brouwer, the founder of the movement, held that mathematical objects arise from the \"a priori\" forms of the volitions that inform the perception of empirical objects.\nA major force behind intuitionism was L. E. J. Brouwer, who rejected the usefulness of formalized logic of any sort for mathematics. His student Arend Heyting postulated an intuitionistic logic, different from the classical Aristotelian logic; this logic does not contain the law of the excluded middle and therefore frowns upon proofs by contradiction. The axiom of choice is also rejected in most intuitionistic set theories, though in some versions it is accepted.\nIn intuitionism, the term \"explicit construction\" is not cleanly defined, and that has led to criticisms. Attempts have been made to use the concepts of Turing machine or computable function to fill this gap, leading to the claim that only questions regarding the behavior of finite algorithms are meaningful and should be investigated in mathematics. This has led to the study of the computable numbers, first introduced by Alan Turing. Not surprisingly, then, this approach to mathematics is sometimes associated with theoretical computer science.\nConstructivism.\nLike intuitionism, constructivism involves the regulative principle that only mathematical entities which can be explicitly constructed in a certain sense should be admitted to mathematical discourse. In this view, mathematics is an exercise of the human intuition, not a game played with meaningless symbols. Instead, it is about entities that we can create directly through mental activity. In addition, some adherents of these schools reject non-constructive proofs, such as using proof by contradiction when showing the existence of an object or when trying to establish the truth of some proposition. Important work was done by Errett Bishop, who managed to prove versions of the most important theorems in real analysis as constructive analysis in his 1967 \"Foundations of Constructive Analysis.\"\nFinitism.\nFinitism is an extreme form of constructivism, according to which a mathematical object does not exist unless it can be constructed from natural numbers in a finite number of steps. In her book \"Philosophy of Set Theory\", Mary Tiles characterized those who allow countably infinite objects as classical finitists, and those who deny even countably infinite objects as strict finitists.\nThe most famous proponent of finitism was Leopold Kronecker, who said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;God created the natural numbers, all else is the work of man.\nUltrafinitism is an even more extreme version of finitism, which rejects not only infinities but finite quantities that cannot feasibly be constructed with available resources. Another variant of finitism is Euclidean arithmetic, a system developed by John Penn Mayberry in his book \"The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets\". Mayberry's system is Aristotelian in general inspiration and, despite his strong rejection of any role for operationalism or feasibility in the foundations of mathematics, comes to somewhat similar conclusions, such as, for instance, that super-exponentiation is not a legitimate finitary function.\nStructuralism.\nStructuralism is a position holding that mathematical theories describe structures, and that mathematical objects are exhaustively defined by their \"places\" in such structures, consequently having no intrinsic properties. For instance, it would maintain that all that needs to be known about the number 1 is that it is the first whole number after 0. Likewise all the other whole numbers are defined by their places in a structure, the number line. Other examples of mathematical objects might include lines and planes in geometry, or elements and operations in abstract algebra.\nStructuralism is an epistemologically realistic view in that it holds that mathematical statements have an objective truth value. However, its central claim only relates to what \"kind\" of entity a mathematical object is, not to what kind of \"existence\" mathematical objects or structures have (not, in other words, to their ontology). The kind of existence mathematical objects have would clearly be dependent on that of the structures in which they are embedded; different sub-varieties of structuralism make different ontological claims in this regard.\nThe \"ante rem\" structuralism (\"before the thing\") has a similar ontology to Platonism. Structures are held to have a real but abstract and immaterial existence. As such, it faces the standard epistemological problem of explaining the interaction between such abstract structures and flesh-and-blood mathematicians &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;.\nThe \"in re\" structuralism (\"in the thing\") is the equivalent of Aristotelian realism. Structures are held to exist inasmuch as some concrete system exemplifies them. This incurs the usual issues that some perfectly legitimate structures might accidentally happen not to exist, and that a finite physical world might not be \"big\" enough to accommodate some otherwise legitimate structures.\nThe \"post rem\" structuralism (\"after the thing\") is anti-realist about structures in a way that parallels nominalism. Like nominalism, the \"post rem\" approach denies the existence of abstract mathematical objects with properties other than their place in a relational structure. According to this view mathematical \"systems\" exist, and have structural features in common. If something is true of a structure, it will be true of all systems exemplifying the structure. However, it is merely instrumental to talk of structures being \"held in common\" between systems: they in fact have no independent existence.\nEmbodied mind theories.\nEmbodied mind theories hold that mathematical thought is a natural outgrowth of the human cognitive apparatus which finds itself in our physical universe. For example, the abstract concept of number springs from the experience of counting discrete objects (requiring the human senses such as sight for detecting the objects, touch; and signalling from the brain). It is held that mathematics is not universal and does not exist in any real sense, other than in human brains. Humans construct, but do not discover, mathematics.\nThe cognitive processes of pattern-finding and distinguishing objects are also subject to neuroscience; if mathematics is considered to be relevant to a natural world (such as from realism or a degree of it, as opposed to pure solipsism).\nIts actual relevance to reality, while accepted to be a trustworthy approximation (it is also suggested the evolution of perceptions, the body, and the senses may have been necessary for survival) is not necessarily accurate to a full realism (and is still subject to flaws such as illusion, assumptions (consequently; the foundations and axioms in which mathematics have been formed by humans), generalisations, deception, and hallucinations). As such, this may also raise questions for the modern scientific method for its compatibility with general mathematics; as while relatively reliable, it is still limited by what can be measured by empiricism which may not be as reliable as previously assumed (see also: 'counterintuitive' concepts in such as quantum nonlocality, and action at a distance).\nAnother issue is that one numeral system may not necessarily be applicable to problem solving. Subjects such as complex numbers or imaginary numbers require specific changes to more commonly used axioms of mathematics; otherwise they cannot be adequately understood.\nAlternatively, computer programmers may use hexadecimal for its 'human-friendly' representation of binary-coded values, rather than decimal (convenient for counting because humans have ten fingers). The axioms or logical rules behind mathematics also vary through time (such as the invention and adaptation of zero).\nAs perceptions from the human brain are subject to illusions, assumptions, deceptions, (induced) hallucinations, cognitive errors or assumptions in a general context, it can be questioned whether they are accurate or strictly indicative of truth (see also: philosophy of being), and the nature of empiricism itself in relation to the universe and whether it is independent to the senses and the universe.\nThe human mind has no special claim on reality or approaches to it built out of math. If such constructs as Euler's identity are true then they are true as a map of the human mind and cognition.\nEmbodied mind theorists thus explain the effectiveness of mathematics\u2014mathematics was constructed by the brain in order to be effective in this universe.\nThe most accessible, famous, and infamous treatment of this perspective is \"Where Mathematics Comes From\", by George Lakoff and Rafael E. N\u00fa\u00f1ez. In addition, mathematician Keith Devlin has investigated similar concepts with his book \"The Math Instinct\", as has neuroscientist Stanislas Dehaene with his book \"The Number Sense\". &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAristotelian realism.\nAristotelian realism holds that mathematics studies properties such as symmetry, continuity and order that can be literally realized in the physical world (or in any other world there might be). It contrasts with Platonism in holding that the objects of mathematics, such as numbers, do not exist in an \"abstract\" world but can be physically realized. For example, the number 4 is realized in the relation between a heap of parrots and the universal \"being a parrot\" that divides the heap into so many parrots. Aristotelian realism is defended by James Franklin and the https:// in the philosophy of mathematics and is close to the view of Penelope Maddy that when an egg carton is opened, a set of three eggs is perceived (that is, a mathematical entity realized in the physical world). A problem for Aristotelian realism is what account to give of higher infinities, which may not be realizable in the physical world.\nThe Euclidean arithmetic developed by John Penn Mayberry in his book \"The Foundations of Mathematics in the Theory of Sets\" also falls into the Aristotelian realist tradition. Mayberry, following Euclid, considers numbers to be simply \"definite multitudes of units\" realized in nature\u2014such as \"the members of the London Symphony Orchestra\" or \"the trees in Birnam wood\". Whether or not there are definite multitudes of units for which Euclid's Common Notion 5 (the whole is greater than the part) fails and which would consequently be reckoned as infinite is for Mayberry essentially a question about Nature and does not entail any transcendental suppositions.\nPsychologism.\nPsychologism in the philosophy of mathematics is the position that mathematical concepts and/or truths are grounded in, derived from or explained by psychological facts (or laws).\nJohn Stuart Mill seems to have been an advocate of a type of logical psychologism, as were many 19th-century German logicians such as Sigwart and Erdmann as well as a number of psychologists, past and present: for example, Gustave Le Bon. Psychologism was famously criticized by Frege in his \"The Foundations of Arithmetic\", and many of his works and essays, including his review of Husserl's \"Philosophy of Arithmetic\". Edmund Husserl, in the first volume of his \"Logical Investigations\", called \"The Prolegomena of Pure Logic\", criticized psychologism thoroughly and sought to distance himself from it. The \"Prolegomena\" is considered a more concise, fair, and thorough refutation of psychologism than the criticisms made by Frege, and also it is considered today by many as being a memorable refutation for its decisive blow to psychologism. Psychologism was also criticized by Charles Sanders Peirce and Maurice Merleau-Ponty.\nEmpiricism.\nMathematical empiricism is a form of realism that denies that mathematics can be known \"a priori\" at all. It says that we discover mathematical facts by empirical research, just like facts in any of the other sciences. It is not one of the classical three positions advocated in the early 20th\u00a0century, but primarily arose in the middle of the century. However, an important early proponent of a view like this was John Stuart Mill. Mill's view was widely criticized, because, according to critics, such as A.J. Ayer, it makes statements like \"2 + 2 \n 4\" come out as uncertain, contingent truths, which we can only learn by observing instances of two pairs coming together and forming a quartet.\nKarl Popper was another philosopher to point out empirical aspects of mathematics, observing that \"most mathematical theories are, like those of physics and biology, hypothetico-deductive: pure mathematics therefore turns out to be much closer to the natural sciences whose hypotheses are conjectures, than it seemed even recently.\" Popper also noted he would \"admit a system as empirical or scientific only if it is capable of being tested by experience.\"\nContemporary mathematical empiricism, formulated by W. V. O. Quine and Hilary Putnam, is primarily supported by the indispensability argument: mathematics is indispensable to all empirical sciences, and if we want to believe in the reality of the phenomena described by the sciences, we ought also believe in the reality of those entities required for this description. That is, since physics needs to talk about electrons to say why light bulbs behave as they do, then electrons must exist. Since physics needs to talk about numbers in offering any of its explanations, then numbers must exist. In keeping with Quine and Putnam's overall philosophies, this is a naturalistic argument. It argues for the existence of mathematical entities as the best explanation for experience, thus stripping mathematics of being distinct from the other sciences.\nPutnam strongly rejected the term \"Platonist\" as implying an over-specific ontology that was not necessary to mathematical practice in any real sense. He advocated a form of \"pure realism\" that rejected mystical notions of truth and accepted much quasi-empiricism in mathematics. This grew from the increasingly popular assertion in the late 20th century that no one foundation of mathematics could be ever proven to exist. It is also sometimes called \"postmodernism in mathematics\" although that term is considered overloaded by some and insulting by others. Quasi-empiricism argues that in doing their research, mathematicians test hypotheses as well as prove theorems. A mathematical argument can transmit falsity from the conclusion to the premises just as well as it can transmit truth from the premises to the conclusion. Putnam has argued that any theory of mathematical realism would include quasi-empirical methods. He proposed that an alien species doing mathematics might well rely on quasi-empirical methods primarily, being willing often to forgo rigorous and axiomatic proofs, and still be doing mathematics\u2014at perhaps a somewhat greater risk of failure of their calculations. He gave a detailed argument for this in \"New Directions\". Quasi-empiricism was also developed by Imre Lakatos.\nThe most important criticism of empirical views of mathematics is approximately the same as that raised against Mill. If mathematics is just as empirical as the other sciences, then this suggests that its results are just as fallible as theirs, and just as contingent. In Mill's case the empirical justification comes directly, while in Quine's case it comes indirectly, through the coherence of our scientific theory as a whole, i.e. consilience after E.O. Wilson. Quine suggests that mathematics seems completely certain because the role it plays in our web of belief is extraordinarily central, and that it would be extremely difficult for us to revise it, though not impossible.\nFor a philosophy of mathematics that attempts to overcome some of the shortcomings of Quine and G\u00f6del's approaches by taking aspects of each see Penelope Maddy's \"Realism in Mathematics\". Another example of a realist theory is the embodied mind theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFictionalism.\nMathematical fictionalism was brought to fame in 1980 when Hartry Field published \"Science Without Numbers\", which rejected and in fact reversed Quine's indispensability argument. Where Quine suggested that mathematics was indispensable for our best scientific theories, and therefore should be accepted as a body of truths talking about independently existing entities, Field suggested that mathematics was dispensable, and therefore should be considered as a body of falsehoods not talking about anything real. He did this by giving a complete axiomatization of Newtonian mechanics with no reference to numbers or functions at all. He started with the \"betweenness\" of Hilbert's axioms to characterize space without coordinatizing it, and then added extra relations between points to do the work formerly done by vector fields. Hilbert's geometry is mathematical, because it talks about abstract points, but in Field's theory, these points are the concrete points of physical space, so no special mathematical objects at all are needed.\nHaving shown how to do science without using numbers, Field proceeded to rehabilitate mathematics as a kind of useful fiction. He showed that mathematical physics is a conservative extension of his non-mathematical physics (that is, every physical fact provable in mathematical physics is already provable from Field's system), so that mathematics is a reliable process whose physical applications are all true, even though its own statements are false. Thus, when doing mathematics, we can see ourselves as telling a sort of story, talking as if numbers existed. For Field, a statement like \"2 + 2 \n 4\" is just as fictitious as \"Sherlock Holmes lived at 221B Baker Street\"\u2014but both are true according to the relevant fictions.\nAnother fictionalist, Mary Leng, expresses the perspective succinctly by dismissing any seeming connection between mathematics and the physical world as \"a happy coincidence\". This rejection separates fictionalism from other forms of anti-realism, which see mathematics itself as artificial but still bounded or fitted to reality in some way.\nBy this account, there are no metaphysical or epistemological problems special to mathematics. The only worries left are the general worries about non-mathematical physics, and about fiction in general. Field's approach has been very influential, but is widely rejected. This is in part because of the requirement of strong fragments of second-order logic to carry out his reduction, and because the statement of conservativity seems to require quantification over abstract models or deductions.\nSocial constructivism.\nSocial constructivism sees mathematics primarily as a social construct, as a product of culture, subject to correction and change. Like the other sciences, mathematics is viewed as an empirical endeavor whose results are constantly evaluated and may be discarded. However, while on an empiricist view the evaluation is some sort of comparison with \"reality\", social constructivists emphasize that the direction of mathematical research is dictated by the fashions of the social group performing it or by the needs of the society financing it. However, although such external forces may change the direction of some mathematical research, there are strong internal constraints\u2014the mathematical traditions, methods, problems, meanings and values into which mathematicians are enculturated\u2014that work to conserve the historically defined discipline.\nThis runs counter to the traditional beliefs of working mathematicians, that mathematics is somehow pure or objective. But social constructivists argue that mathematics is in fact grounded by much uncertainty: as mathematical practice evolves, the status of previous mathematics is cast into doubt, and is corrected to the degree it is required or desired by the current mathematical community. This can be seen in the development of analysis from reexamination of the calculus of Leibniz and Newton. They argue further that finished mathematics is often accorded too much status, and folk mathematics not enough, due to an overemphasis on axiomatic proof and peer review as practices.\nThe social nature of mathematics is highlighted in its subcultures. Major discoveries can be made in one branch of mathematics and be relevant to another, yet the relationship goes undiscovered for lack of social contact between mathematicians. Social constructivists argue each speciality forms its own epistemic community and often has great difficulty communicating, or motivating the investigation of unifying conjectures that might relate different areas of mathematics. Social constructivists see the process of \"doing mathematics\" as actually creating the meaning, while social realists see a deficiency either of human capacity to abstractify, or of human's cognitive bias, or of mathematicians' collective intelligence as preventing the comprehension of a real universe of mathematical objects. Social constructivists sometimes reject the search for foundations of mathematics as bound to fail, as pointless or even meaningless.\nContributions to this school have been made by Imre Lakatos and Thomas Tymoczko, although it is not clear that either would endorse the title. More recently Paul Ernest has explicitly formulated a social constructivist philosophy of mathematics. Some consider the work of Paul Erd\u0151s as a whole to have advanced this view (although he personally rejected it) because of his uniquely broad collaborations, which prompted others to see and study \"mathematics as a social activity\", e.g., via the Erd\u0151s number. Reuben Hersh has also promoted the social view of mathematics, calling it a \"humanistic\" approach, similar to but not quite the same as that associated with Alvin White; one of Hersh's co-authors, Philip J. Davis, has expressed sympathy for the social view as well.\nBeyond the traditional schools.\nUnreasonable effectiveness.\nRather than focus on narrow debates about the true nature of mathematical truth, or even on practices unique to mathematicians such as the proof, a growing movement from the 1960s to the 1990s began to question the idea of seeking foundations or finding any one right answer to why mathematics works. The starting point for this was Eugene Wigner's famous 1960 paper \"The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences\", in which he argued that the happy coincidence of mathematics and physics being so well matched seemed to be unreasonable and hard to explain.\nPopper's two senses of number statements.\nRealist and constructivist theories are normally taken to be contraries. However, Karl Popper argued that a number statement such as \"2 apples + 2 apples \n 4 apples\" can be taken in two senses. In one sense it is irrefutable and logically true. In the second sense it is factually true and falsifiable. Another way of putting this is to say that a single number statement can express two propositions: one of which can be explained on constructivist lines; the other on realist lines.\nPhilosophy of language.\nInnovations in the philosophy of language during the 20th century renewed interest in whether mathematics is, as is often said, the \"language\" of science. Although some mathematicians and philosophers would accept the statement \"mathematics is a language\" (most consider that the language of mathematics is a part of mathematics to which mathematics cannot be reduced), linguists believe that the implications of such a statement must be considered. For example, the tools of linguistics are not generally applied to the symbol systems of mathematics, that is, mathematics is studied in a markedly different way from other languages. If mathematics is a language, it is a different type of language from natural languages. Indeed, because of the need for clarity and specificity, the language of mathematics is far more constrained than natural languages studied by linguists. However, the methods developed by Frege and Tarski for the study of mathematical language have been extended greatly by Tarski's student Richard Montague and other linguists working in formal semantics to show that the distinction between mathematical language and natural language may not be as great as it seems.\nMohan Ganesalingam has analysed mathematical language using tools from formal linguistics. Ganesalingam notes that some features of natural language are not necessary when analysing mathematical language (such as tense), but many of the same analytical tools can be used (such as context-free grammars). One important difference is that mathematical objects have clearly defined types, which can be explicitly defined in a text: \"Effectively, we are allowed to introduce a word in one part of a sentence, and declare its part of speech in another; and this operation has no analogue in natural language.\"\nArguments.\nIndispensability argument for realism.\nThis argument, associated with Willard Quine and Hilary Putnam, is considered by Stephen Yablo to be one of the most challenging arguments in favor of the acceptance of the existence of abstract mathematical entities, such as numbers and sets. The form of the argument is as follows.\nThe justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the \"only\" part of \"all and only\". The assertion that \"all\" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism. Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry, but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position.\nEpistemic argument against realism.\nThe anti-realist \"epistemic argument\" against Platonism has been made by Paul Benacerraf and Hartry Field. Platonism posits that mathematical objects are \"abstract\" entities. By general agreement, abstract entities cannot interact causally with concrete, physical entities (\"the truth-values of our mathematical assertions depend on facts involving Platonic entities that reside in a realm outside of space-time\"). Whilst our knowledge of concrete, physical objects is based on our ability to perceive them, and therefore to causally interact with them, there is no parallel account of how mathematicians come to have knowledge of abstract objects. Another way of making the point is that if the Platonic world were to disappear, it would make no difference to the ability of mathematicians to generate proofs, etc., which is already fully accountable in terms of physical processes in their brains.\nField developed his views into fictionalism. Benacerraf also developed the philosophy of mathematical structuralism, according to which there are no mathematical objects. Nonetheless, some versions of structuralism are compatible with some versions of realism.\nThe argument hinges on the idea that a satisfactory naturalistic account of thought processes in terms of brain processes can be given for mathematical reasoning along with everything else. One line of defense is to maintain that this is false, so that mathematical reasoning uses some special intuition that involves contact with the Platonic realm. A modern form of this argument is given by Sir Roger Penrose.\nAnother line of defense is to maintain that abstract objects are relevant to mathematical reasoning in a way that is non-causal, and not analogous to perception. This argument is developed by Jerrold Katz in his 2000 book \"Realistic Rationalism\".\nA more radical defense is denial of physical reality, i.e. the mathematical universe hypothesis. In that case, a mathematician's knowledge of mathematics is one mathematical object making contact with another.\nAesthetics.\nMany practicing mathematicians have been drawn to their subject because of a sense of beauty they perceive in it. One sometimes hears the sentiment that mathematicians would like to leave philosophy to the philosophers and get back to mathematics\u2014where, presumably, the beauty lies.\nIn his work on the divine proportion, H.E. Huntley relates the feeling of reading and understanding someone else's proof of a theorem of mathematics to that of a viewer of a masterpiece of art\u2014the reader of a proof has a similar sense of exhilaration at understanding as the original author of the proof, much as, he argues, the viewer of a masterpiece has a sense of exhilaration similar to the original painter or sculptor. Indeed, one can study mathematical and scientific writings as literature.\nPhilip J. Davis and Reuben Hersh have commented that the sense of mathematical beauty is universal amongst practicing mathematicians. By way of example, they provide two proofs of the irrationality of . The first is the traditional proof by contradiction, ascribed to Euclid; the second is a more direct proof involving the fundamental theorem of arithmetic that, they argue, gets to the heart of the issue. Davis and Hersh argue that mathematicians find the second proof more aesthetically appealing because it gets closer to the nature of the problem.\nPaul Erd\u0151s was well known for his notion of a hypothetical \"Book\" containing the most elegant or beautiful mathematical proofs. There is not universal agreement that a result has one \"most elegant\" proof; Gregory Chaitin has argued against this idea.\nPhilosophers have sometimes criticized mathematicians' sense of beauty or elegance as being, at best, vaguely stated. By the same token, however, philosophers of mathematics have sought to characterize what makes one proof more desirable than another when both are logically sound.\nAnother aspect of aesthetics concerning mathematics is mathematicians' views towards the possible uses of mathematics for purposes deemed unethical or inappropriate. The best-known exposition of this view occurs in G. H. Hardy's book \"A Mathematician's Apology\", in which Hardy argues that pure mathematics is superior in beauty to applied mathematics precisely because it cannot be used for war and similar ends.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46442", "revid": "50034031", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46442", "title": "Assassins (musical)", "text": "1990 musical by Stephen Sondheim\nAssassins is a musical with music and lyrics by Stephen Sondheim and a book by John Weidman, based on an original concept by Charles Gilbert Jr.\nUsing the framing device of an all-American, yet sinister, carnival game, the semi-revue portrays a group of historical figures who attempted (successfully or not) to assassinate Presidents of the United States, and explores what their presence in American history says about the ideals of their country. The score is written to reflect both popular music of the various depicted eras and a broader tradition of \"patriotic\" American music.\nThe musical opened Off-Broadway in 1990 to many mixed and negative reviews, and ran for 73 performances; in 2004, the show was produced on Broadway to highly favorable notices and won five Tony Awards, including Best Revival of a Musical.\nBackground and productions.\nBackground.\nIn 1979, as a panelist at producer Stuart Ostrow's Musical Theater Lab, Sondheim read a script by playwright Charles Gilbert Jr. entitled \"Assassins\". Inspired by its title and use of quotations from various historical figures who had attempted to assassinate American Presidents, Sondheim asked Gilbert for permission to use his idea. Gilbert consented and offered to write the book, but Sondheim declined, having already had collaborator John Weidman in mind. Weidman had written the book for \"Pacific Overtures\" and would work with Sondheim again on \"Road Show\".\nGilbert's original concept involved a fictional Vietnam War veteran who becomes an assassin and around this central narrative he had woven diary entries, poems, and newspaper reports of historical assassins. Sondheim and Weidman, having no interest in the fictional element, focused the musical solely on the historical figures. Five assassins appear in both versions:\u00a0John Wilkes Booth,\u00a0Charles J. Guiteau,\u00a0Leon Czolgosz,\u00a0Giuseppe Zangara, and\u00a0Squeaky Fromme. The model for Gilbert's protagonist, Lee Harvey Oswald, also appears in the musical. The musical omits three assassins included in Gilbert\u2019s script\u2014Arthur Bremer (cut in rehearsals), Sirhan Sirhan (mentioned by name only),\u00a0and\u00a0John Schrank\u2014and instead features Samuel Byck, Sara Jane Moore,\u00a0and John Hinckley Jr., the last of whom had not yet attempted an assassination when Gilbert's version was written.\nAside from the title, Sondheim and Weidman also retained Gilbert's distinctive conceptual metaphor of the shooting gallery, presided over by a character called\u00a0Fat Man\u00a0(somewhat analogous to Weidman\u2019s Proprietor) who is encouraging would-be assassins to \"shoot the Prez and win a prize.\"\nThe first staged reading of the musical, at Playwrights Horizons on December 18, 1989, was directed by Jerry Zaks and featured Anthony Heald (Czolgosz), Paul McCrane (Hinckley), Michael Jeter (Zangara), Jonathan Hadary (Guiteau), Swoosie Kurtz (Fromme), Christine Baranski (Moore), Victor Garber (Booth), Kevin Anderson (Balladeer/Oswald) and Nathan Lane (Byck).\nProductions.\n\"Assassins\" opened Off-Broadway at Playwrights Horizons on December 18, 1990, and closed on February 16, 1991, after 73 performances. Directed by Jerry Zaks the cast included Victor Garber, Terrence Mann, Patrick Cassidy, Debra Monk, Greg Germann, and Annie Golden. According to the \"Los Angeles Times\", \"The show has been sold out since previews began, reflecting the strong appeal of Sondheim's work among the theater crowd.\" Frank Rich in his review for \"The New York Times\" wrote that \"\"Assassins\" will have to fire with sharper aim and fewer blanks if it is to shoot to kill.\"\nOn October 29, 1992, \"Assassins\" opened in London at the Donmar Warehouse with direction by Sam Mendes and a cast that included Henry Goodman as Charles Guiteau and Louise Gold as Sara Jane Moore. The show ran for 76 performances, closing on January 9, 1993.\nThe first US regional production was mounted at Theatre Three in Dallas, July 15, 1992. The second was mounted by Signature Theatre in Arlington, Virginia in August 1992. The San Jose Civic Light Opera in San Jose, California, presented a production in 1993, which featured the world premiere of the 13-piece orchestration by Michael Starobin. The Los Angeles premiere opened in 1994 at the Los Angeles Theatre Center and included Patrick Cassidy (the original Balladeer) playing Booth, and Alan Safier as Guiteau.\nThe first Australian production opened in February 1995, presented by the Melbourne Theatre Company at the Fairfax Studio. Directed by Roger Hodgman, the cast featured John O'May, John McTernan and Bruce Myles.\nRoundabout Theatre Company's Broadway production was originally scheduled for 2001 but was postponed to April 22, 2004, because the content was sensitive in light of the events of the September 11 attacks. After 101 performances at Studio 54, \"Assassins\" closed on July 18, 2004. Directed by Joe Mantello, with musical staging by Jonathan Butterell, Neil Patrick Harris starred in the roles of The Balladeer and Lee Harvey Oswald, with Marc Kudisch in an extended role as The Proprietor. Michael Cerveris played John Wilkes Booth, for which he received a Tony Award. The 2004 production was noted for a \"coup de th\u00e9\u00e2tre\": the Zapruder film of the assassination of John F. Kennedy projected onto Lee Harvey Oswald's T-shirt by projection designer Elaine J. McCarthy. On December 3, 2012, the Broadway cast reunited for a special benefit. Annaleigh Ashford stood in for Mary Catherine Garrison.\nOther professional productions have included a 2006 production at Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, a 2008 production which ran from January 23 to February 2, 2008, at the Landor Theatre, London, The South African premiere opened in December 2008 as the inaugural production of the NewSpace Theatre in Cape Town. This production was directed by Fred Abrahamse with a South African cast including Marcel Meyer as John Wilkes Booth, Riaan Norval as Lee Harvey Oswald, David Dennis as Charles J. Guiteau and Anthea Thompson as Sara Jane Moore. A 2010 production in Toronto by BirdLand Theatre and Talk is Free Theatre won the Dora Mavor Moore Award for Outstanding Production in the Musical Theatre Division.\nThe Union Theatre, London produced \"Assassins\" in July 2010, which went on the win Best (overall) Production at The Off West End Awards. It was staged and directed by Michael Strassen. It attained Show of the Week and Critics choice in Time Out.\nA new production of \"Assassins\" starring Catherine Tate as Sarah Jane Moore, Aaron Tveit as John Wilkes Booth, Mike McShane as Samuel Byck, Andy Nyman as Charles Guiteau, and Jamie Parker as the Balladeer opened on November 21, 2014, at the Menier Chocolate Factory in London and ran until March 7, 2015 directed by Jamie Lloyd.\n\"Assassins\" was produced in the 2016-2017 season at Yale Repertory Theatre from March 17 to April 8, 2017. The Cast included Robert Lenzi as John Wilkes Booth, Stephen DeRosa as Charles Guiteau, and Julia Murney as Sara Jane Moore\n\"Assassins\" was produced in the 2017 season of \"Encores! Off Center\" at the New York City Center from July 12\u201315 of that year, with a cast including Steven Pasquale as John Wilkes Booth, Victoria Clark as Sara Jane Moore, Alex Brightman as Giuseppe Zangara, and Shuler Hensley as Leon Czolgosz.\nIn October/November 2019 The Watermill Theatre Newbury and Nottingham Playhouse co-produced a new version in the UK, using a full cast of actor/musicians for the first time. The role of the Balladeer was switched to a female part for this production. A poignant moment was added at the end of the final scene, where a young child walks onto the stage from the audience, retrieves a gun from the vending machine (from which the main characters received their weapons at the start of the show) and fires the final gunshot out into the crowd.\nJohn Doyle was to direct an Off-Broadway production at Classic Stage Company scheduled for 2020. On September 24, 2019, it was announced that the cast would include Judy Kuhn as Sara Jane Moore, Will Swenson as Charles Guiteau, Brandon Uranowitz as Leon Czolgosz, Wesley Taylor as Giuseppe Zangara, and Pasquale reprising his role as John Wilkes Booth. Other additions to the cast include Ethan Slater as Lee Harvey Oswald/The Balladeer and Tavi Gevinson as Lynette \u201cSqueaky\u201d Fromme. The show was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On September 9, 2021 it was announced that the production would begin performances on November 2, 2021 - January 8, 2022 with an official opening on November 14, 2021. And on November 9, 2021, it was announced that the production would extend through to January 29, 2022. The production ended up officially closing January 24, 2022 due to positive COVID-19 cases in the company. On March 18, 2022, a cast recording album of this production received a wide digital release, which featured all songs as well as an abridged version of the climactic scene between Booth and Oswald.\nIn June 2023, a revival played at the Chichester Festival Theatre in West Sussex, United Kingdom. The production starred Danny Mac as Booth, Luke Brady as Zangara, Peter Forbes as the Proprietor, Harry Hepple as Guiteau, Nick Holder as Byck, Charlotte Jaconelli as Goldman, and Jack Shalloo as Hinckley.\nCast and characters.\nNotable replacements.\nOff-Broadway: (1990\u201391)\nOff-West End: (2014\u201315)\nSynopsis.\nThis synopsis reflects the current licensed version of the show. The published script of the 1992 Off-Broadway production is slightly different.\nThe show opens in a fairground shooting gallery where, amid flashing lights, human figures trundle past on a conveyor belt. One by one, a collection of misfits enters the stage, where the Proprietor of the game entices them to play, promising that their problems will be solved by killing a President (\"Everybody\u2019s Got the Right\"). Leon Czolgosz, John Hinckley, Charles Guiteau, Giuseppe Zangara, Samuel Byck, Lynette \"Squeaky\" Fromme, and Sara Jane Moore are given their guns one by one. John Wilkes Booth enters last and the Proprietor introduces him to the others as their pioneer before he begins distributing ammunition. The assassins take aim as \"Hail to the Chief\" heralds Abraham Lincoln's offstage arrival. Booth excuses himself, a shot rings out and Booth shouts, \"Sic semper tyrannis!\"\nThe Balladeer, a personification of the American Dream, appears and begins to tell John Wilkes Booth's story (\"The Ballad of Booth\") as the scene changes to Richard H. Garrett's barn in 1865. Booth, mudstained and with a broken leg, is attempting to write his reasons for killing Lincoln in his diary but cannot hold the pen. He forces his associate David Herold to write for him at gunpoint. As Booth dictates, blaming Lincoln for the Civil War and for destroying the South, the Balladeer interjects that Booth's motives really had more to do with his personal problems, much to Booth's annoyance. When a Union soldier calls for Booth's surrender, Herold abandons him and surrenders. In desperation, Booth throws the Balladeer his diary so that he can tell his story to the world. The Balladeer reads out Booth's justifications, and Booth laments that the act for which he has given up his life will not be enough to heal the country. As the Union soldiers set fire to the barn, Booth commits suicide, and the Balladeer concludes that Booth was a madman whose treacherous legacy only served as inspiration for other madmen like him to damage the country. The Balladeer rips Booth's rationale from his diary and burns the pages.\nThe Assassins gather in a bar. Guiteau toasts to the Presidency of the United States, speaking of his ambition to become Ambassador to France. Hinckley accidentally breaks a bottle, and Czolgosz flies into a rage, describing the horrors he sees in the bottle factory he works in and how many men die or are injured just to make a bottle like the one Hinckley has just broken. Guiteau jokingly tells Czolgosz to find another job, and the two begin to argue about the American Dream, with Guiteau defending America and Czolgosz dismissing the \"land of opportunity\" as a lie. Czolgosz becomes enraged and grabs a bottle, barely stopping himself from throwing it across the room. Booth urges Czolgosz to take control of his fate by breaking a bottle himself, but Czolgosz cannot. Zangara complains about his stomach pains, and Booth suggests fixing them by shooting Franklin D. Roosevelt.\nA radio broadcast, narrated by the Proprietor, describes Zangara's failed attempt to assassinate Roosevelt at Bayfront Park in Miami. He misses Roosevelt and accidentally kills Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak instead. Five Bystanders are interviewed in turn, telling the audience their personal versions of the event; each is convinced that he or she personally saved the President (\"How I Saved Roosevelt\"). From an electric chair, Zangara sings his refusal to be afraid and that he hadn't cared whom he killed as long as it was one of the men who control the money. Peeved that as an \"American Nothing\" he has no photographers at his execution, Zangara is electrocuted as the Bystanders preen for the cameras.\nAmerican anarchist leader Emma Goldman gives a lecture from offstage as Leon Czolgosz listens, enraptured. He introduces himself to her and declares his love, but she tells him to redirect his passion to the fight for social justice. She gives him a leaflet that she tells him contains an idea that is \"not mine alone, but mine\". As she prepares to leave, Czolgosz offers to carry her bag, to which Goldman protests by saying, \"They make us servants, Leon. We do not make servants of each other.\" Czolgosz, in his first display of assertiveness, still insists.\nFromme and Moore meet on a park bench and share a joint. Fromme speaks of the apocalyptic preachings of mass murderer Charles Manson, remembering how they met and declaring herself his lover and slave. Juggling her purse, a can of Tab and a bucket of Kentucky Fried Chicken, Moore claims she is an informant for the FBI (or used to be), has been a CPA and had five husbands and three children. They connect over their shared hatred of their fathers, and using Colonel Sanders as a graven image, they give the bucket of chicken the evil eye and then shoot it to pieces while laughing hysterically. Moore realizes that she had known Manson in high school, and the scene ends as the women scream in delight over their memories of the charismatic killer.\nCzolgosz reflects on how many men die in the mines, the steel mills and the factories just to make a gun. Booth, Guiteau and Moore enter one by one and join him in a barbershop quartet in which they honor a single gun's power to change the world (\"The Gun Song\"). Czolgosz decides his gun will claim one more victim: the President.\nCzolgosz arrives at the 1901 Pan-American Exposition and sees that William McKinley is shaking visitors' hands in the Temple of Music Pavilion. The Balladeer sings (\"The Ballad of Czolgosz\") as Czolgosz joins the receiving line, and upon reaching McKinley, he shoots him.\nSamuel Byck sits on a park bench in a dirty Santa suit with a picket sign and a shopping bag. He talks into a tape recorder, preparing a message to Leonard Bernstein telling Bernstein he can save the world by writing more love songs, and explaining that he is going to change things by crashing a 747 into the White House and killing Richard Nixon. Then he accuses Bernstein of ignoring him, just like the other celebrities he has recorded tapes for, such as Hank Aaron and Jonas Salk. After flying into an expletive-laden rage, Byck stands up on the bench and angrily sings the chorus to \"West Side Story\"'s song \"America\" before storming offstage.\nJohn Hinckley sits in his rumpus room, aimlessly playing a guitar. Lynette Fromme enters and tries to convince him to play her a song (asking for \"Helter Skelter\" or \"Sympathy for the Devil\"), but he refuses. Fromme notices a picture of Jodie Foster, who Hinckley claims is his girlfriend. When Fromme realizes the picture is a publicity photo from a film, she pulls out a picture of Charles Manson and mocks Hinckley for being in love with a woman he's never met, which makes him throw her out in a fit of rage. Alone, he swears that he will win Foster's love \"with one brave, historic act\" and sings a love song to her while Fromme individually does the same to Manson (\"Unworthy of Your Love\"). An image of Ronald Reagan appears on a wall in the back of the stage, and an enraged Hinckley shoots it over and over again, but the picture keeps reappearing. The Proprietor mocks Hinckley by quoting Reagan's famous quips about the assassination and his There you go again speech as Hinckley fires and fires, missing each time.\nBack at the Proprietor's shooting range, Charles Guiteau flirts with Sara Jane Moore while giving her marksmanship tips before trying to kiss her. When she rebuffs him, he becomes suddenly enraged and attempts to attack her. Her gun goes off in his ear, and he backs off, angrily proclaiming that he is extraordinary and will be the next Ambassador to France. The scene changes to a train station, where Guiteau goes to meet James A. Garfield and James G. Blaine. He asks to be made Ambassador to France, but Garfield mockingly refuses, prompting Guiteau to shoot him.\nGuiteau is arrested and sent to the gallows, where he recites a poem he wrote that morning titled \"I Am Going to the Lordy\". When Guiteau finishes, the Balladeer enters and sings about Guiteau's trial and sentencing while Guiteau merrily cakewalks up to the noose, getting more and more desperately optimistic with each verse. Guiteau sings along with the Balladeer about Guiteau's optimism before he is finally hanged (\"The Ballad of Guiteau\").\nSqueaky Fromme and Sara Jane Moore prepare to assassinate Gerald Ford. Moore has brought along her nine-year-old son and her dog (which she accidentally shoots), which causes an argument between the two women, who briefly turn on each other. Moore accidentally spills her gun's bullets just as President Ford enters the stage. Not recognizing him at first, the two women allow him to help them, but upon discovering who he is, Fromme tries to shoot him, but her gun jams. Having no other resource left, Moore tries to throw her bullets at Ford, shouting \"bang\" as she does so.\nSamuel Byck is driving to the airport to hijack a plane, which he plans to crash into the White House. Growing completely unhinged, he records a message addressed to Richard Nixon, complaining about contemporary American life, how the American public is constantly lied to, and announces that killing him is the only solution.\nThe assassins congregate in the Proprietor's shooting range once again and enumerate their reasons for taking action. Led by Byck, they lament that they haven't gotten the rewards they were \"promised\". The Balladeer tells them that their actions didn't solve their problems or the country's and that if they want their prizes they must follow the American Dream. The assassins realize that they will never get their prizes, that no one will ever care if they live or die, and briefly sink into absolute desperation until Byck and the Proprietor lead them in (\"Another National Anthem\"), a song for all Americans dispossessed by the dream. The Balladeer attempts to convince them to be optimistic and seek other ways to be happy, but the Anthem grows louder and louder until the assassins force the Balladeer offstage (in the 2004 revival and many productions that followed, the Assassins all surround the Balladeer, transforming him into Lee Harvey Oswald).\nThe scene changes to the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository. The ghosts of John Wilkes Booth, Leon Czolgosz, Charles Guiteau, and the other \"would be\" assassins including John Hinckley, Giuseppe Zangara, Samuel Byck, Lynette \"Squeaky\" Fromme, and Sara Jane Moore, appear before a suicidally depressed and aggressive Lee Harvey Oswald, and convince him that the only way for him to truly connect with his country is to share his pain and disillusionment with it. They slowly and carefully attempt to convince him not to become his own victim and to instead assassinate John F. Kennedy. Booth tells Oswald that by joining them he will finally make a difference, but Oswald refuses. Booth tells him that in the future, when Hinckley's room is searched, Oswald's biographies will be found. Booth tells Oswald that the key to the future is in his hands. Oswald tries to leave, but Zangara addresses him passionately in Italian, his words translated by the other assassins, imploring him to act so their own acts can come alive again. They tell him that he has the power to cause worldwide grief and inspire global passion about himself, a man the world has never cared or heard about. Calling themselves his family, the assassins sing, imploring Oswald to act. He crouches at the window and shoots (\"November 22, 1963\").\nAfter the assassinations, a group of citizens from different time periods recount what they were doing when they heard that the President had been killed and lament that even though only a single man died, the nation has changed forever (\"Something Just Broke\").\nThe assassins regroup once more at the shooting range, now with Oswald among their ranks, and they proudly restate their motto, \"Everybody's got the right to be happy,\" before loading their guns and opening fire on the audience (\"Everybody's Got the Right (Reprise)\").\nThemes.\nSacrificing for the greater good / fighting against political injustice.\nAccording to Valerie Lynn Schrader, out of the nine assassins in the musical, six of them (John Wilkes Booth, Giuseppe Zangara, Leon Czolgosz, Charles Guiteau, Lynette \"Squeaky\" Fromme, and Samuel Byck) are motivated to assassinate their targets due to \"political injustice and sacrifice for the greater good,\" and among the six assassins, Booth and Czolgosz have been portrayed to have such motives as their primary reason for their assassination.\nIn the musical, John Wilkes Booth believes that his assassination on President Abraham Lincoln is for the greater good (and is an act of patriotism), which is \"supported historically: the Ford\u2019s Theatre Museum notes that Booth was part of a conspiracy to assassinate President Lincoln, Vice President Andrew Johnson, and Secretary of State William H. Seward in order to put the Union in a state of disarray and anarchy.\" Raymond Knapp states that Booth's motivation is \"conveyed musically, self-servingly by his own singing in a quasi-hymnic, sometimes inspirational style,\" based on the 1991 original Off-Broadway Version.\nIn the scene before \"The Gun Song\", the anarchist Emma Goldman inspires Leon Czolgosz to take action in light of his anarchist beliefs and the \"societal injustice\" that he has noticed. In \"The Gun Song\", Czolgosz has a \"moody contemplation of how one gun connects backward to the many lifes it consumes in its manufacture,\" and later he claims that \"[a] gun claims many men before it's done. Just one more,\" referring to his assassination target, President William McKinley. The political injustice in Czolgosz's timeline would be the \"class inequalities in America.\"\nDesiring attention.\nMany assassins in the musical have lines reflecting their need for attention, and according to Wang, \"what unites each of the assassins is the desire for attention.\" In \"How I Saved Roosevelt,\" Giuseppe Zangara is extremely angry about not having a photographer even at his execution: \"and why there no photographers? For Zangara no photographers! Only capitalists get photographers!\" Another assassin, Sara Jane Moore, \"proclaims that one of her motives was 'so that her friends would know where [she] was coming from.'\"\nLynette \"Squeaky\" Fromme and John Hinckley Jr. are described as a \"loving couple\" in the musical, but the love that they show is in order to try to draw attention from two different persons. Unlike some assassins such as Zangara whose goals might reflect many of the themes of the musical, these two assassins have only one motive - to get attention from the person they love (for Fromme, it is Charles Manson; for Hinckley, it is Jodie Foster). In the short monologue before the song \"Unworthy of Your Love\", Hinckley states that \"[he] will win [Foster's] love, now and for all eternity.\"\nIdealism and optimism.\nThis theme is mainly represented by Charles Guiteau. His idealism and optimism might make audience members \"feel more sympathy for Guiteau than for some of the other assassins.\" Throughout the musical, Guiteau has lines and lyrics which show his idealism and optimism towards his life and the world. The quartet \"The Gun Song\", which Guiteau participates in, and the song \"The Ballad of Guiteau\" both portray him as an optimist while others are depicted as dark and not so optimistic. For example, in \"The Gun Song\", Guiteau \"waltzes in cheerfully, holding a gun up admiringly, and declares: 'What a wonder is a gun! What a versatile invention,'\" while Czolgosz just states that \"[he hates] this gun.\" Guiteau's idealism is delusional, an exuberant but transparently flimsy cover for decidedly more earthly and self-interested ambition, and when his desires are thwarted, he gets angry. For example, he angrily shouts to Moore that \"[he wants a kiss]\" after Moore has already turned him down, and he assassinates President Garfield when denied the ambassadorship to France. His idealism and optimism are shown even in his execution scene (in \"The Ballad of Guiteau\"): he believes that \"[he] shall be remembered\" for assassinating President Garfield.\nPain, desperation, and disillusionment.\nPain and desperation are central to Zangara's character: he is portrayed as a poor immigrant who suffers a very strong stomachache. In \"How I Saved Roosevelt\", Zangara's stomach pain and his desperation about not being able to cure his stomachache turn into his anger and hatred towards the upper class. According to Schrader, the real-life Moore attempted her assassination due to political reasons, yet in the musical, she does so due to an entirely different one: she is so frustrated and desperate about \"how to understand and express herself\" that she takes \"drastic action.\" On the other hand, Byck's assassination attempt on President Richard Nixon is also to \"satisfy his personal frustrations.\" His solo scene, titled \"Have It Your Way\" in the 2004 Broadway cast recording, presents his pain and disillusionment through his words and emotional expressions.\nUnlike all the other assassins in the musical, Lee Harvey Oswald is portrayed as a desperate man attempting to commit suicide and as the only assassin who had no intention of killing a president.\" In the scene corresponding to this (the original 1991 Off-Broadway version is called \"November 22, 1963\"), Booth, as the leader of all assassins, tries to convince Oswald to assassinate President John F. Kennedy instead of committing suicide using countless tactics, yet he has to rely on other assassins to ultimately convince Oswald to do so. Schrader argues that \"audience members who have encountered depression may find a level of consubstantiality with [him], at least until he is convinced to commit murder.\"\nCommunity.\nAs Schrader states, \"Mark Fulk and Angela Howard suggest that 'family' is \"Assassins\"' central metaphor, particularly noting that family is 'the central concept that binds the group of American assassins and would-be assassins.'\"\nIn the scene \"November 22, 1963\", the assassins join together in order to persuade Oswald to assassinate President John F. Kennedy while assuring him that he can \"connect\" to the other assassins. In addition, the assassins interact with each other despite coming from different time periods, in the scene \"Ladies and Gentlemen a Toast\", the scene \"I Am a Terrifying and Imposing Figure\", and the songs \"Everybody's Got the Right\", \"Another National Anthem\", and \"Everybody's Got the Right (Reprise)\".\nComparing the 1991 original production with other later versions, there is one song later added the musical, \"Something Just Broke\". This song is an assassin-free one, where five bystanders mourn the assassinated Presidents. These bystanders have different occupations and are in different timelines, yet are brought together by the assassination tragedies, indicating a sense of community among them.\nVersions.\nThe three versions of \"Assassins\" (original, London, and Broadway) are not identical, as some roles were combined, and the song \"Something Just Broke\" was new to the London production. In 1991, Theatre Communications Group published the libretto, which did not feature \"Something Just Broke\".\nThe current licensed version of the musical reflects the 2004 Broadway revival. Although the script does not combine The Balladeer and Oswald into a single role, many productions have followed the revival in doing so.\nMusical numbers.\n\"Notes:\"\n+ In the original production, the lead part among the Assassins for \"Another National Anthem\" is sung by Byck. However, in the revised 2004 score, the lead is sung by the Proprietor.\nAdded for the 1992 London producti.\nCultural impact.\nSondheim said that he expected backlash from the public due to the content. \"There are always people who think that certain subjects are not right for musicals...[w]e're not going to apologize for dealing with such a volatile subject. Nowadays, virtually everything goes,\" he told \"The New York Times\". He later wrote in Look I Made a Hat: Collected Lyrics (1981\u20132011) that \"\"Assassins\" has only one moment I\u2019d like to improve. . . . Otherwise, as far as I\u2019m concerned, the show is perfect. Immodest that may sound, but I\u2019m ready to argue it with anybody.\"\n\"Assassins\" was featured in episode 6 of Netflix's \"The Politician\". In the show, they are performing in a school production of the musical, which parallels events occurring in their own lives. The episode included a cover of \"Unworthy of Your Love\", sung by Ben Platt and Zoey Deutch.\nIn March 2025, a production of \"Assassins\" was canceled mid-run at Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois due to student backlash over the use of the N-word by the in-show character John Wilkes Booth. In response to the campus theatre troupe's disclaimer placed on their Instagram page prior to performances warning of \"potentially unsettling content in the musical\" for those who may find it objectionable or offensive, the University paper \"The Daily Northwestern\" published objections to the show. The article claimed: \"using that word in that statement is a form of violence,\" a \"racist action\" with \"nothing else to defend it,\" \"disregarding of the humanity,\" that \"reflects a failure to consider the lived experiences of Black students.\" Northwestern law professor, Andrew Koppelman, rebutted: \"The cancellation was part of a misguided effort to fight racism, and it is a window into how counterproductive such efforts have sometimes become.\" Subsequently, Professor of Law Emeritus and Distinguished Research Professor at UCLA School of Law, Eugene Volokh, wrote: \"This is a disaster both for education at the university where I teach and for the effort to actually do something about the genuine evils that Black Americans suffer in American society. In its small way, this misguided campaign has contributed to systemic racism.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nOriginal Broadway production.\nAlthough \"Assassins\" had not run on Broadway prior to 2004, the 1992 London production and 1991 Off-Broadway production led to a ruling by the Tony Awards Administration Committee that the musical is a revival instead of an original musical.\nRecordings.\nRecordings of both the Off-Broadway production and the 2004 revival were released. The original Off-Broadway version lacks the song \"Something Just Broke\", which was added to the show for the subsequent London production. The 1990 recording does however include the full 11-minute spoken-word climactic scene \"November 22, 1963\". The 2004 Broadway recording adds \"Something Just Broke\" and several dialogue sections but only includes the second half of the \"November 1963\" scene.\nWhile the original Off-Broadway production used just three musicians, the 1990 cast album was fully orchestrated by Michael Starobin, with 33 musicians directed by Paul Gemignani.\nThe 2021 Off-Broadway revival received its own cast recording on March 18, 2022, making it the third English language recording of the show. It includes the full score, and features the actor-musician cast members playing their respective instruments.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46443", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46443", "title": "Empirical validation", "text": ""}
{"id": "46446", "revid": "22678971", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46446", "title": "Prime Directive", "text": "Fictional Starfleet rule in Star Trek\nIn the fictional universe of \"Star Trek\", the Prime Directive (also known as \"Starfleet General Order 1\", and the \"non-interference directive\") is a guiding principle of Starfleet that prohibits its members from interfering with the natural development of alien civilizations. Its stated aim is to protect unprepared civilizations from the danger of starship crews introducing advanced technology, knowledge, and values before they are ready. Since its introduction in the first season of the , the directive has been featured in many \"Star Trek\" episodes as part of a moral question over how best to establish diplomatic relations with new alien worlds. \nThe Prime Directive.\nThe Prime Directive is one of many guidelines for Starfleet's mandate to explore the galaxy and \"seek out new life and new civilizations.\" Although the concept of the Prime Directive has been alluded to and paraphrased by many \"Star Trek\" characters during the television series and feature films, the text of the directive was only revealed to viewers in 2021 during the \"\" episode \"First Con-Tact\" set in 2383. Two sections of the text were shown, and are as follows:\nSection 1:\nStarfleet crew will obey the following with any civilization that has not achieved a commensurate level of technological and/or societal development as described in Appendix 1.\na) No identification of self or mission.\nb) No interference with the social, cultural, or technological development of said planet.\nc) No reference to space, other worlds, or advanced civilizations.\nd) The exception to this is if said society has already been exposed to the concepts listed herein. However, in that instance, section 2 applies.\nSection 2:\nIf said species has achieved the commensurate level of technological and/or societal development as described in Appendix 1, or has been exposed to the concepts listed in section 1, no Starfleet crew person will engage with said society or species without first gathering extensive information on the specific traditions, laws, and culture of that species civilization. Then Starfleet crew will obey the following.\na) If engaged with diplomatic relations with said culture, will stay within the confines of said culture's restrictions.\nb) No interference with the social development of said planet.\nThe Prime Directive was frequently applied to less developed planets which had not yet discovered warp travel or subspace communication technology. The Prime Directive was also sometimes applied to advanced civilizations that already knew of life on other worlds but were protected by empires outside the Federation's jurisdiction. First contact could be made by the Federation with alien worlds that had either discovered warp or were on the verge of it, or with highly advanced civilizations that simply hadn't ventured into space yet. In those cases, the Prime Directive was used as a general policy to not disrupt or interfere with their culture when establishing peaceful diplomatic relations.\nConsequences for violating the Prime Directive could range from a stern reprimand to a demotion, depending on the severity of the infraction. However, enforcement of these rules \u2013 and interpretations of the Prime Directive itself \u2013 varied greatly and were at the discretion of the commanding officer. In many instances, prominent Starfleet personnel like captains James T. Kirk, Jean-Luc Picard, Kathryn Janeway and Benjamin Sisko willingly broke the Prime Directive but faced no real punishment or consequence for doing so.\nHowever, the Prime Directive is not absolute. Starship captains have been known to violate it to protect their ships and crews, and certain Starfleet regulations such as The Omega Directive can even render it null and void in certain circumstances.\nCreation and evolution.\nCreation of the Prime Directive is generally credited to \"Original Series\" producer Gene L. Coon. Later writers have suggested that the Prime Directive was influenced by the Vietnam War or designed to show a civilization that had evolved beyond colonialism. This would have been consistent with Coon and \"Star Trek\" creator Gene Roddenberry's political outlooks, but the notion of science fictional first contact and its possible harms already had a decades-long history by 1966.\nCriticism.\nThe Prime Directive has been criticized in-universe because of the inconsistencies in which it is applied. In the \"TOS\" episodes \",\" \"For the World Is Hollow and I Have Touched the Sky,\" \"The Cloud Minders,\" \",\" \"The Return of the Archons,\" \"Space Seed\" and \"A Taste of Armageddon,\" the crew of the \"Enterprise\" either interferes with laws or customs of alien worlds or outright colonizes an alien planet to achieve a Federation objective, to save the lives of the crew, or to better the lives of the inhabitants.\nOut-of-universe criticisms focus on the above problems; that the Prime Directive is simply a plot device and is manipulated by the writers. Janet D. Stemwedel points out a potential conflict between the anti-colonialist intentions of the Federation and the \"ethical project of sharing a universe\" which would require \"a kind of reciprocity \u2014 even if your technological attainment is quite different, it means recognizing you are owed the same moral consideration.\" Stemwedel writes, \"If your concern is not to change the natural behavior or development of alien citizens at any cost, your best bet is to stay at home rather than to explore new worlds.\" Ars Technica asked lawyers to comment on the Prime Directive and other \"Star Trek\" legal issues. Criticism included interpreting the Prime Directive as a product of the Cold War environment in which Roddenberry wrote, as well as indicating that enforcement would be lacking.\nTemporal Prime Directive.\nThe \"Temporal Prime Directive\" is a fictional guideline for time travelers (from the past \"or\" future) from interfering in the natural development of a timeline.\nIn the \"TNG\" episode \"\", Picard compares the Prime Directive to a possible Temporal Prime Directive: \n\"Of course, you know of the Prime Directive, which tells us that we have no right to interfere with the natural evolution of alien worlds. Now I have sworn to uphold it, but nevertheless I have disregarded that directive on more than one occasion because I thought it was the right thing to do. Now, if you are holding on to some temporal equivalent of that directive, then isn't it possible that you have an occasion here to make an exception, to help me to choose, because it's the right thing to do?\"\nAs 31st-century time traveler Daniels revealed to Captain Jonathan Archer in the \" episode \", as time travel technology became practical, the Temporal Accords were established sometime before the 31st century, to allow the use of time travel for the purposes of studying history, while prohibiting the use of it to alter history.\nAs revealed in the \"Star Trek: Discovery\" episode \"Face the Strange\", the Temporal Prime Directive is still in effect in the late 32nd century.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46447", "revid": "42513980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46447", "title": "Scotch broth", "text": "Scottish soup\nScotch broth is a soup originating in Scotland. The principal ingredients (fresh or preserved as available) are usually barley, stewing or braising cuts of lamb, mutton or beef, root vegetables (such as carrots, swedes, or sometimes turnips), and dried pulses (most often split peas and red lentils). Cabbage and leeks are often added shortly before serving to preserve their texture, colour and flavours. The proportions and ingredients vary according to the recipe or availability. Scotch broth has been sold ready-prepared in tins for many years.\nHistory.\nIn the early 19th-century cookery book \"A New System of Domestic Cookery\" by Maria Rundell, \"Scotch Mutton Broth\" is made with mutton neck, skimmed and simmered around an hour before good-quality cuts of bone-in mutton are trimmed of their fat and added to the soup. After several hours, soup vegetables are added\u2014turnips, carrots and onion\u2014and simmered until just tender; finally, pre-soaked Scotch barley is added. The soup is served with a garnish of fresh parsley.\nAccording to Christian Isobel Johnstone, the mutton could be served on the side as a \"bouilli\" with caper sauce, parsley and butter, pickled cucumbers, or nasturtiums (edible flowers) with mustard and vinegar.\nIngredients.\nThe main ingredients are barley, stewing lamb or mutton, and root vegetables like swedes, potatoes, turnips and carrots. Dried beans are another common addition, as are cabbage and leeks, which can be added in later stages of cooking.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46448", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46448", "title": "War and Peace in Russia, 1796-1825", "text": ""}
{"id": "46455", "revid": "1310758862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46455", "title": "Corn soup", "text": "Soup made with corn\nCorn soup is a soup made of corn, typically sweet corn. Initially popular only in corn-producing areas of the world, the dish is now widespread because of greater corn distribution. Typical ingredients are corn cut from the cob, water, butter and flour, with salt and pepper for seasoning. Additional ingredients vary by region, and may include eggs.\nNative Americans.\nCorn, being a staple crop for many Native American tribes has led to corn soup being a primary food among them. M. R. Harrington reported that 1908 hulled-corn soup \"onno'kw\u01ce\"' was the most popular dish for the Seneca Indians (Native Americans). He also stated, \"[s]eldom do the Indians, pagan or Christian, meet for any function [...] without a kettle of onno'kw\u01ce', hot and savory, to regale the crowd\". The soup was served at religious events, the people getting a ladleful every time they encircled the kettle.\nList of corn soup dishes.\nSeveral types of soups are prepared using corn as a primary ingredient.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46459", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46459", "title": "Clam soup", "text": "Soup prepared with clams\nClam soup is a soup prepared using clams as a primary ingredient. Clam soup can be prepared as a thin, broth- or cream/milk-based soup and as a thicker, chowder-style soup. In Japan, hot miso soup prepared with clams is believed by some to be a cure for the hangover.\nOverview.\nClam soup is prepared using clams as a main ingredient. Additional ingredients can include carrot, celery, onion and other vegetables, vegetable broth or stock or other types of broths and stocks (such as fish stock) seasonings and spices, salt and pepper. Fresh or canned clams can be used to prepare the dish. Clam chowder is a well-known clam soup, but not all clam soups are chowders or have the thick consistency that chowders typically possess.\nIn Japan, hot miso soup with clams is a traditional hangover cure. Clams possess high levels of ornithine, an amino acid that some Japanese people believe reduces levels of stress, and \"helps improve liver function\u2014including detoxifying harmful substances like alcohol.\" A canned clam soup product named \"Power of 70\" claims to cure hangovers.\nVarieties.\nClam chowder.\nClam chowder is a clam soup prepared as a chowder, typically using a cream base. Several varieties of clam chowder exist. Manhattan clam chowder is a tomato-based soup prepared with vegetables and clams, but lacking cream or milk.\nJaecheop-guk.\nJaecheop-guk is a clear Korean soup made with small freshwater clams called \"jaecheop\" (\uc7ac\ucca9, \"Corbicula leana\"). It is a local specialty of the Gyeongsang Province where \"jaecheop\" are harvested, such as the lower reaches of Nakdong River, and river basins around Gimhae, Myeongji, Eumgung, and Hadan counties as well as places near the Suyeong River in Busan and the Seomjin River.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46461", "revid": "22604547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46461", "title": "Chicken soup", "text": "Soup made from chicken\nChicken soup is a soup made from chicken, simmered in water, usually with various other ingredients. The classic chicken soup consists of a clear chicken broth, often with pieces of chicken or vegetables; common additions are pasta, noodles, dumplings, carrots, potatoes, or grains such as rice and barley. Chicken soup is commonly considered a comfort food.\nHistory.\nHumans were already boiling food by the time that chicken was domesticated in the Neolithic period, so it is likely that chickens were being boiled for soup.\nModern American chicken soup, which typically includes root vegetables such as carrot, onion, leeks and celery, was a staple across Northern Europe and was brought to the United States by immigrants.\nPreparation.\nVariations on the flavor are gained by adding root vegetables such as parsnip, potato, sweet potato and celery root; herbs such as bay leaves, parsley and dill; other vegetables such as zucchini, whole garlic cloves, lettuce, or tomatoes; and black pepper. The soup should be brought slowly to a boil and then simmered in a covered pot on a very low flame for one to three hours, adding water if necessary. Saffron or turmeric are sometimes added as a yellow colorant.\nNutritional value.\nChicken soup can be a relatively low fat food: fat can be removed by chilling the soup after cooking and skimming the layer of congealed fat from the top. A study determined that \"prolonged cooking of a bone in soup increases the calcium content of the soup when cooked at an acidic, but not at a neutral pH\".\nTerminology.\nStrictly speaking, chicken soup, unless qualified, implies that the soup is served as a thin broth, with pieces of meat, and possibly vegetables, and either noodles, rice, barley, or dumplings.\nCream of chicken soup is a thick, creamy, soup made with chicken stock and pieces, combined with milk (or cream) and flour, which might contain vegetable pieces, depending on the recipe. \nSeveral terms are used when referring to chicken soups:\nHealth effects.\nChicken soup has long been touted as a form of folk medicine to treat respiratory infections, particularly the common cold and influenza. In 2000, scientists at the University of Nebraska Medical Center in Omaha studied the effect of chicken soup on the inflammatory response \"in vitro\". They found that some components of the chicken soup inhibit neutrophil migration, which may have an anti-inflammatory effect that could \"hypothetically\" lead to temporary ease from symptoms of illness. However, since these results have been obtained from purified cells (and directly applied), the diluted soup \"in vivo\" effect is debatable. \"The New York Times\" reviewed the University of Nebraska study, among others, in 2007 and concluded that \"none of the research is conclusive, and it is not known whether the changes measured in the laboratory really have a meaningful effect on people with cold symptoms.\"\nIt has also been shown that chicken soup contains the amino acid cysteine, which is very similar to acetylcysteine, which is used by doctors for patients with bronchitis and other respiratory infections.\nChicken soup is also known as \"Jewish penicillin\".\nIn different cultures.\nChina.\nMany Chinese soups are based on chicken broth. Typical Chinese chicken soup is made from old hens and is seasoned with ginger, scallions, black pepper, soy sauce, rice wine and sesame oil. A more elaborate version can be made from freshly killed spent hen and various herbs such as ginseng, dried goji, and old ginger root. The soup is then boiled for hours.\nColombia.\nBogot\u00e1, Colombia's capital, is known for a version of chicken soup called \"ajiaco\". Along with chicken, \"ajiaco\" typically includes maize, three types of potatoes, avocado, capers, and the herb \"guascas\", and is served with a dollop of cream.\n\"Sancocho de gallina\" is another popular dish throughout Colombia and in neighboring countries. This is a broth that includes entire pieces of (often rather tough) soup hen on the bone with large pieces of plantain, potato, cassava and/or other vegetables. A bowl of \"sancocho\" is usually an entire meal.\nDenmark.\nThe Danish \"h\u00f8nsek\u00f8dssuppe\" is traditionally cooked using large hens specifically reserved for soup, known as \"suppeh\u00f8ner\" (\"soup-hens\"). Vegetables like celeriac, carrots, onions and leek are usually added and typical flavourings are thyme, laurels and white pepper. The soup may be served with small white dumplings and meatballs. As part of traditional housekeeping, the cooked meat is reserved for other dishes such as \"h\u00f8ns i asparges\" (\"hens in asparagus\") or \"h\u00f8nsesalat\" (\"hens-salad\").\nFrance.\nThe French serve chicken-based forms of bouillon and consomm\u00e9. Typical French seasonings for chicken soup include bay leaves, fresh thyme, dry white wine and garlic.\nGermany.\nIn Germany, chicken soup is made with chicken broth, vegetables, such as carrots, spices and herbs and small noodles. For the broth, a large hen, called a \"Suppenhuhn\" (lit.: \"soup hen\"), may be boiled, and pieces of it\u2014especially from the boiled breast\u2014can later be added to the soup.\nIn southern Germany, homemade chicken soup typically consists of chicken broth, to which spices and semolina dumplings or noodles are added. Another dish made with chicken broth, pieces of chicken, boiled vegetables, and spices is known as \"H\u00fchnereintopf\", meaning \"chicken stew\". Alternatively, homemade noodles may be added to the chicken broth, without vegetables, and with only pickling spice, salt and pepper added.\nGhana.\nIn Ghana, chicken soup, also known as \"chicken light\" soup, is made by cooking chicken in a blended mixture of tomatoes, onions, pepper and other spices, and sometimes eggs; it is served primarily with fufu or on its own.\nGreece.\nIn Greece, chicken soup is most commonly made in the \"avgolemono\" (\"egg-lemon\") fashion, wherein beaten eggs mixed with lemon are added to a broth slowly so that the mixture heats up without curdling, also adding rice or pasta like \"krithar\u00e1ki\" (\"little barley;\" orzo), resulting in a thicker texture. It is a traditional remedy for colds, stomach aches, and hangovers.\nHungary.\nHungarian chicken soup is a clear soup, a consomm\u00e9, called \u00dajh\u00e1zi chicken soup. A consomm\u00e9 with entire pieces of chicken, chicken liver and heart, with chunky vegetables and spices like whole black peppercorn, bay leaves, salt and ground black pepper. The vegetables boiled along with the pieces of chicken are usually carrots, celeriac, parsley root and parsnip. Soup vermicelli, semolina dumplings or thin sp\u00e4tzle noodles or small dumplings are also added to the soup. Other vegetables may be used, such as green peas, a whole tomato and whole onions boiled along with the soup, mushrooms, asparagus, celery, green pepper, cauliflower, kohlrabi, green beans, or parsley, in different combinations.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, chicken soup might appear as \"sayur sop\", vegetable and chicken broth soup that contains chicken pieces, potato, green beans, carrot, celery, and fried shallot. Another chicken soup variant commonly found across the country is soto ayam; a turmeric yellow spicy chicken soup with vegetables and noodle or vermicelli, served with steamed rice, pieces of lontong or ketupat.\nItaly.\nIn Italy, chicken soup is often served with pasta, in such dishes as \"cappelletti in brodo\", \"tortellini in brodo\" and \"passatelli\". Even when served on its own, the meat and any vegetables used are usually removed from the broth and served as a second dish.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, chicken soup is known as \"torijiru\". Typically it starts with dashi, which is made from boiling konbu (kelp) and katsuobushi (dried skipjack tuna flakes), and not by boiling the chicken. After the dashi is prepared, pieces of boneless chicken thigh meat are usually used and combined with vegetables like daikon radish, carrot, burdock, konnyaku, welsh onion, mushrooms, potatoes, and taro root. At the end, different seasonings are added depending on the region of the country or type of soup. It could be a miso-based soup or soy sauce-based. Cooking sake, mirin, salt, and vinegar are also used with the soy sauce or miso. The pork equivalent called \"butajiru\" is more popular than the chicken-based soup.\nBone stocks for ramen are also often made with chicken stock, and it is almost invariably used in the less common \"kotteri\" variety.\nJewish (Ashkenazi).\nChicken soup, sometimes called \"Jewish penicillin\", is a traditional dish of the European Jewish kitchen. The Russian and Polish Jewish communities use a relatively high proportion of chicken stock for their soup, made mostly from the bones.\nThe soup is prepared with herbs such as parsley, fresh dill, and thyme. It is often served with \"matzah balls\", \"kreplach\" (dumplings), \"lokshen\" (flat egg noodles), or \"shkedei marak\" (soup nuts/mandlakh). A traditional garnish was \"eyerlekh\" (little eggs), unlaid chicken eggs taken from a hen and boiled in the soup.\"\" Modern health standards make these difficult to obtain now.\nKorea.\n\"Samgyetang\" is a Korean chicken soup with insam (Korean ginseng), daechu (dried jujube fruits), garlic, ginger, glutinous rice, and sometimes other medicinal herbs. It is believed to be not only a cure for physical ailments but also a preventer of sickness. \"Dak baeksuk\", a type of chicken broth with garlic, is also popular among Koreans. It is believed by some to help cure minor illnesses such as the common cold. Some types of baeksuk also contains noodles, similar to chicken noodle soup.\nMexico.\nCaldo de pollo, also known as consome de pollo, is a common Latin American soup made with whole chicken pieces instead of chopped or shredded chicken, and large cuts of vegetables, such as half-slices of potatoes and whole leaves of cabbage. Another variation of chicken soup is caldo tlalpe\u00f1o which is garnished with chopped avocado, white cheese, and a chipotle chile.\nPeru.\nAguadito de pollo is a traditional chicken soup in Peruvian cuisine consisting of chicken, cilantro, vegetables and spices.\nCaldo de gallina (lit., \"broth of hen\"), the Peruvian form of chicken soup, is made with whole pieces of chicken instead of chopped or shredded chicken, along with potatoes, egg noodles, and hard-boiled eggs. Lime wedges and chili or aji pepper paste are added as condiments.\nPhilippines.\nChicken soup in the Philippines is called \"sopas\" and has some western influences in it. While there are many variations in the recipe, it usually contains chicken strips in broth, onions, vegetables (mainly carrots, cabbage and celery), and macaroni noodles. It is cooked with evaporated milk to give it richer flavor. \"Sopas\" is normally associated with the cold, rainy season in the Philippines, and may thus be regarded as local comfort food.\nAnother chicken soup is called \"mami\" which its style derives from its other Asian neighboring countries, especially East Asia and normally served with sliced chicken, broth, noodles, chopped vegetables. Mami is also associated with the cold, rainy season as well.\nOther chicken dishes are considered soups. \"Tinola\" has chicken cuts in broth, with ginger, chayote, and chili pepper leaves. \"Sinampalukang manok\" is sometimes regarded as a chicken version of \"sinigang\", but here the meat is browned first before being boiled in the water and it uses tamarind leaves. \"Kadyos, manok, kag ubad\" from the Western Visayas uses pigeon peas and banana pith.\nPoland.\nThe Polish chicken soup is called ros\u00f3\u0142. It is commonly served with fine noodles, boiled carrots and parsley every Sunday. The broth is served separate from chicken meat.\nThere are many types of ros\u00f3\u0142, as:\nRos\u00f3\u0142 Kr\u00f3lewski (royal ros\u00f3\u0142), made of three meats: beef or veal, white poultry (hen, turkey or chicken) and dark poultry as duck, goose (crop only), just a couple of dried king boletes, one single cabbage leaf and a variety of vegetables such as (parsley, celery, carrot, and leek). The cooking must take at least six hours of sensitive boiling over a small fire. At the end, softly burnt onion is added to the soup.\nRos\u00f3\u0142 my\u015bliwski (The hunter's ros\u00f3\u0142) is made of a variety of wild birds as well as pheasant, capercaillie, wood grouse, black grouse, or grey partridge, with a small addition of roe deer meat, a couple of wild mushrooms, and 2\u20133 juniper fruits.\nPortugal and Brazil.\nChicken soup is known as canja, a chicken broth prepared with rice or pasta and shredded chicken meat. It is believed to help a person overcome colds and digestive problems, among other mild forms of sickness.\nRomania and Moldova.\nIn most regions of Romania, chicken soup known as sup\u0103 de pui consists of a clear or dense sour soup with strained chicken and vegetable broth, and either noodles (t\u0103ie\u021bei) or dumplings (g\u0103lu\u0219te) are added. Different versions use pieces of chicken and pieces of boiled vegetables (like onion, carrot, parsnip, celery, zucchini, peas, beans, leaves and root of parsley or peppers) and are seasoned usually with sour cream (sm\u00e2nt\u00e2n\u0103), tomato juice, lemon juice, or bor\u0219.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan-style chicken soup, dried jujube fruits, dried shiitake, and other various herbs are also sometimes added. While it may be possible to use regular ginseng in the recipe, a special type of ginseng called san qi is commonly used. This is grown almost exclusively in Wenshan County, Yunnan Province. The roots are powdered for ease of use, although it may also be possible to use the flowerheads.\nRussia and Ukraine.\nEast Slavs traditionally prefer an often simple chicken and vegetable bouillon with added noodles or rice, and a pinch of fresh herbs. Another type of chicken soup includes chicken, noodles, carrot, potato and onion. Some cooks add chopped boiled egg and even sour cream to their variations of the soup.\nUnited Kingdom.\nTraditionally, chicken soup in Britain is a thick broth with chunky vegetables (such as leeks, carrot, celery and onion), chicken, salt and pepper. However, a thick, creamy variety called cream of chicken soup, which may not contain any vegetable pieces (depending on the recipe), is more popular today. A distinct version from Scotland that has become popular throughout the UK is cock-a-leekie soup, a clear, thin broth of shredded chicken and leeks.\nUnited States and Canada.\nIn the United States and Canada, chicken soup often has noodles or rice in it, thus giving it its common name of \"chicken noodle soup\". The term may have been first used in advertising by the Campbell Soup Company in the 1930s. The original 21 varieties of Campbell's condensed soup featured a \"chicken soup with noodles\", but when it was advertised on the \"Amos 'n' Andy\" radio show in the 1930s by a slip of the tongue the soup was referred to as \"chicken noodle soup\". Traditionally, American chicken soup was prepared using old hens, with meat too tough and stringy to be roasted or cooked for a short time. In modern times, these fowl are difficult to come by, and broiler chickens (young chickens suitable for roasting or broiling) are often used in preparation of soup.\nCanned chicken soup.\nOften (but not always) sold as a condensed soup, canned chicken soup such as Campbell's Chicken Noodle Soup, is notable for its high sodium content: 890\u00a0mg per &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 cup serving. This gives a &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1+1\u20442 cup bowl of soup about 2,500\u00a0mg of sodium, a full day's allowance in the case of this mainstream brand. Other condensed chicken soups produced by Campbell's, such as Chicken with Rice or Chicken &amp; Stars Soup, have similar amounts, as do generic versions of the product.\nCanned chicken soup with much less sodium than the traditional formulation is available, including many varieties produced by Campbell's, some with as little as 100\u00a0mg of sodium. Campbell's claims production of a chicken noodle soup that will find broad consumer acceptance\u2014in short, that will sell\u2014is very difficult, so it has to balance healthfulness with sodium content.\nUsually, the main ingredients of this canned soup are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46462", "revid": "204692", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46462", "title": "Chicken broth", "text": ""}
{"id": "46464", "revid": "1263751768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46464", "title": "EPC", "text": "EPC may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46466", "revid": "22041646", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46466", "title": "Hatfield, England", "text": ""}
{"id": "46469", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46469", "title": "Image compression", "text": "Reduction of image size to save storage and transmission costs\nImage compression is a type of data compression applied to digital images, to reduce their cost for storage or transmission. Algorithms may take advantage of visual perception and the statistical properties of image data to provide superior results compared with generic data compression methods which are used for other digital data.\nLossy and lossless image compression.\nImage compression may be lossy or lossless. Lossless compression is preferred for archival purposes and often for medical imaging, technical drawings, clip art, or comics. Lossy compression methods, especially when used at low bit rates, introduce compression artifacts. Lossy methods are especially suitable for natural images such as photographs in applications where minor (sometimes imperceptible) loss of fidelity is acceptable to achieve a substantial reduction in bit rate. Lossy compression that produces negligible differences may be called visually lossless.\nMethods for lossy compression:\nMethods for lossless compression:\nOther properties.\nThe best image quality at a given compression rate (or bit rate) is the main goal of image compression, however, there are other important properties of image compression schemes:\nScalability generally refers to a quality reduction achieved by manipulation of the bitstream or file (without decompression and re-compression). Other names for scalability are \"progressive coding\" or \"embedded bitstreams\". Despite its contrary nature, scalability also may be found in lossless codecs, usually in form of coarse-to-fine pixel scans. Scalability is especially useful for previewing images while downloading them (e.g., in a web browser) or for providing variable quality access to e.g., databases. There are several types of scalability:\nRegion of interest coding. Certain parts of the image are encoded with higher quality than others. This may be combined with scalability (encode these parts first, others later).\nMeta information. Compressed data may contain information about the image which may be used to categorize, search, or browse images. Such information may include color and texture statistics, small preview images, and author or copyright information.\nProcessing power. Compression algorithms require different amounts of processing power to encode and decode. Some high compression algorithms require high processing power.\nThe quality of a compression method often is measured by the peak signal-to-noise ratio. It measures the amount of noise introduced through a lossy compression of the image, however, the subjective judgment of the viewer also is regarded as an important measure, perhaps, being the most important measure.\nHistory.\nEntropy coding started in the late 1940s with the introduction of Shannon\u2013Fano coding, the basis for Huffman coding which was published in 1952. Transform coding dates back to the late 1960s, with the introduction of fast Fourier transform (FFT) coding in 1968 and the Hadamard transform in 1969.\nAn important development in image data compression was the discrete cosine transform (DCT), a lossy compression technique first proposed by Nasir Ahmed, T. Natarajan and K. R. Rao in 1973. JPEG was introduced by the Joint Photographic Experts Group (JPEG) in 1992. JPEG compresses images down to much smaller file sizes, and has become the most widely used image file format. JPEG was largely responsible for the wide proliferation of digital images and digital photos, with several billion JPEG images produced every day as of 2015.\nLempel\u2013Ziv\u2013Welch (LZW) is a lossless compression algorithm developed by Abraham Lempel, Jacob Ziv and Terry Welch in 1984. It is used in the GIF format, introduced in 1987. DEFLATE, a lossless compression algorithm developed by Phil Katz and specified in 1996, is used in the Portable Network Graphics (PNG) format.\nThe JPEG 2000 standard was developed from 1997 to 2000 by a JPEG committee chaired by Touradj Ebrahimi (later the JPEG president). In contrast to the DCT algorithm used by the original JPEG format, JPEG 2000 instead uses discrete wavelet transform (DWT) algorithms. It uses the CDF 9/7 wavelet transform (developed by Ingrid Daubechies in 1992) for its lossy compression algorithm, and the Le Gall\u2013Tabatabai (LGT) 5/3 wavelet transform (developed by Didier Le Gall and Ali J. Tabatabai in 1988) for its lossless compression algorithm. JPEG 2000 technology, which includes the Motion JPEG 2000 extension, was selected as the video coding standard for digital cinema in 2004.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46470", "revid": "1319043549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46470", "title": "Crop rotation", "text": "Agricultural practice of changing crops\nCrop rotation is the practice of growing a series of different types of crops in the same area across a sequence of growing seasons. This practice reduces the reliance of crops on one set of nutrients, pest and weed pressure, along with the probability of developing resistant pests and weeds.\nGrowing the same crop in the same place for many years in a row, known as monocropping, gradually depletes the soil of certain nutrients and promotes the proliferation of specialized pest and weed populations adapted to that crop system. Without balancing nutrient use and diversifying pest and weed communities, the productivity of monocultures is highly dependent on external inputs that may be harmful to the soil's fertility. Conversely, a well-designed crop rotation can reduce the need for synthetic fertilizers and herbicides by better using ecosystem services from a diverse set of crops. Additionally, crop rotations can improve soil structure and organic matter, which reduces erosion and increases farm system resilience.\nHistory.\nFarmers have long recognized that suitable rotations such as planting spring crops for livestock in place of grains for human consumption make it possible to restore or to maintain productive soils. Ancient Near Eastern farmers practiced crop rotation in 6000 BC, alternately planting legumes and cereals.\nTwo-field systems.\nUnder a two-field rotation, half the land was planted in a year, while the other half lay fallow. Then, in the next year, the two fields were reversed. In China both the two- and three-field systems had been used since the Eastern Zhou period.\nThree-field systems.\nFrom the 9th century to the 11th century, farmers in Europe transitioned from a two-field system to a three-field system. This system persisted until the 20th century. Available land was divided into three sections. One section was planted in the autumn with rye or winter wheat, followed by spring oats or barley; the second section grew crops such as one of the legumes, namely peas, lentils, or beans; and the third field was left fallow. The three fields were rotated in this manner so that every three years, one of the fields would rest and lie fallow. Under the two-field system, only half the land was planted in any year. Under the new three-field rotation system, two thirds of the land was planted, potentially yielding a larger harvest. But the additional crops had a more significant effect than mere quantitative productivity. Since the spring crops were mostly legumes, which fix nitrogen needed for plants to make proteins, they increased the overall nutrition of the people of Europe.\nFour-field rotations.\nThe British agriculturist Charles Townshend (1674\u20131738) popularised this system in the 18th century. The sequence of four crops (wheat, turnips, barley and clover), included a fodder crop and a grazing crop, allowing livestock to be bred year-round. The four-field crop rotation became a key development in the British Agricultural Revolution.\nModern developments.\nIn the Green Revolution of the mid-20th century, crop rotation gave way in the developed world to the practice of supplementing the chemical inputs to the soil through topdressing with fertilizers, adding (for example) ammonium nitrate or urea and restoring soil pH with lime. Such practices aimed to increase yields, to prepare soil for specialist crops, and to reduce waste and inefficiency by simplifying planting, harvesting, and irrigation.\nCrop choice.\nA preliminary assessment of crop interrelationships can be found in how each crop:\nCrop choice is often related to the goal the farmer is looking to achieve with the rotation, which could be weed management, increasing available nitrogen in the soil, controlling for erosion, or increasing soil structure and biomass, to name a few. When discussing crop rotations, crops are classified in different ways depending on what quality is being assessed: by family, by nutrient needs/benefits, and/or by profitability (i.e. cash crop versus cover crop). For example, giving adequate attention to plant family is essential to mitigating pests and pathogens. However, many farmers have success managing rotations by planning sequencing and cover crops around desirable cash crops. The following is a simplified classification based on crop quality and purpose.\nRow crops.\nMany crops which are critical for the market, like vegetables, are row crops (that is, grown in tight rows). While often the most profitable for farmers, these crops are more taxing on the soil. Row crops typically have low biomass and shallow roots: this means the plant contributes low residue to the surrounding soil and has limited effects on structure. With much of the soil around the plant exposed to disruption by rainfall and traffic, fields with row crops experience faster break down of organic matter by microbes, leaving fewer nutrients for future plants.\nIn short, while these crops may be profitable for the farm, they are nutrient depleting. Crop rotation practices exist to strike a balance between short-term profitability and long-term productivity.\nLegumes.\nA great advantage of crop rotation comes from the interrelationship of nitrogen-fixing crops with nitrogen-demanding crops. Legumes, like alfalfa and clover, collect available nitrogen from the atmosphere and store it in nodules on their root structure. When the plant is harvested, the biomass of uncollected roots breaks down, making the stored nitrogen available to future crops.\nGrasses and cereals.\nCereal and grasses are frequent cover crops because of the many advantages they supply to soil quality and structure. The dense and far-reaching root systems give ample structure to surrounding soil and provide significant biomass for soil organic matter.\nGrasses and cereals are key in weed management as they compete with undesired plants for soil space and nutrients.\nGreen manure.\nGreen manure is a crop that is mixed into the soil. Both nitrogen-fixing legumes and nutrient scavengers, like grasses, can be used as green manure. Green manure of legumes is an excellent source of nitrogen, especially for organic systems, however, legume biomass does not contribute to lasting soil organic matter like grasses do.\nPlanning a rotation.\nThere are numerous factors that must be taken into consideration when planning a crop rotation. Planning an effective rotation requires weighing fixed and fluctuating production circumstances: market, farm size, labor supply, climate, soil type, growing practices, etc. Moreover, a crop rotation must consider in what condition one crop will leave the soil for the succeeding crop and how one crop can be seeded with another crop. For example, a nitrogen-fixing crop, like a legume, should always precede a nitrogen depleting one; similarly, a low residue crop (i.e. a crop with low biomass) should be offset with a high biomass cover crop, like a mixture of grasses and legumes.\nThere is no limit to the number of crops that can be used in a rotation, or the amount of time a rotation takes to complete. Decisions about rotations are made years prior, seasons prior, or even at the last minute when an opportunity to increase profits or soil quality presents itself.\nImplementation.\nRelationship to other systems.\nCrop rotation systems may be enriched by other practices such as the addition of livestock and manure, and by growing more than one crop at a time in a field. A monoculture is a crop grown by itself in a field. A polyculture involves two or more crops growing in the same place at the same time. Crop rotations can be applied to both monocultures and polycultures, resulting in multiple ways of increasing agricultural biodiversity (table).\nIncorporation of livestock.\nIntroducing livestock makes the most efficient use of critical sod and cover crops; livestock (through manure) are able to distribute the nutrients in these crops throughout the soil rather than removing nutrients from the farm through the sale of hay.\nMixed farming or the practice of crop cultivation with the incorporation of livestock can help manage crops in a rotation and cycle nutrients. Crop residues provide animal feed, while the animals provide manure for replenishing crop nutrients and draft power. These processes promote internal nutrient cycling and minimize the need for synthetic fertilizers and large-scale machinery. As an additional benefit, the cattle, sheep and/or goat provide milk and can act as a cash crop in the times of economic hardship.\nPolyculture.\nPolyculture systems, such as intercropping or companion planting, offer more diversity and complexity within the same season or rotation. An example is the Three Sisters, the inter-planting of corn with pole beans and vining squash or pumpkins. In this system, the beans provide nitrogen; the corn provides support for the beans and a \"screen\" against squash vine borer; the vining squash provides a weed suppressive canopy and a discouragement for corn-hungry raccoons.\nDouble-cropping is common where two crops, typically of different species, are grown sequentially in the same growing season, or where one crop (e.g. vegetable) is grown continuously with a cover crop (e.g. wheat). This is advantageous for small farms, which often cannot afford to leave cover crops to replenish the soil for extended periods of time, as larger farms can. When multiple cropping is implemented on small farms, these systems can maximize benefits of crop rotation on available land resources.\nOrganic farming.\nCrop rotation is a required practice, in the United States, for farms seeking organic certification. The \u201cCrop Rotation Practice Standard\u201d for the National Organic Program under the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, section \u00a7205.205, states that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn addition to lowering the need for inputs (by controlling for pests and weeds and increasing available nutrients), crop rotation helps organic growers increase the amount of biodiversity their farms. Biodiversity is also a requirement of organic certification, however, there are no rules in place to regulate or reinforce this standard. Increasing the biodiversity of crops has beneficial effects on the surrounding ecosystem and can host a greater diversity of fauna, insects, and beneficial microorganisms in the soil as found by McDaniel et al 2014 and Lori et al 2017. Some studies point to increased nutrient availability from crop rotation under organic systems compared to conventional practices as organic practices are less likely to inhibit of beneficial microbes in soil organic matter.\nWhile multiple cropping and intercropping benefit from many of the same principals as crop rotation, they do not satisfy the requirement under the NOP.\nBenefits.\nAgronomists describe the benefits to yield in rotated crops as \"The Rotation Effect\". The factors related to the increase are broadly due to alleviation of the negative factors of monoculture cropping systems. Specifically, improved nutrition; pest, pathogen, and weed stress reduction; and improved soil structure have been found in some cases to be correlated to beneficial rotation effects.\nOther benefits include reduced production cost. Overall financial risks are more widely distributed over more diverse production of crops and/or livestock. Less reliance is placed on purchased inputs and over time crops can maintain production goals with fewer inputs. This in tandem with greater short and long term yields makes rotation a powerful tool for improving agricultural systems.\nSoil organic matter.\nThe use of different species in rotation allows for increased soil organic matter (SOM), greater soil structure, and improvement of the chemical and biological soil environment for crops. With more SOM, water infiltration and retention improves, providing increased drought tolerance and decreased erosion.\nSoil organic matter is a mix of decaying material from biomass with active microorganisms. Crop rotation, by nature, increases exposure to biomass from sod, green manure, and various other plant debris. The reduced need for intensive tillage under crop rotation allows biomass aggregation to lead to greater nutrient retention and utilization, decreasing the need for added nutrients. With tillage, disruption and oxidation of soil creates a less conducive environment for diversity and proliferation of microorganisms in the soil. These microorganisms are what make nutrients available to plants. So, where \"active\" soil organic matter is a key to productive soil, soil with low microbial activity provides significantly fewer nutrients to plants; this is true even though the quantity of biomass left in the soil may be the same.\nSoil microorganisms also decrease pathogen and pest activity through competition. In addition, plants produce root exudates and other chemicals which manipulate their soil environment as well as their weed environment. Thus rotation allows increased yields from nutrient availability but also alleviation of allelopathy and competitive weed environments.\nCarbon sequestration.\nCrop rotations greatly increase soil organic carbon (SOC) content, the main constituent of soil organic matter. Carbon, along with hydrogen and oxygen, is a macronutrient for plants. Highly diverse rotations spanning long periods of time have shown to be even more effective in increasing SOC, while soil disturbances (e.g. from tillage) are responsible for exponential decline in SOC levels. In Brazil, conversion to no-till methods combined with intensive crop rotations has been shown an SOC sequestration rate of 0.41 tonnes per hectare per year.\nIn addition to enhancing crop productivity, sequestration of atmospheric carbon has great implications in reducing rates of climate change by removing carbon dioxide from the air.\nNitrogen fixing.\nRotations can add nutrients to the soil. Legumes, plants of the family Fabaceae, have nodules on their roots which contain nitrogen-fixing bacteria called rhizobia. During a process called nodulation, the rhizobia bacteria use nutrients and water provided by the plant to convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia, which is then converted into an organic compound that the plant can use as its nitrogen source. It therefore makes good sense agriculturally to alternate them with cereals (family Poaceae) and other plants that require nitrates. How much nitrogen made available to the plants depends on factors such as the kind of legume, the effectiveness of rhizobia bacteria, soil conditions, and the availability of elements necessary for plant food.\nPathogen and pest control.\nCrop rotation helps to control pests and diseases that can become established in the soil over time. The changing of crops in a sequence decreases the population level of pests by (1) interrupting pest life cycles and (2) interrupting pest habitat. Plants within the same taxonomic family tend to have similar pests and pathogens. By regularly changing crops and keeping the soil occupied by cover crops instead of lying fallow, pest cycles can be broken or limited, especially cycles that benefit from overwintering in residue. This principle is used in organic farming, where pest control must be achieved without synthetic pesticides.\nWeed management.\nIntegrating certain crops, especially cover crops, into crop rotations is of particular value to weed management. These crops crowd out weeds through competition. In addition, the sod and compost from cover crops and green manure slows the growth of what weeds are still able to make it through the soil, giving the crops further competitive advantage. By slowing the growth and proliferation of weeds while cover crops are cultivated, farmers greatly reduce the presence of weeds for future crops, including shallow rooted and row crops, which are less resistant to weeds. Cover crops are, therefore, considered conservation crops because they protect otherwise fallow land from becoming overrun with weeds.\nThis system has advantages over other common practices for weeds management, such as tillage. Tillage is meant to inhibit growth of weeds by overturning the soil; however, this has a countering effect of exposing weed seeds that may have gotten buried and burying valuable crop seeds. Under crop rotation, the number of viable seeds in the soil is reduced through the reduction of the weed population.\nIn addition to their negative impact on crop quality and yield, weeds can slow down the harvesting process. Weeds make farmers less efficient when harvesting, because weeds like bindweeds, and knotgrass, can become tangled in the equipment, resulting in a stop-and-go type of harvest.\nReducing soil erosion.\nCrop rotation can significantly reduce the amount of soil lost from erosion by water. In areas that are highly susceptible to erosion, farm management practices such as zero and reduced tillage can be supplemented with specific crop rotation methods to reduce raindrop impact, sediment detachment, sediment transport, surface runoff, and soil loss.\nProtection against soil loss is maximized with rotation methods that leave the greatest mass of crop stubble (plant residue left after harvest) on top of the soil. Stubble cover in contact with the soil minimizes erosion from water by reducing overland flow velocity, stream power, and thus the ability of the water to detach and transport sediment. Soil erosion and seal prevent the disruption and detachment of soil aggregates that cause macropores to block, infiltration to decline, and runoff to increase. This significantly improves the resilience of soils when subjected to periods of erosion and stress.\nWhen a forage crop breaks down, binding products are formed that act like an adhesive on the soil, which makes particles stick together, and form aggregates. The formation of soil aggregates is important for erosion control, as they are better able to resist raindrop impact, and water erosion. Soil aggregates also reduce wind erosion, because they are larger particles, and are more resistant to abrasion through tillage practices.\nThe effect of crop rotation on erosion control varies by climate. In regions under relatively consistent climate conditions, where annual rainfall and temperature levels are assumed, rigid crop rotations can produce sufficient plant growth and soil cover. In regions where climate conditions are less predictable, and unexpected periods of rain and drought may occur, a more flexible approach for soil cover by crop rotation is necessary. An opportunity cropping system promotes adequate soil cover under these erratic climate conditions. In an opportunity cropping system, crops are grown when soil water is adequate and there is a reliable sowing window. This form of cropping system is likely to produce better soil cover than a rigid crop rotation because crops are only sown under optimal conditions, whereas rigid systems are not necessarily sown in the best conditions available.\nCrop rotations also affect the timing and length of when a field is subject to fallow. This is very important because depending on a particular region's climate, a field could be the most vulnerable to erosion when it is under fallow. Efficient fallow management is an essential part of reducing erosion in a crop rotation system. Zero tillage is a fundamental management practice that promotes crop stubble retention under longer unplanned fallows when crops cannot be planted. Such management practices that succeed in retaining suitable soil cover in areas under fallow will ultimately reduce soil loss. In a recent study that lasted a decade, it was found that a common winter cover crop after potato harvest such as fall rye can reduce soil run-off by as much as 43%, and this is typically the most nutritional soil.\nBiodiversity.\nIncreasing the biodiversity of crops has beneficial effects on the surrounding ecosystem and can host a greater diversity of fauna, insects, and beneficial microorganisms in the soil as found by McDaniel et al 2014 and Lori et al 2017. Some studies point to increased nutrient availability from crop rotation under organic systems compared to conventional practices as organic practices are less likely to inhibit of beneficial microbes in soil organic matter, such as arbuscular mycorrhizae, which increase nutrient uptake in plants. Increasing biodiversity also increases the resilience of agro-ecological systems.\nFarm productivity.\nCrop rotation contributes to increased yields through improved soil nutrition. By requiring planting and harvesting of different crops at different times, more land can be farmed with the same amount of machinery and labour.\nRisk management.\nDifferent crops in the rotation can reduce the risks of adverse weather for the individual farmer.\nChallenges.\nWhile crop rotation requires a great deal of planning, crop choice must respond to a number of fixed conditions (soil type, topography, climate, and irrigation) in addition to conditions that may change dramatically from year to the next (weather, market, labor supply). In this way, it is unwise to plan crops years in advance. Improper implementation of a crop rotation plan may lead to imbalances in the soil nutrient composition or a buildup of pathogens affecting a critical crop. The consequences of faulty rotation may take years to become apparent even to experienced soil scientists and can take just as long to correct.\nMany challenges exist within the practices associated with crop rotation. For example, green manure from legumes can lead to an invasion of snails or slugs and the decay from green manure can occasionally suppress the growth of other crops.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46471", "revid": "40236449", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46471", "title": "Drawn butter", "text": "Melted butter as a sauce\nDrawn butter is melted butter, often served as a sauce for steamed seafood. Some cooks restrict the term to clarified butter, while others insist that it should not be clarified.\nWhen it is served with seafood, diners often add lemon juice to it.\nDrawn butter sauces.\nIn the 18th century, a small amount of flour and water or milk was often added to melted butter to thicken it and prevent it from separating. Later in the 19th century, increasing amounts of flour and water were used. These sauces may themselves be named simply \"melted butter\", \"drawn butter\", or \"drawn butter sauce\", and flavored with vinegar, salt, pepper, capers, watercress, and so on."}
{"id": "46480", "revid": "15941654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46480", "title": "Tomato catsup", "text": ""}
{"id": "46482", "revid": "14423536", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46482", "title": "Fish sauce", "text": "Condiment made from fish\nFish sauce is a liquid condiment made from fish or krill that have been coated in salt and fermented for up to two years. It is used as a staple seasoning in East Asian cuisine and Southeast Asian cuisine, particularly Myanmar, Cambodia, Laos, Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam. Some garum-related fish sauces have been used in the West since the Roman times.\nDue to its ability to add a savory umami flavor to dishes, it has been embraced globally by chefs and home cooks. The umami flavor in fish sauce is due to its glutamate content.\nFish sauce is used as a seasoning during or after cooking, and as a base in dipping sauces. Soy sauce is regarded by some in the West as a vegetarian alternative to fish sauce though they are very different in flavor.\nHistory.\nAsia.\nSauces that included fermented fish parts with other ingredients such as meat and soy bean were recorded in China, 2300 years ago. During the Zhou dynasty of ancient China, fish fermented with soybeans and salt was used as a condiment. By the time of the Han dynasty, soy beans were fermented without the fish into soy paste and its by-product soy sauce, with fermented fish-based sauces developing separately into fish sauce. A fish sauce, called \"k\u00f4echiap\" in Hokkien Chinese, might be the precursor of ketchup.\nBy 50\u2013100 BC, demand for fish sauces and fish pastes in China had fallen drastically, with fermented bean products becoming a major trade commodity. Fish sauce, however, developed massive popularity in Southeast Asia. Food scholars traditionally divide East Asia into two distinct condiment regions, separated by a bean-fish divide: Southeast Asia, mainly using fermented fish (Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia), and Northeast Asia, using mainly fermented beans (China, Korea, Japan). Fish sauce re-entered China in the 17th and 18th centuries, brought from Vietnam and Cambodia by Chinese traders up the coast of the southern provinces Guangdong and Fujian.\nEurope.\nFish sauces were widely used in ancient Mediterranean cuisine. The earliest recorded production was between 4th\u20133rd century BC by the Ancient Greeks, who fermented scraps of fish called \"garos\" into one.It is believed to have been made with a lower salt content than modern fish sauces.\nThe Romans made a similar condiment called either garum or liquamen. According to Pliny the Elder, \"garum consists of the guts of fish and other parts that would otherwise be considered refuse so that garum is really the liquor from putrefaction.\" Garum was made in the Roman outposts of Spain almost exclusively from mackerel by salting the scrap fish innards, and then sun fermenting the flesh until it fell apart, usually for several months. The brown liquid would then be strained, bottled, and sold as a condiment. Remains of Roman fish salting facilities can still be seen, including in Algeciras in Spain and near Set\u00fabal in Portugal. The process lasted until the 16th century when garum makers switched to anchovy and removed the innards.\nGarum was ubiquitous in Classical Roman cooking. Mixed with wine it was known as \"oenogarum\", or with vinegar, \"oxygarum\", or mixed with honey, \"meligarum\". \"Garum\" was one of the trade specialties in Hispania Baetica. \"Garum\" was frequently maligned as smelling bad or rotten, being called, for example, \"evil-smelling fish sauce\" and is said to be similar to modern \"colatura di alici\", a fish sauce used in Neapolitan cuisine.\nIn English \"garum\" was formerly translated as \"fish pickle\". The original Worcestershire sauce is a related product because it is fermented and contains anchovies.\nDifference from oyster sauce.\nWhile fish sauce and oyster sauce are both briny and may have related histories, they are different products. Fish sauce is watery, clear, and salty, whereas oyster sauce is made by reducing oyster extracts and therefore sweeter with a hint of salt and not as strong an aroma as fish sauce.\nIngredients and manufacture.\nFish sauces historically have been prepared from different species of fish and shellfish, and from using the whole fish, or by using just fish blood or viscera. Most modern fish sauces contain only fish and salt, usually made from anchovy, shrimp, mackerel, or other strong-flavored, high oil fish. Some variants add herbs and spices. For modern fish sauces, fish or shellfish are mixed with salt at a concentration of 10% to 30%. It is then sealed in a closed container for up to two years.\nOnce the original draft has been made, some fish sauces will be produced through a re-extraction of the fish mass via boiling. To improve the visual appearance and add taste, second-pass fish sauces often have added caramel, molasses, or roasted rice. They are thinner, and less costly. Some volume manufacturers of fish sauce will also water down a first-press to manufacture more products.\nFish sauce that has been only briefly fermented has a pronounced fishy taste. Extended fermentation reduces this and gives the product a nuttier, richer and more savory flavor. An anonymous article, \"Neuc-num\", in Diderot and d'Alembert's 18th-century \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", states: \"It is said that Europeans become accustomed enough to this type of sauce\".\nRegional variations.\nSoutheast Asia.\nFish sauce is a fundamental condiment and flavoring widely used in Southeast Asian cuisines. Thai and Cambodian fish sauces are generally milder and less pungent compared to their Vietnamese counterparts.\nMyanmar.\nFish sauce in Myanmar is called \"ngan bya yay\" (\u1004\u102b\u1038\u1004\u1036\u1015\u103c\u102c\u101b\u100a\u103a). It's often a by-product of Hmyin ngapi (\u1019\u103b\u103e\u1004\u103a\u1004\u1015\u102d) (Burmese fish paste made from small fish, anchovies, krill and shrimp).\nCambodia.\nIn Cambodia, fish sauce is called \"tik trei\" (, ). Just like \"prahok\", it is believed to date back to the pre-Angkorean era. Industrially fish sauce is produced by mixing \"trei aing keuy\" or anchovies with coarse salt and fermenting it in large wooden vats. Over the period of six to eight months, it is distilled five times, before being transferred into jars and sun-fermented for the final 2\u20133 months. The most famous fish sauce is produced in the Kampot Province. Food Production Company of Kampot produces a speciality fish sauce containing roe. Fish sauce is mixed with sugar, lime juice, chili peppers and crushed roasted peanuts to create sweet fish sauce, which is the most popular dipping sauce in Cambodia.\nLaos.\nIn Lao/Isan, it is called \"nam pa\" (). A chunkier, more aromatic version known as \"padaek\" is also used.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippine fish sauce is known as \"patis\". It is one of the most important ingredients in Filipino cuisine. \"Patis\" is a by-product of \"bagoong\" production, which include \"bagoong isda\" (fermented fish) and \"bagoong alamang\" (fermented krill), as well as the rarer \"bagoong macabebe\" (fermented oysters) and \"bagoong sisi\" (fermented clams). The fish used are typically small like sardines, anchovies, ambassids, and the fry of larger fish. Unlike other fish sauce variants, the fermented solids are not discarded but are sold as separate products. The \"patis\" is skimmed from the upper layers of fermenting \"bagoong\" and is not pressed. As such, \"patis\" usually takes longer to produce than other types of fish sauce as it is reliant on the readiness of \"bagoong\".\n\"Patis\" is nearly always cooked prior to consumption, even when used as an accent to salads or other raw dishes. \"Patis\" is also used as an ingredient in cooked dishes, including a rice porridge called \"arroz caldo\", as a condiment for fried fish or an umami accent in a common dish, \"sinigang\". \"Patis\" is also used in place of table salt in meals to enhance the flavor of the food, where it can either be dashed from a dispensing bottle onto the food, or poured into a saucer and mixed with calamansi and labuyo chilis and used as a dipping sauce.\nThailand.\nFish sauce in Thailand is called \"Nam pla\" (). In Isan, it is called \"nam pa\". Similar to the Laotian \"padaek\" is \"pla ra\" (), also used in Thai cuisine. In Thailand, fish sauce is used both in cooking and also served at the table as a condiment, for instance in noodle soups. Nearly every Thai meal is served with \"phrik nam pla\" as a condiment: a mixture of fish sauce, lime juice, and chopped bird's eye chilies. Sliced garlic is often added to this sauce.\nHistorically, there were two types of fish sauce made in Thailand: that made from freshwater fish, \"pla soi\", and that made from saltwater fish, \"pla kratak\". Either fish is fermented for at least eight months, three parts fish to two parts salt. The resulting mash is filtered. This yields the best fish sauce called the \"base\". The dregs are then mixed with water and salt and again fermented for three to four months. This yields a second-grade fish sauce, mostly used in cooking.\nIn 2014, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) banned the import of Thai fish sauces due to a lack of information about tests for botulinum toxin. The toxin can cause death if more than 0.5 micrograms are consumed. The Thai Office of Food Safety and Quality then tested 48 brands of fish sauce to determine the content of botulinum toxin in the products. Of 48 brands tested, 28 were genuine fish sauces from 18 production sites in 12 provinces. Twenty samples from production sites in eight provinces were adulterated fish sauce. Tests showed that none were contaminated with botulinum toxin types A, B, E, and F and were free of \"Clostridium botulinum\" bacteria. In 2018, rumours again surfaced concerning banned Thai fish sauce.\nVietnam.\nThe variety from Vietnam is called \"n\u01b0\u1edbc m\u1eafm\". There are two areas in Vietnam that are most famous for producing fish sauce: Ph\u00fa Qu\u1ed1c and Phan Thi\u1ebft.\nFish sauce has a 300-year history dating back to the Champa kingdom of the Cham people. Phan Thi\u1ebft can be identified with the birthplace of Vietnamese fish sauce. Before 1693, Phan Thi\u1ebft was a territory of Champa. The Vietnamese occupied the area in 1693 and commercialized the fish sauce by keeping it in barrels and selling throughout the country. This business was popularized by Tr\u1ea7n Gia H\u00f2a who was born in 1872. There is a fish sauce museum in Phan Thi\u1ebft. Popular brands in the US include Mega Chef, Red Boat, 3 Crabs, Golden Boy, and H\u00f2n Phan Thi\u1ebft.\nVietnamese fish sauces are made with anchovies, mackerel, scabbard fish, and salt. High mercury concentration can be found in larger fish, especially in predator fish like scabbard fish. They do not have any additives like sugar, hydrolyzed protein, or preservatives. Vietnamese prefer sauces without a strong smell, and transparent with a deep golden amber color. \"First press\" fish sauce, meaning the sauce is bottled from the first time the fermenting barrels are drained, also indicates quality. Lastly, when measuring the nitrogen level of fish sauces (\u00b0N, or grams of nitrogen per liter), most fish sauce on the market falls within the mid 20\u00b0N range. Anything over 30\u00b0N is considered high-grade, and 40\u00b0N is optimal.\n\"N\u01b0\u1edbc ch\u1ea5m\" is a Vietnamese prepared fish-based condiment (also referred to as a \"sauce\") that is savory, lightly sweet and salty tasting, and can be sour and spicy if lime and chili peppers are added. The main components are fish sauce, water, and sugar.\n\"M\u1eafm\" is made much like fish sauce, except that it is not fermented as long, and the fish is kept along with its liquid extract, not just the extract. \"M\u1eafm\" can be used as a base condiment in dipping sauces with additional ingredients, used in soups, stir-fries and meat loaves, or eaten with rice as a main dish.\nIn January 2016, the Institute of Food Technologists published a study asserting that using Vietnamese fish sauce as a substitute for sodium chloride (salt) in chicken broth, tomato sauce, and coconut curry reduced the amount of sodium chloride by 10 to 25 percent while still maintaining the perceived deliciousness, saltiness, and overall flavor intensity. This idea is similar to the use of umami flavor enhancers such as MSG to increase flavor intensity and reduce sodium requirement.\nAccording to the General Statistics Office, in 2020, the output of fish sauce reached nearly 380 million liters. According to the Vietnam Fish Sauce Association, the output of fish sauce in 2023 is expected to reach about 420 million liters. The reason for this growth is due to the increasing domestic demand and the strong development of the fish sauce export industry. Vietnamese fish sauce is currently exported to more than 60 countries and territories around the world. According to statistics, Vietnam currently has 783 fish sauce production facilities with 1,500 participating farming households, producing about 250 million liters of fish sauce per year. Of which, 35 facilities produce fish sauce for export to 20 markets.\nEast Asia.\nChina.\nIn China, fish sauce is called \"y\u00fal\u00f9\" (, literally \"fish dew\") and is native to the provinces of Guangdong and Fujian. In Chaoshan cuisine, fish sauce is made with Reeve's shad (\"Tenualosa reevesii\"), which is unsuitable for direct eating due to being fatty, bony, and odorous.\nJapan.\nIn Japan, fish sauce is called \"gyosh\u014d\" (\u9b5a\u91a4); another name is \"uosh\u014dyu\" (\u9b5a\u91a4\u6cb9). There are several variations used in regional cuisines. \"Ishiru\" in the Noto Peninsula is made from sardine and squid. Shottsuru, the best-known type of Japanese fish sauce and often used as a synonym for all \"gyosh\u014d\", is from Akita Prefecture and is mainly made from sailfin sandfish. \"Ikanago shoyu\" of Kagawa Prefecture is made from sand lance. They are used in \"nabemono\", in salad dressings, and as a flavoring ingredient in ramen soups. Imported Thai / Vietnamese fish sauce in Japan is referred to as \"nanpur\u0101\" (\u30ca\u30f3\u30d7\u30e9\u30fc), from the Thai word for fish sauce \"nam pla\".\nKorea.\nIn Korea, fish sauce is called \"eojang\" ().\nAcross the Korean Peninsula, \"aekjeot\" (, literally \"liquid \"jeotgal\"\"), a type of fish sauce usually made from fermented anchovies or \"kkanari\" (sand lances), is used as a crucial ingredient in many types of kimchi, both for taste and fermentation.\nIn Jeju Island, \"eoganjang\" (), made of fermented \"godori\" (young chub mackerel) or horse mackerel, is used in place of soy sauce.\nEurope.\nItaly.\n\"Colatura di alici\" is an Italian fish sauce originating in the village of Cetara, Campania.\nEngland.\nWorcestershire sauce contains fermented anchovies among other ingredients, which is common in the Anglosphere countries.\nNutrition contents.\nCommon commercial brands of fish sauce generally contain about 50% to 60% of the FDA's daily recommended amount of sodium per tablespoon serving. Most commercial brands of reasonable quality contain one or two grams of protein per serving; however, higher-quality brands may have four grams of protein or more, while lower-quality brands may have less than one gram of protein per serving. Fish sauce has an insignificant amount of carbohydrates and fats. Vitamin B12, vitamin B-6, and magnesium are present in small amounts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46484", "revid": "49552034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46484", "title": "Apple sauce", "text": "Pur\u00e9e made from apples\nApple sauce is a pur\u00e9e (not necessarily served as a true sauce) made of apples. It can be made with peeled or unpeeled apples and can be spiced or sweetened. Apple sauce is inexpensive and is widely consumed in North America and some parts of Europe.\nA wide range of apple varieties are used to make apple sauce, depending on the preference for sweetness or tartness. Formerly, sour apples were usually used to make savory apple sauce.\nCommercial versions of apple sauce are readily available at supermarkets and other retail outlets.\nPreparation.\nApple sauce is made by cooking apples with water or apple cider (fresh apple juice). More acidic apples will render a finer pur\u00e9e; the highly acidic Bramley apple creates a very fine pur\u00e9e. The apples may or may not be peeled. If they are not peeled, the peels and seeds are typically separated in a food mill. Sugar and spices such as cinnamon, allspice, and even Red Hot candies may be added for flavor. Lemon juice, citric acid, or other acidifiers may be used to preserve the color and ensure a high enough acidity for safe storage. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) also preserves the color.\nApple sauce can be made by baking rather than boiling, in which case the apples are peeled and cored before cooking. The same process is applied when preparing the sauce in a slow cooker.\nHome or commercially canned apple sauce is sterilized by heat to preserve freshness. \nApple butter.\nApple butter is a highly concentrated version of apple sauce. Its high concentration of sugar gives it a long shelf life.\nUses.\nApple sauce is served as a side dish in northern Europe and North America. In the United States, packaged apple sauce is primarily branded as a children's snack, and is ubiquitous in school cafeterias. In American cuisine, it is commonly served as pork chops and apple sauce.\nAmerican-style apple sauce is not widely available in Britain. An apple preserve, containing chopped, not pur\u00e9ed apples, is sold as \"apple sauce.\" In the UK it is typically sold under the name apple pur\u00e9e and as a popular form of baby food.\nIn Sweden and Britain, it is commonly served with roast pork and goose. The Danish \u00e6blefl\u00e6sk combines the pork with apple sauce while cooking it.\nIn Central Europe it accompanies potato pancakes, in the Rhineland it is served with Reibekuchen. In Ashkenazi cuisine, it is the standard accompaniment for Hanukkah latkes. It also accompanies matzah brei.\nApple sauce is served with many foods: Flurg\u00f6nder (a smoked brawn), various kinds of Sp\u00e4tzle, Schupfnudeln, Swiss \u00c4lplermagronen, a kind of macaroni and cheese. In Netherlands and Belgian cuisine, apple sauce is part of the common dish of chicken, french fries, and apple sauce (\"kip, frieten/patat en appelmoes\"). It is especially popular among children, who dip their fries in apple sauce.\nIn many cuisines, apple sauce is a common accompaniment to blood sausage: the German Himmel und Erde; the Luxembourgish tr\u00e4ipen and the French \"boudin noir\". In fact the only French savory dish normally served with apple sauce (\"compote de pommes\") is \"boudin\" sausage. It is also served with other sausage-like preparations, for example goetta and knipp.\nApple sauce may also be served as a dessert in most European cuisines, or used as an ingredient in apple sauce cake. Apple sauce may be used as a sauce for Polish pierogi, Swedish \u00c4ggakaka, Ukrainian syrniki pancakes, Central European Palatschinken, Austrian Kaiserschmarrn and various kinds of sweet and savory dumplings (Kn\u00f6del). In Scandinavian cuisine, it is sometimes served with breakfast filmj\u00f6lk, a kind of fermented milk.\nFormerly heavily sweetened and boiled-down apple sauce was prepared for winter storage. Made with sour apples, it was eaten with meat; made with sweet apples, it was eaten with tea.\nIn some recipes for baked goods, apple sauce can be used as a substitute for fat or eggs to make them low-fat or vegan.\nBavarian sweet mustard may be made with apple sauce, and is typically served with Wei\u00dfwurst (similar to \"boudin blanc\") or Leberk\u00e4se (a sort of p\u00e2t\u00e9).\nNutritional information.\nAccording to the USDA, a reference amount of unsweetened apple sauce is 82% water, 18% carbohydrates, and contains negligible fat and protein, while supplying of food energy. It has an acidic pH between 3.3 and 3.6.\nIn therapeutic diets.\nThe BRAT diet and the CRAM diet, which are given to children with diarrhea and stomach problems, include apple sauce.\nEconomy.\nApples are the third most internationally traded fruit, behind bananas and grapes. The global apple sauce trade is expanding, with a market valued at US$1.611 billion in 2017 projected to reach US$2.169 billion by the end of the year 2026. This increase in demand can be attributed to an increase in interest for apple flavored products, with increased global consumption of apple flavored juices and sauces.\nApple sauce is most commonly packaged in cups, jars, pouches, and cans. Apple sauce cups are the largest segment of the apple sauce market, comprising 40.9% of the revenue share in 2017.\nBrick-and-mortar retail stores account for about 85% of the market share for apple sauce, as compared to 15% among e-retailers.\nOrigins.\nSauces made with apples date to at least the Middle Ages.\nApple butters were brought to the Americas by German immigrants such as the Moravians and Pennsylvania Dutch. They are traditionally associated with the Appalachian region of the United States and Southern Pennsylvania.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "46489", "revid": "50822909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46489", "title": "Convention on the Rights of the Child", "text": "International treaty about the rights of children\nThe United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (commonly abbreviated as the CRC or UNCRC) is an international human rights treaty which sets out the civil, political, economic, social, health and cultural rights of children. The convention defines a child as any human being under the age of eighteen, unless the age of majority is attained earlier under national legislation.\nNations that have ratified this convention or have acceded to it are bound by international law. When a state has signed the treaty but not ratified it, it is not yet bound by the treaty's provisions but is already obliged to not act contrary to its purpose.\nThe UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, composed of eighteen independent experts, is the main monitoring body of the implementation of the convention by the states that have ratified it. Their governments are required to report to and appear before the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child periodically to be examined on their progress regarding the advancement of the implementation of the convention and the status of child rights in their country. Their reports and the committee's written views and concerns are available on the committee's website.\nIndividuals can appeal to the Committee on the Rights of the Child if they believe that rights, according to the convention, have been violated. The third possibility for monitoring the implementation of the convention is inquiries that the Committee on the Rights of the Child can carry out on their own initiative if they have reliable information that leads them to believe that a member state has violated the convention's rights. However, \"states ... may opt-out from the inquiry procedure, at the time of signature or ratification or accession\". Once a year, the committee submits a report to the Third Committee of the United Nations General Assembly, which also hears a statement from the CRC Chair, and the Assembly adopts a Resolution on the Rights of the Child.\nThe UN General Assembly adopted the convention and opened it for signature on 20 November 1989 (the 30th anniversary of its Declaration of the Rights of the Child). It came into force on 2 September 1990, after it was ratified by the required number of nations. As of none }}, 196 countries are party to it, including every member of the United Nations except the United States.\nTwo optional protocols were adopted on 25 May 2000. The First Optional Protocol restricts the involvement of children in military conflicts, and the Second Optional Protocol prohibits the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. More than 170 states have ratified both protocols. A third optional protocol relating to communication of complaints was adopted in December 2011 and opened for signature on 28 February 2012. It came into effect on 14 April 2014.\nContents.\nThe convention deals with child-specific needs and rights. It requires that the \"nations that ratify this convention are bound to it by international law.\" Ratifying states must act in the best interests of the child.\nIn all jurisdictions implementing the convention requires compliance with child custody and guardianship laws as every child has basic rights, including the right to life, to their own name and identity, to be raised by their parents within a family or cultural grouping, and to have a relationship with both parents, even if they are separated.\nThe convention obliges states to allow parents to exercise their parental responsibilities. The convention also acknowledges that children have the right to express their opinions and to have those opinions heard and acted upon when appropriate, to be protected from abuse or exploitation, and to have their privacy protected. It requires that their lives not be subject to excessive interference.\nThe convention also obliges signatory states to separate legal representation for a child in any judicial dispute concerning their care and asks that the child's viewpoint be heard in such cases.\nThe convention forbids capital punishment for children. In its General Comment 8 (2006) the committee stated that there was an \"obligation of all state parties to move quickly to prohibit and eliminate all corporal punishment and all other cruel or degrading forms of punishment of children\". Article 19 of the convention states that state parties must \"take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence\", but it makes no reference to corporal punishment. The committee's interpretation of this section to encompass a prohibition on corporal punishment has been rejected by several state parties to the convention, including Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom.\nThe European Court of Human Rights has referred to the convention when interpreting the European Convention on Human Rights.\nGlobal standards and cultural relativism.\nGlobal human rights standards were challenged at the World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna (1993) when a number of governments (prominently China, Indonesia, Malaysia and Iran) raised serious objections to the idea of universal human rights. There are unresolved tensions between \"universalistic\" and \"relativistic\" approaches in the establishment of standards and strategies designed to prevent or overcome the abuse of children's capacity to work.\nChild marriage and slavery.\nSome scholars link child marriages to slavery and slavery-like practices. Child marriage as slavery is not directly addressed by the convention.\nStates party and signatories.\nThe term \"party\" refers to a State that gives its explicit consent to be bound by the treaty.\nAs of 12 July 2022, 196 countries are parties to the UNCRC treaty (some with stated reservations or interpretations). Every member of the United Nations except the United States has either ratified or accepted the rights articulated for the child under eighteen or below the age of majority in that state. The most recent ratifications of the convention were by Cook Islands, Niue, the State of Palestine, and the Holy See. South Sudan ratified the convention in January 2015. Somalia's domestic ratification finished in January 2015 and the instrument was deposited with the United Nations in October 2015. Taiwan incorporated the convention into domestic law on 20 November 2014, and signed an Instrument of Accession to the CRC on 16 May 2016.\nAll successor states of Czechoslovakia (Czech Republic and Slovakia) and Yugoslavia (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Slovenia) made declarations of succession to the treaty and currently apply it.\nThe convention does not apply in the territories of Tokelau, Akrotiri and Dhekelia and Gibraltar. Guernsey was also excluded until 2020.\nAzerbaijan.\nAzerbaijan ratified the convention on 21 July 1992. In terms of the ratification of the convention, a significant number of laws, decrees and resolutions were approved in Azerbaijan by the President and the Cabinet of Ministers focusing on the development of the child welfare system. In this regard, the Convention No. 182 of the International Labour Organization, i.e. the Convention on the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour, the Recommendation No. 190 of the International Labour Organization and the Hague Adoption Convention were ratified by Milli Majlis, the parliament of Azerbaijan, in 2004.\nThere is a concern over the administration of juvenile justice in Azerbaijan, mostly regarding compliance with articles 37, 39, and 40 of the convention, as well as other relevant standards such as the Beijing Rules, the Riyadh Guidelines, and the United Nations Rules for the Protection of Juveniles Deprived of their Liberty. Therefore, international organizations assisted Azerbaijan to improve the situation in the field of juvenile justice. Juvenile offenders have been added to the Presidential pardons on a regular basis.\nAzerbaijan has built cooperation with many international organizations, particularly with UNICEF in child protection. In 1993, UNICEF began its activity in Azerbaijan. In 2005, Azerbaijan and UNICEF signed a five-year country program. The country program for 2005-2009 was implemented in child protection, children's health and nutrition, children's education and youth health, and their development and participation. Also, UNICEF supports Azerbaijan in improving its juvenile justice system, establishing an alternative care system and raising awareness among youth about HIV/AIDS.\nBangladesh.\nBangladesh ratified the convention on 3 August 1990, initially reserving Article\u202f14 on freedom of thought, conscience, and religion, and fully withdrew the reservation on 2 March 2011. As required under the UNCRC, Bangladesh enacted the Children Act, 2013 (amended 2018), replacing the Children Act\u202f1974 to provide comprehensive legal protection for children. The Act was explicitly drafted with regard to UNCRC principles, including juvenile justice, custody, and child welfare, though implementation gaps remain. Bangladesh ratified ILO Convention No\u202f182 on the worst forms of child labour and later ratified Minimum Age Convention No\u202f138 in March\u00a02022.\nDespite legal frameworks, juvenile justice remains problematic where the minimum age of criminal responsibility is still nine years, below the UNCRC-recommended 12 years. Child Development Centres (JDCs) established under the Children Act are few, overcrowded, and frequently accused of torture and inhumane treatment. Although every district is meant to have a separate Children's Court, most areas still rely on overburdened Women and Children Tribunals with no dedicated courtrooms.\nIn response, Bangladesh partnered with UNICEF to develop a national child protection system aligned with UNCRC standards through its Child-Friendly Justice initiative. On 24 March 2025, UNICEF welcomed government plans to establish separate Children's Courts nationwide as part of implementing the Children Act and aligning with international norms. Civil society and international monitors continue to call for stronger enforcement and resources to fully realize child protection commitments.\nCanada.\nCanada became a signatory to the convention on 28 May 1990 and ratified in 1991. Youth criminal laws in Canada underwent major changes resulting in the Youth Criminal Justice Act (YCJA) which went into effect on 1 April 2003. The Act specifically refers to Canada's different commitments under the convention. The convention was influential in the administrative law decision of \"Baker v Canada (Minister of Citizenship and Immigration)\", although the Supreme Court of Canada ultimately held that \"Its provisions [...] have no direct application within Canadian law\".\nIndia.\nIndia ratified UNCRC on 11 December 1992, agreeing in principle to all articles but with certain reservations on issues relating to child labor. In India, there is a law that children under the age of 18 should not work, but there is no outright ban on child labor. The practice is generally permitted in most industries except those deemed \"hazardous\", for which minimum ages apply. Although a law in October 2006 banned child labor in hotels, restaurants, and as domestic servants, there continues to be a high demand for children as hired help in the home. There are different estimates as to the number of child laborers in the country. According to the government's conservative estimate, in 2011 4.4 million children under 14 years of age were working in India, while the NGO Save the Children in a statement of 2016 cites a study by the Campaign Against Child Labour that estimates the number of child laborers in India at 12.7 million.\nIn 2016, the Child and Adolescent Labour (Amendment) Act was introduced, which prohibited children's economic employment under the age of 14 years and the employment of adolescents (14\u201317 years of age) in hazardous occupations. Some exceptions exist for children under 14 \u2014they can aid in the family enterprise and participate in the entertainment industry. It must not harm their school education and they must not work between 7 p.m. and 8 a.m.\nIran.\nIran has adhered to the convention (except for alleged child slavery) since 1991 and ratified it in the Parliament in 1994. Upon ratification, Iran made the following reservation: \"If the text of the Convention is or becomes incompatible with the domestic laws and Islamic standards at any time or in any case, the Government of the Islamic Republic shall not abide by it.\" Iran has also signed both optional protocols which relate to the special protection of children against involvement in armed conflict and the sale of children and sexual exploitation.\nAlthough Iran is a state party to the convention, international human rights organisations and foreign governments routinely denounced executions of Iranian child offenders as a violation of the treaty. But on 10 February 2012, Iran's parliament changed the controversial law of executing juveniles. In the new law, the age of 18 (solar year) would be considered the minimum age for adulthood and offenders under this age will be sentenced under a separate law. Based on the previous law, which was revised, girls at the age of 9 and boys at 15 (lunar year, 11 days shorter than a solar year) were fully responsible for their crimes.\n\"According to Islamic sources, the criterion for criminal responsibility is reaching the age of maturity which, according to the Shi'ite School of the IRI, is 9 lunar years (8 years and 9 months) for girls and 15 lunar years (14 years and 7 months) for boys.\"\nIreland.\nIreland signed the convention on 30 September 1990 and ratified it, without reservation, on 28 September 1992. In response to criticisms expressed in the 1998 review by the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child in Geneva, the Irish government established the office of Ombudsman for Children. It drew up a national children's strategy. In 2006, following concerns expressed by the committee that the wording of the Irish Constitution does not allow the State to intervene in abuse cases other than in very exceptional cases, the Irish government undertook to amend the constitution to make a more explicit commitment to children's rights.\nIsrael.\nIsrael ratified the convention in 1991. In 2010, UNICEF criticized the country for its failure to create a government-appointed commission on children's rights or adopt a national children's rights strategy or program to implement various Israeli laws addressing children's rights. The report criticizes Israel for holding that the convention does not apply in the West Bank and for defining Palestinians under the age of 16 in the occupied territories as children, even though Israeli law defines a child as being under 18, in line with the convention. A contemporaneous report by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development found that Israel's investment in children is below the international average. The actual investment had fallen between 1995 and 2006. In 2012, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child criticized Israel for its bombing attacks on Palestinians in the Gaza Strip, stating, \"Destruction of homes and damage to schools, streets and other public facilities gravely affect children\" and called them \"gross violations of the convention on the Rights of the Child, its Optional Protocol on the involvement of children in armed conflict and international humanitarian law\". It also criticized Palestinian rocket attacks from Gaza on southern Israel, which traumatized Israeli children, calling on all parties to protect children.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand ratified the convention on 6 April 1993 with reservations concerning the right to distinguish between persons according to the nature of their authority to be in New Zealand, the need for legislative action on economic exploitation\u2014which it argued was adequately protected by existing law, and the provisions for the separation of juvenile offenders from adult offenders.\nIn 1994, the Court of Appeal of New Zealand dismissed the suggestion that the Minister for Immigration and his department were at liberty to ignore the convention, arguing that this would imply that the country's adherence was \"at least partly window-dressing\".\nThe Children's Commissioner Act 2003 enhanced the Children's Commissioner, giving it significantly stronger investigative powers. The Children's Commissioner is responsible for convening the UNCROC Monitoring Group, which monitors the New Zealand Government's implementation of the Children's Convention, its Optional Protocols and the Government's response to recommendations from the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child. The monitoring group comprises members from the Human Rights Commission (New Zealand), UNICEF New Zealand, Action for Children and Youth Aotearoa and Save the Children New Zealand.\nIn May 2007, New Zealand passed the Crimes (Substituted Section 59) Amendment Act 2007, which removed the defence of \"reasonable force\" for the purpose of correction. In its third and final vote, Parliament voted 113\u20138 in favour of the legislation.\nSaudi Arabia.\nSaudi Arabia ratified the convention in 1996, with a reservation \"with respect to all such articles as are in conflict with the provisions of Islamic law\" which is the national law. The Committee on the Rights of the Child, which reviewed Saudi Arabia's treatment of children under the convention in January 2005, strongly condemned the government for its practice of imposing the death penalty on juveniles, calling it \"a serious violation of the fundamental rights\". The committee said it was \"deeply alarmed\" over the discretionary power judges hold to treat juveniles as adults: In its 2004 report, the Saudi Arabian government had stated that it \"never imposes capital punishment on persons ... below the age of 18\". The government delegation later acknowledged that a judge could impose the death penalty whenever he decided that the convicted person had reached his or her maturity, regardless of the person's actual age at the time of the crime or at the time of the scheduled execution. But the death penalty was ended for minors in April 2020.\nOn 20 October 2020, Human Rights Watch said that Saudi Arabia was seeking the death penalty against eight Saudi men who were accused of committing protest-related crimes at the age of 14 and 17. One of the boys who turned 18 in 2020 was charged with a nonviolent crime that he allegedly committed aged 9. Under the hudud \u2013 an Islamic law \u2013 prosecutors have reportedly sought the death penalty for the eight men, which if granted will make them ineligible for pardon.\nSouth Korea.\nSouth Korea ratified the Convention of the Rights of the Child in 1991. The country then created further legislation to protect children experiencing physical and sexual abuse. However, a 2002 report indicated that South Korea had not yet satisfied article 12 of the CRC and that corporal violence of children in certain settings is not prohibited. A 2017 review by the Committee on the Rights of the Child concluded that further legal protections had been enacted such as legislation against child pornography, prostitution, and the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. A 2017 decision by the National Human Rights Commission of Korea ruled that no kid zones were discriminatory, but this did not legally restrict them from existing. The decision concluded that no-kid zones conflict with a child's right to equality under the constitution and the CRC.\nSouth Korea joined the Hague convention on International Child Abduction in 2012, but was criticized for its repetitive pattern of non-compliance. The pattern continued even after the 2023 Special Commissioner meeting of the Hague Conference, held in The Hague, Netherlands, in 2023, when the shared goal was reaffirmed between the Hague Convention and UNCRC.\nSweden.\nThe Convention on the Rights of the Child has status as Swedish law since 1 January 2020. Also, before that, Swedish legislation was well in line with the convention and went in some cases further. It was given this status because Swedish authorities and the government thought the childs right perspective was not applied sufficiently in Swedish social welfare decisions and law enforcement.\nThailand.\nUpon accession to the convention on 27 March 1992, Thailand registered the following reservation: \"The application of Articles 7, 22 and 29 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child shall be subject to the national laws, regulations and prevailing practices in Thailand.\" This reservation was withdrawn on 11 April 1997 with respect to article 29 (goals of education), on 13 December 2010 with respect to article 7 (birth registration, name, nationality, care) and finally on 30 August 2024 with respect to article 22 (refugee children).\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe United Kingdom ratified the convention on 16 December 1991, with several declarations and reservations, and made its first report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child in January 1995. Concerns raised by the committee included the growth in child poverty and inequality, the extent of violence towards children, the use of custody for young offenders, the low age of criminal responsibility, and the lack of opportunities for children and young people to express views. The 2002 report of the committee expressed similar concerns, including the welfare of children in custody, unequal treatment of asylum seekers, and the negative impact of poverty on children's rights. In September 2008, the UK government decided to withdraw its reservations and agree to the convention in these respects.\nAlthough child slavery is difficult to gauge within the UK, child slaves are imported into the UK and sold. Laws and enforcement mechanisms against slavery and human trafficking were consolidated and strengthened in the Modern Slavery Act 2015.\nWales.\nThe National Assembly for Wales, now known as the Senedd passed the Rights of Children and Young Persons (Wales) Measure 2011, partially incorporating the Convention into domestic law.The National Assembly for Wales passed the Children (Abolition of Defence of Reasonable Punishment) (Wales) Act 2020, banning smacking, by abolishing the \"reasonable punishment defence.\"\nScotland.\nThe Scottish Parliament passed the Children (Equal Protection from Assault) (Scotland) Act 2019, banning smacking, by removing the defence of \"justifiable assault\". \nIn March 2021, the Scottish Parliament unanimously passed the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (Incorporation) (Scotland) Bill, which partially incorporated the Convention into Scots law. The Bill was challenged by the UK Government and specified sections were found by the Supreme Court to be outwith the competence of the Scottish Parliament. The bill was amended and again passed in December 2023, receiving Royal Assent on 16 January 2024 and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (Incorporation) (Scotland) Act 2024 came into force on 16 July 2024.\nJersey.\nThe States Assembly passed the Children and Young People (Jersey) Law 2022, banning smacking, by abolishing the defence of \"reasonable corporal punishment\". The States Assembly incorporated the Convention into domestic law through the passage of the Children (Convention Rights) (Jersey) Law 2022.\nUnited States.\nThe United States government played an active role in the drafting of the convention and signed it on 16 February 1995, but has not ratified it. It has been claimed that American opposition to the convention stems primarily from political and religious conservatives. For example, The Heritage Foundation considers that \"a civil society in which moral authority is exercised by religious congregations, family, and other private associations is fundamental to the American order,\" and the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA) argues that the CRC threatens homeschooling. Other Christian right organizations such as Concerned Women for America have argued that the CRC is an effort by globalists to remove children from their religious and family contexts; Christian right figures such as John Whitehead state that it will limit parental rights.\nMost notably, at the time several states permitted the execution and life imprisonment of juvenile offenders, a direct contravention of Article 37 of the convention. The landmark 2005 Supreme Court decision in \"Roper v. Simmons\" declared juvenile executions to be unconstitutional as \"cruel and unusual punishment\"; in the 2012 case \"Miller v. Alabama\", the court held that mandatory sentences of life without the possibility of parole are unconstitutional for juvenile offenders. However, the Court issued a ruling in \"Jones v. Mississippi\" that Miller does not require States to make an independent finding of \"permanent incorrigibility\" before sentencing the juvenile to life imprisonment without parole.\nState laws regarding the practice of closed adoption may also require an overhaul in light of the convention's position that children have a right to identity from birth.\nDuring his 2008 campaign for president, Senator Barack Obama described the failure to ratify the convention as \"embarrassing\" and promised to review the issue however, this did not occur during his tenure as president. No president of the United States has submitted the treaty to the Senate requesting its advice and consent to ratification since the US signed it in 1995.\nThe United States has ratified two of the optional protocols to the convention: the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, and the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography.\nOptional protocols.\nThere are three optional protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The first, the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict requires parties to ensure that children under the age of 18 are not recruited compulsorily into their armed forces and calls on governments to do everything feasible to ensure that members of their armed forces who are under 18 years do not take part in hostilities. This protocol entered into force on 12 July 2002. As of none }}, 172 states are party to the protocol, and another 8 states have signed but not ratified it.\nThe second, the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, requires parties to prohibit the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. It entered into force on 18 January 2002. As of none }}, 178 states are party to the protocol, and another 7 states have signed but not ratified it.\nA third, the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on a Communications Procedure, which would allow children or their representatives to file individual complaints for violation of the rights of children, was adopted in December 2011 and opened for signature on 28 February 2012. The protocol currently has 52 signatures and 50 ratifications: it entered into force on 14 April 2014 following the tenth ratification three months beforehand.\nProposals for additional optional protocols have also been made. In 2020, the independent \"Lancet-WHO-UNICEF Commission\" proposed the development of an optional protocol to protect children from the marketing of tobacco, alcohol, formula milk, sugar-sweetened beverages, gambling, and potentially damaging social media, and the inappropriate use of their personal data. (The WHO also has its own framework for making treaties.) In 2022, a group of international child rights and education experts joined a call for an update to the right to education under international law to explicitly guarantee children's right to free pre-primary and free secondary education. Human Rights Watch has suggested doing so through a fourth optional protocol to the CRC. In June 2024, the UN's Human Rights Council approved the establishment of a working group with the mandate of \"exploring the possibility of, elaborating and submitting to the Human Rights Council a draft optional protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child with the aim to: (a) Explicitly recognize that the right to education includes early childhood care and education; (b) Explicitly state that, with a view to achieving the right to education, States shall: (i) Make public pre-primary education available free to all, beginning with at least one year; (ii) Make public secondary education available free to all.\"\nParental rights.\nOn 7 October 2020, the vote on United Nations Draft Resolution A/HRC/45/L.48/Rev.1 \u2013 \"Rights of the child: Realizing the rights of the child through a healthy environment\" submitted by Germany (on behalf of the European Union) and Uruguay (on behalf of GRULAC) was adopted.\nThe Russian Federation's Amendments L.57 and L.64 to include parental rights were rejected. The Russian delegate, Kristina Sukacheva, remarked that governments voting against parents deliberately shirk their international responsibilities to provide for the rights of the child. At the time of adoption, Uruguay stated that the incorporation of parental rights language as proposed by the Russian Federation would \"bring imbalance to the resolution and would also go against the spirit of the resolution\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46490", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46490", "title": "Black bile", "text": ""}
{"id": "46491", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46491", "title": "Hippocratic corpus", "text": ""}
{"id": "46493", "revid": "40519033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46493", "title": "Maryland Toleration Act", "text": "1649 religious tolerance act in the Maryland Colony\nThe Maryland Toleration Act, also known as the Act Concerning Religion, was the first law in North America requiring religious tolerance for Christians. It was passed on April 21, 1649, by the assembly of the Colony of Maryland, in St. Mary's City in St. Mary's County, Maryland. It created one of the pioneer statutes passed by the legislative body of an organized colonial government to guarantee any degree of religious liberty. Specifically, the bill, now usually referred to as the Toleration Act, granted freedom of conscience to all Christians. (The colony which became Rhode Island passed a series of laws, the first in 1636, which prohibited religious persecution including against non-Trinitarians; Rhode Island was also the first government to separate church and state.) Historians argue that it helped inspire later legal protections for freedom of religion in the United States. The Calvert family, who founded Maryland partly as a refuge for English Catholics, sought enactment of the law to protect Catholic settlers and those of other religions that did not conform to the dominant Anglicanism of Britain and her colonies.\nThe Act allowed freedom of worship for all Trinitarian Christians in Maryland, but sentenced to death anyone who denied the divinity of Jesus. It was revoked in 1654 by William Claiborne, a Virginian who had been appointed as a commissioner by Oliver Cromwell; he was an Anglican, a Puritan sympathizer, and strongly hostile to the Catholic Religion. When the Calverts regained control of Maryland, the Act was reinstated, before being repealed permanently in 1692 following the events of the Glorious Revolution, and the Protestant Revolution in Maryland. As the first law on religious tolerance in British North America, it influenced related laws in other colonies and portions of it were echoed in the writing of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, which enshrined religious freedom in American law.\nCecil Calvert.\nThe Province of Maryland was founded by Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore in 1634. Like his father George Calvert, 1st Baron Baltimore, who had originated the efforts that led to the colony's charter, he was Catholic at a time when the Kingdom of England was dominated by the Church of England. The Calverts intended the colony to function both as a haven for English Catholics fleeing religious persecution and as a source of income for themselves and their descendants. Many of Maryland's first settlers were Catholic, including at least two Catholic priests, one of whom became the earliest chronicler of the colony's history. But whatever Calvert's intentions, Maryland was a colony of an Anglican nation. Its charter had been granted by an Anglican king and seems to have assumed that the Church of England would be its official church. Eventually, Anglican and Puritan newcomers quickly came to outnumber the early Catholic settlers. Thus, by 1649 when the law was passed, the colonial assembly was dominated by Protestants, and the law was in effect an act of Protestant tolerance for Catholics, rather than the reverse.\nFrom Maryland's earliest days, Cecil Calvert had enjoined its colonists to leave religious rivalries behind. Along with giving instructions on the establishment and defense of the colony, he asked the men he appointed to lead it to ensure peace between Protestants and Catholics. He also asked the Catholics to practice their faith as privately as possible, so as not to disturb that peace. The Ordinance of 1639, Maryland's earliest comprehensive law, expressed a general commitment to the rights of man, but did not specifically detail protections for religious minorities of any kind. Peace prevailed until the English Civil War, which opened religious rifts and threatened Calvert's control of Maryland. In 1647, after the death of Governor Leonard Calvert, Protestants seized control of the colony. Cecil Calvert, 2nd Baron Baltimore, quickly regained power, but recognized that religious tolerance not specifically enshrined in law was vulnerable. This recognition was combined with the arrival of a group of Puritans whom Calvert had induced to establish Providence, now Annapolis, by guaranteeing their freedom of worship. Partially to confirm the promises he made to them, Calvert wrote the Maryland Toleration Act and encouraged the colonial assembly to pass it. They did so on April 21, 1649.\nDescription.\nThe Maryland Toleration Act was an act of tolerance, allowing specific religious groups to practice their religion without being punished, but retaining the ability to revoke that right at any time. It also granted tolerance to only Christians who believed in the Trinity. The law was very explicit in limiting its effects to Christians:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... no person or persons ... professing to believe in Jesus Christ, shall from henceforth be anyways troubled, Molested or discountenanced for or in respect of his or her religion nor in the free exercise thereof within this Province ...\u2014\u200a\nSettlers who blasphemed by denying the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus Christ could be punished by execution or the seizure of their lands. That meant that Jews, Unitarians, and other dissenters from Trinitarian Christianity who practiced their religions risked their lives. Any person who insulted the Virgin Mary, the apostles, or the evangelists could be whipped, jailed, or fined. Otherwise, Trinitarian Christians' right to worship was protected. The law outlawed the use of \"heretic\" and other religious insults against them.\nThe law was used in at least one attempt to prosecute a non-Christian. In 1658, a Jew named Jacob Lumbrozo was accused of blasphemy after saying that Jesus was not the son of God and that the miracles described in the New Testament were conjuring tricks. Lumbrozo did not deny having said such things but argued that he had only responded to questions asked of him. He was held for trial, but the case was later dismissed, and he was given full citizenship as a condition of the restoration of Calvert's rule following the English Civil War.\nThe law had its detractors, even among those groups protected by it. Puritans were concerned that the act and the proprietary government in general were royalist. They were also concerned that by swearing allegiance to Calvert, who was Catholic, they were being required to submit to the Pope, whom they considered to be the Antichrist. Some Anglicans also opposed the law, believing that the Church of England should be the colony's sole established church.\nRepeal and legacy.\nIn 1654, five years after its passage, the Act was repealed. Two years earlier the colony had been seized by Protestants following the execution of King Charles I of England and the outbreak of the English Civil War. In the early stages of that conflict, the colonial assembly of Maryland and its neighbors in Virginia had publicly declared their support for the King. Parliament appointed Protestant commissioners loyal to their cause to subdue the colonies, and two of them, the Virginian William Claiborne and Puritan leader Richard Bennett, took control of the colonial government in St. Mary's City in 1652. In addition to repealing the Maryland Toleration Act with the assistance of Protestant assemblymen, Claiborne and Bennett passed a new law barring Catholics from openly practicing their religion. Calvert regained control after making a deal with the colony's Protestants, and in 1657 the Act was again passed by the colonial assembly and remained in effect until 1692.\nFollowing the Glorious Revolution of 1688 in England, when the Catholic King James II of England was deposed and the Protestant William III ascended the throne, a rebellion of Maryland Puritan Protestants overthrew Calvert's rule. They quickly rescinded the Toleration Act and banned public practice of Catholicism, and it would never be reinstated under colonial rule. In fact, the colony established the Church of England as its official church in 1702 and explicitly barred Catholics from voting in 1718. The Calvert family regained control over the colony in 1715, but only after Benedict Calvert converted to Protestantism. His political control remained tense enough that he did not risk an attempt to reinstate protections for Catholics. It took until the era of the American Revolution for religious tolerance or freedom to again become the practice in Maryland.\nWhile the law did not secure religious freedom, and while it included severe limitations, it was nonetheless a significant milestone. It predates the Enlightenment, which is generally considered to be when the idea of religious freedom took root, and stands as the first legal guarantee of religious tolerance in American and British history. Later laws ensuring religious tolerance and freedom, including the British Act of Toleration of 1689, the Holy Experiment in Pennsylvania, and laws concerning religion in other colonies such as South Carolina, may have been influenced by its example. According to historian Robert Brugger, \"...the measure marked a notable departure from Old World oppression.\" It was not until the passage of the signed First Amendment to the Constitution over a century later that religious freedom was enshrined as a fundamental guarantee, but even that document echoes the Toleration Act in its use of the phrase, \"free exercise thereof\". Thus, despite its lack of a full guarantee of religious freedom or broad-based tolerance, the law is \"a significant step forward in the struggle for religious liberty.\"\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46494", "revid": "50390785", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46494", "title": "Child Soldiers International", "text": "Defunct NGO to stop abuse of children as soldiers\nChild Soldiers International, formerly the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, was a UK-based non-governmental organization that worked to prevent the recruitment, use and exploitation of children by armed forces and groups. It ceased operations as of 7 June 2019.\nHistory.\nFormerly the Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers, Child Soldiers International was founded in 1998 by five human rights and humanitarian organizations: Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, R\u00e4dda Barnen (in the name of Save the Children), Jesuit Refugee Service and QUNO Geneva. Its purpose was to campaign for the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict (OPAC) \u2013 a human rights treaty that prohibits the use of children in armed conflict and raises the age of military recruitment. The treaty was adopted in 2000 and entered the enforcement phase on 12 February 2002. Child Soldiers International continued to promote adherence to the OPAC and other relevant human rights standards.\nPriority countries.\nChild Soldiers International had a London headquarters and conducted research, advocacy and capacity building in countries across the world. Programmes included: Central African Republic; Democratic Republic of Congo; Afghanistan; India; Myanmar; Thailand;\nPolicy making.\nChild Soldiers International delivered research findings and policy recommendations to the United Nations Security Council in New York and the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child in Geneva, Switzerland. According to UN documents, in relation to the adoption and enforcement of the Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict, Child Soldiers International played \"a key role in ensuring implementation at every level.\"\nPublications.\nChild Soldiers International and UNICEF published the \"Guide to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child\" in December 2003. The guide summarizes the process of the treaty's adoption, its fundamental provisions, and recommends that certain activities be undertaken to ensure its full enforcement. It is a practical tool written to aid other NGOs, humanitarian groups, and legislative bodies in implementing OPAC's standards.\nIn 2001, 2004 and 2008, Child Soldiers International published \u2018Child Soldiers Global Reports\u2019 which provide a snapshot of the child soldier situation in every country worldwide. In 2012, Child Soldiers International published Louder than words: an agenda for action to end state use of child soldiers, accompanied by a practical 10-point checklist to assist states to end their recruitment of children. In 2016, Child Soldiers International published \"A law unto themselves? Confronting the recruitment of children by armed groups\". This provides a legal analysis of progress made so far in engaging with armed groups about child recruitment and use.\nFunding and organisational structure.\nChild Soldiers International was a UK registered charity (registered charity number 1095237), with section 501(c)(3) public charity status in the USA.\nAnnual audited financial statements were filed with the UK Charity Commission, Companies House, and published on Child Soldiers International's own website. For the 2015-16 financial year Child Soldiers International had an annual income of \u00a3623,588 and expenditure of \u00a3604,832. In 2015\u201316, 94% of expenditure supported programme activities (6% of expenditure supported the costs of generating funds).\nProgrammatic work was delivered in close collaboration with local and national organisations in target countries. The organisation was governed by a board of trustees.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46496", "revid": "16849003", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46496", "title": "Mount Fuji", "text": "Volcano in Japan\n is an active stratovolcano located on the Japanese island of Honshu, with a summit elevation of . It is the highest mountain in Japan, the second-highest volcano on any Asian island (after Mount Kerinci on the Indonesian island of Sumatra), and the seventh-highest peak of an island on Earth. Mount Fuji last erupted from 1707 to 1708. \nIt is located about southwest of Tokyo, from where it is visible on clear days. It has an exceptionally symmetrical cone, which is covered in snow for about five months of the year. It is a Japanese cultural icon and is frequently depicted in art and photography, as well as visited by sightseers, hikers, and mountain climbers.\nMount Fuji is one of Japan's along with Mount Tate and Mount Haku. It is a Special Place of Scenic Beauty and one of Japan's Historic Sites. It was added to the World Heritage List as a Cultural Site on June 22, 2013. According to UNESCO, Mount Fuji has \"inspired artists and poets and been the object of pilgrimage for centuries\". UNESCO recognizes 25 sites of cultural interest within the Mount Fuji locality. These 25 locations include Mount Fuji and the Shinto shrine, Fujisan Hong\u016b Sengen Taisha.\nEtymology.\nThe current \"kanji\" for Mount Fuji, and , mean \"wealth\" or \"abundant\" and \"man of status\" respectively. The origins of this spelling and the name \"Fuji\" continue to be debated. In Japanese, kanji characters are often applied by sound, and the meaning of the kanji may have nothing to do with the name of the mountain. It was named Fuji before the kanji was applied to it.\n\u5bcc\u58eb\u5c71\u8a18 (Fuji-san Ki) written by Miyako no Yoshika (\u90fd\u826f\u9999) in Heian period states, \u201dThe name of the mountain, Fuji, is taken from the name of the county.\"\nA text of the 9th century, \"Tale of the Bamboo Cutter\", says that the name came from and also from the image of ascending the mountain slopes. An early folk etymology claims that \"Fuji\" came from (\"not\" + \"two\"), meaning \"without equal\" or \"nonpareil\". Another claims that it came from (\"not\" + \"to exhaust\"), meaning \"never-ending\".\nHirata Atsutane, a Japanese classical scholar in the Edo period, speculated that the name is from a word meaning \"a mountain standing up shapely as an of a rice plant\". British missionary John Batchelor (1855\u20131944) argued that the name is from the Ainu word for \"fire\" (\"fuchi\") of the fire deity Kamui Fuchi, which was denied by a Japanese linguist Ky\u014dsuke Kindaichi on the grounds of phonetic development (sound change). Fuji and Fuchi are known to be false friends, and Batchelor's argument is rejected by modern academics. \"Huchi\" means \"old woman\" and \"ape\" is the word for \"fire\", thus \"ape huchi kamuy\" is the fire deity. Research on the distribution of place names that \"fuji\" suggests that \"fuji\" originates in the Yamato language rather than Ainu. Japanese toponymist Kanji Kagami claimed that the name has the same root as and , and came from its \"long well-shaped slope\".\nVovin proposed an alternative hypothesis based on Old Japanese reading : the word may have been borrowed from Eastern Old Japanese \u706b\u4e3b, meaning \"fire master\".\nVariations.\nIn English, the mountain is known as Mount Fuji. Some sources refer to it as \"Fuji-san\", \"Fujiyama\" or, redundantly, \"Mt. Fujiyama\". Japanese speakers refer to the mountain as \"Fuji-san\". This \"san\" is not the honorific suffix used with people's names, but the Sino-Japanese reading of the character used in Sino-Japanese compounds. In Nihon-shiki and Kunrei-shiki romanization, the name is transliterated as \"Huzi\".\nOther Japanese names that have become obsolete or poetic include , , , and , created by combining the first character of , \"Fuji\", and , \"mountain\".\nHistory.\nMount Fuji is widely regarded to have an attractive volcanic cone. It has been a frequent subject of Japanese art, especially after 1600, when Edo (now Tokyo) became the capital and people saw the mountain while traveling on the T\u014dkaid\u014d road. According to historian H. Byron Earhart, \"in medieval times it eventually came to be seen by Japanese as the \"number one\" mountain of the known world of the three countries of India, China, and Japan\". The mountain is mentioned in Japanese literature throughout the ages and is the subject of many poems.\nThe summit has been thought of as sacred since ancient times, and was therefore forbidden to women. In 1872 the Japanese government issued an edict (May 4, 1872, Grand Council of State Edict 98) stating, \"Any remaining practices of female exclusion on shrine and temple lands shall be immediately abolished, and mountain climbing for worship, etc., shall be permitted.\" Tatsu Takayama was the first woman on record to summit Mount Fuji in the fall of 1832.\nAncient samurai used the base of the mountain as a remote training area, near the present-day town of Gotemba. The \"sh\u014dgun\" Minamoto no Yoritomo held \"yabusame\" archery contests in the area in the early Kamakura period.\nThe first ascent by a foreigner was by Sir Rutherford Alcock in September 1860, who ascended the mountain in 8 hours and descended in 3 hours. Alcock's brief narrative in \"The Capital of the Tycoon\" was the first widely disseminated description of the mountain in the West. Lady Fanny Parkes, the wife of British ambassador Sir Harry Parkes, was the first non-Japanese woman to summit, in 1867. Photographer Felix Beato climbed Mount Fuji two years later.\nOn March 5, 1966, BOAC Flight 911, a Boeing 707, broke up in flight and crashed near the Mount Fuji Gotemba New fifth station, shortly after departure. All 113 passengers and 11 crew members died, which was attributed to clear-air turbulence caused by lee waves downwind of the mountain. A memorial for the crash victims sits near Gotemba New Fifth Station.\nToday, Mount Fuji is an international destination for tourism and mountain climbing. In the early 20th century, populist educator Frederick Starr's Chautauqua lectures about his ascents of Mount Fuji were widely known in America. A Japanese saying suggests that a wise person will climb Mt. Fuji once in their lifetime, but only a fool would climb it twice. It remains a popular symbol in Japanese culture, including making numerous movie appearances, inspiring the Infiniti logo, and appearing in medicine with the Mount Fuji sign.\nIn September 2004, the staffed weather station at the summit was closed after 72 years in operation. Observers monitored radar sweeps that detected typhoons and heavy rains. The station, which was the highest in Japan at , was replaced by an automated system.\nMount Fuji was added to the World Heritage List as a Cultural Site on June 22, 2013.\nGeography.\nMount Fuji is a distinctive feature of the geography of Japan. It stands tall and is located near the Pacific coast of central Honshu, just southwest of Tokyo. It straddles the boundary of Shizuoka and Yamanashi prefectures. Four small cities surround it - Gotemba to the east, Fujiyoshida to the north, Fujinomiya to the southwest, and Fuji to the south - accompanied by towns and villages. It is surrounded by five lakes: Lake Kawaguchi, Lake Yamanaka, Lake Sai, Lake Motosu and Lake Sh\u014dji. They, and nearby Lake Ashi in Kanagawa Prefecture, provide views. The mountain is part of Fuji-Hakone-Izu National Park. It can be seen more distantly from Yokohama, Tokyo, and sometimes as far as Chiba, Saitama, Tochigi, Ibaraki and Lake Hamana under skies. It was photographed from space during a space shuttle mission.\nClimate.\nThe summit has a tundra climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"ET\"). The temperature is low at high altitude, and the cone is covered by snow for several months of the year. The lowest recorded temperature is recorded in February 1981, and the highest temperature was recorded in August 1942.\nFuji's seasonal snowcap appears at an average date of 2 October. In 2024, the snowcap formed on 6 November, the latest-occurring since records began in 1894.\nGeology.\nMount Fuji is located at a triple junction trench where the Eurasian Plate, North American Plate, and Philippine Sea Plate meet. These three plates form the western part of Japan, the eastern part of Japan, and the Izu Peninsula respectively. The Pacific Plate is subducting beneath these plates, resulting in volcanic activity. Mount Fuji is located near three island arcs: the Southwestern Japan Arc, the Northeastern Japan Arc, and the Izu-Bonin-Mariana Arc. The Fuji triple junction is only from the Boso triple junction.\nFuji's main crater is in diameter and deep. The bottom of the crater is in diameter. Slope angles from the crater to a distance of are 31\u00b0\u201335\u00b0, the angle of repose for dry gravel. Beyond this distance, slope angles are about 27\u00b0, which is caused by an increase in scoria. Mid-flank slope angles decrease from 23\u00b0 to less than 10\u00b0 in the piedmont.\nScientists have identified four distinct phases of volcanic activity in the formation of Mount Fuji. The first phase, called \"Sen-komitake\", is composed of an andesite core deep within the mountain, discovered in 2004. \"Sen-komitake\" was followed by the \"\"Komitake\" Fuji\", a basalt layer believed to have formed several hundred thousand years ago. Approximately 100,000\u00a0years ago, \"Old Fuji\" was formed over the top of \"Komitake\" Fuji. The modern, \"New Fuji\" is believed to have formed over the top of Old Fuji around 10,000\u00a0years ago.\nPre-Komitake started erupting in the Middle Pleistocene in an area north of Mount Fuji. After a relatively short pause, eruptions began again, which formed Komitake Volcano. These eruptions ended 100,000 years ago. Ashitaka Volcano was active from 400,000 to 100,000 years ago and is located southeast of Mount Fuji. Mount Fuji started erupting 100,000 years ago, with Ko-Fuji (old-Fuji) forming 100,000 to 17,000 years ago, but it is now almost completely buried. A large landslide on the southwest flank occurred about 18,000 years ago. Shin-Fuji (new-Fuji) eruptions in the form of lava, lapilli, and volcanic ash have occurred between 17,000 and 8,000 years ago, between 7,000 and 3,500 years ago, and between 4,000 and 2,000 years ago. Flank eruptions, mostly in the form of parasitic cinder cones, ceased in 1707. The largest cone, Omuro-Yama, is one of more than 100 cones aligned NW-SE and NE-SW through the summit. Mt. Fuji also has more than 70 lava tunnels and extensive lava tree molds. Two large landslides are at the head of the Yoshida-Osawa and Osawa-Kuzure valleys.\nAs of \u00a02002[ [update]], the volcano was classified as active with a low risk of eruption. The last recorded eruption was the H\u014dei eruption which started on December 16, 1707 (\"H\u014dei 4, 23rd day of the 11th month\"), and ended about January 1, 1708 (\"H\u014dei 4, 9th day of the 12th month\"). The eruption formed a new crater and a second peak, named Mount H\u014dei, halfway down its southeastern side. Fuji spewed cinders and ash that resembled rainfall in Izu, Kai, Sagami, and Musashi. Since then, no signs of an eruption are recorded. On the evening of March 15, 2011, however, a magnitude 6.2 earthquake at shallow depth occurred a few kilometres from Mount Fuji on its southern side.\nRecorded eruptions.\nAbout 11,000 years ago, a large amount of lava erupted from the west side of the top. This lava formed new Fuji, which is the main body of Mount Fuji. Since then, the tops of ancient Fuji and new Fuji have been side by side. About 2,500\u20132,800 years ago, the top part of ancient Fuji was destroyed in a large sector collapse and only the top of Shin-Fuji remained. Ten known eruptions can be traced to reliable records.\nCurrent eruptive danger.\nFollowing the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake, media speculated that the shock might induce volcanic unrest at Mount Fuji. In September 2012, mathematical models created by the National Research Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Prevention (NRIESDP) suggested that the pressure in Mount Fuji's magma chamber could be 1.6 megapascals higher than before its 1707 eruption. This was interpreted by some media outlets to mean that an eruption of Mount Fuji could be imminent. Absent any method of directly measuring the pressure of a volcano's magma chamber however, indirect calculations of the type used by NRIESDP remained speculative and unverifiable. Other indicators suggestive of heightened eruptive danger, such as active fumaroles and recently discovered faults, are typical occurrences at this type of volcano.\nEruption fears continued into the 2020s. In 2021, a new hazard map was created to help residents plan for evacuation, stoking fears because of its increased estimate of lava flow and additional vents. Soon afterwards, a 4.8 magnitude earthquake hit the area. The Japan Meteorological Agency however, assured the public that the earthquake did not increase the eruption risk. In 2023, a new evacuation plan was developed to account for the 2021 hazard map update.\nAokigahara forest.\nAokigahara forest sits at Fuji's northwest base. Folk tales and legends tell of ghosts, demons, y\u016brei and y\u014dkai haunting the forest, and in the 19th century, Aokigahara was one of many places where poor families abandoned their young and elderly. Approximately 30 suicides are counted yearly, with a high of nearly 80 in 2002. The recent increase prompted local officials to erect signs that attempt to convince suicidal individuals to reconsider, which have disrupted some attempts. Earlier suicides have created an allure that has persisted across decades.\nMany hikers mark their routes by leaving colored plastic tape behind as they pass, raising concern about effects on the forest's ecosystem.\nAccess.\nTransport.\nThe closest airport with scheduled international service is Mt. Fuji Shizuoka Airport. It opened in June 2009. It is about from Mount Fuji. Tokyo International Airport (Haneda Airport) and Narita International Airport are approximately three hours and 15 minutes from Mount Fuji.\nClimbing routes.\nApproximately 300,000 people climbed Mount Fuji in 2009. The most popular period for people to hike up Mount Fuji is from July to August, while huts and other facilities are operating and the weather is warmest. Buses to the trail heads typically used by climbers start running on July 1. Climbing from October to May is discouraged, after several high-profile deaths amid cold weather. Most Japanese climb the mountain at night to be in a position at or near the summit when the sun rises. The morning light is called \"goraik\u014d\", \"arrival of light\".\nThe four major routes to the summit each have numbered stations along the way. They are (clockwise, starting north): Yoshida, Subashiri, Gotemba, and Fujinomiya routes. Climbers usually start at the fifth stations, as these are reachable by car or by bus. The summit is the tenth station on each trail. The stations on different routes are at different elevations; the highest fifth station is located at Fujinomiya, followed by Yoshida, Subashiri, and Gotemba. Four routes start from the base of the mountain: Shojiko, Yoshida, Suyama, and Murayama routes.\nEven though it has only the second-highest elevation, the Yoshida route is the most popular. It offers a large parking area and many large mountain huts where climbers can rest or stay. During the summer season, most Mount Fuji climbing tour buses arrive there. The next most popular is the Fujinomiya route, which has the highest fifth station, followed by Subashiri and Gotemba. The ascent from the fifth station can take anywhere between five and seven hours, while the descent can take from three to four hours. Even though most climbers do not ascend the Subashiri and Gotemba routes, many descend these because of their ash-covered paths. From the seventh station to near the fifth station, running down these ash-covered paths takes approximately 30\u00a0minutes.\nTractor routes accompany the climbing routes. These routes are used to bring food and other materials to huts on the mountain. Because the tractors usually take up most of the width of these paths and tend to push large rocks from the side of the path, tractor paths are off-limits to climbers on sections that are not merged with the climbing or descending paths. Nevertheless, people often ride mountain bikes down tractor routes from the summit. This is particularly risky, as it may send rocks into others.\nThe four routes from the base of the mountain offer historical sites. Murayama is the oldest route, while the Yoshida route has many old shrines, teahouses, and huts along its path. These routes are gaining popularity and are undergoing restoration, although still relatively uncommon. Bears have been sighted along the Yoshida route.\nHuts at and above the fifth stations are usually staffed during climbing season, but those below the fifth stations are not usually staffed. Yoshida has the most huts, while Gotemba has the fewest. The huts along the Gotemba route also tend to open later and close earlier than those along the Yoshida route. Because Mount Fuji is designated as a national park, it is illegal to camp above the fifth station.\nEight peaks surround the summit. The highest point in Japan, Ken-ga-mine, is where the Mount Fuji Radar System used to be (replaced by an automated system on October 1, 2008). Climbers can visit each of these peaks.\nParagliding.\nParagliders take off in the vicinity of the fifth station, Gotemba parking lot, between Subashiri and H\u014dei-zan peak on Fuji's south side, and at other locations, depending on wind direction. Several paragliding schools use the wide sandy/grassy slope between Gotemba and Subashiri parking lots as a training hill.\nOvertourism concerns.\nOn 1 February 2024, the Yamanashi prefectural government imposed a mandatory fee of 2,000 yen ($13) for hikers using the Yoshida trail beginning in the summer season as part of efforts to ease congestion and provide funding for safety protocols. It later announced that it would impose a daily limit of 4,000 hikers on the trail and close it between 4 p.m. and 3 a.m. except for guests in mountain lodges. The Shizuoka prefectural government subsequently announced that it would close the Subashiri, Gotemba and Fujinomiya trails at the same time with the same exceptions, citing concerns over congestion.\nIn culture.\nShinto mythology.\nIn Shinto mythology, Kuninotokotachi (\u56fd\u4e4b\u5e38\u7acb\u795e, \"Kuninotokotachi-no-Kami\", in \"Kojiki\") (\u56fd\u5e38\u7acb\u5c0a, \"Kuninotokotachi-no-Mikoto\", in \"Nihon Shoki\") is one of the two gods born from \"something like a reed that arose from the soil\" when the earth was chaotic. According to the \"Nihon Shoki\", Konohanasakuya-hime, wife of Ninigi, is the goddess of Mount Fuji, where Fujisan Hong\u016b Sengen Taisha is dedicated to her.\nIn ancient times, the mountain was worshipped from afar. The Asama shrine was set up at the foothills to ward off eruptions. In the Heian period (794\u20131185), volcanic activity subsided and Fuji was used as a base for Shugend\u014d, a syncretic religion combining mountain worship and Buddhism. Worshippers began to climb the slopes, and by the early 12th century, Matsudai Shonin had founded a temple on the summit.\nFuji-k\u014d was an Edo period cult centred around the mountain that was founded by an ascetic named Hasegawa Kakugy\u014d (1541\u20131646). The cult venerated the mountain as a female deity, and encouraged its members to climb it. In doing so, they would be reborn, \"purified and... able to find happiness.\" The cult waned in the Meiji period, and although it persists to this day, it has been subsumed into Shint\u014d sects.\nPopular culture.\nAs a national symbol of the country, the mountain has been depicted in media such as paintings, woodblock prints (such as Hokusai's \"Thirty-six Views of Mount Fuji\" and \"One Hundred Views of Mount Fuji\" from the 1830s), poetry, music, theater, film, manga, anime, pottery and even Kawaii subculture.\nBefore its explosive eruption in 1980, Mount St. Helens was once known as \"The Fuji of America\", for its striking resemblance to Mount Fuji. Mount Taranaki in New Zealand is also said to bear a resemblance to Mount Fuji, and for this reason has been used as a stand-in for the mountain in films and television.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46497", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46497", "title": "Blow job", "text": ""}
{"id": "46499", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46499", "title": "Fujiyama", "text": ""}
{"id": "46500", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46500", "title": "Mt. Fuji", "text": ""}
{"id": "46503", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46503", "title": "Invented", "text": ""}
{"id": "46504", "revid": "46901472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46504", "title": "DARPA TIDES program", "text": "US military program\nTranslingual Information Detection, Extraction and Summarization (TIDES) is a technology development program funded by the U.S. Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), focused on the automated processing and understanding of language data. The primary goal of the program is to enable English speakers to locate and interpret required information quickly and effectively regardless of the original language.\nComponents.\nThe four component capabilities of the technology being developed by TIDES includes:\nTools for detection, extraction, and summarization must work within a language (monolingually) and across languages (translingually), to be used by people who speak only English. In addition to developing technology, TIDES is also researching methods to adapt it quickly and cheaply to other languages, including languages with limited linguistic resources. TIDES aims to integrate the component capabilities together and with other technologies to produce tools for real-world applications.\nInvestigative Data Warehouse.\nThe FBI's Investigative Data Warehouse contains an open-source news library, containing news gathered by the TIDES program. The information is collected from public websites around the world, including \"Ha'aretz\", \"Pravda\", the \"Jordan Times\", \"The People's Daily\", \"The Washington Post\", and others. It uses the Mitre Text and Audio Processing (MiTAP) system.\nNotes and Bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46505", "revid": "1138432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46505", "title": "Airplane!", "text": "1980 American satirical comedy film\nAirplane! (alternatively titled Flying High!) is a 1980 American disaster comedy film written and directed by Jim Abrahams and brothers David and Jerry Zucker in their directorial debut, and produced by Jon Davison. It stars Robert Hays and Julie Hagerty and features Leslie Nielsen, Robert Stack, Lloyd Bridges, Peter Graves, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, and Lorna Patterson. It is a parody of the disaster film genre, particularly the 1957 Paramount film \"Zero Hour!\", from which it borrows the plot, central characters, and some dialogue. It also draws many elements from \"Airport 1975\" and other films in the \"Airport\" series. It is known for using surreal humor and fast-paced slapstick comedy, including visual and verbal puns, gags, running jokes, and dark humor.\nReleased by Paramount Pictures, it was a critical and commercial success, grossing $171 million worldwide against a budget of $3.5 million. The creators received the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Adapted Comedy, and nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy and for the BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay.\nSince its release, the film's reputation has grown substantially, and \"Airplane!\" is now considered one of the greatest comedy films ever made, inspiring numerous references, homages, and further parodies in popular culture. It ranked sixth on Bravo's 100 Funniest Movies. In a 2007 survey by Channel 4 in the United Kingdom, it was judged the second-greatest comedy of all time, behind \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\". In 2008, it was selected by \"Empire\" magazine as one of the 500 Greatest Movies of All Time, and in 2012 was voted number one on the 50 Funniest Comedies Ever poll. In 2010, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nEx\u2013fighter pilot Ted Striker is a traumatized war veteran turned taxi driver. Because of his pathological fear of flying and subsequent \"drinking problem\"\u2014he splashes beverages anywhere but into his mouth\u2014Ted has been unable to hold a responsible job. His wartime girlfriend, Elaine Dickinson, now a flight attendant, breaks off her relationship with him before boarding her rostered flight from Los Angeles to Chicago. Ted abandons his taxi and buys a ticket on the same flight to try to win her back. Once on board, however, Elaine continues to reject him, causing Ted to inadvertently drive several other passengers to suicide as he sadly reminisces.\nAfter the in-flight meal is served, the entire flight crew and several passengers fall ill. Passenger Dr. Rumack discovers that the fish served during meal service has caused food poisoning. With the flight crew incapacitated, Elaine contacts the Chicago control tower for help and is instructed by tower supervisor Steve McCroskey to activate the plane's autopilot, a large inflatable dummy pilot dubbed \"Otto\", which will get them to Chicago, but cannot land the plane. Elaine and Rumack convince Ted to take the controls. When Steve learns Ted is piloting, he contacts Ted's former commanding officer, Rex Kramer\u2014now serving as a commercial pilot\u2014to help talk Ted through the landing procedure. Ted becomes uneasy when Kramer starts giving orders, and he briefly breaks down amid more wartime flashbacks. Elaine and Rumack both bolster Ted's confidence, and he manages to once again take the controls.\nAs the plane nears Chicago, the weather worsens, complicating the landing. With Elaine's help as co-pilot and Rex's guidance from the tower, Ted is able to land the plane safely, despite the landing gear shearing off, and the passengers suffer only minor injuries. Rescue vehicles arrive to help unload the plane. Impressed by Ted's courage, Elaine embraces and kisses him, rekindling their relationship. \"Otto\" restarts the plane and takes off as a female companion inflates beside him.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Robert Hays as Ted Striker\nProduction.\nJerry Zucker, Jim Abrahams, and David Zucker (collectively known as Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker, or ZAZ) wrote \"Airplane!\" while they were performing with the Kentucky Fried Theatre, a theatre group they had founded in 1971. To obtain material for comedy routines, they routinely recorded late-night television and reviewed the tapes later primarily to pull the commercials, a process Abrahams compared to \"seining for fish\". During one such taping process, they unintentionally recorded the 1957 film \"Zero Hour!\", and while scanning the commercials, found it to be a \"perfectly classically structured film\" according to Jerry Zucker. Abrahams later described \"Zero Hour!\" as \"the serious version of \"Airplane!\"\" It was the first film script they wrote, completed around 1975, and was originally called \"The Late Show\". The script originally stayed close to the dialog and plot of \"Zero Hour!\", as ZAZ thought they did not have a sufficient understanding of film at the time to structure a proper script. ZAZ's script borrowed so much from \"Zero Hour!\" that they believed they needed to negotiate the rights to create the remake of the film and ensure they remain within the allowance for parody within copyright law. They were able to obtain the rights from Warner Bros. and Paramount for about $2,500 at the time. The original script contained spoofs of television commercials, but people who proofread it advised them to shorten the commercials, and they eventually removed them. When their script was finished, they were unable to sell it.\nWhile failing to sell their script, the trio met director John Landis, who encouraged them to write a film based on their theatre sketches. They managed to put \"The Kentucky Fried Movie\" into production in the late 1970s. David Zucker said, \"it was the first time we had ever been on a movie set. We learned a lot. We learned that if you really wanted a movie to come out the way you wanted it to, you had to direct. So on the next movie, \"Airplane!\", we insisted on directing\".\nEventually the \"Airplane!\" script found its way to Paramount through Michael Eisner, who had learned of the script via Susan Baerwald, another scriptwriter with United Artists, and had Jeffrey Katzenberg track down and meet with ZAZ to discuss details. Avco Embassy Pictures also expressed interest in producing the film, but ZAZ decided to go with Paramount.\nParamount insisted the film be shot in color rather than black-and-white as ZAZ wanted, and to be set aboard a jet airliner rather than propeller plane to better identify with modern filmgoers. In exchange, Paramount acquiesced to ZAZ's desire to cast serious actors for the film rather than comedy performers. Principal photography began on June 20, 1979, and wrapped on August 31, with the bulk of filming having been done in August. Jerry Zucker stood beside the camera during shooting, while David Zucker and Jim Abrahams watched the video feed to see how the film would look; they conferred after each take.\nCasting.\nDavid Zucker explained that \"the trick was to cast actors like Robert Stack, Leslie Nielsen, Peter Graves, and Lloyd Bridges. These were people who, up to that time, had never done comedy. We thought they were much funnier than the comedians of that time were\".\nDavid Zucker felt Stack was the most important actor to be cast, since he was the \"linchpin\" of the film's plot. Stack initially played his role in a way that was different from what the directors had in mind. They showed him a tape of impressionist John Byner impersonating Robert Stack. According to the producers, Stack was \"doing an impression of John Byner doing an impression of Stack\". Stack was not initially interested in the part, but ZAZ persuaded him. Bridges' children advised him to take the part. Graves rejected the script at first, considering it tasteless. During filming, ZAZ had explained to Graves that his lines spoken to a young boy, like \"Have you ever seen a grown man naked?\", would \"be explained later in a part that you aren't in\". On the DVD commentary, Abrahams said: \"I don't understand. What did he think was tasteless about pedophilia?\"\nFor the role of Dr. Rumack, ZAZ initially suggested Dom DeLuise, Christopher Lee (who had appeared in \"Airport '77\"), Vincent Price, and Jack Webb, all of whom turned it down, before they considered Nielsen, who was \"just a fish in water\" in his role, according to Jerry Zucker. Nielsen's career to this point had consisted mostly of serious leading roles, but he had wanted to work in comedy and had been looking for a film to help in the transition. He was considered a \"closet comedian\" on set, pranking his fellow actors between shots, but immediately adopted his somber, serious persona when performing as Rumack. During filming, Nielsen used a device that made farting noises to keep the cast off-balance. Hays said that Nielsen \"played that thing like a maestro\". Christopher Lee would later acknowledge that turning down the role (to star in the film \"1941\") was a huge mistake.\nThe role of Ted Striker was written for David Letterman, who had auditioned for a news anchorman role in \"Kentucky Fried Movie\". Letterman did a screen test in 1979 that ZAZ liked and they wanted him to do a second audition, but Letterman did not want to pursue the role and was not selected. Chevy Chase, Barry Manilow, Bill Murray and Fred Willard were also considered for the role. Caitlyn Jenner also read for the part. Instead, ZAZ opted for Robert Hays, co-star of ABC situation comedy \"Angie\". Elaine's part was auditioned for by Sigourney Weaver and Shelley Long but eventually went to Julie Hagerty. The directors advised the pair to play their roles straight. Hays and Hagerty developed an on-screen chemistry that worked in the film's favor; they spent time to practice and perfect the bar dance routine set to \"Stayin' Alive\", among other scenes.\nFor the \"red zone/white zone\" send-up of curbside terminal announcements in which public address announcers \"Betty\" and \"Vernon\" argue over the red and white zones, ZAZ went through the usual process of auditioning professional voice actors, but failed to find ones who could provide the desired authenticity. Instead, the filmmakers ultimately sought out and hired the real-life married couple who had recorded the announcement tapes which were then being used at Los Angeles International Airport. ZAZ lifted some of their dialog directly from the 1968 novel \"Airport\", written by Arthur Hailey who had also written \"Zero Hour!\"'s script. The lifted lines included ones about an unwanted pregnancy; David Zucker said the couple \"got a kick out of it\". The role of the Hare Krishna in the airport went to a college roommate of Hays's, newcomer David Leisure, due to Leisure's willingness to shave his head for the bit part; it would be several more years before Leisure landed his breakthrough role as Joe Isuzu. Baseball player Pete Rose was originally considered for the role of Roger Murdock.\nZAZ got businessman and Republican politician Howard Jarvis to make a cameo appearance. Jarvis, who was well known in California at the time for getting his tax policy Proposition 13 passed in 1978, plays the patient passenger who gets into Ted Striker's cab at the start of the film. He then spends the entire movie sitting in an empty cab with the meter running. He also has the final line, which he says after the end credits: he looks at his watch and says \"Well, I'll give him another twenty minutes, but that's it!\", the joke being that Jarvis was wasting money while being known for his stance on fiscal responsibility and limited spending.\nMusic.\nThe film's score was composed and conducted by Elmer Bernstein, who had provided soundtracks for classic films like \"The Ten Commandments\", \"The Magnificent Seven\", \"To Kill a Mockingbird\", and \"The Great Escape\", and performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony. ZAZ told Bernstein they did not want an epic score like his past works but \"a B-Movie level score, overdone and corny\". According to ZAZ, Bernstein completely understood what they were trying to do, had laughed throughout a previous cut of the film, and wrote a \"fantastic score\".\nIn 1980, an LP soundtrack for the film was released by Regency Records which includes dialog and songs from the film. Narrated by Shadoe Stevens, it features only one score track, the \"Love Theme from \"Airplane!\"\" composed by Bernstein. The soundtrack was altered for the European \"Flying High\" release, with several featured tracks swapped for pieces original to the LP.\nIn April 2009, La-La Land Records announced it would release the first official soundtrack album for \"Airplane!\", containing Bernstein's complete score. The soundtrack was released digitally on February 19, 2013, by Paramount Music.\nRelease.\nPrior to the film's release, the directors were apprehensive following a mediocre audience response at a pre-screening, but the film earned its entire budget of about $3.5 million in its first five days of wide release.\n\"Airplane!\" opened on June 27, 1980, in seven theatres in Toronto, grossing $83,058 in its opening weekend. It also opened in two theaters in Buffalo, grossing $14,000 in its first week. The film then expanded on Wednesday, July 2 to 705 theaters in the United States and Canada, grossing $6,052,514 in its first five days of wide release, finishing second for the weekend with a gross of $4,540,000. Overall, it grossed $83 million at the US and Canadian box office and returned $40 million in rentals, making it the fourth-highest-grossing film of 1980. Worldwide, the film earned $130 million in its initial release, and by 2002 it had made $171 million.\nReception.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"\"Airplane!\" emerged in 1980 as a sharply perceptive parody of the big-budget disaster films that dominated Hollywood during the 1970s [and] introduced a much-needed deflating assessment of the tendency of theatrical film producers to push successful formulaic movie conventions beyond the point of logic\".\nLibrary of Congress\n\"Airplane!\" received universal acclaim from critics and is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1980. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, of 73 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.5/10. The website's consensus reads: \"Though unabashedly juvenile and silly, \"Airplane!\" is nevertheless an uproarious spoof comedy full of quotable lines and slapstick gags that endure to this day.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the a score of 78 out of 100, based on 18 critics, indicating .\nRoger Ebert of the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" wrote \"\"Airplane!\" is sophomoric, obvious, predictable, corny, and quite often very funny. And the reason it's funny is frequently because it's sophomoric, predictable, corny, etc.\" Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" wrote \"\"Airplane!\" is more than a pleasant surprise... As a remedy for the bloated self-importance of too many other current efforts, it's just what the doctor ordered\".\nIn 2008, \"Airplane!\" was selected by \"Empire\" magazine as one of 'The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time'. It was also placed on a similar list\u2014'The Best 1000 Movies Ever Made'\u2014by \"The New York Times\". In November 2015, the film was ranked fourth in the Writers Guild of America's list of '101 Funniest Screenplays'.\nMaximOnline.com named the airplane crash in \"Airplane!\" as number four on its list of \"Most Horrific Movie Plane Crashes\". Leslie Nielsen's response to Hays' \"Surely you can't be serious\" line\u2014\"I am serious. And don't call me Shirley\"\u2014was 79th on AFI's list of the best 100 movie quotes. In 2000, the American Film Institute listed \"Airplane!\" as number ten on its list of the 100 funniest American films. In the same year, \"Total Film\" readers voted it the second-greatest comedy film of all time. It was also second in the British 50 Greatest Comedy Films poll on Channel 4, beaten by \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\". \"Entertainment Weekly\" voted the film the \"funniest movie on video\" in their list of the 100 funniest movies on video.\nA number of actors were cast to spoof their established images: prior to their roles in \"Airplane!\", Nielsen, Stack, and Bridges were known for portraying adventurous, no-nonsense tough-guy characters. Stack's role as the captain who loses his nerve in one of the earliest airline \"disaster\" films, \"The High and the Mighty\" (1954), is spoofed in \"Airplane!\", as is Lloyd Bridges' 1970\u20131971 television role as airport manager Jim Conrad in \"San Francisco International Airport\". Peter Graves was in the made-for-television film \"\", in which an SST was unable to land owing to an emergency.\nNielsen enjoyed a major career boost subsequent to \"Airplane!\"'s release. The film marked a significant change in his film persona towards deadpan comedy, notably in the three \"Naked Gun\" films: ' (1988)\"; \" (1991)\";\" and ' (1994). The films were based on the six-episode television series \"Police Squad!\" which starred Nielsen and was created and produced by Zucker\u2013Abrahams\u2013Zucker. This also led to his casting, many years later, in Mel Brooks' \"\". Brooks had wanted to make the film for a long time, but put it off because, as he said: \"I just could not find the right Dracula\". According to Brooks, he did not see \"Airplane!\" until years after its release. When he did, he knew Nielsen would be right for the part. When it was suggested that his role in \"Airplane!\" was against type, Nielsen protested that he had \"always been cast against type before\", and that comedy was what he always really wanted to do.\nInfluence.\nPeter Farrelly said of the film: \"I was in Rhode Island the first time I saw \"Airplane!\" Seeing it for the first time was like going to a great rock concert, like seeing Led Zeppelin or the Talking Heads. We didn't realize until later that what we'd seen was a very specific kind of comedy that we now call the Zucker-Abrahams-Zucker school\". Farrelly, along with his writing partner Bennett Yellin, sent a comedy script to David Zucker, who in return gave them their first Hollywood writing job. Farrelly said: \"I'll tell you right now, if the Zuckers didn't exist, there would be no Farrelly brothers\".\nOn the \"Family Guy\" episode Prick Up Your Ears, Stewie is told to calm down by a line of characters holding various weapons, mimicking a scene from the movie. In the episode Airport '07, Hugh Hefner gives Quagmire a motivation speech while playing the Notre Dame Victory March, another reference.\nDuring the Qantas Flight 72 incident over the Indian Ocean west of Australia in 2008, the captain recited some of Lloyd Bridges' lines to relieve tension while trying to land the plane. This was commented in the \"Air Disasters\" episode \"Free Fall\".\nThe 2010 documentary \"\" opens with a scene from the film, in which a passenger is offered the very short book \"Famous Jewish Sports Legends\" by a flight attendant.\nThe \"MythBusters\" TV show episode \"Airplane Hour\" reenacted the climax of the film to see if an inexperienced pilot could land a plane with only a call from Air Traffic Control. The Mythbusters had to use a simulation to test the myth but concluded that the scene was plausible. They did, however, mention that most planes today have an autopilot to land the plane safely.\nIn the 2012 film \"Ted\", main character John Bennett tells the story of how he met Lori Collins. The flashback is a close recreation of the scene where Ted Striker met Elaine Dickinson in the disco.\nIn early 2014, Delta Air Lines began using a new on-board safety film with many 1980s references, featuring an ending with a cameo of Kareem Abdul-Jabbar reprising his role as co-pilot Roger Murdock.\nIn 2014, Travel Wisconsin began airing an ad with Robert Hays and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar reprising their roles from the film. Kareem makes the comment \"Why did I ever leave this place?\" referring to his time playing for the Milwaukee Bucks. Hays also reprises his role as an airline pilot in \"\".\nThe first episode of the eighth season of the TV series \"The Goldbergs\" re-enacts certain scenes.\nRelated works.\nSequel.\n\"\", first released on December 10, 1982, attempted to tackle the science fiction film genre, though there was still emphasis on the general theme of disaster films. Although most of the cast reunited for the sequel, the writers and directors of \"Airplane!\" chose not to be involved. In the DVD commentary for \"Airplane!\", David Zucker, Jim Abrahams, and Jerry Zucker claim to have never seen nor to have any desire to see \"Airplane II\".\nBook and audiobook.\nAn oral history on the making of \"Airplane!\", was published on October 3, 2023. An audiobook version was also released, featuring David Zucker, Jim Abrahams, and Jerry Zucker as well as guests Jimmy Kimmel, Bill Hader, \"Weird Al\" Yankovic, Molly Shannon, Sarah Silverman, Patton Oswalt, Beau Bridges, John Landis, Barry Diller and Michael Eisner, among others.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46506", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46506", "title": "Heavier than air flight", "text": ""}
{"id": "46507", "revid": "38788892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46507", "title": "Party leaders of the United States Senate", "text": "The positions of majority leader and minority leader are held by two United States senators and people of the party leadership of the United States Senate. They serve as chief spokespersons for their respective political parties, holding the majority and the minority in the chamber. They are each elected to their posts by the senators of their party caucuses: the Senate Democratic Caucus and the Senate Republican Conference.\nBy Senate precedent, the presiding officer gives the majority leader priority in obtaining recognition to speak on the floor. The majority leader serves as the chief representative of their party in the Senate and is considered the most powerful member of the chamber. They also serve as the chief representative of their party in the entire Congress if the House of Representatives, and thus the office of the speaker of the House, is controlled by the opposition party. The Senate's executive and legislative business is also managed and scheduled by the majority leader.\nThe assistant majority leader and assistant minority leader of the United States Senate, commonly called whips, are the second-ranking members of each party's leadership. The main function of the majority and minority whips is to gather votes of their respective parties on major issues. As the second-ranking members of Senate leadership, if there is no floor leader present, the whip may become acting floor leader.\nExisting floor leaders.\nThe Senate of the 119th Congress is composed in 2025 of 53 Republicans, 45 Democrats, and 2 independents; both the independents caucus with the Democrats.\nThe leaders are Senators John Thune (R) of South Dakota and Chuck Schumer (D) of New York. The assistant leaders, or whips, are Senators John Barrasso (R) of Wyoming and Dick Durbin (D) of Illinois.\nHistory.\nAt first a \"Senate leader\" was an informal position usually an influential committee chairman, or a person of great eloquence, seniority, or wealth, such as Daniel Webster and Nelson Aldrich. By at least 1850, parties in each chamber of Congress began naming chairs, and while conference and caucus chairs carried very little authority, the Senate party floor leader positions arose from the position of conference chair. \nSenate Democrats began electing their floor leaders in 1920 while they were in the minority. John W. Kern was a Democratic senator from Indiana. While the title was not official, the Senate website identifies Kern as the first Senate party leader, serving in that capacity from 1913 through 1917 (and in turn, the first Senate Democratic leader), while serving concurrently as chairman of the Senate Democratic Caucus.\nIn 1925, the Republicans (who were in the majority at the time) also adopted this language when Charles Curtis became the first (official) majority leader, although his immediate predecessor Henry Cabot Lodge is considered the first (unofficial) Senate majority leader. However, despite this new, formal leadership structure, the Senate leader initially had virtually no power. Since the Democrats were fatally divided into northern liberal and southern conservative blocs, the Democratic leader had even less power than his title suggested.\nJoseph T. Robinson of Arkansas, the Democratic leader from 1923 to 1937, saw it as his responsibility not to lead the Democrats, but to work the Senate for the president's benefit, no matter who the president was. When Coolidge and Hoover were president, he assisted them in passing Republican legislation. Robinson helped end government operation of Muscle Shoals, helped pass the Hoover Tariff, and stymied a Senate investigation of the Power Trust. Robinson switched his own position on a drought relief program for farmers when Hoover made a proposal for a more modest measure. Alben Barkley called Robinson's cave-in \"the most humiliating spectacle that could be brought about in an intelligent legislative body.\" When Franklin Roosevelt became president, Robinson followed the new president as loyally as he had followed Coolidge and Hoover. Robinson passed bills in the Hundred Days so quickly that Will Rogers joked \"Congress doesn't pass legislation any more, they just wave at the bills as they go by.\nIn 1937, the rule giving majority leader right of first recognition was created. With the addition of this rule, the Senate majority leader enjoyed far greater control over the agenda of which bills to be considered on the floor.\nDuring Lyndon B. Johnson's tenure as Senate leader, the leader gained new powers over committee assignments.\nSenatorial role of the vice president.\nThe United States Constitution designates the vice president of the United States as president of the Senate. The Constitution also calls for a president pro tempore, to serve as the presiding officer when the president of the Senate (the vice president) is absent. In practice, neither the vice president nor the president pro tempore\u2014customarily the most senior (longest-serving) senator in the majority party\u2014actually presides over the Senate on a daily basis; that task is given to junior senators of the majority party. Since the vice president may be of a different party from the majority and is not a Senate member subject to discipline, the rules of procedure of the Senate give the vice president no power beyond the presiding role. For these reasons, it is the majority leader who, in practice, manages the Senate. This is in contrast to the House of Representatives, where the elected speaker of the House has a great deal of discretionary power and generally presides over votes on legislative bills.\nPowers of the majority leader.\nUnder a long-standing Senate precedent, motions or amendments by the majority leader are granted precedence over other motions by other senators. The majority leader can therefore make at any time a motion to proceed to the consideration of a bill on the Senate Calendar (which contains almost exclusively bills which have been reported by the committee they were assigned to); a motion to proceed may be agreed to either by unanimous consent or through the invocation of cloture. Conventionally, no senator other than the majority leader introduces motions to proceed, although every senator is theoretically allowed to. In addition, the majority leader can block consideration of amendments through a practice known as \"filling the tree\", and decides which members will fill each of the committee seats reserved to the majority party; members of committees are therefore often prone to following the instructions of the majority leader, and rarely place bills on the Senate Calendar without the latter's consent.\nList of party leaders.\nThe Democratic Party first selected a leader in 1920. The Republican Party first formally designated a leader in 1925.\nChief deputy whips.\nThe chief deputy whip is the assistant to the majority/minority whip and the head of the whip operations team for their party. The current Republican (majority) chief deputy whip is Mike Crapo (Idaho), who's been holding the office since 2013 and the current Democratic (minority) chief deputy whip is Brian Schatz (Hawaii).\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46509", "revid": "195596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46509", "title": "United States Senate Minority Leader", "text": ""}
{"id": "46510", "revid": "596674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46510", "title": "National Academy of Sciences", "text": "Science branch of the US National Academies\nThe National Academy of Sciences (NAS) is a United States nonprofit, non-governmental organization. NAS is part of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, along with the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) and the National Academy of Medicine (NAM).\nAs a national academy, new members of the organization are elected annually by current members, based on their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research. Election to the National Academy is one of the highest honors in the scientific field in the United States. Members of the National Academy of Sciences serve \"pro bono\" as \"advisers to the nation\" on science, engineering, and medicine. The group holds a congressional charter under Title\u00a036 of the United States Code.\nCongress legislated and President Abraham Lincoln signed an Act of Congress (1863) establishing the National Academy of Sciences as an independent, trusted nongovernmental institution, created for the purpose of \"providing independent, objective advice to the nation on matters related to science and technology [and] to provide scientific advice to the government 'whenever called upon' by any government department.\" This objective gave the academy the purpose of enriching and providing resources to any part of the federal government\u2014rather than serving a single branch or executive agency, in contrast to the Library of Congress or many entities that report to the President. The goal was somewhat unusual at the time, and also different than other knowledge-based entities serving a branch of government, such as the Library of Congress. The academy receives no compensation from the government for its services.\nOverview.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the National Academy of Sciences includes 2,687 NAS members and 531 international members. It employed about 1,100 staff in 2005. Some 190 members have won a Nobel Prize. By its own admission in 1989, the addition of women to the academy \"continues at a dismal trickle\"; at that time there were 1,516 male members and 57 female members.\nThe National Academy of Sciences is one of the 135 member organizations of the International Science Council (ISC). Although there is no formal relationship with state and local academies of science, there often is informal dialogue. The National Academy is governed by a 17-member Council, made up of five officers (president, vice president, home secretary, international secretary, and treasurer) and 12 Councilors, all of whom are elected from among the academy membership. Agencies of the United States government fund about 85 percent of the academy's activities. Further funding comes from state governments, private foundations, and industrial organizations.\nThe council has the ability, ad hoc, to delegate certain tasks to committees. For example, the Committee on Animal Nutrition has produced a series of \"Nutrient requirements of domestic animals\" reports since at least 1944, each one being initiated by a different subcommittee of experts in the field, for example, on dairy cattle.\nThe National Academy of Sciences meets annually in Washington, D.C., which is documented in the \"Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences\" (PNAS), its scholarly journal. The National Academies Press is the publisher for the National Academies and makes more than 5,000 publications freely available on its website.\nFrom 2004 to 2017, the National Academy of Sciences administered the Marian Koshland Science Museum to provide public exhibits and programming related to its policy work. The museum's exhibits focused on climate change and infectious disease. In 2017, the museum closed and made way for a new science outreach program called LabX.\nHistory.\nThe Act of Incorporation, signed by President Abraham Lincoln on March\u00a03,\u00a01863, created the National Academy of Sciences and named 50 charter members. Many of the original NAS members came from the so-called \"Scientific Lazzaroni\", an informal network of mostly physical scientists working in the vicinity of Cambridge, Massachusetts (c.\u20091850).\nIn 1863, the organizers enlisted the support of Alexander Dallas Bache, and also Charles Henry Davis, a professional astronomer who had been recently recalled from the Navy to Washington to head the Bureau of Navigation. They also elicited support from Swiss-American geologist Louis Agassiz and American mathematician Peirce, who together planned the steps whereby the National Academy of Sciences was to be established. Senator Henry Wilson of Massachusetts was to name Agassiz to the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution.\nAgassiz was to come to Washington, D.C., at the government's expense to plan the organization with the others. This bypassed Joseph Henry, who was reluctant to have a bill for such an academy presented to Congress. This was in the belief that such a resolution would be \"opposed as something at variance with our democratic institutions\". Nevertheless, Henry soon became the second President of NAS. Agassiz, Davis, Peirce, Benjamin Gould and Senator Wilson met at Bache's house and \"hurriedly wrote the bill incorporating the Academy, including in it the name of fifty incorporators\".\nDuring the last hours of the session, when the Senate was immersed in the rush of last-minute business before its adjournment, Senator Wilson introduced the bill. Without examining it or debating its provisions, both the Senate and House approved it, and President Lincoln signed it.\nAlthough hailed as a great step forward in government recognition of the role of science in American society, at the time, the National Academy of Sciences created enormous ill feelings among scientists, whether or not they were named as incorporators.\nThe act states:[T]he Academy shall, whenever called upon by any department of the Government, investigate, examine, experiment, and report upon any subject of science or art, the actual expense of such investigations, examinations, experiments, and reports to be paid from appropriations which may be made for the purpose, but the Academy shall receive no compensation whatever for any services to the Government of the United States.The National Academies did not solve the problems facing a nation in Civil War as the Lazzaroni had hoped, nor did it centralize American scientific efforts. However, election to the National Academy did come to be considered \"the pinnacle of scientific achievement for Americans\" until the establishment of the Nobel Prize at the end of the 19th century.\nIn 1870, the congressional charter was amended to remove the limitation on the number of members.\nIn 2013, astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson was asked to write a speech for the 150th anniversary of the Gettysburg Address in which he made the point that one of Lincoln's greatest legacies was establishing NAS in that same year, which had the long-term effect of \"setting our Nation on a course of scientifically enlightened governance, without which we all may perish from this Earth\".\nMembership.\nThe academy currently (as of late 2024) has 6,892 members, including international ones, both past and present. 3218 of them are living. Existing members elect new members for life. Up to 120 members are elected annually, while up to 30 foreign citizens may be elected as international members annually. The election process begins with a formal nomination, followed by a vetting period, and culminates in a final ballot at the academy's annual meeting in April each year. Members are affiliated with a specific scientific field in one of six so-called \"classes\", which include: Physical and Mathematical Sciences; Biological Sciences; Engineering and Applied Sciences; Biomedical Sciences; Behavioral and Social Sciences; and Applied Biological, Agricultural, and Environmental Sciences.\nOver the entire history of the NAS, Harvard University is associated with the most members (331) overall, while the University of California at Berkeley is associated with the most members (255) without including the medical school. Examples of top schools, UC Berkeley/MIT/Princeton/Caltech do not have medical schools, while Harvard/Stanford do. The top ten institutions, two of which are from the University of California System and another four of which are in the Ivy League, account for nearly 28% of all members ever elected. Those ten are also precisely the only institutions in the entire history of the NAS to have had 100 or more members overall.\nOn the list for living members, only 14 institutions have 50 or more members overall, including the medical school (where it applies). They represent 32% of all living members of the NAS.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFacilities.\nThe National Academy of Sciences maintains multiple buildings around the United States. The National Academy of Sciences Building is located at 2101 Constitution Avenue, in northwest Washington, D.C.; it sits on the National Mall, adjacent to the Marriner S. Eccles Federal Reserve Board Building and in front of the headquarters of the U.S. State Department. The building has a neoclassical architectural style and was built by architect Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue. The building was dedicated in 1924 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Goodhue engaged a team of artists and architectural sculptors, including Albert Herter, Lee Lawrie, and Hildreth Mei\u00e8re to design interior embellishments celebrating the history and significance of science. The building is used for lectures, symposia, exhibitions, and concerts, in addition to annual meetings of the NAS, NAE, and NAM. Cultural Programs of the National Academy of Sciences hosts exhibitions exploring intersections of art, science, and culture such as Mathemalchemy. The 2012 Presidential Award for Math and Science Teaching ceremony was held here on March 5, 2014. Approximately 150 staff members work at the NAS Building. In June 2012, it reopened to visitors after a major two-year restoration project, which restored and improved the building's historic spaces, increased accessibility, and brought the building's aging infrastructure and facilities up to date.\nMore than 1,000 National Academies staff members work at The Keck Center of the National Academies at 500 Fifth Street in northwest Washington, D.C. The Keck Center provides meeting space and houses the National Academies Press Bookstore. The Marian Koshland Science Museum of the National Academy of Sciences \u2013 formerly located at 525 E St., N.W. \u2013 hosted visits from the public, school field trips, and permanent science exhibits.\nNAS also maintains conference centers in California and Massachusetts. The Arnold and Mabel Beckman Center is located on 100 Academy Drive in Irvine, California, near the campus of the University of California, Irvine; it offers a conference center and houses several NAS programs. The J. Erik Jonsson Conference Center, located at 314 Quissett Avenue in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, is an NAS conference facility.\nPresidents.\nThe president is the head of the academy, elected by a majority vote of the membership to serve in this position for a term to be determined by the governing Council, not to exceed six years, and may be re-elected for a second term. Terms usually start on July 1 and end on June 30. The academy has had 22 presidents since its foundation. The current president is geophysicist Marcia K. McNutt, the first woman to hold this position. Her term expires on June 30, 2026.\nSource\nAwards.\nThe academy gives a number of different awards:\nJoint Declaration on Global Warming.\nIn 2005, the national science academies of the G8\u00a0forum (including the National Academy of Sciences) and science academies of Brazil, China, and India (three of the largest emitters of greenhouse gases in the developing world) signed a statement on the global response to climate change. The statement stresses that the scientific understanding of climate change has become sufficiently clear to justify nations taking prompt action.\nOn May 7, 2010, a letter signed by 255 Academy members was published in \"Science\" magazine, decrying \"political assaults\" against climate change scientists. This was in response to a civil investigative demand on the University of Virginia (UVA) by Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli, seeking a broad range of documents from Michael\u00a0E. Mann, a former UVA professor from 1999 to 2005. Mann, who currently works at the University of Pennsylvania, is a climate change researcher, and Cuccinelli alleges that Mann may have defrauded Virginia taxpayers in the course of his environmental research. Investigations had cleared Mann of charges that he falsified or suppressed data.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46511", "revid": "1811786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46511", "title": "Reed-Solomon code", "text": ""}
{"id": "46516", "revid": "48998989", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46516", "title": "Vandals", "text": "East Germanic tribe\nThe Vandals were a Germanic people who were first mentioned in the written records as the inhabitants of what is now Poland, during the period of the Roman Empire. Much later, in the 5th century, a group of Vandals led by kings established Vandal kingdoms, first within the Iberian Peninsula, and then in the western Mediterranean islands and North Africa.\nArchaeologists associate the early Vandals with the Przeworsk culture, which has led to some authors equating them to the Lugii, who were another group of Germanic peoples associated with that same archaeological culture and region. Expanding into Dacia during the Marcomannic Wars and into Pannonia during the Crisis of the Third Century, the Vandals were confined to Pannonia by the Goths around 330 AD, where they received permission to settle from Constantine the Great. Around 400, raids by the Huns from the east forced many Germanic tribes to migrate west into the territory of the Roman Empire and, fearing that they might be targeted next, the Vandals were also pushed westwards, crossing the Rhine into Gaul along with other tribes in 406. In 409, the Vandals crossed the Pyrenees into the Iberian Peninsula, where the Hasdingi and the Silingi settled in Gallaecia (northwest Iberia) and Baetica (south-central Iberia).\nOn the orders of the Romans, the Visigoths invaded Iberia in 418. They almost wiped out the Alans and Silingi Vandals who voluntarily subjected themselves to the rule of Hasdingian leader Gunderic. Gunderic was then pushed from Gallaecia to Baetica by a Roman-Suebi coalition in 419. In 429, under King Genseric (reigned 428\u2013477), the Vandals entered North Africa. By 439 they had established the Vandal kingdom which included the Roman province of Africa as well as Sicily, Corsica, Sardinia, Malta and the Balearic Islands. They fended off several Roman attempts to recapture the African province, and sacked the city of Rome in 455. Their kingdom collapsed in the Vandalic War of 533\u2013534, in which the forces of Emperor Justinian I reconquered the province for the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire.\nRenaissance and early-modern writers characterized the Vandals as prototypical barbarians, due to their 14-day Sack of Rome, leading to the use of the term \"vandalism\" to describe any form of wanton destruction, particularly the \"barbarian\" defacing of artwork. However, some modern historians have emphasised the role of Vandals as continuators of aspects of Roman culture, during the transitional period from Late Antiquity to the Early Middle Ages.\nName.\nThe ethnonym is attested as \"Wandali\" and \"Wendilenses\" by Saxo, as \"Vendill\" in Old Norse, and as \"Wend(e)las\" in Old English, all going back to a Proto-Germanic form reconstructed as *\"Wan\u0111ilaz\". The etymology of the name remains unclear. According to linguist Vladimir Orel, it may stem from the Proto-Germanic adjective *\"wan\u0111az\" ('turned, twisted'), itself derived from the verb *\"wen\u0111anan\" (or \"*win\u0111anan\"), meaning 'to wind'. Alternatively, it has been derived from a root *\"wan\u0111-\", meaning 'water', based on the idea that the tribe was originally located near the Limfjord (a sea inlet in Denmark). The stem can also be found in Old High German \"wentils\u0113o\" and Old English \"wendels\u01e3\", both literally meaning 'Vandal-sea' and designating the Mediterranean Sea.\nThe Germanic mythological figure of \"Aurvandill\" has been interpreted by Rudolf Much to mean 'Shining Vandal'. Much forwarded the theory that the tribal name \"Vandal\" reflects worship of Aurvandil or the Divine Twins, possibly involving an origin myth that the Vandalic kings were descended from Aurvandil (comparable to the case of many other Germanic tribal names).\nSome medieval authors equated two classical ethnonyms, \"Vandals\" and Veneti, and applied both to West Slavs, leading to the term Wends, which has been used for various Slavic-speaking groups and is still used for Lusatians. However, modern scholars derive \"Wend\" from \"Veneti\", and do not equate the Veneti and Vandals.\nThe name of the Vandals has been connected to that of Vendel, the name of a province in Uppland, Sweden, which is also eponymous of the Vendel Period of Swedish prehistory, corresponding to the late Germanic Iron Age leading up to the Viking Age. The connection is considered tenuous at best and more plausibly the result of chance, though Scandinavia is considered the probable homeland of the tribe prior to the Migration Period.\nClassification.\nOnce the Vandals came to live outside of Germania, they were no longer considered \"Germani\" by ancient Roman authors.\nSince the Vandals spoke a Germanic language (mainly:Vandalic) and belonged to early Germanic culture, they are classified as a Germanic people by modern scholars.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nEarly classical sources.\nThe earliest mention of the Vandals is from Pliny the Elder, who used the term \"Vandili\" in a broad way to define one of the major groupings of all Germanic peoples. Tribes within this category whom he mentions are the Burgundiones, Varini, Carini (otherwise unknown), and the Gutones.\nTacitus mentioned the \"Vandilii\", but only in a passage explaining legends about the origins of the Germanic peoples. He names them as one of the groups sometimes thought to be one of the oldest divisions of these peoples, along with the Marsi, Gambrivii, and Suebi, but does not say where they live, or which peoples are within this category. On the other hand, Tacitus and Ptolemy give information about the position of Varini, Burgundians, and Gutones in this period, and these indications suggest that the Vandals in this period lived between the Oder and Vistula rivers.\nPtolemy furthermore mentioned the Silingi, who were later counted as Vandals, as living south of the Semnones, and who were Suebians living on the Elbe, and stretching to the Oder.\nThe Hasdingi, who later led the invasion of Carthage, do not appear in written records until the 2nd century and the time of the Marcomannic wars. The Lacringi appear in 3rd century records.\nLugii.\nThe Lugii, who were also mentioned in early classical sources in the same region, are likely to have been the same people as the Vandals. The Lugii are mentioned by Strabo, Tacitus, and Ptolemy as a large group of tribes between the Vistula and the Oder. Strabo and Ptolemy do not mention the Vandals at all, only the Lugii. Tacitus mentions them in a passage about the ancestry of the Germanic peoples without saying where they lived, and Pliny the Elder in contrast mentions the Vandals but not the Lugii. Walter Pohl and Walter Goffart have noted that Ptolemy seems to distinguish the Silingi from the Lugii, and in the 2nd century the Hasdings, when they appear in the Roman record, are also distinguished from the Lugii. Herwig Wolfram notes that \"In all likelihood the Lugians and the Vandals were one cultic community that lived in the same region of the Oder in Silesia, where it was first under Celtic and then under Germanic domination.\" This may account for the differentiation between the Celtic Lugii and their more Germanic successors the Vandals.\nPrzeworsk culture.\nIn archaeology, the Vandals are associated with the Przeworsk culture, but the culture probably extended over several central and eastern European peoples. Their origin, ethnicity, and linguistic affiliation are heavily debated. The bearers of the Przeworsk culture mainly practiced cremation and occasionally inhumation.\nLanguage.\nVery little is known about the Vandalic language itself, but it is believed to be of the extinct East Germanic linguistic branch, like Gothic. The Goths left behind the only text corpus of the East Germanic language type, especially a 4th-century translation of the Gospels.\nIntroduction into the Roman Empire.\nIn the 2nd century, two or three distinct Vandal peoples came to the attention of Roman authors: the Silingi, the Hasdingi, and possibly the Lacringi, who appear together with the Hasdingi. Only the Silingi had been mentioned in early Roman works, and are associated with Silesia.\nThese peoples appeared during the Marcomannic Wars, which resulted in widespread destruction and the first invasion of Italy in the Roman Empire period. During the Marcomannic Wars (166\u2013180) the Hasdingi (or Astingi), led by the kings Raus and Rapt (or Rhaus and Raptus) moved south, entering Dacia as allies of Rome. However they eventually caused problems in Dacia and moved further south, towards the lower Danube area. Together with the Hasdingi were the Lacringi, who were possibly also Vandals.\nIn about 271 AD, the Roman Emperor Aurelian was obliged to protect the middle course of the Danube against Vandals. They made peace and stayed on the eastern bank of the Danube.\nIn 278, Zosimus reported that Emperor Probus had defeated the Vandals and Burgundians near a river (sometimes proposed to be the Lech, and sent many of them to Britain. During this same period, the 11th panegyric to Maximian, delivered in 291, reported two different conflicts outside the empire wherein Burgundians were associated with Alamanni, and other Vandals, probably Hasdingi in the Carpathian region, were associated with Gepids.\nAccording to Jordanes' \"Getica\", the Hasdingi came into conflict with the Goths around the time of Constantine the Great. At the time, these Vandals were living in lands later inhabited by the Gepids, where they were surrounded \"on the east [by] the Goths, on the west [by] the Marcomanni, on the north [by] the Hermanduri and on the south [by] the Hister (Danube).\" The Vandals were attacked by the Gothic king Geberic, and their king Visimar was killed. The Vandals then migrated to neighbouring Pannonia, where, after Constantine the Great (in about 330) granted them lands on the right bank of the Danube, they lived for the next 60 years.\nIn the late 4th century and early 5th, the famous \"magister militum\" Stilicho (died 408), the chief minister of the Emperor Honorius, was described as being of Vandal descent. Vandals raided the Roman province of Raetia in the winter of 401/402. From this, historian Peter Heather concludes that at this time the Vandals were located in the region around the Middle and Upper Danube. It is possible that such Middle Danubian Vandals were part of the Gothic king Radagaisus' invasion of Italy in 405\u2013406 AD.\nWhile the Hasdingian Vandals were already established in the Middle Danube for centuries, it is less clear where the Silingian Vandals had been living, though it may have been in Silesia.\nIn Britannia.\nIn AD 278, Emperor Probus, on defeating the Vandals and Burgundians, transferred many of them to Britain. It is unknown where they were settled, though Silchester seems to be a likely candidate. The city bears the name of the Silingi, is only one of six that existed in Roman Britain that did not survive the sub-Roman era, and appears to have been ritually cursed \u2013 likely by the Anglo-Saxons \u2013 before being abandoned.\nIn Gaul.\nIn 405 AD, the Vandals advanced from Pannonia travelling west along the Danube without much difficulty, but when they reached the Rhine, they met resistance from the Franks, who populated and controlled Romanized regions in northern Gaul. According to the Frigeridus fragment cited by Gregory of Tours, around 20,000 Vandals, including Godigisel himself, died in this Vandal-Frankish war, but then with the help of the Alans they managed to defeat the Franks, and on December 31, 405 the Vandals crossed the Rhine, probably while it was frozen, to invade Gaul, which they devastated terribly. Under Godigisel's son Gunderic, the Vandals plundered their way westward and southward through Aquitaine.\nIn Hispania.\nOn October 13, 409, they crossed the Pyrenees into the Iberian peninsula. There, the Hasdingi received land from the Romans, as foederati, in Asturia (Northwest) and the Silingi in Hispania Baetica (South), while the Alans got lands in Lusitania (West) and the region around Carthago Nova. The Suebi also controlled part of Gallaecia. The Visigoths, who invaded Iberia on the orders of the Romans before receiving lands in Septimania (Southern France), crushed the Silingi Vandals in 417 and the Alans in 418, killing the western Alan king Attaces. The remainder of his people and the remnants of the Silingi, who were nearly wiped out, subsequently appealed to the Vandal king Gunderic to accept the Alan crown. Later Vandal kings in North Africa styled themselves \"Rex Wandalorum et Alanorum\" (\"King of the Vandals and Alans\"). In 419 AD, the Hasdingi Vandals were defeated during Asterius campaign by a joint Roman-Suebi coalition. Gunderic fled to Baetica, where he was also proclaimed king of the Silingi Vandals. In 422, Gunderic decisively defeated a Roman-Suebi-Gothic coalition led by the Roman patrician Castinus in the Vandal war of 422. It is likely that many Roman and Gothic troops deserted to Gunderic following the battle. For the next five years, according to Hydatius, Gunderic created widespread havoc in the western Mediterranean. In 425, the Vandals pillaged the Balearic Islands, Hispania, and Mauritania, sacking Cartagena and Seville in 425. The capture of the maritime city of Cartagena enabled the Vandals to engage in widespread naval activities. In 428, Gunderic captured Seville for a second time but died while laying siege to the city's church. He was succeeded by his half-brother Genseric, who, although he was illegitimate (his mother was a slave), had held a prominent position at the Vandal court, rising to the throne unchallenged. In 429, the Vandals departed Spain, which remained almost totally in Roman hands until 439, when the Suebi, confined to Gallaecia, moved south and captured Emerita Augusta (M\u00e9rida), the see city of Roman administration for the whole peninsula.\nGenseric is often regarded by historians as the most able barbarian leader of the Migration Period. Michael Frassetto writes that he probably contributed more to the destruction of Rome than any of his contemporaries. Although the barbarians controlled Hispania, they still comprised a tiny minority among a much larger Hispano-Roman population, approximately 200,000 out of 6,000,000. Shortly after seizing the throne, Genseric was attacked from the rear by a large force of Suebi under the command of Heremigarius, who had managed to take Lusitania. This Suebi army was defeated near M\u00e9rida and its leader Heremigarius drowned in the Guadiana River while trying to flee.\nIt is possible that the name \"al-Andalus\" (and its derivative \"Andalusia\") is derived from the Arabic adoption of the name of the Vandals.\nKingdom in North Africa.\nEstablishment.\nThe Vandals under Genseric (also known as Geiseric) crossed to Africa in 429. Although numbers are unknown and some historians debate the validity of estimates, based on Procopius' assertion that the Vandals and Alans numbered 80,000 when they moved to North Africa, Peter Heather estimates that they could have fielded an army of around 15,000\u201320,000.\nAccording to Procopius, the Vandals came to Africa at the request of Bonifacius, the military ruler of the region. Seeking to establish himself as an independent ruler in Africa or even become Roman Emperor, Bonifacius had defeated several Roman attempts to subdue him, until he was mastered by the newly appointed Gothic count of Africa, Sigisvult, who captured both Hippo Regius and Carthage. It is possible that Bonifacius had sought Genseric as an ally against Sigisvult, promising him a part of Africa in return.\nAdvancing eastwards along the coast, the Vandals were confronted on the Numidian border in May\u2013June 430 by Bonifacius. Negotiations broke down, and Bonifacius was soundly defeated. Bonifacius subsequently barricaded himself inside Hippo Regius with the Vandals besieging the city. Inside, Saint Augustine and his priests prayed for relief from the invaders, knowing full well that the fall of the city would spell conversion or death for many Roman Christians.\nOn 28 August 430, three months into the siege, St. Augustine (who was 75 years old) died, perhaps from starvation or stress, as the wheat fields outside the city lay dormant and unharvested. The death of Augustine shocked the Regent of the Western Roman Empire, Galla Placidia, who feared the consequences if her realm lost its most important source of grain. She raised a new army in Italy and convinced her nephew in Constantinople, the Eastern Roman Emperor Theodosius II, to send an army to North Africa led by Aspar.\nAround July\u2013August 431, Genseric raised the siege of Hippo Regius, which enabled Bonifacius to retreat from Hippo Regius to Carthage, where he was joined by Aspar's army. During the summer of 432, Genseric soundly defeated the joint forces of both Bonifacius and Aspar, which enabled him to seize Hippo Regius unopposed. Genseric and Aspar subsequently negotiated a peace treaty of some sorts. Upon seizing Hippo Regius, Genseric made it the first capital of the Vandal kingdom.\nThe Romans and the Vandals concluded a treaty in 435 giving the Vandals control of the Mauretania and the western half of Numidia. Genseric chose to break the treaty in 439 when he invaded the province of Africa Proconsularis and seized Carthage on October 19. The city was captured without a fight; the Vandals entered the city while most of the inhabitants were attending the races at the hippodrome. Genseric made it his capital, and styled himself the King of the Vandals and Alans, to denote the inclusion of the Alans of northern Africa into his alliance. His forces also occupied Sardinia, Corsica, and the Balearic Islands. His siege of Palermo in 440 was a failure as was the second attempt to invade Sicily near Agrigento in 442 (the Vandals occupied the island from 468 to 476 when it was ceded to Odovacer). Historian Cameron suggests that the new Vandal rule may not have been unwelcomed by the population of North Africa as the great landowners were generally unpopular.\nThe impression given by ancient sources such as Victor of Vita, Quodvultdeus, and Fulgentius of Ruspe was that the Vandal take-over of Carthage and North Africa led to widespread destruction. However, recent archaeological investigations have challenged this assertion. Although Carthage's Odeon was destroyed, the street pattern remained the same and some public buildings were renovated. The political centre of Carthage was the Byrsa Hill. New industrial centres emerged within towns during this period. Historian Andy Merrills uses the large amounts of African Red Slip ware discovered across the Mediterranean dating from the Vandal period of North Africa to challenge the assumption that the Vandal rule of North Africa was a time of economic instability. When the Vandals raided Sicily in 440, the Western Roman Empire was too preoccupied with war with Gaul to react. Theodosius II, emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire, dispatched an expedition to deal with the Vandals in 441; however, it only progressed as far as Sicily. The Western Empire under Valentinian III secured peace with the Vandals in 442. Under the treaty the Vandals gained Byzacena, Tripolitania, and the eastern half of Numidia, and were confirmed in control of Proconsular Africa as well as the Vandal Kingdom as the first barbarian kingdom was officially recognized as an independent kingdom in former Roman territory instead of foederati. The Empire retained western Numidia and the two Mauretanian provinces until 455.\nSack of Rome.\nDuring the next 35 years, with a large fleet, Genseric looted the coasts of the Eastern and Western Empires. Vandal activity in the Mediterranean was so substantial that the sea's name in Old English was \"Wendels\u00e6\" (i. e. Sea of the Vandals). After Attila the Hun's death, however, the Romans could afford to turn their attention back to the Vandals, who were in control of some of the richest lands of their former empire.\nIn an effort to bring the Vandals into the fold of the Empire, Valentinian III offered his daughter's hand in marriage to Genseric's son. Before this treaty could be carried out, however, politics again played a crucial part in the blunders of Rome. Petronius Maximus killed Valentinian III and claimed the Western throne. Petronius then forced Valentinian III's widow, empress Licinia Eudoxia, to marry him. Diplomacy between the two factions broke down, and in 455, with a letter from Licinia Eudoxia begging Genseric's son to rescue her, the Vandals took Rome, along with the Empress and her daughters Eudocia and Placidia.\nThe chronicler Prosper of Aquitaine offers the only 5th century report that, on 2 June 455, Pope Leo the Great received Genseric and implored him to abstain from murder and destruction by fire, and to be satisfied with pillage. Whether the pope's influence saved Rome is, however, questioned. The Vandals departed with countless valuables. Eudoxia and her daughter Eudocia were taken to North Africa.\nConsolidation.\nIn 456, a Vandal fleet of 60 ships threatening both Gaul and Italy was ambushed and defeated at Agrigentum and Corsica by the Western Roman general Ricimer. In 457, a mixed Vandal-Berber army returning with loot from a raid in Campania were soundly defeated in a surprise attack by Western Emperor Majorian at the mouth of the Garigliano river.\nAs a result of the Vandal sack of Rome and piracy in the Mediterranean, it became important to the Roman Empire to destroy the Vandal kingdom. In 460, Majorian launched an expedition against the Vandals, but was defeated at the Battle of Cartagena. In 468, the Western and Eastern Roman empires launched an enormous expedition against the Vandals under the command of Basiliscus, which reportedly was composed of 100,000 soldiers and 1,000 ships. The Vandals defeated the invaders at the Battle of Cap Bon, capturing the Western fleet, and destroying the Eastern through the use of fire ships. Following up the attack, the Vandals tried to invade the Peloponnese, but were driven back by the Maniots at Kenipolis with heavy losses. In retaliation, the Vandals took 500 hostages at Zakynthos, hacked them to pieces and threw the pieces overboard on the way to Carthage. In 469, the Vandals gained control of Sicily but were forced by Odoacer to relinquish it in 477, except for the western port of Lilybaeum (lost in 491 after a failed attempt on their part to re-take the island).\nIn the 470s, the Romans abandoned their policy of war against the Vandals. The Western general Ricimer reached a treaty with them, and in 476, Genseric was able to conclude a \"perpetual peace\" with Constantinople. Relations between the two states assumed a veneer of normality. From 477 onwards, the Vandals produced their own coinage, restricted to bronze and silver low-denomination coins. The high-denomination imperial money was retained, demonstrating in the words of Merrills \"reluctance to usurp the imperial prerogative\".\nAlthough the Vandals had fended off attacks from the Romans and established hegemony over the islands of the western Mediterranean, they were less successful in their conflict with the Berbers. Situated south of the Vandal kingdom, the Berbers inflicted two major defeats on the Vandals in the period 496\u2013530.\nDomestic religious tensions.\nDifferences between the Arian Vandals and their Trinitarian subjects (including both Catholics and Donatists) were a constant source of tension in their African state. Catholic bishops were exiled or killed by Genseric and laymen were excluded from office and frequently suffered confiscation of their property. He protected his Catholic subjects when his relations with Rome and Constantinople were friendly, as during the years 454\u2013457, when the Catholic community at Carthage, being without a head, elected Deogratias bishop. The same was also the case during the years 476\u2013477, when Bishop Victor of Cartenna sent him, during a period of peace, a sharp refutation of Arianism and suffered no punishment. Huneric, Genseric's successor, issued edicts against Catholics in 483 and 484 in an effort to marginalise them and make Arianism the primary religion in North Africa. Generally, most Vandal kings, except Hilderic, persecuted Trinitarian Christians to a greater or lesser extent, banning conversion for Vandals, exiling bishops, and generally making life difficult for Trinitarians.\nDecline.\nAccording to the 1913 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\": \"Genseric, one of the most powerful personalities of the \"era of the Migrations\", died on 25\u00a0January 477, at the great age of around 88 years. According to the law of succession which he had promulgated, the oldest male member of the royal house was to succeed. Thus he was succeeded by his son Huneric (477\u2013484), who at first tolerated Catholics, owing to his fear of Constantinople, but after 482 began to persecute Manichaeans and Catholics.\"\nGunthamund (484\u2013496), his cousin and successor, sought internal peace with the Catholics and ceased persecution once more. Externally, the Vandal power had been declining since Genseric's death, and Gunthamund lost early in his reign all but a small wedge of western Sicily to the Ostrogoths which was lost in 491 and had to withstand increasing pressure from the autochthonous Moors.\nAccording to the 1913 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\": \"While Thrasamund (496\u2013523), owing to his religious fanaticism, was hostile to Catholics, he contented himself with bloodless persecutions\".\nTurbulent end.\nHilderic (523\u2013530) was the Vandal king most tolerant towards the Catholic Church. He granted it religious freedom; consequently, Catholic synods were once more held in North Africa. However, he had little interest in war, and left it to a family member, Hoamer. When Hoamer suffered a defeat against the Moors, the Arian faction within the royal family led a revolt, raising the banner of national Arianism, and his cousin Gelimer (530\u2013534) became king. Hilderic, Hoamer, and their relatives were thrown into prison.\nByzantine Emperor Justinian I declared war, with the stated intention of restoring Hilderic to the Vandal throne. The deposed Hilderic was murdered in 533 on Gelimer's orders. While an expedition was en route, a large part of the Vandal army and navy was led by Tzazo, Gelimer's brother, to Sardinia to deal with a rebellion. As a result, the armies of the Byzantine Empire commanded by Belisarius were able to land unopposed from Carthage. Gelimer quickly assembled an army, and met Belisarius at the Battle of Ad Decimum; the Vandals were winning until Gelimer's brother Ammatas and nephew Gibamund fell in battle. Gelimer then lost heart and fled. Belisarius quickly took Carthage while the surviving Vandals fought on.\nOn December 15, 533, Gelimer and Belisarius clashed again at the Battle of Tricamarum, approximately from Carthage. Again, the Vandals fought well but eventually broke, this time when Gelimer's brother Tzazo fell in battle. Belisarius quickly advanced to Hippo, second city of the Vandal kingdom, and in 534, Gelimer surrendered to the Byzantine conqueror, which marks the end of the Vandal kingdom.\nNorth Africa, comprising northern Tunisia and eastern Algeria in the Vandal period, became a Roman province again, from which the Vandals were expelled. Many Vandals went to Saldae (today called B\u00e9ja\u00efa in north Algeria) where they integrated with the Berbers. Many others were put into imperial service or fled to the two Gothic kingdoms: the Ostrogothic and the Visigothic. Some Vandal women married Byzantine soldiers and settled in north Algeria and Tunisia. The choicest Vandal warriors were formed into five cavalry regiments, known as \"Vandali Iustiniani\", stationed on the Persian frontier. Some entered the private service of Belisarius. The 1913 \"Catholic Encyclopedia\" states that \"Gelimer was honourably treated and received large estates in Galatia. He was also offered the rank of a patrician but had to refuse it because he was not willing to change his Arian faith.\" In the words of historian Roger Collins: \"The remaining Vandals were then shipped back to Constantinople to be absorbed into the imperial army. As a distinct ethnic unit they disappeared.\" Few Vandals remained in North Africa, while more migrated back to Spain. In 546 the Vandalic Dux of Numidia, Guntarith, defected from the Byzantines and raised a rebellion with Moorish support. He was able to capture Carthage, but was assassinated by the Byzantines shortly afterwards.\nList of kings.\nKnown kings of the Vandals:\nLatin literacy.\nAll Vandals that modern historians know about were able to speak Latin, which also remained the official language of the Vandal administration (most of the staff seem to have been native Berber or Roman). Levels of literacy in the ancient world are uncertain, but writing was integral to administration and business. Studies of literacy in North Africa have tended to centre around the administration, which was limited to the social elite. However, the majority of the population of North Africa did not live in urban centres.\nJudith George explains that \"Analysis of the [Vandal] poems in their context holds up a mirror to the ways and values of the times\". Very little work of the poets of Vandal North Africa survives, but what does is found in the \"Latin Anthology\"; apart from their names, little is known about the poets themselves, not even when they were writing. Their work drew on earlier Roman traditions. Modern scholars generally hold the view that the Vandals allowed the Romans in North Africa to carry on with their way of life with only occasional interference.\nLegacy.\nSince the Middle Ages, kings of Denmark were styled \"King of Denmark, the Goths and the Wends\", the Wends being a group of West Slavs formerly living in Mecklenburg and eastern Holstein in modern Germany. The title \"King of the Wends\" is translated as \"vandalorum rex\" in Latin. The title was shortened to \"King of Denmark\" in 1972. Starting in 1540, Swedish kings (following Denmark) were styled \"Suecorum, Gothorum et Vandalorum Rex\" (\"King of the Swedes, Geats, and Wends\"). Carl XVI Gustaf dropped the title in 1973 and now styles himself simply as \"King of Sweden\".\nThe modern term \"vandalism\" stems from the Vandals' reputation as the barbarian people who sacked and looted Rome in AD 455. The Vandals were probably not any more destructive than other invaders of ancient times, but writers who idealized Rome often blamed them for its destruction. For example, English Restoration poet John Dryden wrote, \"Till Goths, and Vandals, a rude Northern race, / Did all the matchless Monuments deface\".\nThe term \"Vandalisme\" was coined in 1794 by Henri Gr\u00e9goire, bishop of Blois, to describe the destruction of artwork following the French Revolution. The term was quickly adopted across Europe. This new use of the term was important in colouring the perception of the Vandals from later Late Antiquity, popularizing the pre-existing idea that they were a barbaric group with a taste for destruction. Vandals and other \"barbarian\" groups had long been blamed for the fall of the Roman Empire by writers and historians.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "46522", "revid": "41454490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46522", "title": "Baroque chess", "text": "Chess variant by Robert Abbott in 1962\nBaroque chess is a chess variant invented in 1962 by Robert Abbott. In 1963, at the suggestion of his publisher, he changed the name to Ultima, by which name it is also known. Abbott later considered his invention flawed and suggested amendments to the rules, but these suggestions have been substantially ignored by the gaming community, which continues to play by the 1962 rules. Since the rules for Baroque were first laid down in 1962, some regional variation has arisen, causing the game to diverge from Ultima. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_left/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDescription.\nBaroque chess is usually played on a standard 8\u00d78 chessboard with the standard Staunton design of chess pieces. The rules that follow are widely found on the internet, but other variants exist. One variant was popular among students at Cambridge University in 1974. The initial setup of the pieces is the same as in standard chess, except for two things that the players must first decide on \u2013 center counter symmetry, and corner counter symmetry.\nEstablishing the degree of symmetry.\nCenter counter symmetry allows either player to decide whether to switch his king and Withdrawer (\"queen\") around, and then corner counter symmetry requires each player to decide which of his \"rooks\" will be turned upside down. (The one that remains upright is the Coordinator, and the one that is turned upside down is the Immobilizer.) After these two kinds of symmetries are determined, White moves first.\nFor purposes of recording the moves that are played in the game, it is sufficient to employ an algebraic form of notation, as in chess, and write the names of the pieces and the squares they are to be placed in. For instance, 1. Kd1 &amp; We1, Ke8 &amp; Wd8 (center counter symmetry), and 2. Ia1 &amp; Ch1, Ih8 &amp; Ca8 (corner counter symmetry).\nIf the symmetry resolution phases that are usually found at the start of the game could somehow be put off for later, then one may readily see how similar they are to the castling maneuvers in chess. They have the practical function of multiplying the number of games that are possible from the initial starting position.\nMoving.\nIn Baroque, the king is the only piece alone that is limited to moving exactly one square at a time; it moves and takes just like the king in chess. All of the remaining pieces on the first rank may move like the queen, in all directions. They have this power as a matter of privilege, as they are all considered to be \"noble pieces.\" This is a kind of privilege that attaches to them at the outset of the game, and is never diminished; they retain this privilege no matter where they go, except when they find themselves next to an Immobilizer (see below).\nThe pawns, on the other hand, move just like the rook moves in chess. Just as in chess, pawns are the peasants of this game. Unlike chess, pawns are never promoted to another kind of piece. (There is no special square to which pawns can be moved and then promoted.)\nCapturing.\nAll the pieces except for the king capture differently from their counterparts in chess, and all but the king and pawn have different names. The king is the only piece that captures, as chess pieces do, by moving into a square that is occupied by an enemy piece. All the other pieces capture enemy pieces in more complex ways. Friendly pieces are never allowed to capture other friendly pieces.\nPieces.\nThe names of the pieces and rules for movement are as follows:\nThe remaining pieces all move like standard chess queens, but have unique methods of capture.\nDiagrammed examples are indispensable to understanding the rules.\nKing.\nThe white king moves Kc4-d5 delivering checkmate. Normally it would not be possible for the two kings to be adjacent, but here the black king is unable to move due to the white immobilizer on f4, thus the d5 square is not under attack by black, and the white king is not moving into check.\nNote that White could not play Kc4-d4, as that would place his own king in check from the black Withdrawer. Capturing the Withdrawer with Kc4xd3 would result in stalemate, as black would then have no legal moves.\nPawn/Pincer.\nThe white pawn (or \"Pincer\") moves Pg4-d4, capturing the black Immobilizer and black pawn. The black Withdrawer on e5 is not captured because pawns capture only vertically and horizontally, not diagonally. The black Imitator (Chameleon) on d3 is not captured, because there is no white piece on d2. Finally, the black Long-leaper on g3 was safe because it moved between the two white pawns, rather than a white pawn moving to complete the custodial capture.\nWithdrawer.\nThe white Withdrawer moves Wg6-d3, capturing the black pawn on h7. The pawn on g7 and the Imitator (Chameleon) on h6 are unaffected because the Withdrawer did not move in their respective lines, but the Withdrawer could have captured either by a move in the g-file or sixth rank respectively. Note that the Withdrawer also gives check to the black king by threatening to move away on the d-file.\nLong-Leaper.\nThe white Long-Leaper moves Ld2-d4-d6-d8, capturing three black pieces. It might instead have captured the black Withdrawer with either Ld2-g5 or Ld2-h6. On the other hand, the black pawn on b2 and the black Chameleon on d1 are safe from the Long Leaper because there is no square on the opposite side on which the Long Leaper could land. Also the black pawns on f2 and g2 cannot be captured by Ld2-h2, because there is no space in between the two pawns which would allow the Long Leaper to make two separate jumps. A move of Ld2-b4 would be illegal because long leapers may not jump over friendly pieces. Some variations of Baroque forbid multi-leaping, if only because it is felt that the game is more playable if the Leaper is less powerful. By requiring the Leaper to stop its movement immediately after capturing the first piece, that objective is met.\nCoordinator.\nThe white Coordinator moves Cd4-f6, capturing black's Leaper on c6 and Immobilizer on f2. If White had played Cd4-d6 instead, he would have captured black's Leaper and pawn. This kind of capture can be visualized by imagining an invisible cross emanating from the square the king is sitting on, and another one from the square the Coordinator arrives at. The points where these two crosses intersect are the places where captures are possible.\nImmobilizer.\nThe white Immobilizer moves If3-d5, immobilizing five black pieces. The black Leaper on g4, which had been immobilized, is now free to move again.\nAn Immobilizer can never be captured by an Immobilizer, or Imitator (Chameleon). An Immobilizer can never be captured by a king or Withdrawer unless the variation popular in Cambridge is being played, in which case the Immobilizer itself must first be immobilized. When an Immobilizer comes into contact with an enemy Chameleon or Immobilizer, the two pieces freeze each other, after which neither can move unless the other is captured. In the version played at Cambridge, the power of an enemy Immobilizer to arrest a friendly piece's movement is defeated when another friendly Immobilizer or Chameleon is brought up to it, effectively cancelling out each other's power to arrest movement.\nSome versions of Baroque allow an immobilized piece to commit suicide, i.e. be removed from the board, in lieu of the regular move of that player. There may be strategic reasons to open a line. For example, after the above diagrammed move, the black Leaper on c5 may wish to commit suicide, so that the other Leaper can capture the white Immobilizer by jumping over it on the fifth rank. White cannot hinder this plan, because the Immobilizer is itself immobilized by the black Chameleon.\nImitator.\nOn the adjacent diagram, the white Imitator moves Xg6-e6-c6, capturing all seven black pieces except the king in one move and delivering check.\nIn the Cambridge rules, this capture is not possible. The move is legal, but it captures only the two leapers, because the move is not a legal move for any of the other target pieces. In the absence of the two black leapers, the same move would capture the other five pieces.\nVariants.\nMaxima.\nMaxima was invented by Roberto Lavieri in 2003. It is Baroque played on a somewhat larger board that is mostly rectangular and 8\u00d79 (a2\u2013h10) but for a couple of extra squares that are outside the board, located at d1 and e1 just behind the king and queen's squares. A matching pair of squares are also on the other side of the board, just beyond the black king and queen (d11 and e11). Although one objective of the game is to checkmate the king, an alternative objective allows depositing pieces in both of the pair of squares on the other side of the board. Bare king is also a win. Unlike Baroque, the king in Maxima moves like the knight in chess, and moreover treats the board as a cylinder (e.g. Kb2\u2013h3 is a legal move), making for a game with much more fluid movement of pieces.\nThere are two extra pieces: Mage and Guard. The Mage moves one square diagonally, then may continue its move orthogonally away from where it started (i.e. the move of the \"aanca\" from Grant Acedrex). It captures by displacement and is immune to the Immobiliser. The Guard moves and captures like the king in chess (\"not\" like the king in Maxima).\nThe order of White's pieces is:\nBlack's setup is mirrored from White's, so the kings are on d2 and e10.\nOptima.\nBaroque that is similar to Maxima with additional pieces and rules.\nRenaissance.\nAs shogi is to chess, Renaissance is to Baroque\u2014pieces may be revived and reborn. It was invented by Matthew Monchalin in 1975. It is played on a 9\u00d79 board; the arrangement of pieces on White's first rank is: Immobiliser, Long-leaper, Chameleon, Withdrawer, King, Bomb, Resurrector, Pusher, Coordinator. (The arrangement of the pieces on Black's first rank is backwards, so Immobilisers are on a1 and i9.) As in Ultima, White and Black may choose to swap Immobiliser and Coordinator. Captured pieces change sides and can be dropped back into play. The new pieces transform when captured: Pusher becomes Puller and vice versa, while Resurrector becomes Bomb and vice versa. Players may agree to have extra pieces in a queue, awaiting to enter the board. The pieces from Baroque are the same in Renaissance, except that in Renaissance the Long-leaper can only capture one man a turn.\nThe Resurrector (or Swapper or Ankh) moves like a queen for all ordinary purposes, but for swapping actions must move like a king, trading places with any adjacent piece (both friend or foe), never capturing it. Consistent with the concept of the Resurrector being a piece wholly incapable of killing, it can also step into any adjacent empty square, and leave behind a previously captured piece \"resurrected\" by placing it in the square just vacated. Although, seen in that light, though the Resurrector is like a piece of \"life,\" it can be transformed into a 1 square bomb when captured and readmitted to the board - but capable only of \"death\". Instead of moving, a bomb need merely explode to effect the destruction of both friendly pieces and enemy pieces adjacent to itself, and suiciding in the process. The destruction of pieces in this way causes all affected to be unrevivable.\nThere are also two more pieces that, like the \"Coordinator,\" are not capable of unassisted capture: the Pusher and the Puller. They can move like queens for ordinary purposes, but for the purpose of exercising their special powers, they must be adjacent to the affected piece at the start of the turn. If they begin adjacent to a piece (regardless if friendly or foe), they can push or pull it by 1 square. For a Pusher, the empty square on the other side must be \"open\" (except for the unusual circumstance of driving a king into an enemy piece, or an Imitator into a king.) Although the Pushers and Pullers are not capable of capture, their pushing and pulling maneuvers can result in other pieces being forced to make captures, regardless of the captured one being a friendly or enemy piece. (If a Puller pulls an enemy Puller, then that enemy Puller also pulls a piece along with it.)\nRococo.\nRococo was invented by Peter Aronson and David Howe in 2002. It is a species of Baroque that is played on a 10\u00d710 board for the purposes of captures, but on the inner 8\u00d78 square just inside it for the purpose of movement. To put it another way, the outer perimeter of squares can only be entered as a result of a capturing maneuver. In addition to the traditional Baroque pieces, Rococo has an Advancer piece that moves like a queen, but captures the enemy piece it has run up next to, stopping just short of the piece taken. As is usual for most pieces of the Baroque family, the Advancer will not enter into the space vacated by the captured piece, it merely runs up to it, and stops short by 1 square. Unlike the game of Renaissance described above, Rococo has a similarly named Swapper piece that moves like a queen, but trades places with the enemy it runs up to, a full queen's move away. The Rococo Swapper has the unusual property of self-destructing at will, in lieu of moving, provided it is not at the same time immobilized, with the effect of taking one enemy piece alongside it. What sets Rococo apart from Baroque the most is the way the pawns work; they are called cannonball pawns and move like a king, stepping 1 square in all directions, or leap over any adjacent piece (friend or foe). The only way that they can effect capture is by leaping, and \"landing\" on the enemy piece. They cannot capture like a king does. Cannonball pawns can be promoted into other pieces when they reach the other side of the board.\nThe pawn formations unique to the parent game, Baroque, already significantly different from traditional chess, are not seen in Rococo. Instead, Rococo's cannonball pawns seem to hang away from enemy pieces by two or three squares, rarely coming into contact with each other without advance preparation. In both chess and Baroque, however, fine nuances in maneuvering are made possible by locking positions together, made concrete by the establishment of well-defined pawn structures. This sort of thing is lacking in Rococo.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46523", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46523", "title": "Napoleonic Code", "text": "French civil code established in 1804\nThe Napoleonic Code (), officially the Civil Code of the French (; simply referred to as ), is the French civil code established during the French Consulate in 1804 and still in force in France, although heavily and frequently amended since its inception. Although Napoleon himself was not directly involved in the drafting of the Code, as it was drafted by a commission of four eminent jurists, he chaired many of the commission's plenary sessions, and his support was crucial to its enactment.\nThe code, with its stress on clearly written and accessible law, was a major milestone in the abolition of the previous patchwork of feudal laws. Historian Robert Holtman regards it as one of the few documents that have influenced the whole world.\nThe Napoleonic Code was not the first legal code to be established in a European country with a civil-law legal system; it was preceded by the (Bavaria, 1756), the (Prussia, 1794), and the \"West Galician Code\" (Galicia, then part of Austria, 1797). It was, however, the first modern legal code to be adopted with a pan-European scope, and it strongly influenced the law of many of the countries formed during and after the Napoleonic Wars. The Napoleonic Code influenced developing countries outside Europe attempting to modernise and defeudalise their countries through legal reforms, such as those in the Middle East, while in Latin America the Spanish and Portuguese had established their own versions of the civil code.\nHistory.\nThe categories of the Napoleonic Code were not drawn from earlier French law, but instead from Justinian's sixth-century codification of Roman law, the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\", and within it, the \"Institutes\". The \"Institutes\" divide into the law of:\nSimilarly, the Napoleonic Code divided the law into four sections:\nPrior codification attempts.\nBefore the Napoleonic Code, France did not have a single set of laws; law consisted mainly of local customs, sometimes officially compiled in \"custumals\" (\"coutumes\"), notably the \"Custom of Paris\". There were also exemptions, privileges, and special charters granted by kings or other feudal lords. With the Revolution, the last vestiges of feudalism were abolished.\nSpecifically, as to civil law, the many different bodies of law used in different parts of France were to be replaced by a single legal code. The Constituent Assembly on 5 October 1790 voted for a codification of French laws, the Constitution of 1791 promised one, and the National Assembly adopted a unanimous resolution on 4 September 1791 providing that \"there shall be a code of civil laws common for the entire realm.\" However, it was the National Convention in 1793 which established a special commission headed by Jean-Jacques-R\u00e9gis de Cambac\u00e9r\u00e8s to oversee the drafting process. \nHis drafts of 1793 (for which Cambac\u00e9r\u00e8s had been given a one month deadline), 1794, and 1796 were all rejected by a National Convention and the French Directory of the time was more preoccupied with the turmoil resulting from various wars and strife with other European powers. The first draft contained 719 articles and was very revolutionary, but was rejected for being too technical and criticised for not being radical or philosophical enough. The second, with only 297 articles, was rejected for being too brief and was criticised for being a mere manual of morals. The third, expanded to 1,104 articles, was presented under the conservative Directory regime, but never even came up for discussion.\nAnother commission, established in December 1799 established a fourth outline drafted in part by Jean-Ignace Jacqueminot (1754\u20131813). Jacqueminot's draft, the so-called \"loi Jacqueminot\", dealt almost exclusively with persons and emphasised the need to reform the divorce laws, to strengthen parental authority and increase the testator's freedom to dispose of the free portion of his estate. It was rejected.\nNapoleonic reforms.\nNapoleon's victory at the Battle of Marengo allowed him to consolidate his power in France. Returning to Paris, he appointed on 12 August 1800 a commission of distinguished jurists and politicians, including Jacques de Maleville, Fran\u00e7ois Denis Tronchet, F\u00e9lix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Pr\u00e9ameneu, Jean-\u00c9tienne-Marie Portalis to draft a civil code. For this commission, Cambac\u00e9r\u00e8s (now Second Consul), and Napoleon himself chaired the plenary sessions. After this process finished, the Code was sent to the Legislative Body as a preliminary bill in December 1801, where it was rejected by a vote of 142 to 139. In response, Napoleon announced on 2 January 1802 that he was suspending all projects, effectively closing the assemblies' sessions; simultaneously, he went to the S\u00e9nat conservateur to berate its members. These tactics cowed the legislature into submission, and gave Napoleon the majority he needed. The code finally came into effect on 21 March 1804.\nThe process developed mainly out of the various customs, but was inspired by Justinian's sixth-century codification of Roman law, the \"Corpus Juris Civilis\" and, within that, Justinian's Code (\"Codex\"). The Napoleonic Code, however, differed from Justinian's in important ways: \nThe Napoleonic Code marked a fundamental change in the nature of the civil law legal system, making laws clearer and more accessible. It also superseded the former conflict between royal legislative power and, particularly in the final years before the Revolution, protests by judges representing views and privileges of the social classes to which they belonged. Such conflict led the Revolutionaries to take a negative view of judges making law.\nThis is reflected in the Napoleonic Code provision prohibiting judges from deciding a case by way of introducing a general rule (Article 5), since the creation of general rules is an exercise of legislative and not of judicial power. In theory, there is thus no case law in France. However, the courts still had to fill in the gaps in the laws and regulations and, indeed, were prohibited from refusing to do so (Article 4). Moreover, both the code and legislation have required judicial interpretation. Thus a vast body of case law has come into existence, but without any rule of \"stare decisis\".\nContents of the Napoleonic Code.\nThe preliminary article of the code established certain important provisions regarding the rule of law. Laws could be applied only if they had been duly promulgated, and then only if they had previously been officially published (including provisions for publishing delays, given the means of communication available at the time). In brief, no secret laws were authorised. It prohibited \"ex post facto\" laws (i.e. laws that apply to events that occurred before their introduction). The code also prohibited judges from refusing to do justice on grounds of the insufficiency of the law, thereby encouraging them to interpret the law. On the other hand, it also prohibited judges from making general judgements of a legislative nature (see above).\nWith regard to family, the code established the supremacy of the husband over his wife and children, the \"status quo\" in Europe at the time. Women had even fewer rights than children. Divorce by mutual consent was abolished in 1804.\nOther French Napoleonic-era codes.\nThe draft Military Code was presented to Napoleon by the special commission headed by Pierre Daru in June 1805; however, as the War of the Third Coalition progressed, the code was put aside and never implemented.\nIn 1791, Louis Michel le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau presented a new criminal code to the National Constituent Assembly. He explained that it outlawed only \"true crimes\", and not \"phony offences created by superstition, feudalism, the tax system, and [royal] despotism\". He did not list the crimes \"created by superstition\". The new penal code did not mention blasphemy, heresy, sacrilege, witchcraft, incest, or homosexuality, which led to these former offences being swiftly decriminalised. In 1810, a new criminal code was issued under Napoleon. As with the Penal Code of 1791, it did not contain provisions for religious crimes, incest, or homosexuality.\nThe French Revolution's Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen enunciated the presumption of innocence until found guilty. Concerned by the possibility of arbitrary arrest and detention, or excessive remand, Napoleon remarked that care should be taken to preserve personal freedoms, especially before the Imperial Court: \"these courts would have a great strength, they should be prohibited from abusing this situation against weak citizens without connections.\" However, remand still was usual for defendants suspected of serious crimes such as murder.\nThe possibility of lengthy remand periods was one criticism\u2014particularly voiced in common law countries\u2014of the Napoleonic Code. Another concern was the combination of magistrate and prosecutor into a single role. However, once the work of the \"juge d'instruction\" was completed, the trial itself followed the principle of presumption of innocence; for example, the juror's oath explicitly required jurors not to betray the interests of the defendants or ignore their defence.\nThe rules governing court proceedings gave significant power to the prosecution; however, criminal justice in European countries in those days tended to repression. For instance, it was only in 1836 that prisoners charged with a felony were given a formal right to counsel in England. In comparison, article 294 of the Napoleonic Code of Criminal Procedure allowed the defendant access to a lawyer before a \"Cour d'assises\", and mandated the court to appoint a lawyer for the defendants who did not have one. (Failing to do so nullified the proceedings.)\nWhether or not the \"Cour d'assises\", which judges severe crimes, should operate with a jury was a topic of considerable controversy. Napoleon supported jury trials (or \"petit jury\"), and they were finally adopted. On the other hand, Napoleon opposed the indictment jury (\"grand jury\" of common law countries), and preferred to assign this task to the criminal division of the Court of Appeals. Special courts were created to judge criminals who might intimidate the jury.\nFrench codes in the 21st century.\nThe French codes, now more than 60 in number, are frequently amended, as well as judicially re-interpreted. Therefore, for over a century all of the codes in force have been documented in the annually revised editions published by Dalloz (Paris). These editions consist of thorough annotations, with references to other codes, relevant statutes, judicial decisions (even if unpublished), and international instruments. The \"small (\"petit\")\" version of the Civil Code in this form is nearly 3,000 pages, available in print and online. Additional material, including scholarly articles, is added in the larger \"expert (\"expert\")\" version and the still larger \"mega (\"m\u00e9ga\")\" version, both of which are available in print and on searchable CD-ROM. By this stage, it has been suggested, the Civil Code has become \"less a book than a database\".\nThe sheer number of codes, together with digitisation, led the \"Commission sup\u00e9rieure de codification\" to reflect in its annual report for 2011:\nThe Commission observes that the age of drawing up new codes is probably reaching its end. The aim of a nearly complete codification of the law is no longer pursued, for three reasons: firstly, the technical developments by which texts are provided in non-physical form offer to users modes of access that are comparable in many ways to those available through a code; secondly, the creation of new codes encounters a kind of law of diminishing returns in that, the more progress that is made in the development of new codes, the trickier it becomes to determine in which code particular provisions should be located; and, finally, it is clear that certain kinds of provision [...] are unsuitable for codification, since codification makes sense only when it involves provisions that possess sufficient generality.\nA year later, the Commission recommended that, after its current codification projects were completed, there should not be any further codes; an additional reason was government delay in publishing reforms that the Commission had completed. The government responded encouragingly in March 2013, but the Commission in 2014 complained that this has not been followed through; in particular, that the government had abandoned its plan for a public service code (\"code g\u00e9n\u00e9ral de la fonction publique\").\nCodes in other countries.\nEven though the Napoleonic Code was not the first civil code, it was the first modern legal code to be widely adopted in Europe, and it influenced the law of many of the countries formed during and after the Napoleonic Wars. In the German regions on the west bank of the Rhine (Rhenish Palatinate and Prussian Rhine Province), the former Duchy of Berg and the Grand Duchy of Baden, the Napoleonic Code was influential until the introduction of the \"B\u00fcrgerliches Gesetzbuch\" in 1900 as the first common civil code for the entire German Empire.\nA number of factors have been shown by Arvind and Stirton to have had a determinative role in the decision by the German states to receive the code, including territorial concerns, Napoleonic control and influence, the strength of central state institutions, a feudal economy and society, rule by liberal (enlightened despotic) rulers, nativism among the governing elites, and popular anti-French sentiment.\nA civil code with Napoleonic code influences was also adopted in 1864 in Romania, and remained in force until 2011. \nThe term \"Napoleonic Code\" is also used to refer to legal codes of other jurisdictions that are influenced by the \"French Code Napol\u00e9on\", especially the \"Civil Code of Lower Canada\" (replaced in 1994 by the \"Civil Code of Quebec\"), mainly derived from the \"Coutume de Paris\", which the British continued to use in Canada following the 1763 Treaty of Paris. However, most of the laws in Latin American countries are not heavily influenced by the Napoleonic Code, as the Spanish and Portuguese versions of the civil code formed the foundation of the Latin American legal systems e.g. the Chilean, Mexican, and Puerto Rican civil codes.\nIn Mauritius, the Civil Code, which originates from the Napoleonic Code, represents an important primary source of law and provides for the rights of individuals, matrimonial regimes, contract law, and property law, amongst others. The French Civil Code was extended to Mauritius under the title \"Code Napol\u00e9on\" by decree of Charles Mathieu Isidore Decaen, \"Capitaine-General\", on 21 April 1808. The Code was modified and embodied in Chapter 179 of the Revised Laws of Mauritius 1945, edited by Sir Charlton Lane, former Chief Justice of Mauritius. The 1808 decree was repealed by Act 9 of 1983, but the Revision of Laws Act which was enacted in 1974, made provision, in section 7, for the publication of the Code under the title \"Code Civil Mauricien.\"\nIn the United States, the legal system is largely based on English common law. But the state of Louisiana is unique in being strongly influenced by French and Spanish legal traditions in its civil code. Spanish and French colonial forces quarreled over Louisiana during most of the 1700s, with Spain ultimately ceding the territory to France in 1800, which in turn sold the territory to the United States in 1803. The 10th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution grants states control of laws not specifically given to the federal government, so Louisiana's legal system retains many French elements. Examples of the practical legal differences between Louisiana and the other states include the bar exam and legal standards of practice for attorneys in Louisiana being significantly different from other states; Louisiana is the only U.S. state to practice forced inheritance of an estate; additionally, some of Louisiana's laws clash with the Uniform Commercial Code practiced by the other 49 states.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46525", "revid": "16228717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46525", "title": "Wilfred Owen", "text": "English poet and soldier (1893\u20131918)\nWilfred Edward Salter Owen MC (18 March 1893\u00a0\u2013 4 November 1918) was an English poet and soldier. He was one of the leading poets of the First World War. His war poetry on the horrors of trenches and gas warfare was much influenced by his mentor Siegfried Sassoon and stood in contrast to the public perception of war at the time and to the confidently patriotic verse written by earlier war poets such as Rupert Brooke. Among his best-known works\u00a0\u2013 most of which were published posthumously\u00a0\u2013 are \"Dulce et Decorum est\", \"Insensibility\", \"Anthem for Doomed Youth\", \"Futility\", \"Spring Offensive\" and \"Strange Meeting\". Owen was killed in action on 4 November 1918, a week before the Armistice, at the age of 25.\nEarly life.\nOwen was born on 18 March 1893 at Plas Wilmot, a house in Weston Lane, near Oswestry in Shropshire. He was the eldest of Thomas and (Harriett) Susan Owen (\"n\u00e9e\" Shaw)'s four children; his siblings were Mary Millard, (William) Harold, and Colin Shaw Owen. At the time of Owen's birth, his parents lived in a comfortable house owned by his grandfather, Edward Shaw.\nAfter Edward's death in January 1897, and the house's sale in March, the family lodged in the back streets of Birkenhead. There Thomas Owen temporarily worked in the town employed by a railway company. Thomas transferred to Shrewsbury in April 1897 where the family lived with Thomas's parents in Canon Street.\nThomas Owen transferred back to Birkenhead in 1898 when he became stationmaster at Woodside station. The family lived with him at three successive homes in the Tranmere district area of the town. They then moved back to Shrewsbury in 1907. Wilfred Owen was educated at the Birkenhead Institute and at Shrewsbury Technical School (later known as the Wakeman School).\nOwen discovered his poetic vocation in about 1904 during a holiday spent in Cheshire. He was raised as an Anglican of the evangelical type, and in his youth was a devout believer, in part thanks to his strong relationship with his mother, which lasted throughout his life. His early influences included the Bible and the Romantic poets, particularly Wordsworth and John Keats.\nOwen's last two years of formal education saw him as a pupil-teacher at the Wyle Cop school in Shrewsbury. In 1911 he passed the matriculation exam for the University of London, but not with the first-class honours needed for a scholarship, which in his family's circumstances was the only way he could have afforded to attend.\nIn return for free lodging, and some tuition for the entrance exam. Owen worked as lay assistant to the Vicar of Dunsden near Reading, living in the vicarage from September 1911 to February 1913. During this time he attended classes at University College, Reading (now the University of Reading), in botany and later, at the urging of the head of the English Department, took free lessons in Old English. His time spent at Dunsden parish led him to disillusionment with the Church, both in its ceremony and its failure to provide aid for those in need.\nFrom 1913 he worked as a private tutor teaching English and French at the Berlitz School of Languages in Bordeaux, France, and later with a family. There he met the older French poet Laurent Tailhade, with whom he later corresponded in French. When war broke out, Owen did not rush to enlist \u2013 and even considered joining the French army \u2013 but eventually returned to England.\nWar service.\nOn 21 October 1915, he enlisted in the Artists Rifles. For the next seven months, he trained at Hare Hall Camp in Essex. On 4 June 1916, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant (on probation) in the Manchester Regiment. Initially Owen held his troops in contempt for their loutish behaviour, and in a letter to his mother described his company as \"expressionless lumps\". However, his imaginative existence was to be changed dramatically by a number of traumatic experiences. He fell into a shell hole and suffered concussion; he was caught in the blast of a trench mortar shell and spent several days unconscious on an embankment lying amongst the remains of one of his fellow officers. Soon afterward, Owen was diagnosed with neurasthenia or shell shock and sent to Craiglockhart War Hospital in Edinburgh for treatment. It was while recuperating at Craiglockhart that he met fellow poet Siegfried Sassoon, an encounter that was to transform Owen's life.\nWhilst at Craiglockhart he made friends in Edinburgh's artistic and literary circles, and did some teaching at the Tynecastle High School, in a poor area of the city. In November he was discharged from Craiglockhart, judged fit for light regimental duties. He spent a contented and fruitful winter in Scarborough, North Yorkshire, and in March 1918 was posted to the Northern Command Depot at Ripon. While in Ripon he composed or revised a number of poems, including \" and \". His 25th birthday was spent quietly at Ripon Cathedral, which is dedicated to his namesake, St. Wilfrid of Hexham.\nOwen returned in July 1918, to active service in France, although he might have stayed on home-duty indefinitely. His decision to return was probably the result of Sassoon's being sent back to England, after being shot in the head in an apparent \"friendly fire\" incident, and put on sick-leave for the remaining duration of the war. Owen saw it as his duty to add his voice to that of Sassoon, that the horrific realities of the war might continue to be told. Sassoon was violently opposed to the idea of Owen returning to the trenches, threatening to \"stab [him] in the leg\" if he tried it. Aware of his attitude, Owen did not inform him of his action until he was once again in France.\nAt the very end of August 1918, Owen returned to the front line. On 1 October 1918, Owen led units of the Second Manchesters to storm a number of enemy strong points near the village of Joncourt. For his courage and leadership in the Joncourt action, he was awarded the Military Cross, an award he had always sought in order to justify himself as a war poet, but the award was not gazetted until 15 February 1919. The citation followed on 30 July 1919:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;2nd Lt, Wilfred Edward Salter Owen, 5th Bn. Manch. R., T.F., attd. 2nd Bn.\nFor conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty in the attack on the Fonsomme Line on October 1st/2nd, 1918. On the company commander becoming a casualty, he assumed command and showed fine leadership and resisted a heavy counter-attack. He personally manipulated a captured enemy machine gun from an isolated position and inflicted considerable losses on the enemy. Throughout he behaved most gallantly.\nDeath.\nOwen was killed in action on 4 November 1918 during the crossing of the Sambre\u2013Oise Canal, exactly one week (almost to the hour) before the signing of the Armistice which ended the war, and was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant the day after his death. His mother received the telegram informing her of his death on Armistice Day, as the church bells in Shrewsbury were ringing out in celebration. Owen is buried at Ors Communal Cemetery, Ors, in northern France. The inscription on his gravestone was modified from his poetry by his mother, Susan; she omitted the trailing question mark which questions faith to present Owen as more pious: \nPoetry.\nOwen is regarded by many as the greatest poet of the First World War, known for his verse about the horrors of trench and gas warfare. He had been writing poetry for some years before the war, himself dating his poetic beginnings to a stay at Broxton by the Hill when he was ten years old.\nThe poetry of William Butler Yeats was a significant influence for Owen, but Yeats did not reciprocate Owen's admiration, excluding him from \"The Oxford Book of Modern Verse\", a decision Yeats later defended, saying Owen was \"all blood, dirt, and sucked sugar stick\" and \"unworthy of the poet's corner of a country newspaper\". Yeats elaborated: \"In all the great tragedies, tragedy is a joy to the man who dies ... If war is necessary in our time and place, it is best to forget its suffering as we do the discomfort of fever ...\"\nThe Romantic poets Keats and Shelley influenced much of his early writing and poetry. His great friend, the poet Siegfried Sassoon, later had a profound effect on his poetic voice, and Owen's most famous poems (\"Dulce et Decorum est\" and \"Anthem for Doomed Youth\") show direct results of Sassoon's influence. Manuscript copies of the poems survive, annotated in Sassoon's handwriting. Owen's poetry would eventually be more widely acclaimed than that of his mentor. While his use of pararhyme with heavy reliance on assonance was innovative, he was not the only poet at the time to use these particular techniques. He was, however, one of the first to experiment with it extensively.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nAnthem for Doomed Youth\nWhat passing-bells for these who die as cattle?\nOnly the monstrous anger of the guns.\nOnly the stuttering rifles' rapid rattle\nCan patter out their hasty orisons.\nNo mockeries now for them; no prayers nor bells,\nNor any voice of mourning save the choirs, \u2013\nThe shrill, demented choirs of wailing shells;\nAnd bugles calling for them from sad shires.\nWhat candles may be held to speed them all?\nNot in the hands of boys, but in their eyes\nShall shine the holy glimmers of goodbyes.\nThe pallor of girls' brows shall be their pall;\nTheir flowers the tenderness of patient minds,\nAnd each slow dusk a drawing down of blinds.\n&lt;/poem&gt;\n1920\nHis poetry itself underwent significant changes in 1917. As a part of his therapy at Craiglockhart, Owen's doctor, Arthur Brock, encouraged Owen to translate his experiences, specifically the experiences he relived in his dreams, into poetry. Sassoon, who was becoming influenced by Freudian psychoanalysis, aided him here, showing Owen through example what poetry could do. Sassoon's use of satire influenced Owen, who tried his hand at writing \"in Sassoon's style\". Further, the content of Owen's verse was undeniably changed by his work with Sassoon. Sassoon's emphasis on realism and \"writing from experience\" was contrary to Owen's hitherto romantic-influenced style, as seen in his earlier sonnets. Owen was to take both Sassoon's gritty realism and his own romantic notions and create a poetic synthesis that was both potent and sympathetic, as summarised by his famous phrase \"the pity of war\". In this way, Owen's poetry is quite distinctive, and he is, by many, considered a greater poet than Sassoon. Nonetheless, Sassoon contributed to Owen's popularity by his strong promotion of his poetry, both before and after Owen's death, and his editing was instrumental in the making of Owen as a poet.\nOwen's poems had the benefit of strong patronage, and it was a combination of Sassoon's influence, support from Edith Sitwell, and the preparation of a new and fuller edition of the poems in 1931 by Edmund Blunden that ensured his popularity, coupled with a revival of interest in his poetry in the 1960s which plucked him out of a relatively exclusive readership into the public eye. Though he had plans for a volume of verse, for which he had written a \"Preface\", he never saw his own work published apart from those poems he included in \"The Hydra\", the magazine he edited at Craiglockhart War Hospital, and \"Miners\", which was published in \"The Nation\".\nThere were many other influences on Owen's poetry, including his mother. His letters to her provide an insight into Owen's life at the front, and the development of his philosophy regarding the war. Graphic details of the horror Owen witnessed were never spared. Owen's experiences with religion also heavily influenced his poetry, notably in poems such as \"Anthem for Doomed Youth\", in which the ceremony of a funeral is re-enacted not in a church, but on the battlefield itself, and \"At a Calvary near the Ancre\", which comments on the Crucifixion of Christ. Owen's experiences in war led him further to challenge his religious beliefs, claiming in his poem \"Exposure\" that \"love of God seems dying\".\nOnly five of Owen's poems were published before his death, one in fragmentary form. His best known poems include \"Anthem for Doomed Youth\", \"Futility\", \"Dulce Et Decorum Est\", \"The Parable of the Old Men and the Young\" and \"Strange Meeting\".\nHowever, most of them were published posthumously: \"Poems\" (1920), \"The Poems of Wilfred Owen\" (1931), \"The Collected Poems of Wilfred Owen\" (1963), \"The Complete Poems and Fragments\" (1983); fundamental in this last collection is the poem \"Soldier's Dream\", that deals with Owen's conception of war.\nOwen's full unexpurgated opus is in the academic two-volume work \"The Complete Poems and Fragments\" (1994) by Jon Stallworthy. Many of his poems have never been published in popular form.\nIn 1975 Mrs. Harold Owen, Wilfred's sister-in-law, donated all of the manuscripts, photographs and letters which her late husband had owned to the University of Oxford's English Faculty Library. As well as the personal artifacts, this also includes all of Owen's personal library and an almost complete set of \"The Hydra\"\u00a0\u2013 the magazine of Craiglockhart War Hospital. These can be accessed by any member of the public on application in advance to the English Faculty librarian.\nThe Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin holds a large collection of Owen's family correspondence.\nSexuality.\nThough it has been suggested that Owen hoped to marry Albertina Dauthieu, at the time living in Milnathort, Scotland, had he survived the war, Robert Graves and Sacheverell Sitwell, both of whom knew him, believed that Owen was homosexual, and that homoeroticism was a central element in much of his poetry. Through Sassoon, Owen was introduced to a sophisticated homosexual literary circle which included Oscar Wilde's friend Robbie Ross, writer and poet Osbert Sitwell, and Scottish writer C. K. Scott Moncrieff, the translator of Marcel Proust. This contact, it is argued, broadened Owen's outlook, and increased his confidence in incorporating homoerotic elements into his work. Historians have debated whether Owen had an affair with Scott Moncrieff in May 1918; the latter had dedicated various works to a \"Mr\u00a0W.O.\", but Owen never responded.\nThroughout Owen's lifetime and for decades after, homosexual activity between men was a punishable offence throughout the United Kingdom, and the account of Owen's sexual development has been somewhat obscured because his brother Harold removed what he considered discreditable passages in Owen's letters and diaries after the death of their mother. Andrew Motion wrote of Owen's relationship with Sassoon: \"On the one hand, Sassoon's wealth, posh connections and aristocratic manner appealed to the snob in Owen: on the other, Sassoon's homosexuality admitted Owen to a style of living and thinking that he found naturally sympathetic.\" Sassoon, by his own account, was not actively homosexual at this time, but began his first love affair just after the war ended, in November 1918.\nAn important turning point in Owen scholarship occurred in 1987 when the \"New Statesman\" published the polemic \"The Truth Untold\" by Jonathan Cutbill, the literary executor of Edward Carpenter, which attacked the academic suppression of Owen as a poet of homosexual experience. Amongst the article's contentions was that the poem \"Shadwell Stair\", previously alleged to be mysterious, was a straightforward elegy to homosexual soliciting in an area of the London docks once renowned for it. In June 2022 the poem was included in the anthology, \"100 Queer Poems\", compiled by Andrew McMillan and Mary Jean Chan.\nRelationship with Sassoon.\nOwen held Siegfried Sassoon in an esteem not far from hero-worship, remarking to his mother that he was \"not worthy to light [Sassoon's] pipe\". The relationship clearly had a profound impact on Owen, who wrote in his first letter to Sassoon after leaving Craiglockhart \"You have fixed my life \u2013 however short\". Sassoon wrote that he took \"an instinctive liking to him\", and recalled their time together \"with affection\". On the evening of 3 November 1917 they parted, Owen having been discharged from Craiglockhart. He was stationed on home-duty in Scarborough for several months, during which time he associated with members of the artistic circle into which Sassoon had introduced him, which included Robbie Ross and Robert Graves. He also met H. G.\u00a0Wells and Arnold Bennett, and it was during this period he developed the stylistic voice for which he is now recognised. Many of his early poems were penned while stationed at the Clarence Garden Hotel, now the Clifton Hotel, in Scarborough's North Bay. A blue plaque on the hotel marks its association with Owen.\nSassoon and Owen kept in touch through correspondence, and after Sassoon was shot in the head in July 1918 and sent back to the UK to recover, they met in August and spent what Sassoon described as \"the whole of a hot cloudless afternoon together.\" They never saw each other again. About three weeks later, Owen wrote to bid Sassoon farewell, as he was on the way back to France, and they continued to communicate. After the Armistice, Sassoon waited in vain for word from Owen, only to be told of his death several months later. The loss grieved Sassoon greatly, and he was never \"able to accept that disappearance philosophically.\" Many years later, he is said, snobbishly, to have told Stephen Spender that he found Owen's grammar school accent \"embarrassing\". However, in his own account of his friendship with Owen, which appeared in his 1945 autobiography, \"Siegfried's Journey\", Sassoon writes that Owen's death created \"a chasm in my private existence\", Sassoon expressed regret at what he regarded as his \"slowness in discovering that [Owen] was to be of high significance for me, both as a poet and friend...and there was much comfort in his companionship\".\nLegacy.\nMemorials.\nThere are memorials to Owen at Gailly near Sailly-Laurette, Ors Communal Cemetery, near St Oswalds Church in Oswestry, Birkenhead Central Library and Shrewsbury Abbey.\nOn 11 November 1985, Owen was one of sixteen Great War poets commemorated on a slate stone unveiled in Westminster Abbey's Poet's Corner. The inscription on the stone is taken from Owen's \"Preface\" to his poems: \"My subject is War, and the pity of War. The Poetry is in the pity.\" There is also a small museum at the Craiglockhart War Hospital, now a Napier University building, containing the \"War Poets Collection\".\nThe forester's house in Ors where Owen spent his last night, , has been transformed by Turner Prize nominee Simon Patterson into an art installation and permanent memorial to Owen and his poetry. It opened to the public on 1 October 2011.\nIn November 2015, actor Jason Isaacs unveiled a tribute to Owen at the former Craiglockhart War Hospital in Edinburgh where Owen was treated for shell shock during WWI.\nOwen and his poetry in the media.\nBenjamin Britten's \"War Requiem\", first performed in 1962, makes extensive use of Owen's poetry.\nOwen himself has been the subject of several fictional works, notably \"Not About Heroes\", a play about Owen's friendship with Siegfried Sassoon by Stephen MacDonald, first performed in 1982. \nThe \"Regeneration\" Trilogy, a novel series by Pat Barker, includes the meeting and relationship between Sassoon and Owen and the death of Owen as one of its main themes.\nWilfred Owen Association.\nTo commemorate Owen's life and poetry, The Wilfred Owen Association was formed in 1989. Since its formation the Association has established permanent public memorials in Shrewsbury and Oswestry. In addition to readings, talks, visits and performances, it promotes and encourages exhibitions, conferences, awareness and appreciation of Owen's poetry. Peter Owen, Wilfred Owen's nephew, was President of the Association until his death in July 2018. The Association's Patrons include Peter Florence, Rowan Williams Sir Daniel Day-Lewis and Samuel West; Grey Ruthven, 2nd Earl of Gowrie (1939\u20132021) was also a Patron. The Association presents a biennial Poetry Award to honour a poet for a sustained body of work that includes memorable war poems; previous recipients include Sir Andrew Motion (Poet Laureate 1999\u20132009), Dannie Abse, Christopher Logue, Gillian Clarke and Seamus Heaney. Owen Sheers was awarded the prize in September 2018.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
