{"id": "51858", "revid": "46847496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51858", "title": "Jewel-Osco", "text": "American supermarket chain\nJewel-Osco is a regional supermarket chain in the Chicago metropolitan area, headquartered in Itasca, a western suburb. In 2025, the company had 189 stores across northern, central, and western Illinois; eastern Iowa; and portions of northwest Indiana. Jewel-Osco has been a wholly owned subsidiary of Boise-based Albertsons since 1999. The company originally started as a door-to-door coffee delivery service before it expanded into delivering non-perishable groceries and later into grocery stores, and supermarkets. Prior to its 1984 acquisition by American Stores, Jewel evolved into a large multi-state holding company that operated several supermarket chains and other non-food retail chain stores located from coast to coast and had operated under several different brand names.\nHistory.\nBeginnings with home deliveries.\nIn 1899, Frank Vernon Skiff founded Jewel in Chicago as a door-to-door coffee delivery service. In 1902, Skiff partnered with his brother-in-law Frank P. Ross, renaming the venture the Jewel Tea Company. By 1903, they had six routes, then 12 routes in 1904 with expansion into Michigan City, Kankakee, and Kewanee. There were 850 routes by 1915. In the early 1900s, it ran a \"coffee train\" of 40 cars carrying coffee beans exported from South America.\nDuring WWI, the company faced soaring costs for materials and production. Compounding this, the US government commandeered a key Jewel production facility. As a result, by 1919 the company was experiencing severe financial setbacks. Within a few years, it returned to profitability through the leadership of new company officials: retired Commanders John M. Hancock and Maurice H. Karker, who had both gained extensive logistics experience as US Navy supply officers during the war.\nIn 1929, the company built a new office, warehouse, and coffee roasting facility in suburban Barrington, Illinois, creating hundreds of local jobs despite the Great Depression. The Barrington location served as the headquarters and main warehouse facility for both the home delivery and food store divisions until the completion of the new warehouse and office complex at Melrose Park in 1953.\nIn 1949, deliveries were provided on 1876 routes in 43 states to customers mostly in small towns. Customers in cities could visit 154 company-owned grocery stores.\nLater, the service expanded to include 350 grocery and 10,000 general merchandise items by 1981 when Jewel sold its \"Jewel Home Shopping Service\" division to its employees and divest itself from its roots. At the time of the divestiture, the division provided service to customers in mostly small towns located along 1000 routes in 42 states. The division became a 700-member owned cooperative called \"J.T.'s General Store\" in which route sales persons were independent agents.\nIn October 1994, a group of the company's managers acquired the assets of \"J.T.'s General Store\" and \"created J.T. Dealers Sales and Service\". By 1995, \"J.T. Dealer Sales and Service\" was providing service to 60,000 customers along 250 routes in 35 states.\nGrocery stores.\nThe company's expansion continued throughout the mid-20th century. In 1932, Jewel acquired the Chicago unit of the Canadian firm Loblaw Groceterias, Inc., then a chain of 77 self-service stores, as well as four Chicago grocery stores operated by the Middle West Stores Company, and began operating them under the name Jewel Food Stores. In 1934, Jewel Food Stores merged with Jewel Tea Company. In 1937, Jewel Tea Company purchased an eight-story building in Chicago's Central Manufacturing District, which served as Jewel Food Stores' headquarters until 1954.\nThe name of the parent company remained \"Jewel Tea Company\" until 1967 when the stockholders voted to change the name to Jewel Companies, Inc. to better reflect the expansion of the company into different markets. In 1967, the company went public and its stock was traded on the Midwest Stock Exchange.\nEisner acquisition and expansion south.\nIn 1957, Jewel acquired the Champaign-based Eisner Food Stores, located in downstate Illinois and later in west central Indiana (Lafayette, West Lafayette, and Bloomington). This acquisition was significant since it was the first time Jewel maintained the new acquisition as a separate division within the Jewel organization with the acquired stores keeping their original names, setting the pattern for future acquisitions.\nAfter Jewel's hostile takeover by American Stores in 1984, American Stores decided to save money by merging Eisner directly into Jewel, converting all stores to the Jewel name and slowly started to sell off the former Eisner properties. One of the first properties to let go was the former Eisner warehouse facility in Champaign in 1986. With the Champaign warehouse facility gone, many former Eisner locations became less profitable since they had to be serviced from the more distant Jewel warehouse at Melrose Park, justifying the elimination of those locations. The west central Indiana stores, three in Lafayette and two in Bloomington, were sold off in 1990. Jewel also closed central Illinois locations that were formerly Eisner in Decatur (in 1995), Champaign-Urbana (in 1998), and Springfield (2006).\nNon-food retail expansion.\nIn 1961, Jewel acquired two growing non-food related retail chains, Chicago-based Osco Drug stores, and Brighton, Massachusetts-based Turn Style discount department stores, to complement their food store division when building one-stop shopping destinations, such as the new Family Centers and Jewel-Osco (Eisner-Osco, Star-Osco, Buttrey-Osco) food-drug combinations. The acquisition of both Osco and Turn Style allowed Jewel to expand into non-food related retailing that would complement their existing food retailing business and also to expand the geographic range of its main food distribution business since the non-food companies had a different geographical footprint.\nJewel expanded into the home improvement retail market by acquiring Republic Lumber in 1972.\n1960s\u20131970s expansion.\nDuring the 1960s, Jewel expanded by acquiring several chains.\nJewel expanded their food store holdings by acquiring Cambridge, Massachusetts-based Star Market in 1964 and the Great Falls, Montana-based Buttrey Food Stores in 1966 to add to their existing Jewel and Eisner food store chains.\nThe acquisition of Star Market also gave Jewel control of Brigham's Ice Cream, which had been a part of Star since 1961. Jewel later sold off Brigham's in 1982.\nIn 1965, Jewel expanded into the convenience store business by opening Kwik Shoppe, a chain that was quickly renamed White Hen Pantry within a few months.\nBefore 1970 Jewel stores were typically located on arterial city streets. Between 1970 and 1990, Jewel moved or expanded most of its stores to be freestanding buildings with ample parking. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Jewel built and operated many Jewel-Osco side-by-side stores, but most construction after 1983 consolidated Jewel and Osco stores together as one large store under one roof. Today, the two stores present to the customer as one unit. For instance, a customer can check out any items at Jewel or Osco registers, find Jewel and Osco merchandise commingled throughout the store, and can call one telephone number to reach their Jewel-Osco. Each operating unit retains its own public identity as a \"food store\" or a \"drug store\".\nThe first Jewel-Osco food-drug combination stores were built in 1962. The first Jewel-Osco Family Center was opened in Chicago's Appleton Plaza Shopping center in January 1962.\nJewel opened five stores in Michigan in the 1970s, but closed all five in 1996.\nIn 1971, Jewel expanded their brand into Wisconsin by acquiring eight failing stores from Kroger and rebranded the stores Jewel. After a decade of operations, Jewel closed all their stores in Wisconsin in 1980. Those locations were sold to Sentry Foods. Jewel did not return to Wisconsin until 1995.\nUntil 2010, Jewel and Osco stores under the same roof have had separate operations, managers, ordering and receiving procedures, budgets and employees. A 2010 cost-saving measure brought both Jewel and Osco oversight under one store director for each site.\nIn 1978, Jewel Companies, Inc. attempted to acquire Skaggs Companies, Inc. through an exchange in stock in which Jewel would have been the surviving company and still based in Melrose Park instead of Salt Lake City. A few months later, Skaggs turned down the merger offer. At that time, Skaggs had 229 stores.\nAfter six years, Jewel suffered many losses due to failed marketing concepts and general mismanagement while Skaggs became larger and strong enough to perform a hostile take over of Jewel under its new name: American Stores.\nAmerican Stores.\nAmerican Stores made an offer to acquire the Jewel Companies in 1984. The Jewel Companies, Inc. chairman Weston Christopherson was opposed to a merger and Sam Skaggs subsequently engineered a hostile takeover. On June 1, 1984, American Stores tendered an offer worth $1.1 billion for 67% of Jewel's outstanding shares at $70 per share.\nFor two weeks, Jewel's management refused to comment on the offer, maintaining its silence even at a stormy shareholder's meeting before which Jewel shareholder groups controlling 20% of the company's stock were in favor of negotiating with American Stores. On June 14, Sam Skaggs and Jewel president Richard Cline reached an agreement after an all-night bargaining session. American Stores raised its bid for Jewel's preferred stock, increasing the total bid to $1.15 billion in cash and securities. In return, Jewel dropped plans for a defensive acquisition of Household International Inc. (parent company of California supermarket chain Vons) and accepted American Stores' offer. American Stores soon sold Buttrey Food Stores (in 1990), Star Market (in 1994), and White Hen Pantry (in 1985), to pay off debt and for other reasons.\n1990s expansion under American Stores.\nIn 1989, American Stores expanded to Florida using the Jewel-Osco name, but operating as a separate division distinct from the Midwestern Jewel-Osco operations. The Jewel name returned to Florida five years after the company closed all of its Jewel-T discount food stores in 1984. Florida was considered a good market for Jewel because of the high number of Chicagoans who had relocated to that state. After three years of operations, American Stores closed those Jewel-Osco stores and sold them to Albertsons in 1992.\nTo consolidate the names of some of its subsidiaries under one title with nationwide recognition, American Stores renamed some of its Skaggs-Alpha Beta stores to Jewel-Osco in mid-September 1991. American replaced the Skaggs-Alpha Beta name with that of Jewel-Osco on all 76 stores in Texas, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Arkansas, expanding the chain toward the southwestern states. Within six months, American Stores sold all of the Jewel-Osco locations in the states of Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Florida to Albertsons but kept the locations in the state of New Mexico for a few more years.\nIn 1998, American Stores rebranded the Jewel-Osco stores in New Mexico to Lucky/Sav-on, a grocery store/drug store brand which American Stores had used in neighboring Arizona. After the acquisition of American Stores by Albertsons just a few months later, the New Mexico stores were rebranded again to Albertsons Sav-on in 1999.\nUnder American Stores, Jewel returned to Wisconsin by opening a Jewel-Osco store in a new shopping center in Kenosha, Wisconsin in 1995. Jewel returned to Milwaukee in 1998 by purchasing a Pick 'n Save store and four Cub Foods stores and converting them into Jewel Osco stores.\nAlbertsons and SuperValu.\nAlbertsons acquired American Stores' holdings, including Jewel and Jewel-Osco stores, in 1999.\nSeven years later, parent company Albertsons and its stores would be taken over by two separate groups. On May 30, 2006, shareholders approved the break-up of Albertsons. All Jewel-Osco and Jewel Food Stores outside of Springfield, Illinois were sold to SuperValu. Two Springfield stores were acquired by an investment group led by Cerberus Capital Management, which were then sold to Niemann Foods. All free-standing Osco drugstores were acquired by CVS Pharmacy. The Osco name is still used for pharmacies within Albertsons, Jewel, Shaw's and Star Market.\nSuperValu announced on January 5, 2007, that it would offer for sale its Jewel-Osco stores in the Milwaukee area. Pick 'n Save agreed to take 5 of the 15 stores. Two other stores were purchased by Lena's Food Market. SuperValu announced to its workers that the remaining stores, if unsold, would close at the end of March.\nIn 2008, the headquarters for the Illinois-based Jewel-Osco division was moved from Melrose Park to Itasca.\nJewel Express.\nIn 1997, Albertsons added gas pumps and a small convenience store in front of a store in Eagle, Idaho. Since the experiment was successful, Albertsons decided to expand this concept to all stores that would be able to support it and was allowed by local government. The new concept was called Albertsons Express.\nAfter Albertsons acquired American Stores in 1999, Albertsons wanted to expand the Albertsons Express concept to the former American Stores chains. The first Jewel Express was opened in front of a Jewel-Osco in South Elgin in October 2000.\nIn attempt to increase revenue in 2009, Supervalu enhanced the Express concept by enlarging the convenience store, added more marketing tie ins with the main store and added a car wash. This change did not help Supervalu's bottom line so in 2011 Supervalu announced that it was exiting the fuel business and that it would sell or close all fuel stations that it received when it purchased Albertsons which includes the 29 Jewel Express stations that it received. The same announcement said that 27 of the Jewel Express locations would be sold to Alimentation Couche-Tard, the parent of Circle K, and all remaining unsold locations would be closed. Some of these new Circle K locations were paired with the Shell fuel brand.\nNot all Jewel Express locations closed or converted to Circle K. Two Expresses, one in East Moline, Illinois and the other in Moline, Illinois continue with the Jewel Express concept.\nUrban Fresh.\nIn 2008, SuperValu converted one of its closed Sunflower Market stores on Clybourn Avenue to an Urban Fresh by Jewel, a smaller store than the usual Jewel, with more upscale and organic products. This store closed\u00a0on October 31, 2009, and no other stores were opened under this banner.\nLEED certified.\nIn October 2008, Jewel-Osco opened its first LEED certified store at Kinzie and Des Plaines in Chicago. This new store was built with recycled materials and recycled 98% of its construction debris. It featured a rooftop garden, used water-saving devices, had non-ozone-depleting refrigerants in cooling equipment, used a refrigerant detection system, and had energy efficient lighting.\nToday.\nJewel-Osco employs more than 45,000 associates. Its customer base gave it a 45% share of the grocery market in Chicago, trailed by the Safeway Inc.-owned Dominick's chain (ranking second at 15 percent) before its closure. Consumers from 80% of all households in the Chicago metropolitan area visit a Jewel-Osco store at least once a month.\nOn January 10, 2013, SuperValu announced the sale of Jewel food stores to Cerberus Capital Management in a $3.3 billion deal. The deal closed on March 21, 2013.\nAcquisition of Strack &amp; Van Til.\nOn May 15, 2017, Jewel-Osco made a bid to purchase all 19 Strack &amp; Van Til grocery stores for $100 million. The Jewel-Osco bid was ultimately unsuccessful and the stores were sold in the bankruptcy auction to the Strack and Van Til families and the Indiana Grocery Group.\nPast ventures.\nOver the years, Jewel has tried other concepts. It is credited with selling the first generic brand product line in 1977. The packaging had no name or pictures\u2014just a list of contents, UPC, and required nutritional information on a white package with a pseudo-army olive-green stripe. The generic line was given the brand \"Econo Buy\" in the early 1990s.\nJewel Grand Bazaar.\nIn 1973, Jewel Companies opened an experimental Jewel Grand Bazaar, on the southwest side of Chicago; a store that encompassed an entire city block at the northwest corner of 54th Street and Pulaski Road. This store featured bulk packaging, free samples on weekends, and 24-hour service. See photos: http:// This experimental store was in service from 1973 until the 1980s, when it was reformatted as a standard Jewel-Osco combo store. A second Grand Bazaar was opened in 1974 at 87 W. 87th St in Chicago and in 1977, a \"Jewel Grand Bazaar\" was opened at 6505 W. Diversey in the Brickyard Mall. A fourth location was opened in Franklin Park in 1975.\nDuring the 1990s, the Diversey Avenue Grand Bazaar was reformatted to a regular Jewel grocery store, but continued to carry some of the traditional \"Grand Bazaar\" features such as bulk foods. With the reconstruction of the Brickyard Mall in 2003, the Grand Bazaar store was demolished and replaced with a smaller Jewel grocery store. Rockford, Illinois also had a Jewel Grand Bazaar that opened in 1976 and was converted to a non-union Magna store in 1983. That store closed in 1997. There was also one on Grand Ave. and Kostner Ave. on Chicago's West side. The last \"Grand Bazaar\" format store was opened in 1975 at Grand ave. and Mannheim road in Franklin Park, Illinois. This building is currently being operated as a Jewel-Osco. Neither the Chicago Tribune nor the Chicago Sun-Times record when these stores were actually converted or closed.\nTurn Style.\nIn 1961, Jewel Companies (then Jewel Tea) acquired a chain of discount stores in the Chicago area called Turn Style. This chain was moderately successful throughout the 1960s. Some locations were combined with Jewel's supermarket brands to form Family Centers. The first Turn Style Family Center was opened in Racine in March 1962. In 1978, 19 of 22 locations were sold to May Department Stores and converted to the Venture format. Other stores were converted into large Osco Drug Stores.\nJewel T.\nIn the late 1970s and early 1980s, Jewel Companies operated a no-frills grocery chain called Jewel T (phonetically pronounced \"Jewel Tea\", as a nod to the former name of the company). The typical store tends to be rather small, 8,000 square feet instead of the typical 30,000 for a full-service supermarket, with a selection rather limited to canned and dry foods and non-perishable with everything sold at a steep discount.\nTo avoid cannibalizing sales from their existing markets in the Midwest and North East Atlantic States, the first Jewel T location was opened in New Port Richey, Florida, in 1977, quickly followed by 2 other stores in the St. Petersburg area during the same year. Jewel T expanded into Pennsylvania in 1978 and many suburban Philadelphia kids in this gas crisis era remember mom driving the Vega or Pinto out to Jewel T, and bringing back powdered milk, frozen pretzels, and bulk frozen cherry pielettes. They expanded to Atlanta in 1979. Jewel T had approximately 30 stores in two states at the beginning of 1979 and 44 stores in four states by the following June.\nBy the end of 1979, Jewel T had 87 stores located in the states of Florida, Georgia, Texas, Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Tennessee, and Alabama. In the first month of 1980, Jewel T opened eight stores in highly competitive Southern California. In 1981, Jewel T opened stores in Atlanta and its 150th store in Louisiana.\nAt its height in 1981, Jewel T operated 150 stores in 10 states located mainly in the Mid-Atlantic, South East, the Gulf Coast, the Deep South and Southern California. At the same time it encountered problems competing against the full service supermarkets which fought back by dropping prices, in some cases at or below costs, on the same limited items that Jewel T and other discount food stores specialized in stocking. Within a few years, the company began to sell unprofitable locations. By the beginning of 1984, approximately 131 locations remained.\nIn March 1984, the company closed all 21 Jewel T stores in Southern California. Seven of the leases and most of the inventory was sold to the 99 Cents Only Stores.\nA few months later, 105 stores remained when the chain was finally sold off in two separate transactions in June 1984, 28 stores in Texas were sold to a group of managers while the other 77 stores in Florida, Georgia, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey were sold to Save-A-Lot.\nRepublic Lumber.\nJewel Companies expanded into the hardware and home improvement business by acquiring Republic Lumber in 1972. In 1979, Jewel, under the Osco division, sold four of its five Republic Lumber locations to R &amp; L Lumber, parent company of Handy Andy Home Improvement Center, and closed the fifth. They were located on the west side of Chicago at 4052 W. Grand Ave (a former Jewel opened in 1957 to celebrate the chain's 25th anniversary), Oak Lawn, Arlington Heights and Chicago Heights. A fifth location in Norridge was closed early in 1979 when the lease was not renewed, which later became a Joseph Lumber location.\nPresident's Choice house brand.\nWhile as a subsidiary division of American Stores, Jewel-Osco began offering the Canadian staple President's Choice branded products in 1992. President's Choice is a house brand created and distributed by Loblaw Companies Limited of Toronto, Ontario. Loblaw makes extra money by offering their President's Choice to other retailers who do not compete in their home marketing areas. Under American Stores' marketing agreement with Loblaw, American Stores were the exclusive distributor of the President's Choice brand within each American Stores, marketing area. The marketing agreement between Jewel and Loblaw ceased when Albertsons acquired American Stores. In 2011, Supervalu replaced the house brand at Jewel with their own Culinary Circle and Wild Harvest private label brands.\nOrganizational philosophy.\nA 1972 book written by Jewel senior leaders, \"The Jewel Concepts,\" stressed good citizenship within the community, \"watching the horizon\", and sponsorship of young people.\nIn an Illinois Retail Merchants Association online article, retired Jewel-Osco chairman Don Perkins reflects, \"Jewel has a tradition of people orientation.\" One of these traditions came in the form of the \"first assistant\" philosophy of management. Each higher-level manager was to see himself or herself as \"serving\" the employees he or she managed. On the store level, this would mean that the manager would be the \"first assistant\" to the employees by making personal contact and taking personal interest, solving problems, suggesting solutions, and using flexibility in order to best serve the employees' concerns. Then the floor employees' duty was to be in service as the \"first assistant\" to the customers.\nJewel also was progressive in creating partnerships with vendors, at a time when the practice was rare.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51859", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51859", "title": "Wile E. Coyote", "text": ""}
{"id": "51860", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51860", "title": "Osco Drug and Sav-on Drugs", "text": "Retail pharmacy chains in the United States\nOsco Drug and Sav-on Drugs were the names of a pair of chain pharmacies that operated in the United States. Osco Drug was founded by the Skaggs family. The grocery store chain Alpha Beta was purchased by American Stores in 1961. Skaggs Drug Centers bought American Stores in 1979 and assumed the American Stores name. Sav-on Drugs was a California-based pharmacy chain that was acquired by Osco's parent company in 1980. Both Osco and Sav-on stores eventually came under the ownership of American Stores, then Albertsons, and finally SuperValu before the stores were sold off.\nThe Osco and Sav-on brands survive today as brandings for in-store pharmacies in the Albertsons chain of stores. Osco pharmacies can be found in Jewel stores, which are co-branded Jewel-Osco, as well as in Shaw's and Star Markets. Sav-on pharmacies are found largely in Acme stores. Pharmacies in Albertsons stores are called Osco in Arizona and Montana stores, and Sav-On in other markets, in Nevada and predominantly in Texas for example.\nHistory.\nRoots.\nIn 1915, S.M. Skaggs, a Baptist minister, opened a grocery store in American Falls, Idaho, with lower prices on goods. In 1917, O.P Skaggs started a chain of self-service stores, and later sold the franchise in the western states to Christian Call. In 1926, the Skaggs brothers merged the chain with Sam Seelig stores, which had become Safeway in 1925. L.J. Skaggs retired from Safeway in 1932, and in 1934, he opened the first self-service drugstore in the US in Tacoma, Washington.\nFirst store.\nLoronzo L. (L.L.) Skaggs owned a controlling stock in a company called Quality Food in Minnesota and subsequently left the Safeway business. L.L. opened a chain of self-service drugstores in the Midwest similar to his brother L.J.'s stores in the west. The first store opened in 1937 in Rochester, Minnesota, and was named \"Pay-Less\" (different from the drug chain Payless founded later in the century), and was managed by George Hilden. The store remained in operation until 1987, when it closed due to redevelopment in downtown Rochester.\nIn 1937, while in the process of opening a second store in Mason City, Iowa, it was learned that another company had already registered the name \"Payless\" in the state. L.L changed \"Payless\" to \"Self-Service Drug, Inc.\" and formed a new corporation.\nName change to Osco.\nIn 1942, the corporation \"Self-Service Drug, Inc.\" was dissolved and succeeded by \"Owners Service Company\", a partnership of L.L Skaggs, H.B. Finch, Paul Stratton and George Hilden. From this company 'Osco' was coined. That year Osco moved its headquarters from Waterloo, Iowa, to the Merchandise Mart in Chicago, Illinois.\nSav-on Drugs.\nSav-on Drugs was a Southern California-based drugstore chain that was founded by Christian J. Call in San Bernardino, in July 1945. Ira D. Brown served as general manager. The chain was the second largest California-based drugstore chain in Southern California at the time it was acquired by The Jewel Companies in November 1980.\nIn October 1947, the third store in the chain opened in Long Beach. The store was managed by Ronald L. Call while the chain was co-owned at that time by Christian J. Call and Alton D. Clark\nThe seventh store was opened in South Gate in September 1948.\nIn June 1952, the ninth store opened in Lakewood.\nThe tenth store of the chain opened in Gardena in October 1952.\nFounder and president Christian Call died on January 11, 1958. He was replaced by his nephew Ronald Call.\nThe 27th store was opened in the North Hills Shopping Center in Granada Hills in July 1959.\nThe 35th store in the chain was opened in the Park Western Shopping Center in San Pedro in September 1963.\nThe United States Department of Justice filed an anti-trust lawsuit against Sav-On's rival Thrifty Drug Stores in Federal Court in August 1962 to force Thrift to divest itself of its 28.75% stock it owns in Sav-On Drugs, Inc. In December 1964, Thrifty Drug Stores sold its almost 30% stake in its rival Sav-On back to Sav-On that it had acquired since 1958.\nThe company's general offices was moved from downtown Los Angeles to a new building in Marina del Rey in 1967.\nThe company's second president, Ronald L. Call, died in March 1968 and was replaced by Ira Brown.\nSav-on opened its 64th store in Torrance in July 1971.\nIn November 1972, Sav-On Drugs stock began trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol SVN.\nThe 77th store was opened in Marina del Rey in January 1974.\nSav-on opened its 98th store in Carson in October 1975. Except for four stores in Houston, Texas, the other 94 stores were located in California.\nThe 100th store was opened in Santa Clarita in December 1975.\nSav-On purchased the inventories, fixtures, leasehold improvements, and other assets for 15 Pay Less Drug Stores in Southern California from the Oakland-based Pay Less in March 1978. The new stores were mostly located in Orange and San Diego counties. Sav-On had 112 stores prior to the sale and 127 after including the former Pay Less stores. All 127 stores were located in Southern California except for five in Houston, Texas. The chain also had plans of opening stores in Las Vegas, Nevada, in the near future.\nIn 1978, Sav-On acquired a warehouse in Anaheim in which the company remodel it to be a new warehouse distribution site and also as the site of its new corporate headquarters to replace it previous offices in Marina del Rey.\nBy August 1980, the Sav-on had a total of 141 stores, which includes 130 in California, 6 in Houston, and 5 in Las Vegas.\nIn October 1980, Sav-on opened its 146th store in Orange.\nSav-on opened its 148th store in the South Gate Shopping Center Plaza in South Gate, in June 1981.\nAcquisitions.\nThe Jewel Companies, Inc..\nIn 1961, The Jewel Companies, Inc. acquired the 30 Osco Drug stores in six Midwest states. In 1962, Osco's headquarters was moved from Chicago's Merchandise Mart to Melrose Park, Illinois, and the first side-by-side \"Jewel-Osco\" store opened. The early Jewel-Osco combination (combo) stores were two individual stores, separated by an interior wall (and in some locations, a half-wall), allowing a customer to go back and forth between each store without having to go outside. The first Jewel-Osco Family Center was opened in Chicago's Appleton Plaza Shopping center in January 1962.\nThe first Eisner-Osco Family Center was opened in West Lafayette, Indiana, in September 1970.\nThe first Osco Drug store to open adjacent to an existing Buttrey Food store occurred in Anaconda, Montana, in July 1967. The first example of a purpose-built Buttrey-Osco Family Center occurred with the opening in Boise in September 1969.\nThe first Star-Osco Family Center opened in Manchester, New Hampshire, in October 1970.\nAfter the merger, all of Jewel's subsidiaries soon had an Osco Drug. Some Eisner Food Stores locations were re-branded \"Eisner-Osco\". When Jewel acquired Star Market in 1964, the first Osco Drug in New England was opened, and some were next to Star Market locations and were branded as \"Star-Osco\". By 1968, Osco grew to 168 stores in sixteen states. During most of the 1960s, Osco operated as two divisions \u2013 'City Osco', comprising the Chicago, Illinois, and Chicago suburb stores and 'Country Osco' (all the other Oscos). These two divisions were combined in 1968 and formed Osco Drug, Inc. Also in 1968, Osco's headquarters relocated from Melrose Park, Illinois to Franklin Park, Illinois. Later that year, the Jewel Imports procurement group was established to import a broad range of general merchandise from around the world to sell in Osco stores.\nWhen The Jewel Companies Inc. acquired Montana-based Buttrey Food Stores in 1966, many of the stores were converted to a combination store format and bannered as \"Buttrey-Osco\" with common checkout stands but separate store management, all under one roof. By the early 1980s, Buttrey eventually operated 60 stores in Montana, North Dakota, western Minnesota, Wyoming, eastern Washington, eastern Oregon and Idaho. Buttrey stores were spread thinly over a wide territory from the Cascades to the Red River Valley.\nOutside of the Chicago metropolitan area, Osco operated stand-alone pharmacies (or free standing stores). In the early years, many of the Jewel and Osco combination stores maintained different operating hours from one another and on certain days such as holidays, one side of the combo store would be open, while the other would be closed. By the early 1980s, new and remodeled combo stores had the 'wall' removed and the store became one, and to this day, Osco retains control over drug, general merchandise, pharmacy and liquor departments in the Jewel Osco combo stores.\nIn the late 1960s, Osco was seeking to purchase or build a photofinishing plant to service its stores. At the time, the company was using outside vendors, and the film developing quality and service was inconsistent. In 1970, working with Kodak, Osco built a photofinishing lab in Elgin, Illinois. The facility, Crest Photo Lab opened in 1971, and serviced Osco's Chicago, Central and Eastern region stores. The Elgin photo lab expanded several times over the years. As both Osco and its photofinishing market share grew, three more photo plants were added: Alves Photo Service Braintree, Massachusetts, in 1980, Rich Photo Lab Salt Lake City, Utah, in 1984 and Drewry Photocolor Burbank, California, in 1987 (renamed Crest Photo in 1988). The photo labs were sold to Kodak's Qualex photo processing division in 1996, prompted by the emergence of in-store one-hour photo labs and digital photography technology.\nIn 1974, Osco's headquarters were relocated from Franklin Park, Illinois, to a new facility at 1818 Swift Drive in Oak Brook, Illinois.\nAcquisition of Sav-on Drugs.\nIn November 1980, The Jewel Companies Inc. purchased Sav-on Drugs, Inc. which was headquartered in Anaheim, California, and had 150 stores in California, Nevada and Texas. The Sav-on chain became Osco's 'Western Region'.\nAmerican Stores Company.\nIn 1984, American Stores Company, which consisted of Alpha Beta, Acme Markets, and Skaggs, acquired The Jewel Companies Inc.\nAmerican Drug Stores, Inc..\nIn 1989, a new subsidiary, American Drug Stores, Inc., was formed and consisted of American Stores drugstore holdings of Osco Drug, Sav-on Drugs, the Osco side of the Jewel-Osco food-drug combination stores and RxAmerica. RxAmerica began earlier in 1989 as a mail service prescription fulfillment center with a facility in Salt Lake City, Utah.\nSav-on re-branding and relaunching.\nAmerican Stores had a strategy to build a nationwide network of pharmacies, streamline operations and advertising to gain national recognition for the brand, especially for the high-margin private label products. The name Osco Drug was chosen as the national chain banner because of the large number of stores which already had that name and existed in various parts of the US. The name change was completed for the \"Skaggs\" drugstores in 1985 and then for the \"Sav-on\" stores in 1986. The name \"Osco\" did not resonate well with \"Sav-on's\" Southern California customer base. American Stores eventually made the decision to change the name of the former \"Sav-on\" stores back to Sav-on Drugs. Rumors circulated at the time claiming that the reason for the name change back to \"Sav-on\" was due to \"Osco\" having the same pronunciation as the Spanish word (oss-ko), which means \"nausea\" or \"disgust\", a considerable factor within Southern California's heavily Hispanic market. This explanation for the name change was refuted by American Stores.\nThe name change on all stores was completed in 1989, and the Sav-on Drugs brand was re-launched in Southern California and Nevada.\nSav-on Express, Reliable Drug, Clark Drug.\nAt the same time that the company was making major divestments in the early 1990s, American Stores also looked for opportunities to make strategic minor acquisitions that would enhance its position in the main markets where it needed to strengthen market share.\nConsolidation of operations.\nIn 1992, American Stores shifted its strategy from that of a holding company to a centralized operating company. As a result of the decision, common functions among American Stores' operating divisions (procurement, distribution logistics, payroll, human resources, etc.) were removed from the operating divisions, consolidated and run centrally. From 1992 through 1998, American Stores consolidated operations and moved responsibilities of their division offices to their headquarters in Salt Lake City, Utah. Although 'American Stores' food divisions retained an operating presence in their geographical locations and other centralized marketing, merchandising and other staff functions were relocated between 1992 and 1998 from Oak Brook, Illinois, to Salt Lake City to occupy the then-new American Stores Tower. Pharmacy operations were relocated to Scottsdale Arizona with certain pharmacy systems-related resources continuing to operate from the Chicago area after being relocated to 3030 Cullerton Drive in Franklin Park, Illinois.\nAfter American Drug Stores' move to Salt Lake City, Utah, was complete in 1998, Osco's Oak Brook, Illinois, 1818 Swift Drive headquarters was sold to the Follett Corporation.\nOsco Foodmarts.\nIn 1994, American Stores converted 25 Jewel Food Stores in Chicago, Illinois, to Osco Drug free-standing stores. These older and smaller Jewel stand-alone stores were closed so that American Stores could focus on the combination formats only for Jewel and to expand Osco's presence in Chicago as a response to Walgreens increasing market dominance. The Osco stores replacing the Jewel stores contained expanded food and produce presentations and were coined 'Osco Foodmarts'.\nHealth 'n' Home.\nTo extend its core drugstore business, in November 1995 American Drug Stores launched a new format called Health 'n' Home, which was a , 18,000-item home health care superstore. The first Health 'n' Home opened in Phoenix, Arizona, and by late 1997 there were 20 Health 'n' Home stores in four states.\nRxAmerica.\nIn 1998, American Stores RxAmerica division and Longs Drug Stores Integrated Health Concepts (IHC) division agreed to merge their Pharmacy Benefits Management (PBM) ventures. Under terms of the joint venture, RxAmerica and its former corporate partner, Geneva Pharmaceuticals, parted ways, and RxAmerica combined with Longs' IHC division in a 50/50 partnership. The alliance created a national PBM of nearly 1,400 Longs and American Stores pharmacy outlets and a nationwide network of 40,000 pharmacies serving some 3 million patients under contract. Longs and Albertsons remained equal partners up though 2001, when Albertsons sold their 50% interest to Longs.\nAlbertsons, Inc..\nDuring 1999, the drugstore operations division and general merchandise procurement functions were moved from Salt Lake City, Utah, to Scottsdale, Arizona, operating as \"Albertsons Drug Region\".\nIn 2002, Albertsons sold its 84 free-standing Osco Drug stores in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Maine to the Jean Coutu Group, a Canadian drugstore company. Jean Coutu re-branded the acquired Osco stores as Brooks Pharmacy. Also in 2002, Albertsons, due to financial difficulties, closed several of its stores across the country including all stores in the Des Moines, Iowa, metro market.\nIn March 2005, Albertsons re-introduced the Osco brand name to the New England region by way of its Shaw's and Star Market pharmacies.\nSuperValu, CVS Corporation, and Cerberus.\nOn June 2, 2006, the sale of Albertsons essentially split the company into three parts.\nThe SuperValu owned Albertsons stores and the chains it acquired were in turn sold to Cerberus in 2013 and Osco and Sav-On pharmacies moved their operations to the base of Albertsons LLC in Boise, Idaho. Certain store support functions exist in the Franklin Park, Illinois, office.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51861", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51861", "title": "Jewel tea", "text": ""}
{"id": "51862", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51862", "title": "Supermarket", "text": "Large format of grocery store\nA supermarket is a self-service shop offering a wide variety of food, beverages and household products, organized into sections under one roof. The supermarket retail format first appeared around 1930 in the United States as the culmination of almost two decades of retail innovations to the grocery store, and began to spread to other countries after extensive worldwide publicity in 1956. In everyday American English usage, \"grocery store\" is often used interchangeably with \"supermarket\", while in other regions a supermarket is larger and has a wider selection, but is smaller and more limited in the range of merchandise than a hypermarket or megastore, which developed decades later.\nThe supermarket typically has places for fresh meat, fresh produce, dairy, deli items, baked goods, and similar foodstuffs. Shelf space is also reserved for canned and packaged goods and for various non-food items such as kitchenware, household cleaners, pharmacy products and pet supplies. Some supermarkets also sell other household products that are consumed regularly, such as alcohol (where permitted), medicine, and clothing, and some sell a much wider range of non-food products: DVDs, art supplies, sporting equipment, board games, and seasonal items (e.g., Christmas wrapping paper, Easter eggs, school uniforms, Valentine's Day themed gifts, Mother's Day gifts, Father's Day gifts and Halloween).\nA larger full-service supermarket combined with a department store is sometimes known as a hypermarket. Other services may include those of banks, caf\u00e9s, childcare centers/creches, insurance (and other financial services), mobile phone sales, photo processing, video rentals, pharmacies, and Filling stations. In the US, if the eatery in a supermarket is substantial enough, the facility may be called a \"grocerant\", a portmanteau of \"grocery\" and \"restaurant\".\nThe traditional supermarket occupies a large amount of floor space, usually on a single level. It is usually situated near a residential area in order to be convenient to consumers. The basic appeal is the availability of a broad selection of goods under a single roof, at relatively low prices. Other advantages include ease of parking and frequently the convenience of shopping hours that extend into the evening or even 24 hours of the day. Supermarkets usually allocate large budgets to advertising, typically through newspapers and television. They also present elaborate in-shop displays of products.\nSupermarkets typically are chain stores, supplied by the distribution centers of their parent companies, thus increasing opportunities for economies of scale. Supermarkets usually offer products at relatively low prices by using their buying power to buy goods from manufacturers at lower prices than smaller stores can. They also minimize financing costs by paying for goods at least 30 days after receipt and some extract credit terms of 90 days or more from vendors. Certain products (typically staple foods such as bread, milk and sugar) are very occasionally sold as loss leaders so as to attract shoppers to their store. Supermarkets make up for their low margins by a high volume of sales, and with sales of higher-margin items bought by the customers. Self-service with shopping carts (trolleys) or baskets reduces labor costs, and many supermarket chains are attempting further reduction by shifting to self-service check-outs.\nHistory.\nEarly history of retail food sales.\nHistorically, the earliest retailers were peddlers who marketed their wares in the streets, but by the 1920s, retail food sales in the United States had mostly shifted to small corner grocery stores. In that era, the standard retail grocery business model was for a clerk to fetch products from shelves behind the merchant's counter while customers waited in front of the counter, indicating the items they wanted. Customers needed to ask because \"most stores were designed to keep customers (and their children) away from the food\". Most foods and merchandise did not come in individually wrapped consumer-sized packages, so the clerk had to measure out and wrap the precise amount desired. Merchants did not post prices, which forced customers to haggle and bargain with clerks to reach fair prices for their purchases. Haggling was further complicated by other factors such as the clerk's awareness of the customer's social status and ability to pay. This business model had already been established in Europe for millennia, with examples of primitive retail stores found as far back as ancient Rome. It offered extensive opportunities for social interaction: many regarded this style of shopping as \"a social occasion\" and would often \"pause for conversations with the staff or other customers\".\nThese practices were by nature slow, had high labor intensity, and were quite expensive. The number of customers who could be attended to at one time was limited by the number of staff employed in the store. Early grocery stores were \"austere\" and tiny by modern standards, with as few as 450 items. Shopping for groceries often involved trips to multiple specialty shops, such as a greengrocer, butcher, bakery, fishmonger and dry goods store, in addition to a general store. Milk and other items of short shelf life were delivered by a milkman. These small retailers were the final links in a \"long and tortuous food chain,\" as most of them were far too small to deal directly with most of the persons who actually harvested, processed, and distributed all that food. During the 1920s, the highly inefficient nature of the American food distribution system meant that the \"average urban family spent fully one-third of its budget on food\".\nOne of the most important defining features of the modern supermarket is cheap food. The vast abundance of cheap, wholesome food which modern consumers take for granted today was simply unimaginable before the middle of the 20th century, to the point that the first American supermarket customers in the 1930s were overcome with emotion at the sight of so much cheap food.\nBefore the 20th century, food was neither cheap, nor wholesome, nor abundant. For example, in 1812, almost 90 percent of Americans worked in food production, and they struggled to stay alive on food which was often scarce, of poor quality, and riddled with diseases which could and did often kill them.\nEarly experiments in building large stores and chain stores.\nThe concept of an inexpensive food market relying on economies of scale was developed by Vincent Astor, but he was ahead of his time. He founded the Astor Market in 1915, investing $750,000 of his fortune into a 165\u2032 by 125\u2032 (50\u00d738-metre) corner of 95th and Broadway, Manhattan, creating, in effect, an open-air mini-mall that sold meat, fruit, produce and flowers. The expectation was that customers would come from great distances (\"miles around\"), but in the end, even attracting people from ten blocks away was difficult, and the market folded in 1917.\nThe Great Atlantic &amp; Pacific Tea Company (A&amp;P), which was established in 1859, was an early grocery store chain in Canada and the United States. It became common in North American cities in the 1920s. Early chains like A&amp;P did not sell fresh meats or produce. During the 1920s, to reduce the hassle of visiting multiple stores, U.S. grocery store chains like A&amp;P introduced the combination store. This was a grocery store which combined several departments under one roof, but generally maintained the traditional system of clerks pulling products from shelves on request. By 1929, only one in three U.S. grocery stores was a combination store.\nSelf-service grocery stores.\nThe concept of a self-service grocery store predates the supermarket; it was developed by entrepreneur Clarence Saunders at his Piggly Wiggly stores, the first of which opened in 1916. Saunders was awarded several patents for the ideas he incorporated into his stores. The stores were a financial success and Saunders began to offer franchises.\nThe general trend since then has been to stock shelves at night so that customers, the following day, can obtain their own goods and bring them to the front of the store to pay for them. Although there is a higher risk of shoplifting, the costs of appropriate security measures ideally will be outweighed by reduced labor costs.\nBirth of the supermarket.\nHistorically, there has been much debate about the origin of the supermarket. For example, Southern California grocery store chains Alpha Beta and Ralphs both have strong claims to being the first supermarket. By 1930, both chains were already operating multiple self-service grocery stores. However, as of 1930, both chains were not yet true supermarkets in the modern sense because their prices remained quite high; as noted above, one of the most important defining features of the supermarket is cheap food. Their main selling point was free parking. Other strong contenders in Texas included Weingarten's and Henke &amp; Pillot.\nTo end the debate, the Food Marketing Institute in conjunction with the Smithsonian Institution and with funding from H.J. Heinz, researched the issue. They defined the attributes of a supermarket as \"self-service, separate product departments, discount pricing, marketing and volume selling\". They determined that the first true supermarket in the United States was opened by a former Kroger employee, Michael J. Cullen, on 4 August 1930, inside a former garage in Jamaica, Queens in New York City. The store King Kullen, operated under the logic of \"pile it high and sell it cheap\". The store layout was designed by Joseph Unger, who originated the concept of customers using baskets to collect groceries before checking out at a counter. Everything displayed for sale in the store \"had prices clearly marked\", meaning that consumers would no longer need to haggle over prices. Cullen described his store as \"the world's greatest price wrecker\". At the time of his death in 1936, there were seventeen King Kullen stores in operation. Although Saunders had brought the world self-service, uniform stores, and nationwide marketing, Cullen built on this idea by adding separate food departments, selling large volumes of food at discount prices and adding a parking lot. Moreover, the supermarket format as pioneered by King Kullen was not only cheap, but convenient, in how it combined so many different departments under one roof which had formerly required trips to separate stores.\nEarly supermarkets like King Kullen were called \"cheapy markets\" by industry experts at the time because they were literally so cheap, thanks to their rock-bottom prices; this was soon replaced by the less derogatory and more positive phrase \"super market\". The compound phrase was then closed up to become the modern term \"supermarket\".\nGrocery stores become supermarkets.\nOther established American grocery chains in the 1930s, such as Kroger and Safeway Inc. at first resisted Cullen's ideas, but were eventually forced to build their own supermarkets as the economy sank into the Great Depression. American consumers became extraordinarily price-sensitive at a level never experienced before. Kroger took the new retail format one step further and pioneered the first supermarket surrounded on all four sides by a parking lot.\nFor A&amp;P, the largest grocery store chain of that era, the conversion from traditional grocery stores to supermarkets came as a terrible shock for the thousands of retail employees whose lives and careers were changed forever. The armies of retail clerks who were the public face of the traditionally slow and social retail experience were replaced with the tedious, specialized jobs necessary to operate a modern supermarket. Stock clerks, usually male, moved boxes and kept the shelves full of goods, while checkout clerks (cashiers), usually female, were faced with never-ending lines of impatient shoppers eager to check out and go. But A&amp;P had no choice but to plunge ahead into this strange new world. One of King Kullen's earliest imitators, Big Bear, opened its first supermarket in 1933 in New Jersey and collected more revenue in one year than over a hundred A&amp;P stores. By 1937, 44 percent of A&amp;P stores were losing money. By 1938, A&amp;P had already opened over 1,100 supermarkets. By February 1940, A&amp;P had closed 5,950 grocery stores and cut its percentage of money-losing stores to 18 percent. There was no way to escape the cold, hard numbers driving this brutal process: in A&amp;P's traditional grocery stores, \"wages and overhead expenses\" had consumed 18 percent of sales, while in A&amp;P's newly opened supermarkets in those same neighborhoods, those same numbers were less than 12 percent of sales.\nOnce the large chains joined the supermarket trend, the new retail format exploded across the country like a wildfire. The number of American supermarkets almost tripled from 1,200 in 32 states in 1936 to over 3,000 in 47 states in 1937. It was well over 15,000 by 1950. One sign of the supermarket format's success in slashing labor costs, overhead, and food prices was that the percentage of disposable income spent by American consumers on food plunged \"from 21 percent in 1930 to 16 percent in 1940\". The modern era of \"cheap food\" had begun.\nAs large chain stores began to dominate the American grocery landscape with their low overhead and low prices (while crushing numerous independent small stores along the way), a backlash to this radical alteration of food distribution infrastructure appeared in the form of numerous anti-chain campaigns. The idea of \"monopsony\", proposed by Cambridge economist Joan Robinson in 1933, that a single buyer could outmaneuver a market of multiple sellers, became a strong anti-chain rhetorical device. With public backlash came political pressure to even the playing field for smaller vendors lacking the luxury of economies of scale. In 1936, the Robinson-Patman Act was implemented as a way of preventing such large chains from using their buying power to reap advantages over small stores, although the act was not well enforced and did not have much impact on such chains.\nSupermarkets rapidly proliferated across both Canada and the United States with the growth of automobile ownership and suburban development after World War II. Most North American supermarkets are located in suburban strip shopping centers as an anchor store along with other smaller retailers. They are generally regional rather than national in their company branding. Kroger is the most nationally oriented supermarket chain in the United States, but it has preserved most of its regional brands, including Ralphs, City Market, King Soopers, Fry's, Smith's, and QFC.\nInternational expansion.\nBy the 1950s, supermarkets had become part of the everyday lives of American consumers, but were still extremely rare outside of the United States. Most persons outside the United States had never seen a supermarket or even heard of the term. That began to change after 1956, when the U.S. Department of Agriculture presented an \"American Way exhibit\" at the International Food Congress in Rome, Italy. The exhibit included \"the first fully stocked supermarket outside of the United States\". The exhibit was a rather \"modest staging\" with only about 2,500 items, not a truly comprehensive duplicate of a typical full-size U.S. supermarket, and yet it was much larger than anything the world had ever seen. Just like the American consumers who had entered the first supermarkets two decades earlier, conference attendees, local Italian visitors, and the international news media were all astonished, bewildered, and stunned by the \"mountains of food\".\nIn 1957, the U.S. Department of Commerce and the National Association of Food Chains orchestrated an even grander presentation, Supermarket USA, at the Zagreb International Trade Fair in what was then part of Yugoslavia. Supermarket USA featured 4,000 consumer items in a 10,000 square-foot (929 m\u00b2) exhibit, \"the first fully operational American-style supermarket in a communist country\". The American Way \"supermercato\" the year before and Supermarket USA were among the first of several instances in which American supermarkets were deployed internationally at the height of the Cold War as shock and awe instruments of American propaganda to demonstrate the supposed superiority of Western Bloc capitalism over Eastern Bloc communism.\nBefore then, a few countries had already begun to implement supermarkets due to their proximity to or affinity for the United States. Canada, to the north, had implemented the new retail format at the same time during the 1930s. For example, Qu\u00e9bec's first supermarket opened in 1934 in Montr\u00e9al, under the banner Steinberg's. In Canada, the largest supermarket chain is Loblaw, which operates stores under a variety of banners targeted to different segments and regions, including Fortinos, Zehrs, No Frills, the Real Canadian Superstore, and Loblaws, the foundation of the company. Sobeys is Canada's second largest supermarket with locations across the country, operating under many banners (Sobeys IGA in Quebec).\nIn the United Kingdom, self-service shopping took longer to become established, despite its Special Relationship with the United States. In 1947, there were just ten self-service shops in the country. In 1951, ex-US Navy sailor Patrick Galvani, son-in-law of Express Dairies chairman, made a pitch to the board to open a chain of supermarkets across the country. The UK's first supermarket under the new Premier Supermarkets brand opened in Streatham, South London, taking in ten times as much revenue per week as the average British general store of the time. Other chains caught on quickly. The number of British supermarkets exploded from roughly 50 in 1950 to 572 by 1961, and finally to over 3,400 by 1969. After Galvani lost out to Tesco's Jack Cohen in 1960 to buy 212 stores of the Irwin's chain, the sector underwent significant consolidation, resulting in \"the big four\" dominant UK supermarket chains: Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury's and Morrisons.\nIn the 1950s, supermarkets frequently issued trading stamps as incentives to customers. Today, most chains issue store-specific \"membership cards\", \"club cards\", or \"loyalty cards\". These typically enable the cardholder to receive special members-only discounts on certain items when the credit card-like device is scanned at the checkout. Sales of selected data generated by club cards is becoming a significant revenue stream for some supermarkets.\nIn the 21st century.\nA report published by the international organization ActionAid in 2007, \"Who pays?\" estimated that 32 million people shopped in British supermarkets every week.\nAs of 2018[ [update]], there were approximately 38,000 supermarkets in the supermarket's birthplace, the United States; Americans spent $701 billion at supermarkets that year; and the American supermarket stood at the pinnacle of a food production and distribution system so efficient that less than three percent of the U.S. population produced more than enough food to feed everyone. The average American adult \"will spend 2 percent of their life inside\" supermarkets.\nIn the 21st century, traditional supermarkets in many countries face intense competition from discounters such as Wal-Mart, Aldi and Lidl, which typically is non-union and operates with better buying power. Other competition exists from warehouse clubs such as Costco that offer savings to customers buying in bulk quantities. Superstores, such as those operated by Wal-Mart and Asda, often offer a wide range of goods and services in addition to foods. In Australia, Aldi, Woolworths and Coles are the major players running the industry with fierce competition among all the three. The rising market share of Aldi has forced the other two to cut prices and increase their private label product ranges. The proliferation of such warehouse and superstores has contributed to the continuing disappearance of smaller, local grocery stores, the increased dependence on the automobile, and suburban sprawl because of the necessity for large floor space and increased vehicular traffic. For example, in 2009 51% of Wal-Mart's $251\u00a0billion domestic sales were recorded from grocery goods. Some critics consider the chains' common practice of selling loss leaders to be anti-competitive. They are also wary of the negotiating power that large, often multinationals have with suppliers around the world.\nOnline-only supermarkets (21st century).\nDuring the dot-com boom, Webvan, an online-only supermarket, was formed and went bankrupt after three years and was acquired by Amazon. The British online supermarket Ocado, which uses a high degree of automation in its warehouses, was the first successful online-only supermarket. Ocado expanded into providing services to other supermarket firms such as Waitrose and Morrisons. Grocery stores such as Walmart employ food delivery services offered by third parties such as DoorDash. Other online food delivery services, such as Deliveroo in the United Kingdom, have begun to pay specific attention to supermarket delivery.\nDelivery robots are offered by various companies partnering with supermarkets.\nMicro-fulfillment centers (MFC) are relatively small warehouses with sophisticated automated rack-and-tote systems which prepare orders for pickup and delivery. Once the order is complete, the customer will pick it up (i.e. \"click-and-collect\") or have it fulfilled via home delivery. Supermarkets are investing in micro-fulfillment centers with the hope that automation can help reduce the costs of online commerce and e-commerce by shortening the distances from store to home and speeding up deliveries. MFCs are said by many to be the key to profitably fulfilling online orders.\nTypes.\nU.S. categorization.\nThe U.S. FMI food industry association, drawing on research by Willard Bishop, defines the following formats (store types) that sell groceries:\nOrganic and environmentally-friendly supermarkets.\nSome supermarkets are focusing on selling more (or even exclusively) organically certified produce. Others are trying to differentiate themselves by selling fewer (or no) products containing palm oil. This as the demand of palm oil is a main driver for the destruction of rainforests. As a response to the growing concern on the heavy use of petroleum-based plastics for food packaging, so-called \"zero waste\" and \"plastic-free\" supermarkets and groceries are on the rise.\nGrowth in developing countries.\nBeginning in the 1990s, the food sector in developing countries has rapidly transformed, particularly in Latin America, South-East Asia, India, China and South Africa. With growth, has come considerable competition and some amount of consolidation. The growth has been driven by increasing affluence and the rise of a middle class; the entry of women into the workforce; with a consequent incentive to seek out easy-to-prepare foods; the growth in the use of refrigerators, making it possible to shop weekly instead of daily; and the growth in car ownership, facilitating journeys to distant stores and purchases of large quantities of goods. The opportunities presented by this potential have encouraged several European companies to invest in these markets (mainly in Asia) and American companies to invest in Latin America and China. Local companies also entered the market. Initial development of supermarkets has now been followed by hypermarket growth. In addition there were investments by companies such as Makro and Metro Cash and Carry in large-scale Cash-and-Carry operations.\nWhile the growth in sales of processed foods in these countries has been much more rapid than the growth in fresh food sales, the imperative nature of supermarkets to achieve economies of scale in purchasing means that the expansion of supermarkets in these countries has important repercussions for small farmers, particularly those growing perishable crops. New supply chains have developed involving cluster formation; development of specialized wholesalers; leading farmers organizing supply, and farmer associations or cooperatives. In some cases supermarkets have organized their own procurement from small farmers; in others wholesale markets have adapted to meet supermarket needs.\nTypical supermarket merchandise.\nLarger supermarkets in North America and in Europe typically sell many items among many brands, sizes and varieties. U.S. publisher \"Supermarket News\" lists the following categories, for example: Hypermarkets have a larger range of non-food categories such as clothing, electronics, household decoration and appliances.\nLayout strategies.\nMost merchandise is already packaged when it arrives at the supermarket. Packages are placed on shelves, arranged in aisles and sections according to type of item. Some items, such as fresh produce, are stored in bins. Those requiring an intact cold chain are in temperature-controlled display cases.\nWhile branding and store advertising will differ from company to company, the layout of a supermarket remains virtually unchanged. Although big companies spend time giving consumers a pleasant shopping experience, the design of a supermarket is directly connected to the in-store marketing that supermarkets must conduct to get shoppers to spend more money while there.\nEvery aspect of the store is mapped out and attention is paid to color, wording and surface texture. The overall layout of a supermarket is a visual merchandising project that plays a major role. Stores can creatively use a layout to alter customers' perceptions of the atmosphere. Alternatively, they can enhance the store's atmospherics through visual communications (signs and graphics), lighting, colors, and scents. For example, to give a sense of the supermarket being healthy, fresh produce is deliberately located at the front of the store. In terms of bakery items, supermarkets usually dedicate 30 to 40 feet of store space to the bread aisle.\nSupermarkets are designed to \"give each product section a sense of individual difference and this is evident in the design of what is called the anchor departments; fresh produce, dairy, delicatessen, meat and the bakery\". Each section has different floor coverings, style, lighting and sometimes even individual services counters to allow shoppers to feel as if there are a number of markets within this one supermarket. Marketers use well-researched techniques to try to control purchasing behavior. The layout of a supermarket is considered by some to consist of a few rules of thumb and three layout principles. The high-draw products are placed in separate areas of the store to keep drawing the consumer through the store. High impulse and high margin products are placed in the most predominant areas to grab attention. Power products are placed on both sides of the aisle to create increased product awareness, and end caps are used to receive a high exposure of a certain product whether on special, promotion or in a campaign, or a new line.\nMarketers use well-researched techniques to try to control purchasing behavior. The layout of a supermarket is considered by some to consist of a few rules of thumb and three layout principles. The high-draw products are placed in separate areas of the store to keep drawing the consumer through the store. High impulse and high margin products are placed in the most predominant areas to grab attention. Power products are placed on both sides of the aisle to create increased product awareness, and end caps are used to receive a high exposure of a certain product whether on special, promotion or in a campaign, or a new line.\nThe first principle of the layout is circulation. Circulation is created by arranging product so the supermarket can control the traffic flow of the consumer. Along with this path, there will be high-draw, high-impulse items that will influence the consumer to make purchases which they did not originally intend. Service areas such as restrooms are placed in a location which draws the consumer past certain products to create extra buys. Necessity items such as bread and milk are found at the rear of the store to increase the start of circulation. Cashiers' desks are placed in a position to promote circulation. In most supermarkets, the entrance will be on the right-hand side because some research suggests that consumers who travel in a counter-clockwise direction spend more. However, other researchers have argued that consumers moving in a clockwise direction can form better mental maps of the store leading to higher sales in turn.\nThe second principle of the layout is coordination. Coordination is the organized arrangement of product that promotes sales. Products such as fast-selling and slow-selling lines are placed in strategic positions in aid of the overall sales plan. Managers sometimes place different items in fast-selling places to increase turnover or to promote a new line.\nThe third principle is consumer convenience. The layout of a supermarket is designed to create a high degree of convenience to the consumer to make the shopping experience pleasant and increase customer spending. This is done through the character of merchandising and product placement. There are many different ideas and theories in relation to layout and how product layout can influence the purchases made. One theory suggests that certain products are placed together or near one another that are of a similar or complementary nature to increase the average customer spend. This strategy is used to create cross-category sales similarity. In other words, the toothpaste is next to or adjacent the toothbrushes and the tea and coffee are down the same aisle as the sweet biscuits. These products complement one another and placing them near is one-way marketers try to increase purchases.\nFor vertical placement, cheap generic brands tend to be on the lowest shelves, products appealing to children are placed at the mid-thigh level, and the most profitable brands are placed at eye level.\nThe fourth principle is the use of color psychology, and the locations of the food, similar to its use in fast food branding.\nConsumer psychologists suggest that most buyers tend to enter the store and shop to their right first. Some supermarkets, therefore, choose to place the entrance to the left-hand side as the consumer will likely turn right upon entry, and this allows the consumer to do a full counter-clockwise circle around the store before returning to the checkouts. This suggests that supermarket marketers should use this theory to their advantage by placing their temporary displays of products on the right-hand side to entice you to make an unplanned purchase. Furthermore, aisle ends are extremely popular with product manufacturers, who pay top dollar to have their products located there. These aisle ends are used to lure customers into making a snap purchase and to also entice them to shop down the aisle. The most obvious place supermarket layout influences consumers are at the checkout. Small displays of candy, magazines, and drinks are located at each checkout to tempt shoppers while they wait to be served.\nCriticisms.\nThe large scale of supermarkets, while often improving cost and efficiency for customers, can place significant economic pressure on suppliers and smaller shopkeepers. Supermarkets often generate considerable food waste, although modern technologies such as biomethanation units may be able to process the waste into an economical source of energy. Also, purchases tracking may help as supermarkets then become better able to size their stock (of perishable goods), reducing food spoilage.\nIn 1997, the Reverend John Papworth attracted international attention with his criticism of giant supermarkets. For him, they are \"places of evil and temptation\", destroyers of local communities, and shoplifting in them would be illegal but not sinful.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51863", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51863", "title": "Acme corporation", "text": ""}
{"id": "51864", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51864", "title": "Rocket 88", "text": "Song first recorded by Jackie Brenston with Ike Turner in 1951\n\"Rocket 88\" (originally stylized as Rocket \"88\") is a song that was first recorded in Memphis, Tennessee, in March 1951. The recording was credited to \"Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats\"; while Brenston did provide the vocals, the band was actually Ike Turner and his Kings of Rhythm. The single reached number one on the \"Billboard\" R&amp;B chart.\nMany music writers acknowledge its importance in the development of rock and roll music, with several considering it to be the first rock and roll record. In 2017, the Mississippi Blues Trail dedicated its 200th marker to \"Rocket 88\" as an influential record. The song was inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame in 1991, the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1998, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2018, and the National Recording Registry in 2024.\nComposition and recording.\nThe original version of the twelve-bar blues song was credited to Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats, which reached number one on the R&amp;B charts. Brenston was Ike Turner's saxophonist and the Delta Cats were actually Turner's Kings of Rhythm back-up band, who rehearsed at the Riverside Hotel in Clarksdale, Mississippi. Brenston sang the lead vocal and is officially listed as the songwriter. Turner led the band and is credited in some sources as the composer. \nBrenston later said that the song was not particularly original; \"they had simply borrowed from another jump blues about an automobile, Jimmy Liggins\u2019 'Cadillac Boogie'\". The song was a hymn of praise to the joys of the Oldsmobile Rocket 88 automobile which had recently been introduced, and was based on the 1947 song \"Cadillac Boogie\" by Jimmy Liggins.\nDrawing on the template of jump blues and swing combo music, Turner made the style even rawer, superimposing Brenston's enthusiastic vocals, his own piano, distorted guitar played by Willie Kizart (the first use of such a sound on record), and tenor saxophone solos by 17-year-old Raymond Hill. Willie Sims played drums for the recording.\nA review of the record in \"Time\" magazine included:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rocket 88 was brash and it was sexy; it took elements of the blues, hammered them with rhythm and attitude and electric guitar, and reimagined black music into something new. If the blues seemed to give voice to old wisdom, this new music seemed full of youthful notions. If the blues was about squeezing cathartic joy out of the bad times, this new music was about letting the good times roll. If the blues was about earthly troubles, the rock that Turner's crew created seemed to shout that the sky was now the limit.\nThe legend of how the sound came about says that Kizart's amplifier was damaged on Highway 61 when the band was driving from Mississippi to Memphis, Tennessee. An attempt was made to hold the cone in place by stuffing the amplifier with wadded newspapers, which unintentionally created a distorted sound; Phillips liked the sound and used it. Peter Guralnick, in his biography of Sam Phillips, has the amplifier being dropped from the car's trunk when the band got a flat tire and was digging out the spare.\nPhillips offered this reminiscence about the amp in an interview with \"Rolling Stone\": \"The bass amplifier fell off the car. And when we got in the studio, the woofer had burst; the cone had burst. So I stuck the newspaper and some sack paper in it, and that's where we got that sound\". Afterwards, Phillips had no complaints about the unusual effect the \"fix\" had created. \"The more unconventional it sounded, the more interested I would become in it.\"\nThe song was recorded in the Memphis studio of producer Sam Phillips in March 1951, and licensed to Chess Records for release. The record was supposed to be credited to Ike Turner and his Kings of Rhythm featuring Jackie Brenston, but Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats was printed instead. Turner blamed Phillips for this error since he was the one who licensed it to Chess. Turner and the band were only paid $20 each (US$ in 2024 dollars) for the record, with the exception of Brenston who sold the rights to Phillips for $910.\nWhether this was the first record of the rock'n'roll genre is debated. A 2014 article in \"The Guardian\" stated that \"Rocket 88's reputation may have more to do with Sam Phillips's vociferous later claims he had discovered rock'n'roll\". Time quotes \"The New Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock &amp; Roll\" and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as confirming that \"Rocket 88 may well have been the first rock 'n' roll record\".\nIn a later interview, however, Ike Turner offered this comment: \"I don't think that 'Rocket 88' is rock 'n' roll. I think that 'Rocket 88' is R&amp;B, but I think 'Rocket 88' is the cause of rock and roll existing\".\nChart performance.\n\"Rocket 88\" was the third-biggest rhythm and blues single in jukebox plays of 1951, according to \"Billboard\" magazine, and ninth in record sales. The single reached the top of the Best Selling R&amp;B Records chart on June 9, 1951, and stayed there for three weeks. It also spent two weeks at the top of the Most Played Juke Box R&amp;B Records chart; spending a total of five weeks at number-one on the R&amp;B charts.\nInfluence.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"When I was a little boy, that song fascinated me in a big way. I never heard a piano sound like that. I never played the piano then. Soon, I was trying. if you listen to 'Good Golly, Miss Molly,' you hear the same introduction as the one to 'Rocket 88,' the exact same, ain't nothing been changed.\"\n \u2014 \"Little Richard\" (1999)\nIke Turner's piano intro on \"Rocket 88\" influenced Little Richard who later used it for his 1958 hit song \"Good Golly, Miss Molly.\"\nSam Philips, the founder of Sun Records and Sun Studio, and many writers have suggested that \"Rocket 88\" has strong claims to be called the first rock'n'roll record. Others take a more nuanced view. Charlie Gillett, writing in 1970 in \"The Sound of the City\", said that it was \"one of several records that people in the music business cite as 'the first rock'n'roll record.'\" It has been suggested by Larry Birnbaum that the idea that \"Rocket 88\" could be called \"the first rock'n'roll record\" first arose in the late 1960s; he argued that: \"One of the reasons is surely that Kizart's broken amp anticipated the sound of the fuzzbox, which was in its heyday when 'Rocket 88' was rediscovered.\"\nMusic historian Robert Palmer, writing in \"The Rolling Stone History of Rock &amp; Roll\" in 1980, described it as an important and influential record. He noted that Hill's saxophone playing was \"wilder and rougher\" than on many jump blues records, and also emphasized the record's \"fuzzed-out, overamplified electric guitar\". Writing in his 1984 book \"Unsung Heroes of Rock \u2018n\u2019 Roll\", Nick Tosches, though rejecting the idea that it could be described as the first rock'n'roll record \"any more than there is any first modern novel\u00a0\u2013 the fact remains that the record in question was possessed of a sound and a fury the sheer, utter newness of which set it apart from what had come before.\" Echoing this view, Bill Dahl at AllMusic wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Determining the first actual rock &amp; roll record is a truly impossible task. But you can't go too far wrong citing Jackie Brenston's 1951 Chess waxing of \"Rocket 88\", is a seminal piece of rock's fascinating history with all the prerequisite elements firmly in place: practically indecipherable lyrics about cars, booze, and women; Raymond Hill's booting tenor sax, and a churning, beat-heavy rhythmic bottom.\nRock art historian Paul Grushkin wrote:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Working from the raw material of post-big band jump blues, Turner had cooked up a mellow, cruising boogie with a steady-as-she-goes back beat now married to Brenston's enthusiastic, sexually suggestive vocals that spoke of opportunity, discovery and conquest. This all combined to create (as one reviewer later put it) \"THE mother of all R&amp;B songs for an evolutionary white audience\". Michael Campbell wrote, in \"Popular Music in America: And the Beat Goes On\":&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Both the distortion and the relative prominence of the guitar were novel features of this recording\u00a0\u2013 these are the elements that have earned \"Rocket 88\" so many nominations as \"the first\" rock and roll record. From our perspective, \"Rocket 88\" wasn't the first rock and roll record, because the beat is a shuffle rhythm, not the distinctive rock rhythm heard first in the songs of Chuck Berry and Little Richard. Still, the distortion and the central place of the guitar in the overall sound certainly anticipate key features of rock style.\nIke Turner himself said, in an interview with Holger Petersen:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I don't think that \"Rocket 88\" is rock'n'roll. I think that \"Rocket 88\" is R&amp;B, but I think \"Rocket 88\" is the \"cause\" of rock and roll existing\u00a0... Sam Phillips got Dewey Phillips to play \"Rocket 88\" on his program\u00a0\u2013 and this is like the first black record to be played on a white radio station\u00a0\u2013 and, man, all the white kids broke out to the record shops to buy it. So that's when Sam Phillips got the idea, \"Well, man, if I get me a white boy to sound like a black boy, then I got me a gold mine\", which is the truth. So, that's when he got Elvis and he got Jerry Lee Lewis and a bunch of other guys and so they named it rock and roll rather than R&amp;B and so this is the reason I think rock and roll exists\u00a0\u2013 not that \"Rocket 88\" was the first one, but that was what caused the first one.\nThe song was covered by several artists over the years, the first being Bill Haley &amp; His Comets in July 1951. No matter which version deserves the accolade, \"Rocket 88\" is seen as a prototype rock and roll song in musical style and lineup, as well as its lyrical theme, in which an automobile serves as a metaphor for sexual prowess.\nAlbum appearances.\nThe song appears on the 1959 compilation album \"Oldies in Hi Fi\" (Chess LP 1439), on the 1983 Charly Records compilation \"Red Hot and Blue\" (a tribute to 1950s Memphis DJ Dewey Phillips), and on the 1987 compilation \"The Best of Chess Rock 'N' Roll\" (Chess CH2-6024).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51865", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51865", "title": "Giant Food", "text": "Giant Food may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51866", "revid": "1236002208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51866", "title": "Grocery", "text": "Grocery store"}
{"id": "51867", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51867", "title": "Constitution of Canada/1982 I Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms", "text": ""}
{"id": "51868", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51868", "title": "Bodhisattvas", "text": ""}
{"id": "51869", "revid": "903118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51869", "title": "Tulostomatales", "text": ""}
{"id": "51871", "revid": "4977632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51871", "title": "Shavian", "text": ""}
{"id": "51872", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51872", "title": "Nestorians", "text": ""}
{"id": "51873", "revid": "34573757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51873", "title": "Paper clip", "text": "Metal device to hold papers together\nA paper clip (or paperclip) is a tool used to hold sheets of paper together, usually made of steel wire bent to a looped shape (though some are covered in plastic). Most paper clips are variations of the \"Gem\" type introduced in the 1890s or earlier, characterized by the one and a half loops made by the wire. Common to paper clips proper is their utilization of torsion and elasticity in the wire, and friction between wire and paper. When a moderate number of sheets are inserted between the two \"tongues\" of the clip, the tongues will be forced apart and cause torsion in the bend of the wire to grip the sheets together. They are usually used to bind papers together for productivity and portability.\nShape and composition.\nPaper clips usually have an oblong shape with straight sides, but may also be triangular or circular, or have more elaborate shapes. The most common material is steel or some other metal, but molded plastic is also used. Some other kinds of paper clips use a two-piece clamping system. Recent innovations include multi-colored plastic-coated paper clips and spring-fastened binder clips. Regular metal paper clips weigh about a gram.\nHistory.\nAccording to the Early Office Museum, the first patent for a bent wire paper clip was awarded in the United States to Samuel B. Fay in 1867. This clip was originally intended primarily for attaching tickets to fabric, although the patent recognized that it could be used to attach papers together. Fay received U.S. patent 64,088 on 23 April 1867. Although functional and practical, Fay's design along with the 50 other designs patented prior to 1899 are not considered reminiscent of the modern paperclip design known today. Another notable paper clip design was also patented in the United States by Erlman J. Wright on 24 July 1877, patent #193,389. This clip was advertised at that time for use in fastening together loose leaves of papers, documents, periodicals, newspapers etc.\nThe most common type of wire paper clip still in use, the Gem paper clip, was never patented, but it was most likely in production in Britain in the early 1870s by \"The Gem Manufacturing Company\", according to the American expert on technological innovations, Professor Henry J. Petroski. He refers to an 1883 article about \"Gem Paper-Fasteners\", praising them for being \"better than ordinary pins\" for \"binding together papers on the same subject, a bundle of letters, or pages of a manuscript\". Since the 1883 article had no illustration of this early \"Gem\", it may have been different from modern paper clips of that name.\nThe earliest illustration of its current form is in an 1893 advertisement for the \"Gem Paper Clip\". In 1904 Cushman &amp; Denison registered a trademark for the \"Gem\" name in connection with paper clips. The announcement stated that it had been used since 1 March 1892, which may have been the time of its introduction in the United States. Paper clips are still sometimes called \"Gem clips\", and in Swedish the word for any paper clip is \"gem\" (but pronounced similar to English \"game\").\nDefinite proof that the modern type of paper clip was well known in 1899 at the latest, is the patent granted to William Middlebrook of Waterbury, Connecticut on 27 April of that year for a \"Machine for making wire paper clips.\" The drawing clearly shows that the product is a perfect clip of the Gem type. The fact that Middlebrook did not mention it by name suggests that it was already well known at the time. Since then countless variations on the same theme have been patented. Some have pointed instead of rounded ends, some have the end of one loop bent slightly to make it easier to insert sheets of paper, and some have wires with undulations or barbs to get a better grip. In addition, purely aesthetic variants have been patented, clips with triangular, star, or round shapes. But the original Gem type has for more than a hundred years proved to be the most practical, and consequently by far the most popular. Its qualities\u00a0\u2013 ease of use, gripping without tearing, and storing without tangling\u00a0\u2013 have been difficult to improve upon. In the United States, National Paperclip Day is celebrated on 29 May.\nThe Gem-type paperclip has become a symbol of inventive design, as confirmed below\u00a0\u2013 although falsely\u00a0\u2013 by its celebration as a Norwegian invention in 1899. More convincing is its appropriation as logo of the \"Year of Design\" () in Barcelona 2003, depicted on posters, T-shirts and other merchandise.\nUnsupported claims.\nIt has been claimed that the paper clip was invented by English intellectual Herbert Spencer (1820\u20131903). Spencer registered a \"binding-pin\" on 2 September 1846, which was made and sold by Adolphus Ackermann for over a year, advertised as \"for holding loose manuscripts, sermons, weekly papers, and all unstitched publications\". Spencer's design, approximately unfolded, looked more like a modern cotter pin than a modern paper clip.\nNorwegian claim.\nNorwegian Johan Vaaler (1866\u20131910) has been identified as the inventor of the paper clip. He was granted patents in Germany and in the United States (1901) for a paper clip of similar design, but less functional and practical. Because it was more complicated to insert into the paper, Vaaler probably did not know that a better product was already on the market, although not yet in Norway. His version was never manufactured and never marketed because the superior \"Gem\" was already available.\nLong after Vaaler's death, his countrymen created a national myth based on the false assumption that the paper clip was invented by an unrecognized Norwegian genius. Norwegian dictionaries since the 1950s have mentioned Vaaler as the inventor of the paper clip, and that myth later found its way into international dictionaries and much of the international literature on paper clips.\nVaaler probably succeeded in having his design patented abroad, despite the previous existence of more useful paper clips, because patent authorities at that time were quite liberal and rewarded any marginal modification of existing inventions. Johan Vaaler began working for \"Alfred J. Bryns Patentkontor\" in Kristiania in 1892 and was later promoted to office manager, a position he held until his death. As the employee of a patent office, he could easily have obtained a patent in Norway. His reasons for applying abroad are not known; it is possible that he wanted to secure the commercial rights internationally. Also, he may have been aware that a Norwegian manufacturer would find it difficult to introduce a new invention abroad, starting from the small home market.\nVaaler's patents expired quietly, while the \"Gem\" was used worldwide, including his own country. The failure of his design was its impracticality. Without the two full loops of the fully developed paper clip, it was difficult to insert sheets of paper into his clip. One could manipulate the end of the inner wire so that it could receive the sheet, but the outer wire was a dead end because it could not exploit the torsion principle. The clip would instead stand out like a keel, perpendicular to the sheet of paper. The impracticality of Vaaler's design may easily be demonstrated by cutting off the last outer loop and one long side from a regular Gem clip.\nNational symbol.\nThe originator of the Norwegian paper clip myth was an engineer of the Norwegian national patent agency who visited Germany in the 1920s to register Norwegian patents in that country. He came across Vaaler's patent but failed to detect that it was not the same as the then-common Gem-type clip. In the report of the first fifty years of the patent agency, he wrote an article in which he proclaimed Vaaler to be the inventor of the common paper clip. This piece of information found its way into some Norwegian encyclopedias after World War\u00a0II.\nEvents of that war contributed greatly to the mythical status of the paper clip. Patriots wore them in their lapels as a symbol of resistance to the German occupiers and local Nazi authorities when other signs of resistance, such as flag pins or pins showing the cipher of the exiled King HaakonVII of Norway, were forbidden. Those wearing them did not yet see them as national symbols, as the myth of their Norwegian origin was not commonly known at the time.\nThe clips were meant to denote solidarity and unity (\"we are bound together\"). The wearing of paper clips was soon prohibited, and people wearing them could risk severe punishment.\nThe leading Norwegian encyclopedia mentioned the role of the paper clip as a symbol of resistance in a supplementary volume in 1952 but did not yet proclaim it a Norwegian invention. That information was added in later editions. According to the 1974 edition, the idea of using the paper clip to denote resistance originated in France. A clip worn on a lapel or front pocket could be seen as \"deux gaules\" (two posts or poles) and be interpreted as a reference to the leader of the French Resistance, General Charles de Gaulle.\nThe post-war years saw a widespread consolidation of the paper clip as a national symbol. Authors of books and articles on the history of Norwegian technology eagerly seized it to make a thin story more substantial. They chose to overlook the fact that Vaaler's clip was not the same as the fully developed Gem-type clip. In 1989, a giant paper clip, almost high, was erected on the campus of a commercial college near Oslo in honor of Vaaler, ninety years after his invention was patented. But this monument shows a Gem-type clip, not the one patented by Vaaler. The celebration of the alleged Norwegian origin of the paper clip culminated in 1999, one hundred years after Vaaler submitted his application for a German patent. A commemorative stamp was issued that year, the first in a series to draw attention to Norwegian inventiveness. The background shows a facsimile of the German \"Patentschrift\". However, the figure in the foreground is not the paper clip depicted on that document, but the much better known \"Gem\". In 2005, the national biographical encyclopedia of Norway (\"Norsk biografisk leksikon\") published the biography of Johan Vaaler, stating he was the inventor of the paper clip.\nOther uses.\nWire is versatile in its nature. Thus a paper clip is a useful accessory in many kinds of mechanical work, including computer work: the metal wire can be unfolded with a little force. Several devices call for a very thin rod to push a recessed button which the user might only rarely need. This is seen on most CD-ROM drives as an \"emergency eject\" should the power fail; also on early floppy disk drives (including the early Macintosh). Various smartphones require the use of a long, thin object such as a paper clip to eject the SIM card and some Palm PDAs advise the use of a paper clip to reset the device. The trackball can be removed from early Logitech pointing devices using a paper clip as the key to the bezel. A paper clip bent into a \"U\" can be used to start an ATX PSU without connecting it to a motherboard, by connecting the green[what?] to a black[what?] on the motherboard header. One or more paper clips can make a loopback device for a RS-232 interface (or indeed many interfaces). A paper clip could be installed in a Commodore 1541 disk drive as a flexible head-stop. The steel wire from a paperclip can be used in dentistry to form a dental post.\nPipe smokers, including Cannabis smokers use straightened out paper clips to unclog their pipe or bong bowl.\nAnother creative use of paper clips is in \"paperclip art\", where enthusiasts bend and twist paper clips into intricate designs and figures, ranging from simple shapes to detailed sculptures. This form of art showcases the flexibility and adaptability of the paper clip beyond its traditional use.\nAdditionally, paper clips can serve as temporary bookmarks in books or documents. Their slim profile and easy placement make them useful for marking a specific page or section without causing damage or adding bulk.\nPaper clips can be bent into a crude but sometimes effective lock picking device. Some types of handcuffs can be unfastened using paper clips. There are two approaches. The first one is to unfold the clip in a line and then twist the end in a right angle, trying to imitate a key and using it to lift the lock fixator. The second approach, which is more feasible but needs some practice, is to use the semi-unfolded clip kink for lifting when the clip is inserted through the hole where the handcuffs are closed.\nA paper clip image is the standard image for an attachment in an email client.\nTrade.\nIn 1994, the United States imposed anti-dumping tariffs against China on paper clips.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"Patents\""}
{"id": "51874", "revid": "9023670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51874", "title": "Googly", "text": "Delivery in cricket\nA googly, also known as a wrong'un or Bosie, is a type of delivery in the game of cricket bowled by a right-arm leg spin bowler. It is different from the normal delivery for a leg-spin bowler in that it is turning the other way. The googly is \"not\" a variation of the typical off spin type of delivery, in that the cricket ball is presented from the bowler's hand in such a way that once the ball pitches; instead, it deviates in the opposite direction of a leg spinning type of delivery (i.e. towards the leg stump rather than the off stump). It has also been colloquially referred to as the wrong'un, Bosie or Bosey, with the latter two eponyms referring to Bernard Bosanquet, the bowler who originally devised and began using the googly. He first employed it in July 1900, during the second innings of a County Championship match between Middlesex and Leicestershire at Lord's. In that game, Sam Coe became the first batter known to have been dismissed by a googly. During the Edwardian era, some considered its use to be an example of cheating.\nExplanation.\nWhile a normal leg break spins from the leg to the off side, away from a right-handed batter, a googly spins the other side, from off to leg, into a right-handed batter (and is distinct from an off break delivery). The bowler achieves this change of spin by bending the wrist sharply from the normal leg break delivery position. When the ball rolls out of the hand (from the side near the little finger, as in a normal leg break), it emerges with a clockwise spin (from the bowler's point of view). A googly may also be achieved by bowling the ball as a conventional leg break, but spinning the ball further with the fingers just before it is released.\nThe change of wrist action can be seen by a skilled batter and the change of spin allowed for when playing a shot at the ball. Less skilled batters, or ones who have lost their concentration, can be deceived completely, expecting the ball to move one direction off the pitch, only for it to move the other direction. If the batter is expecting a leg break, he or she will play outside the line of the ball after it spins. This means the ball can strike the pads for a potential leg before wicket (lbw) appeal, fly between the bat and the pads and hit the wicket, or catch the edge of the bat.\nThe googly is a major weapon in the arsenal of a leg spin bowler, and can be one of the bowler's most effective most important wicket-taking balls. It is used infrequently, because its effectiveness comes mostly from its surprise value.\nLeft-arm unorthodox spinners can bowl with the googly action using the left arm. This delivery turns away from a right-handed batter, like a leg break or left-arm orthodox spinner. This type of delivery was known historically as a \"chinaman\".\nThe googly is similar in principle to the doosra, the ball from an off-spinner that turns the opposite way from his stock ball.\n\"Chambers Dictionary\" describes the whole etymology of the word as \"dubious\".\nMechanics.\nTo grip the ball for a leg-spinning delivery, the ball is placed into the palm with the seam parallel to the palm. The first two fingers then spread and grip the ball, and the third and fourth fingers close together and rest against the side of the ball. The first bend of the third finger should grasp the seam. The thumb resting against the side is up to the bowler, but should impart no pressure. When the ball is bowled, the third finger will apply most of the spin. The wrist is cocked as it comes down by the hip, and the wrist moves sharply from right to left as the ball is released, adding more spin. The ball is tossed up to provide flight. The batter will see the back of the hand when the ball is released.\nAn alternative grip is to hold the ball in the thumb, index finger and middle finger. The finger-print of both the thumb and index finger rest on the seam, as does the first bend of the middle finger. Together with rotation of the wrist, the index and middle fingers are involved in imparting spin on the ball and can achieve a very high number of revolutions.\nAs with the more conventional grip, all the various deliveries can be bowled with the same level of success and the wrist and fingers must also be relaxed.\nIn popular culture.\nIn a scene from John Boorman's 1987 film \"Hope and Glory\", David Hayman plays a father who, before leaving to fight in WWII, passes on \"the secret of the googly\" to his young son.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51876", "revid": "26301143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51876", "title": "Pim Fortuyn List", "text": "Dutch political party\nThe Pim Fortuyn List (, LPF) was a political party in the Netherlands that existed from 2002 to 2008 at a national level and was named after its eponymous founder Pim Fortuyn, a former university professor and political columnist. The party was often considered right-wing populist nationalist by media and political observers due to its policies as well as adhering to its own distinct ideology of \"Fortuynism\" according to some commentators which reflected the political ideas of Fortuyn.\nThe LPF supported tougher measures against immigration and crime, opposition to multiculturalism, greater political reform, a reduction in state bureaucracy and was eurosceptic but differed somewhat from other European right-wing or nationalist parties by taking a liberal stance on certain social issues and sought to describe its ideology as pragmatic and not populistic. It also aimed to present itself as an alternative to the Polder model of Dutch politics and the governing style of the existing mainstream parties.\nPim Fortuyn had initially had planned to contest the 2002 general election as leader of the Livable Netherlands (LN) party. He was however dismissed as leader of LN in February 2002 due to controversial remarks he made in a newspaper interview on immigration-related issues, and instead founded LPF a few days later, taking many former LN candidates with him. After gaining support in opinion polls, Fortuyn was assassinated on 6 May 2002, nine days before the election. The party held onto its support, and went on to become the second-largest party in the election.\nThe LPF formed part of a coalition government with the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) and the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) as part of the first Balkenende cabinet and was granted ministerial posts. However, internal conflicts in the LPF led to the coalition's break-up and fresh elections after a few months. Following the 2003 election, the party was left in opposition. It became clear that the party was not viable without its original leader, and it went into decline until it was finally dissolved in 2008. Despite this, Fortuyn and the LPF have had a significant influence on changing public discourse on immigration, multiculturalism, and political reform, and went on to influence politicians in both older and newer political parties in the Netherlands.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nThe LPF was founded by its namesake, Pim Fortuyn, a former sociology professor who had become known in the Netherlands as an author, press columnist and a media commentator. Fortuyn had announced his intention to run for parliament in a television interview on 20\u00a0August\u00a02001. An unusual aspect of this was that it was not yet clear which political party he would be a candidate for. Although he was already in contact with the Livable Netherlands (LN) party, he initially also considered running for the Christian Democratic Appeal (for whom he had briefly worked as an advisor) or creating his own list. He subsequently became a member of the LN in 2001 at the encouragement of its chairman Jan Nagel. On 25\u00a0November he was chosen as party leader for the LN. The LN functioned as the combined national extension of various movements that existed as localist alternatives to the main parties and had contested municipal elections but had never contested in national elections before. Fortuyn concluded his acceptance speech by saying the words that would become his slogan; \"At your service!\" Almost immediately after Fortuyn became leader, LN went from 2% in opinion polls to about 17%.\nIn January\u00a02002, it was announced that Fortuyn also would head the Livable Rotterdam (LR) list for the March\u00a02002 local elections. The official 2002 election study found that immigration and integration problems were the second most important issue for voters after issues concerning the health care system. Helped by the many speeches and interviews given by Fortuyn, immigration issues became the major topic of the national political agenda, thereby forcing other parties to react.\nUntil February, Liveable Netherlands had received disproportionate and generally sympathetic coverage in the media. The situation took a dramatic turn on 9\u00a0February, when Fortuyn was interviewed in \"de Volkskrant\", one of the leading national newspapers. Against the strong advice of his campaign team, he made several controversial statements; including one that said Islam was \"a backward culture\", that no more asylum seekers would be allowed into the country, and, if necessary, the possible repeal of anti-racism clauses in the Dutch Constitution to protect freedom of speech. Fortuyn maintained that if he came to power, he would pardon asylum seekers and illegal immigrants who had been in the Netherlands for a certain period but if legally possible he would close the borders to Muslim immigrants. Fortuyn was summoned to an emergency meeting by the LN party board and asked to retract his statements, but after refusing he was dismissed as party leader the next day. In a television interview, Fortuyn said that the split was irreparable, although he would have preferred to remain in the party.\nEstablishment.\nFortuyn founded Pim Fortuyn List (LPF) on 14 February taking several former LN members and candidates with him. He began assembling candidates to stand in the upcoming general election. Fortuyn secured financial backing from several individuals involved in the property development sector and was allocated an office and campaign headquarters in downtown Rotterdam. Within a short time, Fortuyn was able to secure thirty candidates for the election. Mat Herben was appointed as LPF group leader. Second on the party's list was Jo\u00e3o Varela, originally from Cape Verde whom Fortuyn proposed as immigration minister should he become prime minister. Fortuyn also recruited Jim Janssen van Raaij a former member of the European Parliament for the CDA and one of few on the list with professional political experience. Others included former editor of \"Elsevier\" Ferry Hoogendijk, ex-drafts champion Harm Wiersma, civil servant Joost Eerdmans, Surinamese broadcaster Philomena Bijlhout, counter-terrorism officer Andr\u00e9 Peperkoorn, spokesman for farmers Wien van den Brink and spokeswoman for the Central Bureau of Food Trade Winny de Jong. The party's candidates were unveiled by Fortuyn at a press conference in March 2002.\nOpinion polls soon showed that he took most of LN's supporters with him, leaving LN with its original 2%, while Fortuyn soared to 17%. The local LR\u2014which held on to Fortuyn as its leader\u2014was hugely successful in the March 2002 local elections, as it won more than one third of the vote and became Rotterdam's strongest party, displacing the Labour Party who had governed Rotterdam since World War Two. Fortuyn was subsequently elected to Rotterdam's municipal council.\nIn the run-up to the 2002 general election, Fortuyn appeared in numerous television and radio interviews to generate publicity, and was featured in the televised leadership debates representing his new party. He was often attacked or derided as an extremist figure by other party leaders (in particular Labour leader Ad Melkert, former prime minister Wim Kok and GroenLinks's Paul Rosenm\u00f6ller), and both Dutch and foreign media outlets compared Fortuyn to other European far-right party leaders. Fortuyn disputed the comparisons and stated that the press and other party leaders were distorting or mislabeling him and his ideas. However, polling showed rapid and growing support for the LPF, with some polls indicating that the LPF would emerge as the largest party and make Fortuyn a candidate for prime minister. Fortuyn himself maintained that he would not accept a cabinet position headed by another party leader and aimed to take the role of prime minister himself.\nFortuyn assassination.\nIt was reported in February\u00a02002 that Fortuyn did not dare to appear in public owing to death threats. In March, he was attacked by pie-throwing activists at the presentation of his new book \"De puinhopen van acht jaar Paars\" (which became the bestselling book by a Dutch author in the Netherlands in 2002). Despite this, the authorities did not provide protection for Fortuyn, nor did he request protection. In various interviews, including with the BBC and \"Jensen!,\" Fortuyn expressed a concern that he would be killed or injured during the election campaign, and argued that if such an event were to happen, the media and Dutch political establishment would be to blame through creating a hostile atmosphere against him.\nOn 6\u00a0May, Fortuyn was assassinated outside a radio studio in Hilversum. This was the first political murder in the Netherlands for centuries (excluding the Second World War). Some claimed that by demonising Fortuyn, the political left and the media had created a climate of opinion that had made the assassination possible. Campaigning immediately stopped, and although some suggested postponing the elections, the campaign resumed (half-heartedly) after his funeral four days later. His funeral was broadcast live on television and, according to Cas Mudde, lead \"to scenes of mass hysteria not seen since the Netherlands national football team won the European Championship in 1988.\" The murder of Fortuyn, together with that of Theo van Gogh two years later, would result in a polarisation in the political debate in the Netherlands, and subsequently changes in immigration-related policies and public discourse.\nFirst Balkenende cabinet (2002\u20132003).\nThe LPF decided to maintain Fortuyn's posthumous candidacy, and delayed naming a new leader until after the election. The 2002 general election proved a great success for the LPF, yielding 17% of the votes and 26 seats in the House of Representatives\u2014by far a record number of seats in the Netherlands for a new party\u2014to become the second largest party. LN also made it into Parliament, with two seats. The Labour Party (PvdA) and People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) saw their largest-ever losses, while the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA) won large gains \u2013 later attributed in part to the fact that CDA leader Jan Peter Balkenende had remained neutral and not joined in attacking Fortuyn with other party leaders during debates. Balkenende had earlier announced that his party would follow a tougher line towards asylum seekers and tighten some of the Netherlands's immigration policies, and he later agreed with much of Fortuyn's criticism of the purple coalition and Holland's multicultural society. Some commentators claimed that the CDA was able to draw in voters who otherwise would have supported the LPF (but felt it was no longer viable without Fortuyn in charge) or that the CDA was seen as a stabilizing force after a tense election. As leader of the strongest party, Balkenende became the leading candidate for prime minister.\nFollowing the election, journalist and former civil servant Mat Herben was appointed Fortuyn's successor as LPF party leader in May 2002 while newly elected LPF representatives Jo\u00e3o Varela and Ferry Hoogendijk became the party's vice-chairmen. Businessman and personal friend of Fortuyn Peter Langendam was appointed chairman by the LPF parliamentary faction and faced the difficult task of shaping the party organization without Fortuyn.\nTogether with the CDA and the VVD, the LPF formed part of the governing coalition, and supplied several members for the Balkenende cabinet. The party was granted four of fourteen cabinet seats, for immigration, economics, environment, health and sports, and five state secretaries. LPF member Eduard Bomhoff was appointed deputy prime minister. The following day after the cabinet's formation, LPF State Secretary for Social Affairs and Work Opportunity Philomena Bijlhout resigned after it was reported that she had been a member of a Surinamese militia group. She was replaced by fellow LPF MP Khee Liang Phoa.\nWithout its original leader and lack of a clearly defined organisational structure and political experience among its members, the LPF also succumbed to highly public internal squabbles. MPs within the LPF resigned to sit as independents due to the infighting and the intense media storm following Fortuyn's death or unsuccessfully tried founding splinter parties of their own to contest in the next election. In August 2002, Herben resigned as leader due to the unrest and was briefly replaced by Harry Wijnschenk. However, arguments within the party continued after Wijnschenk was accused of dictatorial behaviour by other faction members which eventually led to the departure of LPF MPs Winny de Jong and Cor Eberhard. Wijnschenk was subsequently ousted from his position and replaced by Herben again, but by October\u00a02002, the break-up of the government coalition was ultimately triggered by the bickering of LPF Ministers Eduard Bomhoff and Herman Heinsbroek who did not get along on a personal level. Although the VVD had suggested that the LPF could replace Bomhoff and Heinsbroek in the cabinet, Bomhoff warned that the other parties would use the opportunity to call a new election. Ultimately, the cabinet fell and a fresh election was called.\nOpposition and disintegration (2003\u20132006).\nIn December 2002, the LPF chose Herben to lead the party into the January 2003 general election. Herben was considered a stabilising force amid the infighting which had collapsed the cabinet but his appointment also caused internal confusion since LPF minister Hilbrand Nawijn had been considered the frontrunner to lead the party in December 2002 before voluntarily stepping back on December 7th and then announcing that he wished to return to parliament and become Prime Minister on the same day. During the election campaign, Herben positioned the LPF as the only barrier against a centrist\u2013left government and acknowledged the party's difficult start in government whilst asking voters for a second chance and arguing that the party was now mature enough to govern. Although Herben's performance during televised debates was considered articulate and confident, external commentators felt Herben lacked the same dynamism as Fortuyn and his candidacy softened the LPF into a more conventional right-wing party with a focus on economic policies over the anti-establishment edge it had held under Fortuyn. Meanwhile, some of the other traditional parties began to adopt more conservative messages on issues such as crime and immigration that the LPF had initially campaigned on and mainstreamed some of Fortuyn's original positions. Despite efforts to rebrand and position the LPF as more approachable and having learned from its mistakes in the cabinet, it began to diminish in polls as it struggled to maintain relevance within the political landscape while the other parties were reluctant to consider cooperation with the LPF following the collapse of the first Balkenende cabinet.\nDuring the election, the LPF shrank to 5.7% support and gained eight seats while Balkenende and the CDA retained a majority. Following the election the LPF was exchanged for the Democrats 66 in the government coalition and never returned to government. The LPF found it hard to maintain support in parliamentary opposition as besides Joost Eerdmans, most of its Members of Parliament were not very visible or considered as charismatic as Fortuyn, while party leader Herben had enough work behind the scenes in keeping the party from further infighting. The LPF also went into financial straits as many of its former financial backers left. Other commentators later claimed that the relative inexperience of some of the LPF's members and lack of internal structure also hampered its ability to function as a coherent movement in parliament. As the new coalition continued most of the former coalition's policies and Balkenende stated that he agreed with some of Fortuyn's views on multiculturalism and implemented some of his policy ideas, it became increasingly difficult for the LPF to present the anti-establishment or alternative image to the government which had galvanized support for the party in the first place.\nThe LPF managed to revive some success in the 2003 Dutch provincial elections in which it won 17 seats in eleven provinces, enabling it to qualify for a seat in the Senate during the 2003 Dutch Senate election which was taken by Rob Hessing. However, the party was beset by further internal problems and won just 2.6% of the vote in the 2004 European Parliament election, and did not win a seat. In this election, Paul van Buitenen surprisingly won two seats with his anti-corruption Europe Transparent (although it was not successful in the long term). By 2004, the LPF had fallen to a less than 1% support and disintegrated. The party had lost most of its members, and for a brief period the parliamentary faction (with exception of Wien van den Brink) had declared itself independent from the party while continuing to use the LPF name in the house. In 2005, a newly elected party board managed to put an end to many of the disputes within the LPF and got party organisation back in order. Herben also stepped back and handed over the faction chairmanship to Gerard van As. As a result, some LPF representatives rejoined the party. That same year, LPF minister and parliamentarian Hilbrand Nawijn held a meeting with Vlaams Belang politician Filip Dewinter in the former home of Fortuyn which caused uproar within the party since Fortuyn had stated he had wanted nothing to do with Dewinter's former Vlaams Blok party. Nawijn subsequently left the LPF and announced the formation of a new party with ideas closer to Vlaams Belang.\nIn 2006, Van As announced his departure from the LPF to join Nawijn's Party for the Netherlands. A week after Van As' departure, Joost Eerdmans was expelled from the parliamentary faction after signalling his intention to join the E\u00e9nNL party founded by Marco Pastors and was subsequently joined by other former LPF parliamentarians. In March 2006, the LPF decided to go ahead with contesting the 2006 Dutch municipal elections and saw a relatively strong performance in the municipalities of Westland, Spijkenisse and Eindhoven with the LPF receiving its first alderman in Westland.\nList Five Fortuyn and dissolution (2006\u20132008).\nThe LPF attempted to start afresh for the 2006 general election and participated in the election under its new name List Five Fortuyn (\"Lijst Vijf Fortuyn\"). On 25 September 2006, the party released a controversial campaign commercial which featured new leader Olaf Stuger coming down from \"heaven\" with a parachute and presenting himself as a \"reincarnation\" of Pim Fortuyn. Marten Fortuyn, brother of Pim Fortuyn, declared it \"outrageous and tasteless.\" In the election, LVF did not receive enough votes to secure a seat with support of only 0.2%. Much of its voter base and support became splintered across several new parties, some of which had been established by former members of the LPF. It also lost all of its seats in the 2007 Provincial Council elections, meaning it was no longer eligible for representation in the Senate. By this stage, many former LPF supporters were switching to the new Party for Freedom led by Geert Wilders which contained similar policies to the LPF and emerged as a successor. \nIn 2006, the party decided to close its office in the Hague since it was no longer represented in national or provincial politics. In July\u00a02007, the party held a meeting in which its delegates voted to dissolve itself by 1\u00a0January\u00a02008. The decision was opposed by the party's youth-wing and LPF municipal branches in the Hague and Eindhoven who all declared they would continue under the LPF banner as independent organisations. As a result, the LPF name has only existed at a municipal level since 2008.\nIdeology.\nThe party was variously described as populist, nationalist, conservative-liberal, national-liberal, national-conservative, classical-liberal, eurosceptic and anti-Islam. Some scholars and political scientists observed that the LPF presented a distinct ideology that differed from other populist parties in Europe while Fortuyn himself maintained that both he and the party based their beliefs on pragmatic, not populistic ideas and wanted the LPF to represent an alternative set of policy solutions to what Fortuyn regarded as an identical consensus within the existing Dutch political establishment.\nFortuynism.\nThe ideology or political style that is derived from Pim Fortuyn, and in turn the LPF, is often called \"Fortuynism\". Observers variously saw him as a political protest targeting the alleged elitism and bureaucratic style of the Dutch purple coalitions or as offering an appealing political style. The style was characterized variously as one \"of openness, directness and clearness\", populism or simply as charisma. Another school holds Fortuynism as a distinct ideology, with an alternative vision of society. Some argued that Fortuynism was not just \"one\" ideology, but contained liberalism, populism and nationalism. Gerrit Boerman, the head of the Document Center for Dutch Political Parties at the University of Groningen described Fortuyn's and by extension the LPF's ideology as not fitting into the traditional left-right pattern and described it as a \"cocktail of elements stemming from different directions\" which included strands of conservatism, communitarianism, libertarianism, classical and social liberalism, and national-populism.\nDuring the 2002 campaign, Fortuyn was accused of being on the \"extreme right\", although others saw only certain similarities. Comparisons were drawn between Fortuyn and the LPF with far-right populist leaders and parties in Europe such as Jean-Marie Le Pen and his French National Front by foreign journalists and these were often referred to by the Dutch media and rival politicians. However, this was strongly disputed by Fortuyn who stated he wanted nothing to do with such leaders while the LPF called the comparisons \"over-simplified\" and inaccurate, asserting that the party's immigration programme was not based on hatred of foreigners. While Fortuyn employed anti-immigration rhetoric, he was neither a radical nationalist nor a defender of traditional authoritarian values. On the contrary, Fortuyn wanted to protect the socio-culturally liberal values of the Netherlands, women's rights and sexual minorities (he was openly homosexual himself), from the \"backward\" Islamic culture. Fortuyn often maintained that his opposition to immigration was not motivated by race or skin colour and that he was not opposed to a multi-racial society. The LPF also won support from some ethnic minorities and fielded candidates from immigrant backgrounds during the 2002 election; one of Fortuyn's closest associates was of Cape Verdean origin while one of the party's MPs was a young woman of Turkish descent.\nDomestic policy.\nMany of the LPF's policies for the 2002 general election were based on proposals put forward in Fortuyn's book \"De puinhopen van acht jaar Paars\". The LPF campaigned on a strong law and order message at both local and national levels. The party supported cutting state bureaucracy while strengthening public services. The party also called for reforms to the Netherlands' employment policy, proposed reducing the number of civil servants and abolishing permanent contracts for government employees. It also wanted to revise and strongly restrict immigration and asylum policies, particularly from Islamic societies, as well as put an end to the Dutch government's policy of pursuing multiculturalism. Instead, the party argued for compulsory policies that existing immigrants learn Dutch and become integrated while future immigration would be reduced or halted until existing immigrants had been assimilated. However, Fortuyn also maintained that asylum seekers or illegal immigrants who had been living in the Netherlands for a long period should not be deported and instead be pardoned and offered a path to citizenship if they demonstrated the ability to assimilate into Dutch society and had not committed crimes while potential migrants would be offered financial incentives to stay in their own country. During the 2002 election and cabinet formation, the LPF proposed that asylum seekers who already had been in the Netherlands for more than five years could be pardoned while the government should temporarily stop all future immigration and asylum intake. In the First Balkenende cabinet, LPF immigration minister Hilbrand Nawijn proposed the \"One-off Regulation 2003\" which would give a grace period for long-term asylum seekers to gain residency while asylum migration would be frozen for a period, however the cabinet collapsed before this could be effectuated. The party also supported the right to freedom of speech and took a socially liberal stance on issues such as gay rights, soft drug legalization and gender equality.\nThe LPF also supported reforming the Dutch economic model, arguing that outdated bureaucracy and welfare systems had created psychological and physical barriers to entrepreneurship and modernization of the economy. Fortuyn supported locating workplaces, smaller schools and regional hospitals closer to communities, expanding internet infrastructure outside of cities and replacing parts of the state with digital technology. Some political historians describe the LPF as supporting \"market populist\" ideas and holding both a free market vision while stressing communitarian ideas and being one of the first European populist parties associated with a rise in anti-globalization arguments.\nForeign policy.\nAlthough the LPF was established post-9/11, Fortuyn had already developed a worldview based on the \"clash between civilizations\", namely between \"modernity\" and Islam, or Western society and Islamic culture. The LPF supported NATO, but was eurosceptic and saw the European Union as a \"bureaucracy which barely interests its citizens, let alone inspires them.\" The party was against the euro currency (which the Netherlands had adopted in 1999), EU influence over Dutch domestic regulation, and opposed the Netherlands participating in the European Schengen agreement. Fortuyn also campaigned to reduce Dutch financial contributions to the European Union and criticised the EU for being \"elite\" and \"technocratic\". The party however did not oppose the principle of economic and political cooperation between European countries and the project of European integration in general, but rather the EU's present organization, and what it regarded as its lack of democracy, excessive bureaucracy and threat to national sovereignty. The LPF also warned that unopposed EU expansion would lead to the Netherlands becoming absorbed into a Federal Superstate in which Dutch identity would be lost. Opposing the full membership of Turkey, Albania, Ukraine, Belarus and Russia, the LPF maintained that the European Union \"shouldn't cross the Bosporus and the Ural\". The LPF was also supportive of Israel.\nLegacy.\nFortuyn's political heritage became scattered among various politicians in the Netherlands, several of whom had begun their careers in the LPF and tried founding parties of their own, most of which were unsuccessful. These included Marco Pastors and Joost Eerdmans, founders of the One NL, Winny de Jong of DeConservatieven.nl, and Hilbrand Nawijn, leader of the Party for the Netherlands\u2014none of which managed to win a seat in the 2003 or 2006 elections. Other parties included Forza! Nederland founded by Paul Meijer and Fleur Agema, both former members of the LPF branch on the States-Provincial of North Holland. The LPF also influenced politicians in the Flemish region of Belgium, such as lawyer and Open VLD member Hugo Coveliers who went on to found the VLOTT party based on Fortuyn's ideas, and Jean-Marie Dedecker and his Lijst Dedecker party. Former New Flemish Alliance leader and Minister-President of Flanders Geert Bourgeois was inspired to write \"De puinhoop van Paars-Groen\" (The wreckage of Purple-Green) based on Fortuyn's \"De puinhopen van acht jaar Paars\" which offered similar critiques and solutions for the Belgian political system.\nHowever, in the Netherlands the LPF became squeezed out by the tougher line on immigration and integration issues taken by mainstream politicians, such as Minister for Integration and Immigration Rita Verdonk, who had largely adopted Fortuyn's policies. By the end of the decade, former LPF supporters had mostly moved to support Geert Wilders and his Party for Freedom (PVV). Traces of Fortuyn's legacy have remained at a national political level with former LPF politician Fleur Agema being elected to parliament for the Party for Freedom and later becoming Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands in 2024.\nIn February 2006, soon before it fell out of parliament, the scholar Hans Jansen organised a conference in cooperation with the scientific committee of the LPF in the House of Representatives building that brought together several international anti-Islam figures, including Bat Ye'or, Daniel Pipes, Geert Wilders, Robert Spencer, Bruce Bawer, Lars Hedegaard, Ibn Warraq, Paul Beli\u00ebn and Peder \"Fjordman\" Jensen. This movement would eventually become known as the counter-jihad movement.\nIn 2020, Eerdemans founded the JA21 party which claims to want to help \"Fortuyn's ideas return to the House of Representatives\". The party won nine seats in the 2025 Dutch general election.\nAlthough dissolved at national level, the name \"Pim Fortuyn List\" continued to be used for a period at municipal level by local branches that split off from the LPF in Eindhoven, Boornsterhem, Westland and The Hague. As of 2018, the last remaining local party using \"Pim Fortuyn List\" were in Eindhoven and Westland which competed in the municipal elections under the names \"LPF Eindhoven\" and \"LPF Westland.\" In 2022 a new local Pim Fortuyn List entered the municipal elections in the city of Breda winning one seat in the council. The LPF's youth-wing the \"Jonge Fortuynisten\" continues to remain active as an independent organisation and is affiliated to LPF Eindhoven.\nLeadership.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51878", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51878", "title": "Bowling (cricket)", "text": "Cricket delivery\nIn cricket, bowling is the action of propelling the ball toward the wicket defended by a batter. A player skilled at bowling is called a \"bowler\"; a bowler who is also a competent batter is known as an \"all-rounder\". Bowling the ball is distinguished from \"throwing\" the ball by a strictly specified biomechanical definition, which restricts the angle of extension of the elbow. A single act of bowling the ball towards the batter is called a \"ball\" or a \"delivery\". Bowlers bowl deliveries in sets of six, called an \"over\". Once a bowler has bowled an over, a teammate will bowl an over from the other end of the pitch. The Laws of Cricket govern how a ball must be bowled. If a ball is bowled illegally, an umpire will rule it a \"no-ball\". If a ball is bowled too wide of the striker for the batter to be able to play at it with a proper cricket shot, the bowler's end umpire will rule it a \"wide\".\nThere are different types of bowlers, from fast bowlers, whose primary weapon is pace, through swing and seam bowlers who try to make the ball deviate in its course through the air or when it bounces, to slow bowlers, who will attempt to deceive the batter with a variety of flight and spin. A spin bowler usually delivers the ball quite slowly and puts spin on the ball, causing it to turn at an angle while bouncing off the pitch.\nA team can be said to have elected to \"have a bowl\" when it wins the coin toss and chooses to field.\nHistory.\n \nIn the early days of cricket, underarm bowling was the only method employed.\nMany theories exist about the origins of cricket. One suggests that the game began among shepherds hitting a stone or a ball of wool with their crooks and, at the same time, defending the wicket gate into the sheep-fold (from Anglo Saxon 'cricce', a crooked staff). A second theory suggests the name came from a low stool known as a 'cricket' in England, which from the side looked like the long, low wicket used in the early days of the game (originally from the Flemish 'krickstoel', a low stool on which parishioners knelt in church). There is also a reference to 'criquet' in North-East France in 1478 and evidence that the game evolved in South-East England in the Middle Ages.\nIn 1706 William Goldwyn published the first description of the game. He wrote that two teams were first seen carrying their curving bats to the venue, choosing a pitch and arguing over the rules to be played. They pitched two sets of wickets, each with a \"milk-white\" bail perched on two stumps; tossed a coin for first knock, the umpire called \"play\" and the \"leathern orb\" was bowled. They had four-ball overs, the umpires leant on their staves (which the batters had to touch to complete a run), and the scorers sat on a mound making notches.\nThe first written \"Laws of Cricket\" were drawn up in 1744. They stated, \"the principals shall choose from amongst the gentlemen present two umpires who shall absolutely decide all disputes. The stumps must be 22 inches high and the bail across them six inches. The ball must be between 5 &amp; 6 ounces, and the two sets of stumps 22 yards apart\". There were no limits on the shape or size of the bat. It appears that 40 notches was viewed as a very big score, probably due to the bowlers bowling quickly at shins unprotected by pads. The world's first cricket club was formed in Hambledon in the 1760s and the Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC) was founded in 1787.\nDuring the 1760s and 1770s it became common to pitch the ball through the air, rather than roll it along the ground. This innovation gave bowlers the weapons of length, deception through the air, plus increased pace. It also opened new possibilities for spin and swerve. In response, batters had to master timing and shot selection. One immediate consequence was the replacement of the curving bat with the straight one. All of this raised the premium on skill and lessened the influence of rough ground and brute force. It was in the 1770s that the modern game began to take shape. The weight of the ball was limited to between five and a half and five and three-quarter ounces, and the width of the bat to four inches. The latter ruling followed an innings by a batter called Thomas \"Daddy\" White, who appeared with a bat the width of the wicket. In 1774, the first leg before law was published. Also around this time, a third stump became commonplace. By 1780, the duration of a first-class cricket match was generally three days, and this year also saw the creation of the first six-seam cricket ball. In 1788, the MCC published its first revision of the laws, which prohibited charging down an opponent and also provided for mowing and covering the wicket to standardise conditions. The desire for standardisation reflected the massive increase in the popularity of cricket during the 18th century. Between 1730 and 1740, 150 cricket matches were recorded in the papers of the time. Between 1750 and 1760, this figure rose to 230, and between 1770 and 1790 over 500.\nThe 19th century saw a series of significant changes. Wide deliveries were outlawed in 1811. The circumference of the ball was specified for the first time in 1838 (its weight had been dictated 60 years earlier). Pads, made of cork, became available for the first time in 1841, and these were further developed following the invention of vulcanised rubber, which was also used to introduce protective gloves in 1848. In the 1870s, boundaries were introduced \u2013 previously, all hits had to be run; if the ball went into the crowd, the spectators would clear a way for the fieldsman to fetch it. The biggest change, however, was in how the ball was delivered by the bowler.\nAt the start of the century, all bowlers were still delivering the ball under-arm. However, so the story goes, John Willes became the first bowler to use a \"round-arm\" technique after practising with his sister Christina, who had used the technique, as she was unable to bowl underarm due to her wide dress impeding her delivery of the ball.\nThe round-arm action came to be employed widely in matches but was quickly determined to be illegal and banned by the MCC, who stated that \"the ball must be delivered underhand, not thrown or jerked, with the hand underneath the elbow at the time of delivering the ball\". When it was accepted the rules stated that the arm could not be raised above the shoulder. It was quickly found, however, that a raised arm imparted more accuracy and generated more bounce than the roundarm method. Again, the governing body banned the method. It was not until the method was finally accepted by the MCC in 1835 that it grew rapidly in popularity amongst all players. Underarm bowling hitherto had almost disappeared from the game.\nModern-day underarm bowling.\nAn infamous \"underarm bowling incident\" occurred during a match in 1981, in which the Australian bowler, Trevor Chappell, took advantage of the fact that underarm bowling was still legal by rolling the ball along the ground. By doing so he avoided the possibility that the New Zealand batter, Brian McKechnie, would score a six from the last ball to tie the match, as the bat would not be able to hit the ball high enough to score a six.\nAs a result of this incident underarm bowling was subsequently made illegal in all grades of cricket, except by prior agreement of both teams, as it was not considered to be within the spirit of the game.\nThe bowling action.\nBowling the ball is distinguished from simply throwing the ball by a strictly specified biomechanical definition.\nOriginally, this definition said that the elbow joint must not straighten out during the bowling action. Bowlers generally hold their elbows fully extended and rotate the arm vertically about the shoulder joint to impart velocity to the ball, releasing it near the top of the arc. Flexion at the elbow is not allowed, but any extension of the elbow was deemed to be a throw and would be liable to be called a no-ball. This was thought to be possible only if the bowler's elbow was originally held in a slightly flexed position.\nIn 2005, this definition was deemed to be physically impossible by a scientific investigative commission. Biomechanical studies that showed that \"almost\" all bowlers extend their elbows somewhat throughout the bowling action, because the stress of swinging the arm around \"hyperextends\" the elbow joint. A guideline was introduced to allow extensions or hyperextensions of angles up to 15 degrees before deeming the ball illegally thrown.\nBowling actions are typically divided into \"side on\" and \"front on\" actions. In the side on action, the back foot lands parallel to the bowling crease and the bowler aims at the wicket by looking over his front shoulder. In the front on action, the back foot lands pointing down the pitch and the bowler aims at the wicket by looking inside the line of his front arm. Many bowlers operate with a \"mid-way\" action with the back foot landing at roughly 45 degrees and the upper body aligned somewhere between side on and front on. This differs from a \"mixed\" action, which mixes distinct elements of both side on and front on actions, and is generally discouraged amongst young bowlers as it can lead to problems in later life due to the twisting of the back inherent in the action.\nGoals of bowling.\nIn a game of cricket, the ultimate priority of the fielding side is to restrict the total number of runs scored by the batting side, and the actions of the bowlers will be fundamental to achieving this objective. The primary means of achieving this is by dismissing the batting side by getting all ten of the opposition wickets as quickly as possible. A secondary objective will be to keep the batting side's run rate as low as possible. In fact, in most forms of cricket, the twin aims of the fielding side are targeted concurrently, as the achievement of one aim tends to have a positive effect upon the other. Taking regular opposition wickets will remove the better batters from the crease, typically leading to a slowing of the scoring rate. Conversely, slowing the scoring rate can put additional pressure on the batters and force them into taking extra risks, which will often lead to wickets.\nDepending upon the format of the match, these two strategies will be given different weights. In an unlimited, timed or declaration match, the main aim of the bowling attack will be to take wickets, so attacking bowling and fielding strategies will be used. In a limited overs match, this aim will also be supplemented by the secondary need to prevent the batting side from scoring quickly, so more defensive strategies will be used. In general, the shorter the number of overs per side, the more priority will be given to this secondary target of maintaining a low run-rate. It is also highly probable that the need for attacking or defensive strategies can switch frequently as a cricket match progresses. It is the sign of a good cricket captain to be able to tell which strategy is most appropriate in any set of circumstances and the best way of implementing it.\nBowling tactics.\nThe simultaneous twin objectives of bowling are to take wickets and prevent run scoring opportunities. Both objectives are achieved through the underlying aim of bowling the ball in such a way that the batter is unable to connect with the ball in the middle of the bat and control its movement after contact. There are three distinct means of achieving this aim: by bowling the ball on a good line and length, by bowling with sufficient pace that the batter struggles to react to the delivery, or by bowling the ball in such a way that it has lateral movement as it approaches the batter, either in the air or off the ground. A good bowler may be able to combine two of these skills, a truly great bowler may be able to combine all three.\nLine and length.\nThe fundamental skill of bowling on a good length incorporates the ability to pitch the ball such a distance from the batter that he is unable to move forward and drive the ball on the half volley, and is also unable to step back and play the ball on the back foot. This removes many of the batter's attacking options, and also increases the probability of misjudging a delivery and losing the wicket. A good length delivery is one in which the ball has had sufficient time to move far enough off the pitch to beat the bat but the batter has not had time to react to the movement and adjust the shot. The faster the bowler and the greater the movement he is able to generate, the larger the area of the pitch that can be designated an effective \"good\" length.\nOther areas of the pitch may also often be used as a variation to a good length delivery. Primarily these are the yorker, in which the ball is bowled directly at the batter's feet as a surprise delivery intended to dismiss the batter bowled, and the bouncer in which the ball is bowled on such a short length that it rises towards the batter's throat or head as a means of physical intimidation. But the height of an attempted yorker or full toss must not be higher than the batter's waist, or else it will be called a no-ball beamer, which could have bowlers banned from the match.\nThe line a bowler chooses to bowl will depend on several factors: the movement he is generating on the ball, the shots the batter is able to play, and the field the captain has set. The two most common tactics are to either bowl directly at the stumps, or to bowl 3 inches to 6 inches outside the line of off stump. Bowling at the stumps is an attacking tactic with the intention of dismissing the batter bowled or lbw. It can also be used as a defensive tactic, as the batter will feel less able to play risky shots knowing that he will be dismissed should he miss the ball. Bowling outside off stump is known as \"the corridor of uncertainty\". When done well, this line may confuse the batter into whether to defend the ball or leave it, and may tempt him to play away from his body with his head not in line with the ball. The main aim of this tactic is to dismiss the batter caught by the wicketkeeper or in the slips. Other bowling variations, such as bowling wide of off stump or bowling at leg stump are generally seen as negative and defensive tactics.\nSome different types of bowling tactic:\nPace and movement.\nOther than the ability to land the ball on a strategically optimum line and length, the main weapons of the bowler are his ability to move the ball sideways as it approaches the batter and his ability to deliver the ball at a high velocity.\nThe velocities of cricket bowlers vary between . In professional cricket, a bowler in the 40\u201360\u00a0mph range would be said to be a slow bowler, in the 60\u201380\u00a0mph range a medium pace bowler, and a bowler 80\u00a0mph+ a fast bowler. In the amateur game, these distinctions would be approximately 10\u00a0mph slower. Many professional fast bowlers are able to reach speeds of over 85\u00a0mph, with a handful of bowlers in the world able to bowl at 95\u00a0mph+. The ability to react to a cricket ball travelling at 85\u00a0mph is a skill that only professional and high level amateur cricketers possess. The pace of a bowler not only challenges the reaction speed of the batter, but also his physical courage. Fast bowlers are able to exploit this by bowling bouncers, either regularly or as an occasional surprise delivery.\nBowlers are also able to get the ball to move sideways by using either \"spin\" or \"swing\". Adding a spin to a cricket ball will make it deviate due to the Magnus effect in its flight (like a slider in baseball), and then produce sideways movement off the ground. Swing is obtained by using air pressure differences caused by angling the seam of the cricket ball to produce a lateral movement in the air. Fast bowlers will generally only use swing to obtain movement, but medium pace and slow bowlers will often use a combination of the two. The intention is that in creating movement in the delivery, the batter will misjudge the line of the ball as it arrives, causing him to miss it entirely, in which case he may be dismissed bowled or lbw, or miss-hit it, in which case he may be out caught.\nTo avoid becoming predictable, a bowler will typically bowl a variety of different deliveries with different combinations of pace and movement. A tactically astute bowler may be able to spot a potential weakness in a batter that a particular delivery may be able to exploit. Bowlers will often also bowl deliveries in preplanned sets, with the intention of dismissing the batter with the final delivery in the set. This is known as \"setting a trap\" for the batter. batters and bowlers will often also engage in a game of \"cat and mouse\", in which the bowler varies his tactics to try and trap and dismiss the batter, but the batter also keeps adjusting his tactics in response.\nLimited overs.\nIn limited overs cricket, there is a limitation on the number of overs each bowler can bowl. This number depends on the match length, and is usually 20% of the total overs in the innings. For example, the usual limit for twenty-over cricket is four overs per bowler, for forty-over cricket eight per bowler and for fifty-over cricket ten per bowler. There is, however, no limit on the number of overs each bowler may bowl in first-class cricket matches, except that no two overs can be bowled consecutively thus restricting any one bowler from a maximum of 50% (plus 1 over) of each innings total. The rule also applies in terms of breaks within a Test innings (Drinks, Lunch and Tea breaks, end of day and beginning of next day). The rule can only be broken if one finishes the end of the previous match starts the next match.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51879", "revid": "44144402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51879", "title": "Gamal Abdel Nasser", "text": "President of Egypt from 1956 to 1970\nGamal Abdel Nasser Hussein (15 January 1918 \u2013 28 September 1970) was an Egyptian military officer and revolutionary who served as the second president of Egypt from 1954 until his death in 1970. Nasser led the Egyptian revolution of 1952 and introduced far-reaching land reforms the following year. Following a 1954 assassination attempt on his life by a Muslim Brotherhood member, he cracked down on the organization, put President Mohamed Naguib under house arrest and assumed executive office. He was formally elected president in June 1956.\nNasser's popularity in Egypt and the Arab world skyrocketed after his nationalization of the Suez Canal and his political victory in the subsequent Suez Crisis, known in Egypt as the \"Tripartite Aggression\". Calls for pan-Arab unity under his leadership increased, culminating with the formation of the United Arab Republic with Syria from 1958 to 1961. In 1962, Nasser began a series of major socialist measures and modernization reforms in Egypt. Despite setbacks to his pan-Arabist cause, by 1963 Nasser's supporters gained power in several Arab countries, but he became embroiled in the North Yemen Civil War, and eventually the much larger Arab Cold War. He began his second presidential term in March 1965 after his political opponents were banned from running. Following Egypt's defeat by Israel in the Six-Day War of 1967, Nasser resigned, but he returned to office after popular demonstrations called for his reinstatement. By 1968, Nasser had appointed himself prime minister, launched the War of Attrition to regain the Israeli-occupied Sinai Peninsula, begun a process of depoliticizing the military, and issued a set of political liberalization reforms. After the conclusion of the 1970 Arab League summit, Nasser suffered a heart attack and died. His funeral in Cairo drew five to six million mourners, and prompted an outpouring of grief across the Arab world.\nNasser remains an iconic figure in the Arab world, particularly for his strides towards social justice and Arab unity, his modernization policies, and his anti-imperialist efforts. His presidency also encouraged and coincided with an Egyptian cultural boom, and the launching of large industrial projects, including the Aswan Dam, and Helwan city. Nasser's detractors criticize his authoritarianism, his human rights violations, his antisemitism, and the dominance of the military over civil institutions that characterised his tenure, establishing a pattern of military and dictatorial rule in Egypt which has persisted, nearly uninterrupted, to the present day.\nEarly life.\nGamal Abdel Nasser Hussein was born in Bakos, Alexandria, Egypt on 15 January 1918, a year before the tumultuous events of the Egyptian Revolution of 1919. Nasser's father, Abdel Nasser Hussein, was a postal worker born in Beni Mur in Upper Egypt, and raised in Alexandria. His mother Fahima Hammad was born in the village of Bani Murr, the daughter of the Alexandrian coal trader. Her family came from Mallawi, el-Minya. His parents had married in 1917. Nasser had two brothers, Izz al-Arab and al-Leithi. Nasser's biographers Robert Stephens and Said Aburish wrote that Nasser's family believed strongly in the \"Arab notion of glory\", since the name of Nasser's brother, Izz al-Arab, translates to \"Glory of the Arabs\".\nNasser's family traveled frequently due to his father's work. In 1921, they moved to Asyut and, in 1923, to Khatatba, where Nasser's father ran a post office. Nasser attended a primary school for the children of railway employees until 1924, when he was sent to live with his paternal uncle in Cairo, and to attend the Nahhasin elementary school.\nNasser exchanged letters with his mother and visited her on holidays. He stopped receiving messages at the end of April 1926. Upon returning to Khatatba, he learned that his mother had died after giving birth to his third brother, Shawki, and that his family had kept the news from him. Nasser later stated that \"losing her this way was a shock so deep that time failed to remedy\". He adored his mother and the injury of her death deepened when his father remarried before the year's end.\nIn 1928, Nasser went to Alexandria to live with his maternal grandfather and attend the city's Attarin elementary school. He left in 1929 for a private boarding school in Helwan, and later returned to Alexandria to enter the Ras el-Tin secondary school and to join his father, who was working for the city's postal service. It was in Alexandria that Nasser became involved in political activism. After witnessing clashes between protesters and police in Manshia Square, he joined the demonstration without being aware of its purpose. The protest, organized by the ultranationalist Young Egypt Society, called for the end of colonialism in Egypt in the wake of the 1923 Egyptian constitution's annulment by Prime Minister Isma'il Sidqi. Nasser was arrested and detained for a night before his father bailed him out. Nasser joined the paramilitary wing of the group, known as the Green Shirts, for a brief period in 1934. His association with the group and active role in student demonstrations during this period \"imbued him with a fierce Egyptian nationalism\", according to the historian James Jankowski.\nWhen his father was transferred to Cairo in 1933, Nasser joined him and attended al-Nahda al-Masria school. He took up acting in school plays for a brief period and wrote articles for the school's paper, including a piece on French philosopher Voltaire titled \"Voltaire, the Man of Freedom\". On 13 November 1935, Nasser led a student demonstration against British rule, protesting against a statement made four days prior by UK foreign minister Samuel Hoare that rejected prospects for the 1923 Constitution's restoration. Two protesters were killed and Nasser received a graze to the head from a policeman's bullet. The incident garnered his first mention in the press: the nationalist newspaper \"Al Gihad\" reported that Nasser led the protest and was among the wounded. On 12 December, the new king, Farouk, issued a decree restoring the constitution.\nNasser's involvement in political activity increased throughout his school years, such that he only attended 45 days of classes during his last year of secondary school. Despite it having the almost unanimous backing of Egypt's political forces, Nasser strongly objected to the 1936 Anglo-Egyptian Treaty because it stipulated the continued presence of British military bases in the country. Nonetheless, political unrest in Egypt declined significantly and Nasser resumed his studies at al-Nahda, where he received his leaving certificate later that year.\nEarly influences.\nAburish asserts that Nasser was not distressed by his frequent relocations, which broadened his horizons and showed him Egyptian society's class divisions. His own social status was well below the wealthy Egyptian elite, and his discontent with those born into wealth and power grew throughout his lifetime. Nasser spent most of his spare time reading, particularly in 1933, when he lived near the National Library of Egypt. He read the Qur'an, the sayings of Muhammad, the lives of the Sahaba (Muhammad's companions), the biographies of nationalist leaders Napoleon, Atat\u00fcrk, Otto von Bismarck and Garibaldi, and the autobiography of Winston Churchill.\nNasser was greatly influenced by Egyptian nationalism, as espoused by politician Mustafa Kamel, poet Ahmed Shawqi, and his anti-colonialist instructor at the Royal Military Academy, Aziz al-Masri, to whom Nasser expressed his gratitude in a 1961 newspaper interview. He was especially influenced by Egyptian writer Tawfiq al-Hakim's novel \"Return of the Spirit\", in which al-Hakim wrote that the Egyptian people were only in need of a \"man in whom all their feelings and desires will be represented, and who will be for them a symbol of their objective\". Nasser later credited the novel as his inspiration to launch the coup d'\u00e9tat that began the Egyptian Revolution of 1952.\nMilitary career.\nIn 1937, Nasser applied to the Royal Military Academy for army officer training, but his police record of anti-government protest initially blocked his entry. Disappointed, he enrolled in the law school at King Fuad University, but quit after one semester to reapply to the Military Academy. From his readings, Nasser, who frequently spoke of \"dignity, glory, and freedom\" in his youth, became enchanted with the stories of national liberators and heroic conquerors; a military career became his chief priority.\nConvinced that he needed a \"wasta\", or an influential intermediary to promote his application above the others, Nasser managed to secure a meeting with Under-Secretary of War Ibrahim Khairy Pasha, the person responsible for the academy's selection board, and requested his help. Khairy Pasha agreed and sponsored Nasser's second application, which was accepted in late 1937. Nasser focused on his military career from then on, and had little contact with his family. At the academy, he met Abdel Hakim Amer and Anwar Sadat, both of whom became important aides during his presidency. After graduating from the academy in July 1938, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in the infantry, and posted to Mankabad. It was here that Nasser and his closest comrades, including Sadat and Amer, first discussed their dissatisfaction at widespread corruption in the country and their desire to topple the monarchy. Sadat would later write that because of his \"energy, clear-thinking, and balanced judgement\", Nasser emerged as the group's natural leader.\nIn 1941, Nasser was posted to Khartoum, Sudan, which was part of Egypt at the time. Nasser returned to Egypt in September 1942 after a brief stay in Sudan, then secured a position as an instructor in the Cairo Royal Military Academy in May 1943. In February 1942, in what became known as the Abdeen Palace Incident, British troops surrounded Farouk's palace to compel him to dismiss Prime Minister Hussein Sirri Pasha in favour of Mostafa El-Nahas, whom Britain felt would be more sympathetic to its war effort. The British ambassador, Miles Lampson, marched into the palace and confronted the King, stating that he would be forced to abdicate and sent into exile unless he dismissed Pasha. Ultimately, Farouk submitted, and appointed El-Nahas as Prime Minister. Nasser saw the incident as a blatant violation of Egyptian sovereignty and wrote, \"I am ashamed that our army has not reacted against this attack\", and wished for \"calamity\" to overtake the British. Nasser was accepted into the General Staff College later that year. He began to form a group of young military officers with strong nationalist sentiments who supported some form of revolution. Nasser stayed in touch with the group's members primarily through Amer, who continued to seek out interested officers within the Egyptian Armed Force's various branches and presented Nasser with a complete file on each of them.\n1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War.\nNasser's first battlefield experience was in Palestine during the 1948 Arab\u2013Israeli War. He initially volunteered to serve with the Arab Higher Committee (AHC) led by Mohammad Amin al-Husayni. Nasser met with and impressed al-Husayni, but was ultimately refused entry to the AHC's forces by the Egyptian government for reasons that were unclear.\nIn May 1948, following the British withdrawal, King Farouk sent the Egyptian army into Israel, with Nasser serving as a staff officer of the 6th Infantry Battalion. During the war, he wrote of the Egyptian army's unpreparedness, saying \"our soldiers were dashed against fortifications\". Nasser was deputy commander of the Egyptian forces that secured the Faluja pocket (commanded by Said Taha Bey nicknamed the \"Sudanese tiger\" by the Israelis). On 12 July, he was lightly wounded in the fighting. By August, his brigade was surrounded by the Israeli Army. Appeals for help from Transjordan's Arab Legion went unheeded, but the brigade refused to surrender. Negotiations between Israel and Egypt finally resulted in the ceding of Faluja to Israel. According to veteran journalist Eric Margolis, the defenders of Faluja, \"including young army officer Gamal Abdel Nasser, became national heroes\" for enduring Israeli bombardment while isolated from their command.\nStill stationed after the war in the Faluja enclave, Nasser agreed to an Israeli request to identify 67 killed soldiers of the \"religious platoon\". The expedition was led by Rabbi Shlomo Goren and Nasser personally accompanied him, ordering the Egyptian soldiers to stand at attention. They spoke briefly, and according to Goren, after learning what the square phylacteries found with the soldiers were, Nasser told him that he \"now understands their courageous stand\". During an interview on Israeli TV in 1971, Rabbi Goren claimed the two agreed to meet again when the time of peace comes.\nThe Egyptian singer Umm Kulthum hosted a public celebration for the officers' return despite reservations from the royal government, which had been under British pressure to prevent the reception. The apparent difference in attitude between the government and the general public increased Nasser's determination to topple the monarchy. Nasser had also felt bitter that his brigade had not been relieved despite the resilience it displayed. He started writing his book \"Philosophy of the Revolution\" during the siege.\nAfter the war, Nasser returned to his role as an instructor at the Royal Military Academy. He sent emissaries to forge an alliance with the Muslim Brotherhood in October 1948, but soon concluded that the religious agenda of the Brotherhood was not compatible with his nationalism. From then on, Nasser prevented the Brotherhood's influence over his cadres' activities without severing ties with the organization. Nasser was sent as a member of the Egyptian delegation to Rhodes in February 1949 to negotiate a formal armistice with Israel, and reportedly considered the terms to be humiliating, particularly because the Israelis were able to easily occupy the Eilat region while negotiating with the Arabs in March.\nRevolution.\nFree Officers.\nNasser's return to Egypt coincided with Husni al-Za'im's Syrian coup d'\u00e9tat. Its success and evident popular support among the Syrian people encouraged Nasser's revolutionary pursuits. Soon after his return, he was summoned and interrogated by Prime Minister Ibrahim Abdel Hadi regarding suspicions that he was forming a secret group of dissenting officers. According to secondhand reports, Nasser convincingly denied the allegations. Abdel Hadi was also hesitant to take drastic measures against the army, especially in front of its chief of staff, who was present during the interrogation, and subsequently released Nasser. The interrogation pushed Nasser to speed up his group's activities.\nAfter 1949, the group adopted the name \"Association of Free Officers\" and advocated \"little else but freedom and the restoration of their country's dignity\". Nasser organized the Free Officers' founding committee, which eventually comprised fourteen men from different social and political backgrounds, including representation from Young Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood, the Egyptian Communist Party, and the aristocracy. Nasser was unanimously elected chairman of the organization.\nIn the 1950 parliamentary elections, the Wafd Party of el-Nahhas gained a victory\u2014mostly due to the absence of the Muslim Brotherhood, which boycotted the elections\u2014and was perceived as a threat by the Free Officers as the Wafd had campaigned on demands similar to their own. Accusations of corruption against Wafd politicians began to surface, however, breeding an atmosphere of rumor and suspicion that consequently brought the Free Officers to the forefront of Egyptian politics. By then, the organization had expanded to around ninety members. According to Khaled Mohieddin, \"nobody knew all of them and where they belonged in the hierarchy except Nasser\". Nasser felt that the Free Officers were not ready to move against the government and, for nearly two years, he did little beyond officer recruitment and underground news bulletins.\nOn 11 October 1951, the Wafd government abrogated the unpopular Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936 by which the United Kingdom had the right to maintain its military forces in the Suez Canal Zone. The popularity of this move, as well as that of government-sponsored guerrilla attacks against the British, put pressure on Nasser to act. According to Sadat, Nasser decided to wage \"a large scale assassination campaign\". In January 1952, he and Hassan Ibrahim attempted to kill the royalist general Hussein Sirri Amer by firing their submachine guns at his car as he drove through the streets of Cairo. Instead of killing the general, the attackers wounded an innocent female passerby. Nasser recalled that her wails \"haunted\" him and firmly dissuaded him from undertaking similar actions in the future.\nSirri Amer was close to King Farouk, and was nominated for the presidency of the Officer's Club\u2014normally a ceremonial office\u2014with the king's backing. Nasser was determined to establish the independence of the army from the monarchy, and with Amer as the intercessor, resolved to field a nominee for the Free Officers. They selected Mohamed Naguib, a popular general who had offered his resignation to Farouk in 1942 over British high-handedness and was wounded three times in the Palestine War. Naguib won overwhelmingly and the Free Officers, through their connection with a leading Egyptian daily, \"al-Misri\", publicized his victory while praising the nationalistic spirit of the army.\nRevolution of 1952.\nOn 25 January 1952, at a time of growing fedayeen attacks on British forces occupying the Suez Canal Zone, some 7,000 British soldiers attacked the main police station in the Canal city Ismailia. In the ensuing battle, which lasted two hours, 50 Egyptian policeman were killed, sparking outrage across Egypt, and the Cairo Fire riots which left 76 people dead. Afterwards, Nasser published a simple six-point program in \"Rose al-Y\u016bsuf\" to dismantle feudalism and British influence in Egypt. In May, Nasser received word that Farouk knew the names of the Free Officers and intended to arrest them; he immediately entrusted Free Officer Zakaria Mohieddin with the task of planning the government takeover by army units loyal to the association.\nThe Free Officers' intention was not to install themselves in government, but to re-establish a parliamentary democracy. Nasser did not believe that a low-ranking officer like himself (a lieutenant colonel) would be accepted by the Egyptian people, and so selected General Naguib to be his \"boss\" and lead the coup in name. The revolution they had long sought was launched on 22 July and was declared a success the next day. The Free Officers seized control of all government buildings, radio stations, and police stations, as well as army headquarters in Cairo. While many of the rebel officers were leading their units, Nasser donned civilian clothing to avoid detection by royalists and moved around Cairo monitoring the situation. In a move to stave off foreign intervention two days before the revolution, Nasser had notified the American and British governments of his intentions, and both had agreed not to aid Farouk. Under pressure from the Americans, Nasser had agreed to exile the deposed king with an honorary ceremony.\nOn 18 June 1953, the monarchy was abolished and the Republic of Egypt declared, with Naguib as its first president. According to Aburish, after assuming power, Nasser and the Free Officers expected to become the \"guardians of the people's interests\" against the monarchy and the pasha class while leaving the day-to-day tasks of government to civilians. They asked former prime minister Ali Maher to accept reappointment to his previous position, and to form an all-civilian cabinet. The Free Officers then governed as the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) with Naguib as chairman and Nasser as vice-chairman. Relations between the RCC and Maher grew tense, however, as the latter viewed many of Nasser's schemes\u2014agrarian reform, abolition of the monarchy, reorganization of political parties\u2014as too radical, culminating in Maher's resignation on 7 September. Naguib assumed the additional role of prime minister, and Nasser that of deputy prime minister. In September, the Agrarian Reform Law was put into effect. In Nasser's eyes, this law gave the RCC its own identity and transformed the coup into a revolution.\nPreceding the reform law, in August 1952, communist-led riots broke out at textile factories in Kafr el-Dawwar, leading to a clash with the army that left nine people dead. While most of the RCC insisted on executing the riot's two ringleaders, Nasser opposed this. Nonetheless, the sentences were carried out. The Muslim Brotherhood supported the RCC, and after Naguib's assumption of power, demanded four ministerial portfolios in the new cabinet. Nasser turned down their demands and instead hoped to co-opt the Brotherhood by giving two of its members, who were willing to serve officially as independents, minor ministerial posts.\nRoad to presidency.\nDisputes with Naguib.\nIn January 1953, Nasser overcame opposition from Naguib and banned all political parties, creating a one-party system under the Liberation Rally, a loosely structured movement whose chief task was to organize pro-RCC rallies and lectures, with Nasser its secretary-general. Despite the dissolution order, Nasser was the only RCC member who still favored holding parliamentary elections, according to his fellow officer Abdel Latif Boghdadi. Although outvoted, he still advocated holding elections by 1956. In March 1953, Nasser led the Egyptian delegation negotiating a British withdrawal from the Suez Canal.\nWhen Naguib began showing signs of independence from Nasser by distancing himself from the RCC's land reform decrees and drawing closer to Egypt's established political forces, namely the Wafd and the Brotherhood, Nasser resolved to depose him. In June, Nasser took control of the interior ministry post from Naguib loyalist Sulayman Hafez, and pressured Naguib to conclude the abolition of the monarchy.\nOn 25 February 1954, Naguib announced his resignation after the RCC held an official meeting without his presence two days prior. On 26 February, Nasser accepted the resignation, put Naguib under house arrest, and the RCC proclaimed Nasser as both RCC chairman and prime minister. As Naguib intended, a mutiny immediately followed, demanding Naguib's reinstatement and the RCC's dissolution. While visiting the striking officers at Military Headquarters (GHQ) to call for the mutiny's end, Nasser was initially intimidated into accepting their demands. However, on 27 February, Nasser's supporters in the army launched a raid on the GHQ, ending the mutiny. Later that day, hundreds of thousands of protesters, mainly belonging to the Brotherhood, called for Naguib's return and Nasser's imprisonment. In response, a sizable group within the RCC, led by Khaled Mohieddin, demanded Naguib's release and return to the presidency. Nasser acquiesced, but delayed Naguib's reinstatement until 4 March, allowing him to promote Amer to Commander of the Armed Forces\u2014a position formerly occupied by Naguib.\nOn 5 March, Nasser's security coterie arrested thousands of participants in the uprising. As a ruse to rally opposition against a return to the pre-1952 order, the RCC decreed an end to restrictions on monarchy-era parties and the Free Officers' withdrawal from politics. The RCC succeeded in provoking the beneficiaries of the revolution, namely the workers, peasants, and petty bourgeois, to oppose the decrees, with one million transport workers launching a strike and thousands of peasants entering Cairo in protest in late March. Naguib sought to crack down on the protesters, but his requests were rebuffed by the heads of the security forces. On 29 March, Nasser announced the decrees' revocation in response to the \"impulse of the street\". Between April and June, hundreds of Naguib's supporters in the military were either arrested or dismissed, and Mohieddin was informally exiled to Switzerland to represent the RCC abroad. King Saud of Saudi Arabia attempted to mend relations between Nasser and Naguib, but to no avail.\nAssuming chairmanship of RCC.\nOn 26 October 1954, Muslim Brotherhood member Mahmoud Abdel-Latif attempted to assassinate Nasser while he was delivering a speech in Alexandria, broadcast to the Arab world by radio, to celebrate the British military withdrawal. The gunman was away from him and fired eight shots, but all missed Nasser. Panic broke out in the mass audience, but Nasser maintained his posture and raised his voice to appeal for calm. With great emotion he exclaimed the following:\nMy countrymen, my blood spills for you and for Egypt. I will live for your sake and die for the sake of your freedom and honor. Let them kill me; it does not concern me so long as I have instilled pride, honor, and freedom in you. If Gamal Abdel Nasser should die, each of you shall be Gamal Abdel Nasser ... Gamal Abdel Nasser is of you and from you and he is willing to sacrifice his life for the nation.\nThe crowd roared in approval and Arab audiences were electrified. The assassination attempt backfired, quickly playing into Nasser's hands. Upon returning to Cairo, he ordered one of the largest political crackdowns in the modern history of Egypt, with the arrests of thousands of dissenters, mostly members of the Brotherhood, but also communists, and the dismissal of 140 officers loyal to Naguib. Eight Brotherhood leaders were sentenced to death, although the sentence of its chief ideologue, Sayyid Qutb, was commuted to a 15-year imprisonment. Naguib was removed from the presidency and put under house arrest, but was never tried or sentenced, and no one in the army rose to defend him. With his rivals neutralized, Nasser became the undisputed leader of Egypt.\nNasser's street following was still too small to sustain his plans for reform and to secure him in office. To promote himself and the Liberation Rally, he gave speeches in a cross-country tour, and imposed controls over the country's press by decreeing that all publications had to be approved by the party to prevent \"sedition\". Both Umm Kulthum and Abdel Halim Hafez, the leading Arab singers of the era, performed songs praising Nasser's nationalism. Others produced plays denigrating his political opponents. According to his associates, Nasser orchestrated the campaign himself. Arab nationalist terms such \"Arab homeland\" and \"Arab nation\" frequently began appearing in his speeches in 1954\u201355, whereas prior he would refer to the Arab \"peoples\" or the \"Arab region\". In January 1955, the RCC appointed him as their president, pending national elections.\nNasser made secret contacts with Israel in 1954\u201355, but determined that peace with Israel would be impossible, considering it an \"expansionist state that viewed the Arabs with disdain\". On 28 February 1955, Israeli troops attacked the Egyptian-held Gaza Strip with the stated aim of suppressing Palestinian fedayeen raids. Nasser did not feel that the Egyptian Army was ready for a confrontation and did not retaliate militarily. His failure to respond to Israeli military action demonstrated the ineffectiveness of his armed forces and constituted a blow to his growing popularity. Nasser subsequently ordered the tightening of the blockade on Israeli shipping through the Straits of Tiran and restricted the use of airspace over the Gulf of Aqaba by Israeli aircraft in early September. The Israelis re-militarized the al-Auja Demilitarized Zone on the Egyptian border on 21 September.\nSimultaneous with Israel's February raid, the Baghdad Pact was formed between some regional allies of the UK. Nasser considered the Baghdad Pact a threat to his efforts to eliminate British military influence in the Middle East, and a mechanism to undermine the Arab League and \"perpetuate [Arab] subservience to Zionism and [Western] imperialism\". Nasser felt that if he was to maintain Egypt's regional leadership position he needed to acquire modern weaponry to arm his military. When it became apparent to him that Western countries would not supply Egypt under acceptable financial and military terms, Nasser turned to the Eastern Bloc and concluded a armaments agreement with Czechoslovakia on 27 September. Through the Czechoslovakian arms deal, the balance of power between Egypt and Israel was more or less equalized and Nasser's role as the Arab leader defying the West was enhanced. The arms deal led to increased unease in the United States, where Nasser was compared to Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler, causing it to strengthen its relations with Israel and become more wary of Egypt as a result.\nAdoption of neutralism.\nAt the Bandung Conference in Indonesia in late April 1955, Nasser was treated as the leading representative of the Arab countries and was one of the most popular figures at the summit. He had paid earlier visits to Pakistan (9 April), India (14 April), Burma, and Afghanistan on the way to Bandung, and previously cemented a treaty of friendship with India in Cairo on 6 April, strengthening Egyptian\u2013Indian relations on the international policy and economic development fronts.\nNasser mediated discussions between the pro-Western, pro-Soviet, and neutralist conference factions over the composition of the \"Final Communique\" addressing colonialism in Africa and Asia and the fostering of global peace amid the Cold War between the West and the Soviet Union. At Bandung, Nasser sought a proclamation for the avoidance of international defense alliances, support for the independence of Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco from French rule, support for the Palestinian right of return, and the implementation of UN resolutions regarding the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. He succeeded in lobbying the attendees to pass resolutions on each of these issues, notably securing the strong support of China and India.\nFollowing Bandung, Nasser officially adopted the \"positive neutralism\" of Yugoslavian president Josip Broz Tito and Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru as a principal theme of Egyptian foreign policy regarding the Cold War. Nasser was welcomed by large crowds of people lining the streets of Cairo on his return to Egypt on 2 May and was widely heralded in the press for his achievements and leadership in the conference. Consequently, Nasser's prestige was greatly boosted, as was his self-confidence and image.\n1956 constitution and presidency.\nWith his domestic position considerably strengthened, Nasser was able to secure primacy over his RCC colleagues and gained relatively unchallenged decision-making authority, particularly over foreign policy.\nIn January 1956, the new Constitution of Egypt was drafted, entailing the establishment of a single-party system under the National Union (NU), a movement Nasser described as the \"cadre through which we will realize our revolution\". The NU was a reconfiguration of the Liberation Rally, which Nasser determined had failed in generating mass public participation. In the new movement, Nasser attempted to incorporate more citizens, approved by local-level party committees, in order to solidify popular backing for his government. The NU would select a nominee for the presidential election whose name would be provided for public approval.\nNasser's nomination for the post and the new constitution were put to public referendum on 23 June and each was approved by an overwhelming majority. A 350-member National Assembly was established, elections for which were held in July 1957. Nasser had ultimate approval over all the candidates. The constitution granted women's suffrage, prohibited discrimination by sex, and entailed special protection for women in the workplace. Coinciding with the new constitution and Nasser's presidency, the RCC dissolved itself and its members resigned their military commissions as part of the transition to civilian rule. During the deliberations surrounding the establishment of a new government, Nasser began a process of sidelining his rivals among the original Free Officers, while elevating his closest allies to high-ranking positions in the cabinet.\nNationalization of the Suez Canal Company.\nAfter the three-year transition period ended with Nasser's official assumption of power, his domestic and independent foreign policies increasingly collided with the regional interests of the UK and France. The latter condemned his strong support for Algerian independence, and the UK's Eden government was agitated by Nasser's campaign against the Baghdad Pact. In addition, Nasser's adherence to neutralism regarding the Cold War, recognition of communist China, and arms deal with the Eastern bloc alienated the United States. On 19 July 1956, the US and UK abruptly withdrew their offer to finance construction of the Aswan Dam, citing concerns that Egypt's economy would be overwhelmed by the project.\nNasser was informed of the British\u2013American withdrawal in a news statement while aboard a plane returning to Cairo from Belgrade, and took great offense. Although ideas for nationalizing the Suez Canal Company were in the offing after the UK agreed to withdraw its military from Egypt in 1954 (the last British troops left on 13 June 1956), journalist Mohamed Hassanein Heikal asserts that Nasser made the final decision to nationalize the company that operated the waterway between 19 and 20 July. Nasser himself would later state that he decided on 23 July, after studying the issue and deliberating with some of his advisers from the dissolved RCC, namely Boghdadi and technical specialist Mahmoud Younis, beginning on 21 July. The rest of the RCC's former members were informed of the decision on 24 July, while the bulk of the cabinet was unaware of the nationalization scheme until hours before Nasser publicly announced it. According to Ramadan, Nasser's decision to nationalize the canal was a solitary decision, taken without consultation.\nOn 26 July 1956, Nasser gave a speech in Alexandria announcing the nationalization of the Suez Canal Company as a means to fund the Aswan Dam project in light of the British\u2013American withdrawal. In the speech, he denounced British imperialism in Egypt and British control over the canal company's profits, and upheld that the Egyptian people had a right to sovereignty over the waterway, especially since \"120,000 Egyptians had died building it\". The motion was technically in breach of the international agreement he had signed with the UK on 19 October 1954, although he ensured that all existing stockholders would be paid off.\nThe nationalization announcement was greeted very emotionally by the audience and, throughout the Arab world, thousands entered the streets shouting slogans of support. US ambassador Henry A. Byroade stated, \"I cannot overemphasize [the] popularity of the Canal Company nationalization within Egypt, even among Nasser's enemies.\" Egyptian political scientist Mahmoud Hamad wrote that, prior to 1956, Nasser had consolidated control over Egypt's military and civilian bureaucracies, but it was only after the canal's nationalization that he gained near-total popular legitimacy and firmly established himself as the \"charismatic leader\" and \"spokesman for the masses not only in Egypt, but all over the Third World\". According to Aburish, this was Nasser's largest pan-Arab triumph at the time and \"soon his pictures were to be found in the tents of Yemen, the souks of Marrakesh, and the posh villas of Syria\". The official reason given for the nationalization was that funds from the canal would be used for the construction of the dam in Aswan. That same day, Egypt closed the canal to Israeli shipping.\nSuez Crisis.\nFrance and the UK, the largest shareholders in the Suez Canal Company, saw its nationalization as yet another hostile measure aimed at them by the Egyptian government. Nasser was aware that the canal's nationalization would instigate an international crisis and believed the prospect of military intervention by the two countries was 80 percent likely. Nasser dismissed their claims, and believed that the UK would not be able to intervene militarily for at least two months after the announcement, and dismissed Israeli action as \"impossible\". In early October, the UN Security Council met on the matter of the canal's nationalization and adopted a resolution recognizing Egypt's right to control the canal as long as it continued to allow passage through it for foreign ships. According to Heikal, after this agreement, \"Nasser estimated that the danger of invasion had dropped to 10 percent\". Shortly thereafter, however, the UK, France, and Israel made a secret agreement to take over the Suez Canal, occupy the Suez Canal zone, and topple Nasser.\nOn 29 October 1956, Israeli forces crossed the Sinai Peninsula, overwhelmed Egyptian army posts, and quickly advanced to their objectives. Two days later, British and French planes bombarded Egyptian airfields in the canal zone. Nasser ordered the military's high command to withdraw the Egyptian Army from Sinai to bolster the canal's defenses. Moreover, he feared that if the armored corps was dispatched to confront the Israeli invading force and the British and French subsequently landed in the canal city of Port Said, Egyptian armor in the Sinai would be cut off from the canal and destroyed by the combined tripartite forces. Amer strongly disagreed, insisting that Egyptian tanks meet the Israelis in battle. The two had a heated exchange on 3 November, and Amer conceded. Nasser also ordered blockage of the canal by sinking or otherwise disabling forty-nine ships at its entrance.\nDespite the commanded withdrawal of Egyptian troops, about 2,000 Egyptian soldiers were killed during engagement with Israeli forces, and some 5,000 Egyptian soldiers were captured by the Israeli Army. Amer and Salah Salem proposed requesting a ceasefire, with Salem further recommending that Nasser surrender himself to British forces. Nasser berated Amer and Salem, and vowed, \"Nobody is going to surrender.\" Nasser assumed military command. Despite the relative ease in which Sinai was occupied, Nasser's prestige at home and among Arabs was undamaged. To counterbalance the Egyptian Army's dismal performance, Nasser authorized the distribution of about 400,000 rifles to civilian volunteers and hundreds of militias were formed throughout Egypt, many led by Nasser's political opponents.\nIt was at Port Said that Nasser saw a confrontation with the invading forces as being the strategic and psychological focal point of Egypt's defense. A third infantry battalion and hundreds of national guardsmen were sent to the city as reinforcements, while two regular companies were dispatched to organize popular resistance. Nasser and Boghdadi traveled to the canal zone to boost the morale of the armed volunteers. According to Boghdadi's memoirs, Nasser described the Egyptian Army as \"shattered\" as he saw the wreckage of Egyptian military equipment en route. When British and French forces landed in Port Said on 5\u20136 November, its local militia put up a stiff resistance, resulting in street-to-street fighting. The Egyptian Army commander in the city was preparing to request terms for a ceasefire, but Nasser ordered him to desist. The British-French forces managed to largely secure the city by 7 November. Between 750 and 1,000 Egyptians were killed in the battle for Port Said.\nThe US Eisenhower administration condemned the tripartite invasion, and supported UN resolutions demanding withdrawal and a United Nations Emergency Force (UNEF) to be stationed in Sinai. Nasser commended Eisenhower, stating he played the \"greatest and most decisive role\" in stopping the \"tripartite conspiracy\". By the end of December, British and French forces had totally withdrawn from Egyptian territory, while Israel completed its withdrawal in March 1957 and released all Egyptian prisoners of war. As a result of the Suez Crisis, Nasser brought in a set of regulations imposing rigorous requirements for residency and citizenship as well as forced expulsions, mostly affecting British and French nationals and Jews with foreign nationality, as well as many Egyptian Jews. Some 25,000 Jews, almost half of the Jewish community, left in 1956, mainly for Israel, Europe, the United States and South America.\nAfter the fighting ended, Amer accused Nasser of provoking an unnecessary war and then blaming the military for the result. On 8 April, the canal was reopened, and Nasser's political position was enormously enhanced by the widely perceived failure of the invasion and attempt to topple him. British diplomat Anthony Nutting claimed the crisis \"established Nasser finally and completely\" as the \"rayyes\" (president) of Egypt.\nPan-Arabism and socialism.\nBy 1957, pan-Arabism had become the dominant ideology in the Arab world, and the average Arab citizen considered Nasser their undisputed leader. Historian Adeed Dawisha credited Nasser's status to his \"charisma, bolstered by his perceived victory in the Suez Crisis\". The Cairo-based Voice of the Arabs radio station spread Nasser's ideas of united Arab action throughout the Arabic-speaking world, so much so that historian Eugene Rogan wrote, \"Nasser conquered the Arab world by radio.\" Lebanese sympathizers of Nasser and the Egyptian embassy in Beirut\u2014the press center of the Arab world\u2014bought out Lebanese media outlets to further disseminate Nasser's ideals. Egypt also expanded its policy of secondment, dispatching thousands of high-skilled Egyptian professionals (usually politically active teachers) across the region. Nasser also enjoyed the support of Arab nationalist civilian and paramilitary organizations throughout the region. His followers were numerous and well-funded, but lacked any permanent structure and organization. They called themselves \"Nasserites\", despite Nasser's objection to the label (he preferred the term \"Arab nationalists\").\nIn January 1957, the US adopted the Eisenhower Doctrine and pledged to prevent the spread of communism and its perceived agents in the Middle East. Although Nasser was an opponent of communism in the region, his promotion of pan-Arabism was viewed as a threat by pro-Western states in the region. Eisenhower tried to isolate Nasser and reduce his regional influence by attempting to transform King Saud into a counterweight. Also in January, the elected Jordanian prime minister and Nasser supporter Sulayman al-Nabulsi brought Jordan into a military pact with Egypt, Syria, and Saudi Arabia.\nRelations between Nasser and King Hussein of Jordan deteriorated in April when Hussein implicated Nasser in two coup attempts against him\u2014although Nasser's involvement was never established\u2014and dissolved al-Nabulsi's cabinet. Nasser subsequently slammed Hussein on Cairo radio as being \"a tool of the imperialists\". Relations with King Saud also became antagonistic as the latter began to fear that Nasser's increasing popularity in Saudi Arabia was a genuine threat to the royal family's survival. Despite opposition from the governments of Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and Lebanon, Nasser maintained his prestige among their citizens and those of other Arab countries.\nBy the end of 1957, Nasser nationalized all remaining British and French assets in Egypt, including the tobacco, cement, pharmaceutical, and phosphate industries. When efforts to offer tax incentives and attract outside investments yielded no tangible results, he nationalized more companies and made them a part of his economic development organization. He stopped short of total government control: two-thirds of the economy was still in private hands. This effort achieved a measure of success, with increased agricultural production and investment in industrialization. Nasser initiated the Helwan steelworks, which subsequently became Egypt's largest enterprise, providing the country with product and tens of thousands of jobs. Nasser also decided to cooperate with the Soviet Union in the construction of the Aswan Dam to replace the withdrawal of US funds.\nUnited Arab Republic.\nDespite his popularity with the people of the Arab world, by mid-1957 his only regional ally was Syria. In September, Turkish troops massed along the Syrian border, giving credence to rumors that the Baghdad Pact countries were attempting to topple Syria's leftist government. Nasser sent a contingent force to Syria as a symbolic display of solidarity, further elevating his prestige in the Arab world, and particularly among Syrians.\nAs political instability grew in Syria, delegations from the country were sent to Nasser demanding immediate unification with Egypt. Nasser initially turned down the request, citing the two countries' incompatible political and economic systems, lack of contiguity, the Syrian military's record of intervention in politics, and the deep factionalism among Syria's political forces. However, in January 1958, a second Syrian delegation managed to convince Nasser of an impending communist takeover and a consequent slide to civil strife. Nasser subsequently opted for union, albeit on the condition that it would be a total political merger with him as its president, to which the delegates and Syrian president Shukri al-Quwatli agreed. On 1 February, the United Arab Republic (UAR) was proclaimed and, according to Dawisha, the Arab world reacted in \"stunned amazement, which quickly turned into uncontrolled euphoria.\" Nasser ordered a crackdown against Syrian communists, dismissing many of them from their governmental posts.\nOn a surprise visit to Damascus to celebrate the union on 24 February, Nasser was welcomed by crowds in the hundreds of thousands. Crown Prince Imam Badr of North Yemen was dispatched to Damascus with proposals to include his country in the new republic. Nasser agreed to establish a loose federal union with Yemen\u2014the United Arab States\u2014in place of total integration. While Nasser was in Syria, King Saud planned to have him assassinated on his return flight to Cairo. On 4 March, Nasser addressed the masses in Damascus and waved before them the Saudi check given to Syrian security chief and, unbeknownst to the Saudis, ardent Nasser supporter Abdel Hamid Sarraj to shoot down Nasser's plane. As a consequence of Saud's plot, he was forced by senior members of the Saudi royal family to informally cede most of his powers to his brother, King Faisal, a major Nasser opponent who advocated pan-Islamic unity over pan-Arabism.\nA day after announcing the attempt on his life, Nasser established a new provisional constitution proclaiming a 600-member National Assembly (400 from Egypt and 200 from Syria) and the dissolution of all political parties. Nasser gave each of the provinces two vice-presidents: Boghdadi and Amer in Egypt, and Sabri al-Asali and Akram al-Hawrani in Syria. Nasser then left for Moscow to meet with Nikita Khrushchev. At the meeting, Khrushchev pressed Nasser to lift the ban on the Communist Party, but Nasser refused, stating it was an internal matter which was not a subject of discussion with outside powers. Khrushchev was reportedly taken aback and denied he had meant to interfere in the UAR's affairs. The matter was settled as both leaders sought to prevent a rift between their two countries.\nWith the establishment of the United Arab Republic, the United States under President Eisenhower attempted to build better relations and initiate a rapprochement between the two countries, contrasting with the previously cautious stance of the American government towards Nasser. In particular, Nasser sought American assistance in his ideological cold war with Abdel Karim Qasim in Iraq and his ideology of Qasimism, which conflicted with Nasser's pan-Arab nationalism. However, due to major ideological differences, no significant long-term working relationship developed between Nasser and Eisenhower.\nInfluence on the Arab world.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe holy march on which the Arab nation insists, will carry us forward from one victory to another ... the flag of freedom which flies over Baghdad today will fly over Amman and Riyadh. Yes, the flag of freedom which flies over Cairo, Damascus, and Baghdad today will fly over the rest of the Middle East ...\nGamal Abdel Nasser, 19 July in Damascus\nIn Lebanon, clashes between pro-Nasser factions and supporters of staunch Nasser opponent, then-President Camille Chamoun, culminated in civil strife by May. The former sought to unite with the UAR, while the latter sought Lebanon's continued independence. Nasser delegated oversight of the issue to Sarraj, who provided limited aid to Nasser's Lebanese supporters through money, light arms, and officer training\u2014short of the large-scale support that Chamoun alleged. Nasser did not covet Lebanon, seeing it as a \"special case\", but sought to prevent Chamoun from a second presidential term. In Oman, the Jebel Akhdar War between the rebels in the interior of Oman against the British-backed Sultanate of Oman prompted Nasser to support the rebels in what was considered a war against colonialism between 1954 and 1959.\nOn 14 July 1958, Iraqi army officers Abdel Karim Qasim and Abdel Salam Aref overthrew the Iraqi monarchy and, the next day, Iraqi prime minister and Nasser's chief Arab antagonist, Nuri al-Said, was killed. The entire Iraqi royal family was killed, and Al-Said's and Iraqi crown prince 'Abd al-Ilah's bodies were mutilated and dragged across Baghdad. Nasser recognized the new government and stated that \"any attack on Iraq was tantamount to an attack on the UAR\". On 15 July, US marines landed in Lebanon, and British special forces in Jordan, upon the request of those countries' governments to prevent them from falling to pro-Nasser forces. Nasser felt that the revolution in Iraq left the road for pan-Arab unity unblocked. On 19 July, for the first time, he declared that he was opting for full Arab union, although he had no plan to merge Iraq with the UAR. While most members of the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) favored Iraqi-UAR unity, Qasim sought to keep Iraq independent and resented Nasser's large popular base in the country.\nIn the fall of 1958, Nasser formed a tripartite committee consisting of Zakaria Mohieddin, al-Hawrani, and Salah Bitar to oversee developments in Syria. By moving the latter two, who were Ba'athists, to Cairo, he neutralized important political figures who had their own ideas about how Syria should be run. He put Syria under Sarraj, who effectively reduced the province to a police state by imprisoning and exiling landholders who objected to the introduction of Egyptian agricultural reform in Syria, as well as communists. Following the Lebanese election of Fuad Chehab in September 1958, relations between Lebanon and the UAR improved considerably. On 25 March 1959, Chehab and Nasser met at the Lebanese\u2013Syrian border and compromised on an end to the Lebanese crisis.\nRelations between Nasser and Qasim grew increasingly bitter on 9 March, after Qasim's forces suppressed a rebellion in Mosul, launched a day earlier by a pro-Nasser Iraqi RCC officer backed by UAR authorities. Nasser had considered dispatching troops to aid his Iraqi sympathizers, but decided against it. He clamped down on Egyptian communist activity due to the key backing Iraqi communists provided Qasim. Several influential communists were arrested, including Nasser's old comrade Khaled Mohieddin, who had been allowed to re-enter Egypt in 1956.\nBy December, the political situation in Syria was faltering and Nasser responded by appointing Amer as governor-general alongside Sarraj. Syria's leaders opposed the appointment and many resigned from their government posts. Nasser later met with the opposition leaders and in a heated moment, exclaimed that he was the elected president of the UAR and those who did not accept his authority could \"walk away\".\nCollapse of the union and aftermath.\nOpposition to the union mounted among some of Syria's key elements, namely the socioeconomic, political, and military elites. In response to Syria's worsening economy, which Nasser attributed to its control by the bourgeoisie, in July 1961, Nasser decreed socialist measures that nationalized wide-ranging sectors of the Syrian economy. He also dismissed Sarraj in September to curb the growing political crisis. Aburish states that Nasser was not fully capable of addressing Syrian problems because they were \"foreign to him\". In Egypt, the economic situation was more positive, with a GNP growth of 4.5 percent and a rapid growth of industry. In 1960, Nasser nationalized the Egyptian press, which had already been cooperating with his government, in order to steer coverage towards the country's socioeconomic issues and galvanize public support for his socialist measures.\nOn 28 September 1961, secessionist army units launched a coup in Damascus, declaring Syria's secession from the UAR. In response, pro-union army units in northern Syria revolted and pro-Nasser protests occurred in major Syrian cities. Nasser sent Egyptian Special Forces to Latakia to bolster his allies, but withdrew them two days later, citing a refusal to allow inter-Arab fighting. Addressing the UAR's breakup on 5 October, Nasser accepted personal responsibility and declared that Egypt would recognize an elected Syrian government. He privately blamed interference by hostile Arab governments. According to Heikal, Nasser suffered something resembling a nervous breakdown after the dissolution of the union; he began to smoke more heavily and his health began to deteriorate.\nRevival on regional stage.\nNasser's regional position changed unexpectedly when Yemeni officers led by Nasser supporter Abdullah al-Sallal overthrew Imam Badr of North Yemen on 27 September 1962. Al-Badr and his tribal partisans began receiving increasing support from Saudi Arabia to help reinstate the kingdom, while Nasser subsequently accepted a request by Sallal to militarily aid the new government on 30 September. Consequently, Egypt became increasingly embroiled in the drawn-out civil war, with 60,000 Egyptian soldiers deployed in North Yemen in March 1966. In August 1967, in order to make up for Egyptian losses during the Six-Day War, Nasser recalled 15,000 troops from North Yemen. As part of the Khartoum Resolution at the 1967 Arab League summit in the same month, Egypt announced that it was ready to withdraw all its soldiers from North Yemen and it did so by the end of 1967. 26,000 Egyptian soldiers were killed during the intervention. Most of Nasser's old colleagues had questioned the wisdom of continuing the war, but Amer reassured Nasser of their coming victory. Nasser later remarked in 1968 that intervention in Yemen was a \"miscalculation\".\nIn July 1962, Algeria became independent of France. As a staunch political and financial supporter of the Algerian independence movement, Nasser considered the country's independence to be a personal victory. Amid these developments, a pro-Nasser clique in the Saudi royal family led by Prince Talal defected to Egypt, along with the Jordanian chief of staff, in early 1963.\nOn 8 February 1963, a military coup in Iraq led by a Ba'athist\u2013Nasserist alliance toppled Qasim, who was subsequently shot dead. Abdel Salam Aref, a Nasserist, was chosen to be the new president. A similar alliance toppled the Syrian government on 8 March. On 14 March, the new Iraqi and Syrian governments sent Nasser delegations to push for a new Arab union. At the meeting, Nasser lambasted the Ba'athists for \"facilitating\" Syria's split from the UAR, and asserted that he was the \"leader of the Arabs\". A transitional unity agreement stipulating a federal system was signed by the parties on 17 April and the new union was set to be established in May 1965. However, the agreement fell apart weeks later when Syria's Ba'athists purged Nasser's supporters from the officers corps. A failed counter-coup by a Nasserist colonel followed, after which Nasser condemned the Ba'athists as \"fascists\".\nIn January 1964, Nasser called for an Arab League summit in Cairo to establish a unified Arab response against Israel's plans to divert the Jordan River's waters for economic purposes, which Syria and Jordan deemed an act of war. Nasser blamed Arab divisions for what he deemed \"the disastrous situation\". He discouraged Syria and Palestinian guerrillas from provoking the Israelis, conceding that he had no plans for war with Israel. During the summit, Nasser developed cordial relations with King Hussein, and ties were mended with the rulers of Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Morocco. In May, Nasser moved to formally share his leadership position over the Palestine issue by initiating the creation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO). In practice, Nasser used the PLO to wield control over the Palestinian fedayeen. Its head was to be Ahmad Shukeiri, Nasser's personal nominee.\nAfter years of foreign policy coordination and developing ties, Nasser, President Sukarno of Indonesia, President Tito of Yugoslavia, and Prime Minister Nehru of India founded the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in 1961. Its declared purpose was to solidify international non-alignment and promote world peace amid the Cold War, end colonization, and increase economic cooperation among developing countries. In 1964, Nasser was made president of the NAM and held the second conference of the organization in Cairo.\nNasser played a significant part in the strengthening of African solidarity in the late 1950s and early 1960s, although his continental leadership role had increasingly passed to Algeria since 1962. During this period, Nasser made Egypt a refuge for anti-colonial leaders from several African countries and allowed the broadcast of anti-colonial propaganda from Cairo. Beginning in 1958, Nasser had a key role in the discussions among African leaders that led to the establishment of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) in 1963.\nModernization efforts and internal dissent.\nAl-Azhar.\nIn 1961, Nasser sought to firmly establish Egypt as the leader of the Arab world and to promote a second revolution in Egypt with the purpose of merging Islamic and socialist thinking. To achieve this, he initiated several reforms to modernize al-Azhar, which serves as the \"de facto\" leading authority in Sunni Islam, and to ensure its prominence over the Muslim Brotherhood and the more conservative Wahhabism promoted by Saudi Arabia. Nasser had used al-Azhar's most willing \"ulema\" (scholars) as a counterweight to the Brotherhood's Islamic influence, starting in 1953.\nNasser instructed al-Azhar to create changes in its syllabus that trickled to the lower levels of Egyptian education, consequently allowing the establishment of coeducational schools and the introduction of evolution into school curriculum. The reforms also included the merger of religious and civil courts. Moreover, Nasser forced al-Azhar to issue a fatw\u0101 admitting Shia Muslims, Alawites, and Druze into mainstream Islam; for centuries prior, al-Azhar deemed them to be \"heretics\".\nRivalry with Amer.\nFollowing Syria's secession, Nasser grew concerned with Amer's inability to train and modernize the army, and with the state within a state Amer had created in the military command and intelligence apparatus. In late 1961, Nasser established the Presidential Council and decreed it the authority to approve all senior military appointments, instead of leaving this responsibility solely to Amer. Moreover, he instructed that the primary criterion for promotion should be merit and not personal loyalties. Nasser retracted the initiative after Amer's allies in the officers corps threatened to mobilize against him.\nIn early 1962 Nasser again attempted to wrest control of the military command from Amer. Amer responded by directly confronting Nasser for the first time and secretly rallying his loyalist officers. Nasser ultimately backed down, wary of a possible violent confrontation between the military and his civilian government. According to Boghdadi, the stress caused by the UAR's collapse and Amer's increasing autonomy forced Nasser, who already had diabetes, to practically live on painkillers from then on.\nNational Charter and second term.\nIn October 1961, Nasser embarked on a major nationalization program for Egypt, believing the total adoption of socialism was the answer to his country's problems and would have prevented Syria's secession. In order to organize and solidify his popular base with Egypt's citizens and counter the army's influence, Nasser introduced the National Charter in 1962 and a new constitution. The charter called for universal health care, affordable housing, vocational schools, greater women's rights and a family planning program, as well as widening the Suez Canal.\nNasser also attempted to maintain oversight of the country's civil service to prevent it from inflating and consequently becoming a burden to the state. New laws provided workers with a minimum wage, profit shares, free education, free health care, reduced working hours, and encouragement to participate in management. Land reforms guaranteed the security of tenant farmers, promoted agricultural growth, and reduced rural poverty. As a result of the 1962 measures, government ownership of Egyptian business reached 51\u00a0percent, and the National Union was renamed the Arab Socialist Union (ASU). With these measures came more domestic repression, as thousands of Islamists were imprisoned, including dozens of military officers. Nasser's tilt toward a Soviet-style system led his aides Boghdadi and Hussein el-Shafei to submit their resignations in protest.\nDuring the presidential referendum in Egypt, Nasser was re-elected to a second term as UAR president and took his oath on 25 March 1965. He was the only candidate for the position, with virtually all of his political opponents forbidden by law from running for office, and his fellow party members reduced to mere followers. That same year, Nasser had the Muslim Brotherhood chief ideologue Sayyed Qutb imprisoned. Qutb was charged and found guilty by the court of plotting to assassinate Nasser, and was executed in 1966. Beginning in 1966, as Egypt's economy slowed and government debt became increasingly burdensome, Nasser began to ease state control over the private sector, encouraging state-owned bank loans to private business and introducing incentives to increase exports. During the '60s, the Egyptian economy went from sluggishness to the verge of collapse, the society became less free, and Nasser's appeal waned considerably.\nSix-Day War.\nIn mid May 1967, the Soviet Union issued warnings to Nasser of an impending Israeli attack on Syria, although Chief of Staff Mohamed Fawzi considered the warnings to be \"baseless\". According to Kandil, without Nasser's authorization, Amer used the Soviet warnings as a pretext to dispatch troops to Sinai on 14 May, and Nasser subsequently demanded UNEF's withdrawal. Earlier that day, Nasser received a warning from King Hussein of Israeli-American collusion to drag Egypt into war. The message had been originally received by Amer on 2 May, but was withheld from Nasser until the Sinai deployment on 14 May. Although in the preceding months, Hussein and Nasser had been accusing each other of avoiding a fight with Israel, Hussein was nonetheless wary that an Egyptian\u2013Israeli war would risk the West Bank's occupation by Israel. Nasser still felt that the US would restrain Israel from attacking due to assurances that he received from the US and Soviet Union. In turn, he also reassured both powers that Egypt would only act defensively.\nOn 21 May, Amer asked Nasser to order the Straits of Tiran blockaded, a move Nasser believed Israel would use as a \"casus belli\". Amer reassured him that the army was prepared for confrontation, but Nasser doubted Amer's assessment of the military's readiness. According to Nasser's vice president Zakaria Mohieddin, although \"Amer had absolute authority over the armed forces, Nasser had his ways of knowing what was really going on\". Moreover, Amer anticipated an impending Israeli attack and advocated a preemptive strike. Nasser refused the call upon determination that the air force lacked pilots and Amer's handpicked officers were incompetent. Still, Nasser concluded that if Israel attacked, Egypt's quantitative advantage in manpower and arms could stave off Israeli forces for at least two weeks, allowing for diplomacy towards a ceasefire. Israel repeated declarations it had made in 1957 that any closure of the Straits would be considered an act of war, or justification for war, but Nasser closed the Straits to Israeli shipping on 22\u201323 May. Towards the end of May, Nasser increasingly exchanged his positions of deterrence for deference to the inevitability of war, under increased pressure to act by both the general Arab populace and various Arab governments. On 26 May Nasser declared, \"our basic objective will be to destroy Israel\". On 30 May, King Hussein committed Jordan in an alliance with Egypt and Syria.\nOn the morning of 5 June, the Israeli Air Force struck Egyptian air fields, destroying much of the Egyptian Air Force. Before the day ended, Israeli armored units had cut through Egyptian defense lines and captured the town of el-Arish. The next day, Amer ordered the immediate withdrawal of Egyptian troops from Sinai\u2014causing the majority of Egyptian casualties during the war. Israel quickly captured Sinai and the Gaza Strip from Egypt, the West Bank from Jordan, and the Golan Heights from Syria.\nAccording to Sadat, it was only when the Israelis cut off the Egyptian garrison at Sharm el-Sheikh that Nasser became aware of the situation's gravity. After hearing of the attack, he rushed to army headquarters to inquire about the military situation. The simmering conflict between Nasser and Amer subsequently came to the fore, and officers present reported the pair burst into \"a nonstop shouting match\". The Supreme Executive Committee, set up by Nasser to oversee the conduct of the war, attributed the repeated Egyptian defeats to the Nasser\u2013Amer rivalry and Amer's overall incompetence. According to Egyptian diplomat Ismail Fahmi, who became foreign minister during Sadat's presidency, the Israeli invasion and Egypt's consequent defeat was a result of Nasser's dismissal of all rational analysis of the situation and his undertaking of a series of irrational decisions.\nResignation and aftermath.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI have taken a decision with which I need your help. I have decided to withdraw totally and for good from any official post or political role, and to return to the ranks of the masses, performing my duty in their midst, like any other citizen. This is a time for action, not grief. ... My whole heart is with you, and let your hearts be with me. May God be with us\u2014hope, light, and guidance in our hearts.\nNasser's 9 June resignation speech, which was retracted the next day\nDuring the first four days of the war, the general population of the Arab world believed Arab radio station fabrications of imminent Arab victory. On 9 June, Nasser appeared on television to inform Egypt's citizens of their country's defeat. He announced his resignation on television later that day, and ceded all presidential powers to his then-Vice President Zakaria Mohieddin, who had no prior information of this decision and refused to accept the post. It was in this resignation\nspeech that the Six Day War was first called the \"setback\". The second sentence of his speech ran: \"We cannot hide from ourselves the fact that we have met with a grave setback [naksa] in the last few days\"\u2014the \"naksa\" or \"setback\" for Egypt being the destruction of its armed forces, the loss of the entire Sinai Peninsula and the Gaza region, and the national humiliation and disgrace of losing a war to the vastly smaller Israeli Army.\nHundreds of thousands of sympathizers poured into the streets in mass demonstrations throughout Egypt and across the Arab world rejecting his resignation, chanting, \"We are your soldiers, Gamal!\" Nasser retracted his decision the next day.\nOn 11 July, Nasser replaced Amer with Mohamed Fawzi as general commander, over the protestations of Amer's loyalists in the military, 600 of whom marched on army headquarters and demanded Amer's reinstatement. After Nasser sacked thirty of the loyalists in response, Amer and his allies devised a plan to topple him on 27 August. Nasser was tipped off about their activities and, after several invitations, he convinced Amer to meet him at his home on 24 August. Nasser confronted Amer about the coup plot, which he denied before being arrested by Mohieddin. Amer allegedly committed suicide (others claims state he was poisoned) on 14 September. Despite his souring relationship with Amer, Nasser spoke of losing \"the person closest to [him]\". Thereafter, Nasser began a process of depoliticizing the armed forces, arresting dozens of leading military and intelligence figures loyal to Amer.\nAt the 29 August Arab League summit in Khartoum, Nasser's usual commanding position had receded as the attending heads of state expected Saudi King Faisal to lead. A ceasefire in the Yemen War was declared and the summit concluded with the Khartoum Resolution, which, according to Abd al Azim Ramadan, left only one option\u2014a war with Israel.\nThe Soviet Union soon resupplied the Egyptian military with about half of its former arsenals and broke diplomatic relations with Israel. Nasser cut relations with the US following the war, and, according to Aburish, his policy of \"playing the superpowers against each other\" ended. In November, Nasser accepted UN Resolution 242, which called for Israel's withdrawal from territories acquired in the war. His supporters claimed Nasser's move was meant to buy time to prepare for another confrontation with Israel, while his detractors believed his acceptance of the resolution signaled a waning interest in Palestinian independence.\nFinal years of presidency.\nDomestic reforms and governmental changes.\nNasser appointed himself the additional roles of prime minister and supreme commander of the armed forces on 19 June 1967. Angry at the military court's perceived leniency with air force officers charged with negligence during the 1967 war, workers and students launched protests calling for major political reforms in late February 1968. Nasser responded to the demonstrations, the most significant public challenge to his rule since workers' protests in March 1954, by removing most military figures from his cabinet and appointing eight civilians in place of several high-ranking members of the Arab Socialist Union (ASU). By 3 March, Nasser directed Egypt's intelligence apparatus to focus on external rather than domestic espionage, and declared the \"fall of the mukhabarat state\".\nOn 30 March, Nasser proclaimed a manifesto stipulating the restoration of civil liberties, greater parliamentary independence from the executive, major structural changes to the ASU, and a campaign to rid the government of corrupt elements. A public referendum approved the proposed measures in May, and held subsequent elections for the Supreme Executive Committee, the ASU's highest decision-making body. Observers noted that the declaration signaled an important shift from political repression to liberalization, although its promises would largely go unfulfilled.\nNasser appointed Sadat and Hussein el-Shafei as his vice presidents in December 1969. By then, relations with his other original military comrades, namely Khaled and Zakaria Mohieddin and former vice president Sabri, had become strained. By mid-1970, Nasser pondered replacing Sadat with Boghdadi after reconciling with the latter.\nWar of Attrition and regional diplomatic initiatives.\nMeanwhile, in January 1968, Nasser commenced the War of Attrition to reclaim territory captured by Israel, ordering attacks against Israeli positions east of the then-blockaded Suez Canal. In March, Nasser offered Yasser Arafat's Fatah movement arms and funds after their performance against Israeli forces in the Battle of Karameh that month. He also advised Arafat to think of peace with Israel and the establishment of a Palestinian state comprising the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Nasser effectively ceded his leadership of the \"Palestine issue\" to Arafat.\nIsrael retaliated against Egyptian shelling with commando raids, artillery shelling and air strikes. This resulted in an exodus of civilians from Egyptian cities along the Suez Canal's western bank. Nasser ceased all military activities and began a program to build a network of internal defenses, while receiving the financial backing of various Arab states. The war resumed in March 1969. In November, Nasser brokered an agreement between the PLO and the Lebanese military that granted Palestinian guerrillas the right to use Lebanese territory to attack Israel.\nIn June 1970, Nasser accepted the US-sponsored Rogers Plan, which called for an end to hostilities and an Israeli withdrawal from Egyptian territory, but it was rejected by Israel, the PLO, and most Arab states except Jordan. Nasser had initially rejected the plan, but conceded under pressure from the Soviet Union, which feared that escalating regional conflict could drag it into a war with the US. He also determined that a ceasefire could serve as a tactical step toward the strategic goal of recapturing the Suez Canal. Nasser forestalled any movement toward direct negotiations with Israel. In dozens of speeches and statements, Nasser posited the equation that any direct peace talks with Israel were tantamount to surrender. Following Nasser's acceptance, Israel agreed to a ceasefire and Nasser used the lull in fighting to move surface-to-air missiles towards the canal zone.\nMeanwhile, tensions in Jordan between an increasingly autonomous PLO and King Hussein's government had been simmering; following the Dawson's Field hijackings, a military campaign was launched to rout out PLO forces. The offensive elevated risks of a regional war and prompted Nasser to hold an emergency Arab League summit on 27 September in Cairo, where he forged a ceasefire.\nDeath and funeral.\nAs the Arab League summit closed on 28 September 1970, hours after escorting the last Arab leader to leave, Nasser suffered a heart attack. He was immediately transported to his house, where his physicians tended to him. Nasser died several hours later, around 6\u00a0p.m. at age 52. Heikal, Sadat, and Nasser's wife Tahia were at his deathbed. According to his doctor, al-Sawi Habibi, Nasser's likely cause of death was arteriosclerosis, varicose veins, and complications from long-standing diabetes. Nasser was also a heavy smoker with a family history of heart disease\u2014two of his brothers died in their fifties from the same condition. The state of Nasser's health was not known to the public prior to his death. He had suffered heart attacks before, in 1966 and September 1969.\nFollowing the announcement of Nasser's death, most Arabs were in a state of shock. Nasser's funeral procession through Cairo on 1 October was attended by at least five million mourners. The procession to his burial site began at the old RCC headquarters with a flyover by MiG-21 jets. His flag-draped coffin was attached to a gun carriage pulled by six horses and led by a column of cavalrymen. All Arab heads of state attended, with the exception of Saudi King Faisal. King Hussein and Arafat cried openly, and Muammar Gaddafi of Libya fainted from emotional distress twice. A few major non-Arab dignitaries were present, including Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin and French Prime Minister Jacques Chaban-Delmas.\nAlmost immediately after the procession began, mourners engulfed Nasser's coffin chanting, \"There is no God but Allah, and Nasser is God's beloved... Each of us is Nasser.\" Police unsuccessfully attempted to quell the crowds and, as a result, most of the foreign dignitaries were evacuated. The final destination was the Nasr Mosque, which was afterwards renamed Abdel Nasser Mosque, where Nasser was buried.\nBecause of his ability to motivate nationalistic passions, \"men, women, and children wept and wailed in the streets\" after hearing of his death, according to Nutting. The general Arab reaction was of mourning, with thousands of people pouring onto the streets of major cities throughout the Arab world. Over a dozen people were killed in Beirut as a result of the chaos, and in Jerusalem, roughly 75,000\u00a0Arabs marched through the Old City chanting, \"Nasser will never die.\" As a testament to his unchallenged leadership of the Arab people, following his death, the headline of the Lebanese \"Le Jour\" read, \"One hundred million human beings\u2014the Arabs\u2014are orphans.\" Sherif Hetata, a former political prisoner and later member of Nasser's ASU, said that \"Nasser's greatest achievement was his funeral. The world will never again see five million people crying together.\"\nLegacy.\nNasser made Egypt fully independent of British influence, and the country became a major power in the developing world under his leadership. One of Nasser's main domestic efforts was to establish social justice, which he deemed a prerequisite to liberal democracy. During his presidency, ordinary citizens enjoyed unprecedented access to housing, education, jobs, health services and nourishment, as well as other forms of social welfare, while feudalistic influence waned.\nHowever, these advances came at the expense of civil liberties. In Nasser's Egypt, the media were tightly controlled, mail was opened, and telephones were wiretapped. He was elected in 1956, 1958 and 1965 in plebiscites in which he was the sole candidate, each time claiming unanimous or near-unanimous support. With few exceptions, the legislature did little more than approve Nasser's policies. As the legislature was made up almost entirely of government supporters, Nasser effectively held all governing power in the nation.\nBy the end of his presidency, employment and working conditions improved considerably, although poverty was still high in the country and substantial resources allocated for social welfare had been diverted to the war effort.\nThe national economy grew significantly through agrarian reform, major modernization projects such as the Helwan steel works and the Aswan Dam, and nationalization schemes such as that of the Suez Canal. However, the marked economic growth of the early 1960s took a downturn for the remainder of the decade, only recovering in 1970. Egypt experienced a \"golden age\" of culture during Nasser's presidency, according to historian Joel Gordon, particularly in film, television, theater, radio, literature, fine arts, comedy, poetry, and music. Egypt under Nasser dominated the Arab world in these fields, producing cultural icons.\nDuring Mubarak's presidency, Nasserist political parties began to emerge in Egypt, the first being the Arab Democratic Nasserist Party (ADNP). The party carried minor political influence, and splits between its members beginning in 1995 resulted in the gradual establishment of splinter parties, including Hamdeen Sabahi's 1997 founding of Al-Karama. Sabahi came in third place during the 2012 presidential election. Nasserist activists were among the founders of Kefaya, a major opposition force during Mubarak's rule. On 19 September 2012, four Nasserist parties (the ADNP, Karama, the National Conciliation Party, and the Popular Nasserist Congress Party) merged to form the United Nasserist Party.\nPublic image.\nNasser was known for his accessibility and direct relationship with ordinary Egyptians. His availability to the public, despite assassination attempts against him, was unparalleled among his successors. A skilled orator, Nasser gave 1,359 speeches between 1953 and 1970, a record for any Egyptian head of state. Historian Elie Podeh wrote that a constant theme of Nasser's image was \"his ability to represent Egyptian authenticity, in triumph or defeat\". The national press also helped to foster his popularity and profile\u2014more so after the nationalization of state media. Historian Tarek Osman wrote:\nThe interplay in the Nasser 'phenomenon' between genuine expression of popular feeling and state-sponsored propaganda may sometimes be hard to disentangle. But behind it lies a vital historical fact: that Gamal Abdel Nasser signifies the only truly Egyptian developmental project in the country's history since the fall of the Pharaonic state. There had been other projects ... But this was different\u2014in origin, meaning and impact. For Nasser was a man of the Egyptian soil who had overthrown the Middle East's most established and sophisticated monarchy in a swift and bloodless move\u2014to the acclaim of millions of poor, oppressed Egyptians\u2014and ushered in a programme of 'social justice', 'progress and development', and 'dignity'.\nWhile Nasser was increasingly criticized by Egyptian intellectuals following the Six-Day War and his death in 1970, the general public was persistently sympathetic both during and after Nasser's life. According to political scientist Mahmoud Hamad, writing in 2008, \"nostalgia for Nasser is easily sensed in Egypt and all Arab countries today\". General malaise in Egyptian society, particularly during the Mubarak era, augmented nostalgia for Nasser's presidency, which increasingly became associated with the ideals of national purpose, hope, social cohesion, and vibrant culture.\nUntil the present day, Nasser serves as an iconic figure throughout the Arab world, a symbol of Arab unity and dignity, and a towering figure in modern Middle Eastern history. He is also considered a champion of social justice in Egypt. \"Time\" writes that despite his mistakes and shortcomings, Nasser \"imparted a sense of personal worth and national pride that [Egypt and the Arabs] had not known for 400 years. This alone may have been enough to balance his flaws and failures.\"\nHistorian Steven A. Cook wrote in July 2013, \"Nasser's heyday still represents, for many, the last time that Egypt felt united under leaders whose espoused principles met the needs of ordinary Egyptians.\" During the Arab Spring, which resulted in a revolution in Egypt, photographs of Nasser were raised in Cairo and Arab capitals during anti-government demonstrations. According to journalist Lamis Andoni, Nasser had become a \"symbol of Arab dignity\" during the mass demonstrations.\nCriticism.\nSadat declared his intention to \"continue the path of Nasser\" in his 7 October 1970 presidential inauguration speech, but began to depart from Nasserist policies as his domestic position improved following the 1973 October War. President Sadat's Infitah policy sought to open Egypt's economy for private investment. According to Heikal, ensuing anti-Nasser developments until the present day led to an Egypt \"[half] at war with Abdel-Nasser, half [at war] with Anwar El-Sadat\".\nNasser's Egyptian detractors considered him a dictator who thwarted democratic progress, imprisoned thousands of dissidents, and led a repressive administration responsible for numerous human rights violations. Islamists in Egypt, particularly members of the politically persecuted Brotherhood, viewed Nasser as oppressive, tyrannical, and demonic. Samer S. Shehata, who wrote an article on \"The Politics of Laughter: Nasser, Sadat, and Mubarek in Egyptian Political Jokes\" noted that \"with the new regime came the end of parliamentary politics and political freedoms, including the right to organize political parties, and freedoms of speech and the press\". Liberal writer Tawfiq al-Hakim described Nasser as a \"confused Sultan\" who employed stirring rhetoric, but had no actual plan to achieve his stated goals.\nSome of Nasser's liberal and Islamist critics in Egypt, including the founding members of the New Wafd Party and writer Jamal Badawi, dismissed Nasser's popular appeal with the Egyptian masses during his presidency as being the product of successful manipulation and demagoguery. Egyptian political scientist Alaa al-Din Desouki blamed the 1952 revolution's shortcomings on Nasser's concentration of power, and Egypt's lack of democracy on Nasser's political style and his government's limitations on freedom of expression and political participation.\nAmerican political scientist Mark Cooper asserted that Nasser's charisma and his direct relationship with the Egyptian people \"rendered intermediaries (organizations and individuals) unnecessary\". He opined that Nasser's legacy was a \"guarantee of instability\" due to Nasser's reliance on personal power and the absence of strong political institutions under his rule. Historian Abd al-Azim Ramadan wrote that Nasser was an irrational and irresponsible leader, blaming his inclination to solitary decision-making for Egypt's losses during the Suez War, among other events. Miles Copeland, Jr., a Central Intelligence Agency officer known for his close personal relationship with Nasser, said that the barriers between Nasser and the outside world have grown so thick that all but the information that attest to his infallibility, indispensability, and immortality has been filtered out.\nZakaria Mohieddin, who was Nasser's vice president, said that Nasser gradually changed during his reign. He ceased consulting his colleagues and made more and more of the decisions himself. Although Nasser repeatedly said that a war with Israel will start at a time of his, or Arab, choosing, in 1967 he started a bluffing game \"but a successful bluff means your opponent must not know which cards you are holding. In this case Nasser's opponent could see his hand in the mirror and knew he was only holding a pair of deuces\" and Nasser knew that his army is not prepared yet. \"All of this was out of character...His tendencies in this regard may have been accentuated by diabetes... That was the only rational explanation for his actions in 1967\".\nAntisemitism.\nDuring an interview with Gerhard Frey in the German neo-Nazi newspaper \"National-Zeitung\" on May 1st, 1964, Nasser said that \"\"no person, not even the most simple one, takes seriously the lie of the six million Jews that were murdered [in the Holocaust]\".\" However, he is not known to have ever again publicly called the figure of six million into question, perhaps because his advisors and East German contacts had advised him on the subject. Nasser, convinced of its authenticity, also encouraged the distribution of the antisemitic fabrication \"The Protocols of the Elders of Zion\". He believed that the Jews greatly influenced the global financial market and that they ultimately strove for world domination. Nasser also hired former Nazi officials like Johann von Leers to distribute antisemitic propaganda. He is, however, thought to have been more moderate in that regard than contemporary political powers like Young Egypt or the Muslim Brotherhood.\nRegional leadership.\nThrough his actions and speeches, and because he was able to symbolize the popular Arab will, Nasser inspired several nationalist revolutions in the Arab world. He defined the politics of his generation and communicated directly with the public masses of the Arab world, bypassing the various heads of states of those countries\u2014an accomplishment not repeated by other Arab leaders. The extent of Nasser's centrality in the region made it a priority for incoming Arab nationalist heads of state to seek good relations with Egypt, in order to gain popular legitimacy from their own citizens.\nTo varying degrees, Nasser's statist system of government was continued in Egypt and emulated by virtually all Arab republics, namely Algeria, Syria, Iraq, Tunisia, Yemen, Sudan, and Libya. Ahmed Ben Bella, Algeria's first president, was a staunch Nasserist. Abdullah al-Sallal drove out the king of North Yemen in the name of Nasser's pan-Arabism. Other coups influenced by Nasser included those that occurred in Iraq in July 1958 and Syria in 1963. Muammar Gaddafi, who overthrew the Libyan monarchy in 1969, considered Nasser his hero and sought to succeed him as \"leader of the Arabs\". Also in 1969, Colonel Gaafar Nimeiry, a supporter of Nasser, took power in Sudan. The Arab Nationalist Movement (ANM) helped spread Nasser's pan-Arabist ideas throughout the Arab world, particularly among the Palestinians, Syrians, and Lebanese, and in South Yemen, the Persian Gulf, and Iraq. While many regional heads of state tried to emulate Nasser, Podeh opined that the \"parochialism\" of successive Arab leaders \"transformed imitation [of Nasser] into parody\".\nPortrayal in film.\nIn 1963, Egyptian director Youssef Chahine produced the film \"El Nasser Salah El Dine\" (\"Saladin The Victorious\"), which intentionally drew parallels between Saladin, considered a hero in the Arab world, and Nasser and his pan-Arabist policies. Nasser is played by Ahmed Zaki in Mohamed Fadel's 1996 \"Nasser 56\". The film set the Egyptian box office record at the time, and focused on Nasser during the Suez Crisis. It is also considered a milestone in Egyptian and Arab cinema as the first film to dramatize the role of a modern-day Arab leader. Together with the 1999 Syrian biopic \"Gamal Abdel Nasser\", the films marked the first biographical movies about contemporary public figures produced in the Arab world. He is portrayed by Amir Boutrous in the Netflix television series \"The Crown\".\nPersonal life.\nIn 1944, Nasser married Tahia Kazem (1920 \u2013 25 March 1992), the daughter of a wealthy Iranian father and an Egyptian mother, both of whom had died when she was young. She had been introduced to Nasser through her brother, Abdel Hamid Kazim, a merchant friend of Nasser's, in 1943. After their wedding, the couple moved into a house in Manshiyat al-Bakri, a suburb of Cairo, where they lived for the rest of their lives. Nasser's entry into the officer corps in 1937 secured him relatively well-paid employment in a society where most people lived in poverty. Nasser and Tahia would sometimes discuss politics at home, but for the most part Nasser kept his career separate from his family life. He preferred to spend most of his free time with his children.\nNasser and Tahia had two daughters and three sons:\nAlthough he was a proponent of secular politics, Nasser was an observant Muslim who made the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1954 and 1965. He was known to be personally incorruptible, a characteristic which further enhanced his reputation among the citizens of Egypt and the Arab world. Nasser's personal hobbies included playing chess, photography, watching American films, reading Arabic, English, and French magazines, and listening to classical music.\nNasser was a chain smoker. He maintained 18-hour workdays and rarely took time off for vacations. The combination of smoking and working long hours contributed to his poor health. He was diagnosed with diabetes in the early 1960s and by the time of his death in 1970, he also had arteriosclerosis, heart disease, and high blood pressure. He suffered two major heart attacks (in 1966 and 1969), and was on bed rest for six weeks after the second episode. State media reported that Nasser's absence from the public view at that time was a result of influenza.\nWritings.\nNasser wrote the following books, published during his lifetime:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51882", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51882", "title": "Race war", "text": ""}
{"id": "51883", "revid": "44106950", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51883", "title": "Aryan Nation", "text": ""}
{"id": "51884", "revid": "47356169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51884", "title": "Hosni Mubarak", "text": "President of Egypt from 1981 to 2011\nMuhammad Hosni El Sayed Mubarak (\u200e; 4 May 1928 \u2013 25 February 2020) was an Egyptian politician and military officer who served as the fourth president of Egypt from 1981 to 2011 and the 41st prime minister from 1981 to 1982. He was previously the 18th vice president under President Anwar Sadat from 1975 until his accession to the presidency. Before he entered politics, Mubarak was a career officer in the Egyptian Air Force. He served as its commander from 1972 to 1975 and rose to the rank of air chief marshal in 1973.\nAfter Sadat was assassinated in 1981, Mubarak assumed the presidency in a single-candidate referendum, and renewed his term through single-candidate referendums in 1987, 1993, and 1999. Under United States pressure, Mubarak held the country's first multi-party election in 2005, which he won. In 1989, he succeeded in reinstating Egypt's membership in the Arab League, which had been frozen since the Camp David Accords with Israel, and in returning the Arab League's headquarters back to Cairo. He was known for his supportive stance on the Israeli\u2013Palestinian peace process, in addition to his role in the Gulf War. Despite providing stability and reasons for economic growth, his rule was repressive. The state of emergency, which had not been lifted since the 1967 war, stifled political opposition, the security services became known for their brutality, and corruption became widespread.\nMubarak stepped down during the 2011 Egyptian revolution after 18 days of demonstrations, transferring power to the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces. He was later ordered to stand trial on charges of killing peaceful protesters during the revolution. These trials began on 3 August 2011, making him the first Arab leader to be tried in his own country in an ordinary court of law. On 2 June 2012, an Egyptian court sentenced Mubarak to life imprisonment. After sentencing, he was reported to have suffered a series of health crises. On 13 January 2013, Egypt's Court of Cassation (the nation's high court of appeal) overturned Mubarak's sentence and ordered a retrial. On retrial, Mubarak and his sons were convicted on 9 May 2015 of corruption and given prison sentences. Mubarak was detained in a military hospital while his sons were freed on 12 October 2015 by a Cairo court. Mubarak was acquitted on 2 March 2017 by the Court of Cassation and was released on 24 March 2017.\nMubarak died in 2020, aged 91. He was honoured with a military funeral and buried at a family plot outside Cairo. Mubarak's presidency lasted almost thirty years, making him Egypt's longest-serving ruler since Muhammad Ali Pasha, who ruled the country for 43 years from 1805 to 1848.\nEarly life and education.\nHosni Mubarak was born on 4 May 1928 in Kafr El-Meselha, Monufia Governorate, Egypt. On 2 February 1949, he left the Military Academy and joined the Air Force Academy, gaining his commission as a pilot officer on 13 March 1950 and eventually receiving a bachelor's degree in aviation sciences.\nAir Force career.\nMubarak served as an Egyptian Air Force officer in various formations and units; he spent two years in a Spitfire fighter squadron. Some time in the 1950s, he returned to the Air Force Academy as an instructor, remaining there until early 1959. From February 1959 to June 1961, Mubarak undertook further training in the Soviet Union, attending a Soviet pilot training school in Moscow and another at Kant Air Base near Bishkek in the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic.\nMubarak undertook training on the Ilyushin Il-28 and Tupolev Tu-16 jet bombers. In 1964 he gained a place at the Frunze Military Academy in Moscow. On his return to Egypt, he served as a wing commander, then as a base commander; he commanded the Cairo West Air Base in October 1966 then briefly commanded the Beni Suef Air Base. In November 1967, Mubarak became the Air Force Academy's commander when he was credited with doubling the number of Air Force pilots and navigators during the pre-October War years. Two years later, he became Chief of Staff for the Egyptian Air Force.\nIn 1972, Mubarak became Commander of the Air Force and Egyptian Deputy Minister of Defense. On 6 October 1973, at the breakout of the Yom Kippur War, the Egyptian Air Force launched a surprise attack on Israeli soldiers on the east bank of the Suez Canal. Egyptian pilots hit 90% of their targets, making Mubarak a national hero. The next year he was promoted to Air Chief Marshal in recognition of service during the October War of 1973 against Israel. Mubarak was credited in some publications for Egypt's initial strong performance in the war. The Egyptian analyst Mohamed Hassanein Heikal said the Air Force played a mostly psychological role in the war, providing an inspirational sight for the Egyptian ground troops who carried out the crossing of the Suez Canal, rather than for any military necessity. However Mubarak's influence was also disputed by Shahdan El-Shazli, the daughter of the former Egyptian military Chief of Staff Saad el-Shazly. She said Mubarak exaggerated his role in the 1973 war. In a 2011 interview with the independent Egyptian newspaper \"Al-Masry Al-Youm\", El-Shazli said Mubarak altered documents to take credit from her father for the initial success of the Egyptian forces in 1973. She also said photographs pertaining to the discussions in the military command room were altered and Saad El-Shazli was erased and replaced with Mubarak. She stated she intended to take legal action.\nVice President of Egypt.\nIn April 1975, President Anwar Sadat appointed Mubarak Vice President of Egypt. In this position, he took part in government consultations that dealt with the future disengagement of forces agreement with Israel. In September 1975, Mubarak went on a mission to Riyadh and Damascus to persuade the Saudi Arabian and Syrian governments to accept the disengagement agreement signed with the Israeli government (\"Sinai II\"), but was refused a meeting by the Syrian president Hafez al-Assad. During his meetings with the Saudi government, Mubarak developed a friendship with the nation's powerful Crown Prince Fahd, whom Sadat had refused to meet or contact and who was now seen as a major player who could help mend the failing relationship between Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Mubarak also developed friendships with several other important Arab leaders, including Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud, Oman's Sultan Qaboos, Morocco's King Hassan II, and Sudan's President Jaafar Nimeiry.\nSadat also sent Mubarak to numerous meetings with foreign leaders outside the Arab world. Mubarak's political significance as Vice President can be seen from a conversation held on 23 June 1975 between Foreign Minister Fahmy and US Ambassador Hermann Eilts. Fahmy told Eilts that \"Mubarak is, for the time being at least, likely to be a regular participant in all sensitive meetings\" and he advised the ambassador not to antagonize Mubarak because he was Sadat's personal choice. Though supportive of Sadat's earlier efforts made to bring the Sinai Peninsula back into Egyptian control, Mubarak agreed with the views of various Arab leaders and opposed the Camp David Accords for failing to address other issues relating to the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. Sadat even transferred his decision-making authority to Mubarak temporarily at times he went on vacations.\nPresident of Egypt.\nMubarak was injured during the assassination of President Sadat in October 1981 by soldiers led by Lieutenant Khalid Islambouli; however, the assassination plot altogether was acknowledged to have been led by Muhammad Abd al-Salam Faraj. Following Sadat's death, Mubarak became the fourth president of Egypt.\nEgypt's return to the Arab League.\nUntil Libya's suspension from the Arab League at the beginning of the Libyan Civil War, Egypt was the only state in the history of the organization to have had its membership suspended, because of President Sadat's peace treaty with Israel. In June 1982, Mubarak met King Fahd of Saudi Arabia, which marked a beginning of an Egyptian-Saudi rapprochement. Since Egypt is the most populous Arab country and Saudi Arabia the richest, the Saudi\u2013Egyptian axis was a powerful force in the Arab world. At an Arab League summit later in 1982 in Fez, Saudi Arabia put forward an Egyptian peace plan where in exchange for Israel resolving the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict by allowing a Palestinian state, the entire Arab world would make peace with Israel.\nThe Islamic Republic of Iran had, from 1979 onward, been making the claim to be the leader of the Islamic world, and in particular Ayatollah Khomeini had called for the overthrow of the governments of Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and other Arab states along the southern shores of the Persian Gulf, calling these states illegitimate. The claim of the Ayatollah Khomeini to be the rightful leader of the Islamic world and his attempts to export the Iranian revolution by working to overthrow governments that Khomeini deemed un-Islamic caused profound alarm and fear in the governments that were targeted like Iraq and Saudi Arabia. In the face of the Iranian challenge, the other Arab states looked towards Egypt as an ally. For King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and the other leaders of the Arab Gulf states, the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict faded into the background and the main concern was resisting Iranian pretensions to be the leader of the Islamic world, meaning that Egypt could not be ignored.\nDuring the Iran\u2013Iraq War from 1980 to 1988, Egypt supported Iraq militarily and economically with one million Egyptians working in Iraq to take the place of Iraqi men serving on the front-line. In December 1983, Mubarak welcomed Yasser Arafat of the PLO to a summit in Cairo, marking a rapprochement with the PLO, and from that time, Egypt became the PLO's main ally. In 1985, the \"Achille Lauro\" hijacking caused a major crisis in relations when the U.S Air Force forced an EgyptAir plane carrying the \"Achille Lauro\" hijackers to Tunisia to land in Italy; otherwise the plane would have been shot down. Mubarak stated in a press conference on 12 October 1985: \"I am very wounded. Now there is coolness and strain as a result of this incident.\" Egypt had been ostracized by the other Arab states for signing the Camp David Accords in 1979, but Egypt's weight within the Arab world had led to Egypt regaining its \"central place in the Arab world\" by 1989. In 1989, Egypt was re-admitted as a full member to the Arab League and the League's headquarters were moved to their original location in Cairo.\nGoverning style.\nThroughout the 1980s, Mubarak increased the production of affordable housing, clothing, furniture, and medicine. The state remained large under Mubarak employing 8 million people out of a population of 75 million.\nBy the time he became president, Mubarak was one of a few Egyptian officials who refused to visit Israel and vowed to take a less enthusiastic approach to normalizing relations with the Israeli government. Under Mubarak, Israeli journalists often wrote about the \"cold peace\" with Egypt, observing Israeli\u2013Egyptian relations were frosty at best. Mubarak was quick to deny that his policies would result in difficulties for Egyptian\u2013Israeli dealings in the future.\nThe Israeli historian Major Efraim Karsh wrote in 2006 that in Egypt \"...numberless articles, scholarly writings, books, cartoons, public statements, and radio and television programs, Jews are painted in the blackest terms imaginable\". Karsh accused Mubarak of being personally antisemitic, writing he \"evidently shared the premises\" of his propaganda.\nEgypt's heavy dependence on US aid and its hopes for US pressure on Israel for a Palestinian settlement continued under Mubarak.\nMubarak took significant steps to improve relations with the then-Soviet Union. In 1984, he reestablished diplomatic ties that had been severed by his predecessor, Anwar Sadat, in 1981. This move marked a shift from the previous estrangement and aimed to diversify Egypt's international partnerships.\nIn his early years in power, Mubarak expanded the Egyptian State Security Investigations Service (\"Mabahith Amn ad-Dawla\") and the Central Security Forces (anti-riot and containment forces). According to Tarek Osman, the experience of seeing his predecessor assassinated \"right in front of him\" and his lengthy military career\u2014which was longer than those of Nasser or Sadat\u2014may have instilled in him more focus and absorption with security than seemed the case with the latter heads of state. Mubarak sought advice and confidence not in leading ministers, senior advisers or leading intellectuals, but from his security chiefs\u2014\"interior ministers, army commanders, and the heads of the ultra-influential intelligence services.\"\nBecause of his positions against Islamic fundamentalism and his diplomacy towards Israel, Mubarak was the target of repeated assassination attempts. According to the BBC, Mubarak survived six attempts on his life. In June 1995, there was an alleged assassination attempt involving noxious gases and Egyptian Islamic Jihad while Mubarak was in Ethiopia for a conference of the Organization of African Unity. He was also reportedly injured by a knife-wielding assailant in Port Said in September 1999.\nRepression and torture.\nDuring Hosni Mubarak's presidency, Egypt was marked by widespread human rights abuses, including arbitrary detention and systematic torture. The government maintained a continuous state of emergency, granting security forces extensive powers to arrest and detain individuals without due process. Reports from human rights organizations highlight the pervasive use of torture in police stations and detention centers. Detainees were subjected to severe beatings, electric shocks, suspension by the wrists and ankles, and sexual violence. These practices were not isolated incidents but part of a systematic approach to suppress dissent and control the population. The lack of accountability for security forces further entrenched a culture of impunity, allowing such violations to persist throughout Mubarak's tenure.\nIsraeli\u2013Palestinian conflict.\nDuring his presidency, Mubarak upheld the U.S.-brokered Camp David Accords treaty signed between Egypt and Israel in 1978. Mubarak on occasion also hosted meetings relating to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and made a number of attempts to serve as a broker between them. Mubarak was concerned that Rabbi Menachem M. Schneerson did not trust him on the issue and considered meeting him in New York.\nIn October 2000, Mubarak hosted an emergency summit meeting at Sharm el-Sheikh to discuss the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In attendance were: U.S. President Bill Clinton, P.L.O. Chairman Yasser Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak, King Abdullah of Jordan, NATO Sec. General Javier Solana, and U.N. Sec. General Kofi Annan. Mubarak was involved in the Arab League, supporting Arab efforts to achieve a lasting peace in the region. At the Beirut Summit on 28 March 2002, the league adopted the Arab Peace Initiative, a Saudi-inspired plan to end the Arab\u2013Israeli conflict. In 2006, Mubarak condemned the Israeli military attack in Lebanon, but also indirectly criticised Hezbollah for harming Arab interests.\nIn June 2007, Mubarak held a summit meeting at Sharm el-Sheik with King Abdullah II of Jordan, President Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Ehud Olmert. On 19 June 2008, the Egypt-brokered pause in hostilities between Israel and Hamas went into effect. According to \"The New York Times\", neither side fully respected the terms of the ceasefire.\nThe agreement required Hamas to end rocket attacks on Israel and to enforce the ceasefire throughout Gaza. In exchange, Hamas expected the blockade to end, commerce in Gaza to resume, and truck shipments to be restored to 2005 levels. Israel tied an easing of the blockade to a reduction in rocket fire and gradually re-opened supply lines and permitted around 90 daily truck shipments to enter Gaza. Hamas criticized Israel for its continued blockade while Israel accused Hamas of continued weapons smuggling via tunnels to Egypt and pointed to continued rocket attacks. In 2009, Mubarak's government banned the Cairo Anti-war Conference, which had criticised his lack of action against Israel.\nGulf War of 1991.\nEgypt was a member of the allied coalition during the 1991 Gulf War; Egyptian infantry were some of the first to land in Saudi Arabia to remove Iraqi forces from Kuwait. Egypt's participation in the war solidified its central role in the Arab World and brought financial benefits for the Egyptian government. Reports of sums of up to US$ worth of debt forgiveness were published in the news media. According to \"The Economist\": The programme worked like a charm: a textbook case, says the [International Monetary Fund]. In fact, luck was on Hosni Mubarak's side; when the US was hunting for a military alliance to force Iraq out of Kuwait, Egypt's president joined without hesitation. After the war, his reward was that America, the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, and Europe forgave Egypt around $20 billion of debt.\nStance on the 2003 invasion of Iraq.\nMubarak spoke out against the 2003 invasion of Iraq, arguing that the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict should have been resolved first. He also said the war would cause \"100 Bin Ladens\". However, as president he did not support an immediate US withdrawal from Iraq because he believed it would probably lead to chaos.\n2005 elections.\nPresident Mubarak was re-elected by majority votes in a referendum for successive terms on four occasions in 1987, 1993, and 1999. Each time, Mubarak secured his position by having himself nominated by Parliament then confirmed without opposition in a referendum.\nThe September 2005 ballot was a multiple-candidate election rather than a referendum, but the electoral institutions and security apparatus remain under the control of the President. On 28 July 2005, Mubarak announced his candidacy. The election was scheduled for 7 September 2005; according to civil organizations that observed the election it was marred by mass rigging activities. In a move widely seen as political persecution, Ayman Nour, a dissident and candidate for the El-Ghad Party (\"Tomorrow Party\") was convicted of forgery and sentenced to five years' hard labor on 24 December 2005.\nWidespread corruption.\nWhile in office, political corruption in the Mubarak administration's Ministry of the Interior rose dramatically. Political figures and young activists were imprisoned without trial. Illegal, undocumented, hidden detention facilities were established, and universities, mosques, and newspaper staff were rejected because of their political views.\nIn 2005 Freedom House, a non-governmental organization that conducts research into democracy, reported that the Egyptian government under Mubarak expanded bureaucratic regulations, registration requirements, and other controls that often feed corruption. Freedom House said, \"corruption remained a significant problem under Mubarak, who promised to do much, but in fact never did anything significant to tackle it effectively\".\nIn 2010, Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index report assessed Egypt with a CPI score of 3.1, based on perceptions of the degree of corruption from business people and country analysts, with 10 being very clean and 0 being highly corrupt. Egypt ranked 98th out of the 178 countries included in the report.\nWealth and allegations of personal corruption.\nIn February 2011, ABC News reported that experts believed the personal wealth of Mubarak and his family was between US$ and US$ from military contracts made during his time as an air force officer. \"The Guardian\" reported that Mubarak and his family might be worth up to US$ garnered from corruption, bribes and legitimate business activities. The money was said to be spread out in various bank accounts, including some in Switzerland and the UK, and invested in foreign property. The newspaper said some of the information about the family's wealth might be ten years old. According to \"Newsweek\", these allegations are poorly substantiated and lack credibility.\nOn 12 February 2011, the government of Switzerland announced it was freezing the Swiss bank accounts of Mubarak and his family. On 20February 2011, the Egyptian Prosecutor General ordered the freezing of Mubarak's assets and those of his wife Suzanne, his sons Alaa and Gamal Mubarak, and his daughters-in-law Heidi Rasekh and Khadiga Gamal. The Prosecutor General also ordered the Egyptian foreign minister to communicate this to other countries where Mubarak and his family could have assets. This order came two days after Egyptian newspapers reported that Mubarak filed his financial statement. Egyptian regulations mandate government officials submit a financial statement listing their assets and sources of income while performing government work. On 21February 2011, the Egyptian Military Council, which was temporarily given the presidential authorities following the 25January 2011 revolution, said it had no objection to a trial of Mubarak on charges of corruption.\nOn 23February 2011, the Egyptian newspaper \"Eldostor\" reported that a \"knowledgeable source\" described the order of the Prosecutor General to freeze Mubarak's assets and the threats of a legal action as nothing but a signal for Mubarak to leave Egypt after a number of attempts were made to encourage him to leave willingly. In February 2011, Voice of America reported that Egypt's top prosecutor had ordered a travel ban and an asset freeze for Mubarak and his family as he considered further action. On 21 May 2014 a Cairo court convicted Mubarak and his sons of embezzling the equivalent of US$ of state funds which were allocated for renovation and maintenance of presidential palaces but were instead diverted to upgrade private family homes. The court ordered the repayment of US$, fined the trio US$, and sentenced Mubarak to three years in prison and each of his sons to four years.\nPresidential succession.\nThe National Democratic Party continued to state that Hosni Mubarak was to be the party's only candidate in the 2011 presidential election. Mubarak said on 1 February 2011 that he had no intention of standing in the 2011 presidential election. When this declaration failed to ease the protests, Mubarak's vice president stated that Gamal Mubarak would not run for president. With the escalation of the demonstration and the fall of Mubarak, Hamdy El-Sayed, a former influential figure in the National Democratic Party, said Gamal Mubarak intended to usurp the presidency, assisted by then Interior Minister, Habib El-Adly.\nRevolution and overthrow.\nProtests against Mubarak and his regime erupted in Cairo and other Egyptian cities in January 2011. On 1 February, Mubarak announced he would not contest the presidential election due in September. He also promised constitutional reform. This did not satisfy most protesters, who expected Mubarak to depart immediately. The demonstrations continued and on 2 February, violent clashes occurred between pro-Mubarak and anti-Mubarak protesters.\nOn 10 February, contrary to rumours, Mubarak said he would not resign until the September election, though he would be delegating responsibilities to Vice President Omar Suleiman. The next day, Suleiman announced that Mubarak had resigned. The announcement sparked cheers, flag-waving, and celebrations from protesters in Egypt. Discussions about the nation's future direction began. It had been suggested that Egypt be put in the hands of a caretaker government.\nProtests.\nOn 25 January 2011, protests against Mubarak and his government erupted in Cairo and around Egypt calling for Mubarak's resignation. Mubarak stated in a speech that he would not leave, and would die on Egyptian soil. Opposition leader Mohamed ElBaradei paid no attention to Mubarak's remarks and labeled it as a trick designed to help Mubarak to stay in power. In a state televised broadcast on 1 February 2011, Mubarak announced that he would not seek re-election in September but would like to finish his current term and promised constitutional reform. This compromise was not acceptable for the protestors and violent demonstrations occurred in front of the Presidential Palace. On 11 February, then Vice President Omar Suleiman announced Mubarak had resigned and that power would be turned over to the Egyptian military.\nTwo and a half hours after Mubarak's resignation, an Egyptian military member came on air and thanked Mubarak for \"putting the interests of the country first.\" The statement, which said \"The Supreme Council is currently studying the situation,\" did not state what the council would do next.\nPost-overthrow life.\nMubarak made no media appearances after his overthrow. Except for his family and a close circle of aides, he reportedly refused to talk to anyone\u2014even his supporters. His health was speculated to be rapidly deteriorating; some reports said he was in a coma. Most sources said he was no longer interested in performing any duties and wanted to \"die in Sharm El-Sheikh\".\nOn 28 February 2011, the General Prosecutor of Egypt issued an order prohibiting Mubarak and his family from leaving Egypt. It was reported that Mubarak was in contact with his lawyer in case of possible criminal charges against him. As a result, Mubarak and his family were placed under house arrest at a presidential palace in the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh. On 13 April 2011, a prosecutor originally appointed by Mubarak ordered the former president and both his sons to be detained for 15 days of questioning about allegations of corruption and abuse of power amid growing suspicion that the Egyptian military was more aligned with the Mubaraks than with the revolution. Gamal and Alaa were jailed in Tora Prison; state television reported that Mubarak was in police custody in a hospital near his residence following a heart attack. Former Israeli Cabinet minister Benjamin Ben Eliezer told Israeli Radio that he had offered Mubarak refuge in the southern Israeli city of Eilat.\nOn 11 May 2013, he told \"El-Watan\" in his first media appearance since his resignation said, \"History will judge and I am still certain that the coming generations will view me fairly.\" He added that President Mohammed Morsi faced a tough time and that it was too early to judge him.\nTrial.\nOn 24 May 2011, Mubarak was ordered to stand trial on charges of premeditated murder of peaceful protesters during the revolution and, if convicted, could face the death penalty. The decision to try Mubarak was made days before a scheduled protest in Tahrir Square. The full list of charges released by the public prosecutor was \"intentional murder, attempted killing of some demonstrators\u00a0...\u00a0misuse of influence, deliberately wasting public funds and unlawfully making private financial gains and profits\".\nOn 28 May, a Cairo administrative court found Mubarak guilty of damaging the national economy during the protests by shutting down the Internet and telephone services. He was fined LE200\u00a0million\u2014about US$\u2014which the court ordered he must pay from his personal assets. This was the first court ruling against Mubarak, who would next have to answer to the murder charges.\nThe trial of Hosni Mubarak, his sons Ala'a and Gamal, former interior minister Habib el-Adly and six former top police officials began on 3 August 2011 at a temporary criminal court at the Police Academy in north Cairo. They were charged with corruption and the premeditated killing of peaceful protesters during the mass movement to oust the Mubarak government, the latter of which carries the death penalty. The trial was broadcast on Egyptian television; Mubarak made an unexpected appearance\u2014his first since his resignation. He was taken into the court on a hospital bed and held in a cage for the session. Upon hearing the charges against him, Mubarak pleaded not guilty. Judge Ahmed Refaat adjourned the court, ruling that Mubarak be transferred under continued arrest to the military hospital on the outskirts of Cairo. The second court session scheduled for 15 August. On 15 August, the resumed trial lasted three hours. At the end of the session, Rifaat announced that the third session would take place on 5 September and that the remainder of the proceedings would be off-limits to television cameras.\nThe trial resumed in December 2011 and lasted until January 2012. The defense strategy was that Mubarak never actually resigned, was still president, and thus had immunity. On 2 June 2012, Mubarak was found guilty of not halting the killing of protesters by the Egyptian security forces; he was sentenced to life imprisonment. The court found Mubarak not guilty of ordering the crackdown on Egyptian protesters. All other charges against Mubarak, including profiteering and economic fraud, were dismissed. Mubarak's sons, Habib el-Adly, and six senior police officials were all acquitted for their roles in the killing of demonstrators because of a lack of evidence. According to \"The Guardian\", the relatives of those killed by Mubarak's forces were angered by the verdict. Thousands of demonstrators protested the verdict in Tahrir Square, Arbein Square and Al-Qaed Ibrahim Square.\nIn January 2013, an appeals court overturned Mubarak's life sentence and ordered a retrial. He remained in custody and returned to court on 11 May 2013 for a retrial on charges of complicity in the murder of protesters. On 21 August 2013, a Cairo court ordered his release. Judicial sources confirmed that the court had upheld a petition from Mubarak's longtime lawyer that called for his release. A day later, interim prime minister Hazem El Beblawi ordered that Mubarak be put under house arrest.\nOn 21 May 2014, while awaiting retrial, Mubarak and his sons were convicted on charges of embezzlement; Mubarak was sentenced to three years in prison, while his sons received four-year sentences. The three were fined the equivalent of US$, and were ordered to repay US$.\nIn November 2014, conspiracy to kill charges were dismissed by the Cairo Criminal Court on a technicality. The court also cleared Mubarak of corruption charges. On 13 January 2015, Egypt's Court of Cassation overturned Mubarak's and his sons' embezzlement charges, the last remaining conviction against him, and ordered a retrial. A retrial on the corruption charges led to a conviction and sentencing to three years in prison in May 2015 for Mubarak, with four-year terms for his sons, Gamal and Alaa. It was not immediately clear whether the sentence would take into account time already served\u2014Mubarak and his sons had already spent more than three years in prison, so potentially would not have to serve any additional time. Supporters of Mubarak jeered the decision when it was announced in a Cairo courtroom on 9 May. The sentence also included a 125 million Egyptian pound (US$16.3\u00a0million) fine, and required the return of 21\u00a0million embezzled Egyptian pounds (US$2.7\u00a0million). These amounts were previously paid after the first trial.\nSupport for Sisi.\nThough mostly out of the public eye, Mubarak granted a rare interview in February 2014 with Kuwaiti journalist Fajer Al-Saeed, expressing support for then-Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief of the Egyptian Armed Forces Abdel Fattah el-Sisi as the next president of Egypt, recognizing that Sisi was working to restore the confidence of the Egyptian people. \"The people want Sisi, and the people's will shall prevail,\" Mubarak noted. Mubarak also expressed great admiration and gratitude towards the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan of the United Arab Emirates and his children, for their continuous support of Egypt and its people. However, Mubarak expressed his dislike of opposition politician Hamdeen Sabbahi, a Nasserist following the policies of Gamal Abdel Nasser.\nHealth problems.\nIn July 2010, the media said Egypt was about to undergo dramatic change because Mubarak was thought to have cancer and because of the scheduled 2011 presidential election. Intelligence sources said he had esophageal cancer, stomach or pancreatic cancer; this was denied by Egyptian authorities. Speculation about his ill health increased after his resignation from the presidency. According to Egyptian media, Mubarak's condition worsened after he went into exile in Sharm el-Sheikh. He was reportedly depressed, refused to take medications, and was slipping into and out of unconsciousness. According to the source\u2014an unnamed Egyptian security official\u2014\"Mubarak wants to be left alone and die in his homeland\". The source denied that Mubarak was writing his memoirs, stating that he was almost completely unconscious. After his resignation, Egypt's ambassador to the United States Sameh Shoukry reported that his personal sources said Mubarak \"is possibly in somewhat of bad health\", while several Egyptian and Saudi Arabian newspapers reported that Mubarak was in a coma and close to death. On 12 April 2011, it was reported that he had been hospitalized after suffering a heart attack during questioning over possible corruption charges.\nIn June 2011, Mubarak's lawyer Farid el-Deeb said his client \"has stomach cancer, and the cancer is growing\". Mubarak had undergone surgery for the condition in Germany in 2010 and also suffered from circulatory problems with an irregular heart beat. On 13 July 2011, unconfirmed reports stated that Mubarak had slipped into a coma at his residence after giving his final speech, and on 17 July, el-Deeb confirmed the reports. On 26 July 2011, Mubarak was reported to be depressed and refusing solid food while in hospital being treated for a heart condition and in custody awaiting trial.\nOn 2 June 2012, Mubarak was reported as have suffered a health crisis while being transported to prison after his conviction on the charges of complicity in the killing of protestors. Some sources reported he had had a heart attack. Further reports stated that Mubarak's health continued to decline; some said he had to be treated with a defibrillator. On 20 June 2012, as Mubarak's condition continued to decline, state-run media erroneously reported that the former president had been declared \"clinically dead\", causing widespread confusion. Officials later clarified that Mubarak was in a critical condition.\nOn 27 December 2012, Mubarak was taken from Tora Prison to the Cairo military hospital after falling and breaking a rib. He was released from prison in August 2013.\nOn 19 June 2014, Mubarak slipped in the bathroom at the military hospital in Cairo where he was being held and broke his left leg, also fracturing his left thighbone, requiring surgery. Mubarak was serving a three-year sentence for corruption, and also awaiting retrial regarding the killing of protesters during his regime. At one time, his release was ordered. However, Mubarak had remained at the military hospital since January 2014 due to his ongoing health issues.\nAcquittal.\nOn 2 March 2017, the Court of Cassation, Egypt's top appeals court, acquitted Mubarak of conspiring in the killing of protesters during the 2011 uprising. He was subsequently released on 24 March 2017.\nDeath.\nHosni Mubarak died on 25 February 2020, in a Cairo military hospital, at the age of 91. A full-honour state funeral was held for him at the Tantawi Mosque in eastern Cairo, and he was later buried in a cemetery in Heliopolis. Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi participated at the funeral and extended his condolences to Mubarak's widow, Suzanne, and his sons Alaa and Gamal; three days of national mourning were subsequently proclaimed.\nFollowing his death, President El-Sisi praised Mubarak for his role in the Yom Kippur War but remained silent over his role as president. The government-controlled newspaper \"Al-Ahram\" eulogized Mubarak for his military and political career.\nPersonal life.\nHosni Mubarak was married to Suzanne Thabet, with whom he had two sons: Alaa and Gamal. Both sons served four years in Egyptian jail for corruption and were released in 2015. Through his son Alaa, Mubarak has two grandsons, Mohammed and Omar; and through his son Gamal, he has a granddaughter Farida. Mohammed died in 2009 from a cerebral hemorrhage.\nIn April 2016, Alaa Mubarak was named in the Panama Papers as someone with financial interests that intersect with that of Mossack Fonseca, the firm implicated in that scandal.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51885", "revid": "16750284", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51885", "title": "Multiculturalism", "text": "Existence of multiple, distinct cultures within a single country\nMulticulturalism is the coexistence of multiple cultures. The word is used in sociology, in political philosophy, and colloquially. In sociology and everyday usage, it is usually a synonym for \"ethnic\" or cultural pluralism in which various ethnic and cultural groups exist in a single society. It can describe a mixed ethnic community area where multiple cultural traditions exist or a single country. Groups associated with an indigenous, aboriginal or autochthonous ethnic group and settler-descended ethnic groups are often the focus.\nIn reference to sociology, multiculturalism is the end-state of either a natural or artificial process (for example: legally controlled immigration) and occurs on either a large national scale or on a smaller scale within a nation's communities. On a smaller scale, this can occur artificially when a jurisdiction is established or expanded by amalgamating areas with two or more different cultures (e.g. French Canada and English Canada). On a large scale, it can occur as a result of either legal or illegal migration to and from different jurisdictions around the world.\nIn reference to political science, \"multiculturalism\" can be defined as a state's capacity to effectively and efficiently deal with cultural plurality within its sovereign borders. Multiculturalism as a political philosophy involves ideologies and policies which vary widely. It has been described as a \"salad bowl\" and as a \"cultural mosaic\", in contrast to a \"melting pot\"\n, or \"cultural amalgamation\".\nHistory.\nPrevalence of multiculturalism over time.\nAccording to migration researcher Hein de Haas, it is a myth that current societies are more diverse than ever. The idea that the current society is an exceptionally diverse one is based on a distorted image of past societies, in which historical diversity is often overlooked. Historical waves of migration have led to levels of diversity that are comparable to or even greater than those of today. European countries such as the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and the Netherlands have long-standing diverse societies due to colonial migration, labor migration, and flows of refugees.\nStates that embody multicultural ideals have arguably existed since ancient times. The Achaemenid Empire founded by Cyrus the Great followed a policy of incorporating and tolerating various cultures.\nEurope has historically known great diversity in terms of ethnic, linguistic, and religious groups, far outnumbering the number of nation-states. Local and regional identities were strong, with each region and town having its own dialect, customs, and traditions. From the 16th century larger nation states were formed. This process gained momentum after the French Revolution and consolidated in the 19th century.\nThe Habsburg monarchy, which existed from 1282 to 1918, stood in contrast to the emerging trend of nation-state formation in Europe. It encompassed a mosaic of languages, religions, and regional identities, resisting the centralizing and homogenizing tendencies that characterized nation-state development elsewhere. Today's topical issues such as social and cultural differentiation, multilingualism, competing identity offers or multiple cultural identities have already shaped the scientific theories of many thinkers of this multi-ethnic empire.\nEspecially since the 19th century societies in Europe and North America have become culturally more homogeneous due to the consolidation of the nation-state. Governments promoted national identities through education, conscription, and the standardization of languages. In France, for instance, the promotion of French led to the decline of regional languages such as Breton and Occitan. Likewise, in Western Europe, the use of many local dialects decreased. In addition, the rigid religious divides in Western countries softened due to the declining influence of organized religion and the advance of secularization. This pattern repeated itself elsewhere in Europe and North America, where national unification was accompanied by cultural homogenization.\nIn the 19th century, millions of people from diverse ethnic and religious backgrounds migrated to the United States and Europe, in search of better economic opportunities or to escape persecution. The U.S. was a melting pot of groups such as Irish, Italian, Chinese, German, and Jewish immigrants, who were often initially perceived as threats to the national identity. At the beginning of the 20th century, 14.7% of the U.S. population were immigrants, a percentage that corresponds to current levels.\nNationalism further accelerated cultural homogenization in the 20th century. For example after World War I, much of the former ethnic diversity in the area of the former Habsburg monarchy disappeared. Under the influence of nationalist ideologies, ethnic minorities were disadvantaged, forced to emigrate or even murdered in most regions in the area of the former Habsburg monarchy due to the prevailing nationalism at the time. In many areas, these ethnic mosaics no longer exist today. The ethnic mix of that time can only be experienced in a few areas, such as in the former Habsburg port city of Trieste.\nGlobalization has further reduced cultural differences. The emergence of an increasingly global youth culture in the 1920s, which accelerated significantly from the 1950s onward, made it easier for young people around the world to find shared reference points in food, music, film, literature, and other forms of artistic expression. International travel and the rise of television and the internet promoted the development of both national and international culture. The spread of English as a global language, Hollywood films, and the universal availability of fast-food chains such as McDonald's are all signs of a world becoming increasingly culturally homogeneous. Although urban areas tend to show greater ethnic diversity, the variation between regions and countries has declined, which is often seen as a loss of cultural diversity.\nHomogenization is taking place worldwide, with the decline of minority languages being a major indicator of this trend. It is estimated that every two weeks a language disappears along with its last speaker. Since language is a crucial carrier of culture, identity, and shared understanding, the significance of this development is substantial.\nMulticulturalism in modern government policy.\nThe term multiculturalism is most often used in reference to Western nation-states, which had seemingly achieved a de facto single national identity during the 18th and/or 19th centuries.\nMulticulturalism has been official policy in several Western nations since the 1970s, for reasons that varied from country to country, including the fact that many of the great cities of the Western world are increasingly made of a mosaic of cultures.\nThe Canadian government has often been described as the instigator of multicultural ideology because of its public emphasis on the social importance of immigration. The Canadian Royal Commission on Bilingualism and Biculturalism is often referred to as the origins of modern political awareness of multiculturalism. Canada has provided provisions to the French-speaking majority of Quebec, whereby they function as an autonomous community with special rights to govern the members of their community, as well as establish French as one of the official languages. In the Western English-speaking countries, multiculturalism as an official national policy started in Canada in 1971, followed by Australia in 1973 where it is maintained today. Recently, right-of-center governments in several European Union states \u2013 notably the Netherlands and Denmark \u2013 have reversed the national policy and returned to an official monoculturalism. A similar reversal is the subject of debate in the United Kingdom, among others, due to evidence of incipient segregation and anxieties over \"home-grown\" terrorism. Several heads-of-state or heads-of-government have expressed doubts about the success of multicultural policies: The United Kingdom's ex-Prime Minister David Cameron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Australia's ex-prime minister John Howard, Spanish ex-prime minister Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Aznar and French ex-president Nicolas Sarkozy have voiced concerns about the effectiveness of their multicultural policies for integrating immigrants.\nMany nation-states in Africa, Asia, and the Americas are culturally diverse and are 'multicultural' in a descriptive sense. In some, ethnic communalism is a major political issue. The policies adopted by these states often have parallels with multiculturalist policies in the Western world, but the historical background is different, and the goal may be a mono-cultural or mono-ethnic nation-building \u2013 for instance in the Malaysian government's attempt to create a 'Malaysian race' by 2020.\nImpact.\nAccording to migration researcher Hein de Haas, research anno 2023 shows that there is no systematic relationship between levels of immigration or ethnic diversity and social cohesion or trust. Studies show that factors such as economic inequality and trust in government are much more important for social cohesion than diversity. In countries and regions where income inequality is low and where people trust their government, social cohesion remains strong even with high levels of diversity. Canada and Australia, for example, are countries with high levels of immigration and diversity, but also with stable and well-functioning societies. On the other hand, hate speech toward minority groups by politicians can reduce social cohesion. So diversity as such does not undermine social cohesion, hate speech by politicians does.\nIn a study concluded in 2007, Harvard professor of political science Robert D. Putnam conducted a nearly decade-long study on how multiculturalism affects social trust. He surveyed 26,200 people in 40 American communities, finding that when the data were adjusted for class, income and other factors, the more racially diverse a community is, the greater the loss of trust. People in diverse communities \"don't trust the local mayor, they don't trust the local paper, they don't trust other people and they don't trust institutions,\" writes Putnam. In the presence of such ethnic diversity, Putnam maintains that, \"[W]e hunker down. We act like turtles. The effect of diversity is worse than had been imagined. And it's not just that we don't trust people who are not like us. In diverse communities, we don't trust people who do not look like us\". Putnam has also stated, however, that \"this allergy to diversity tends to diminish and to go away... I think in the long run we'll all be better.\" Putnam denied allegations he was arguing against diversity in society and contended that his paper had been \"twisted\" to make a case against race-conscious admissions to universities. He asserted that his \"extensive research and experience confirm the substantial benefits of diversity, including racial and ethnic diversity, to our society.\"\nIn a 2003 book \"On Genetic Interests\", Ethnologist Frank Salter writes:\nRelatively homogeneous societies invest more in public goods, indicating a higher level of public altruism. For example, the degree of ethnic homogeneity correlates with the government's share of gross domestic product as well as the average wealth of citizens. Case studies of the United States, Africa and South-East Asia find that multi-ethnic societies are less charitable and less able to cooperate to develop public infrastructure. Moscow beggars receive more gifts from fellow ethnics than from other ethnies [\"sic\"]. A recent multi-city study of municipal spending on public goods in the United States found that ethnically or racially diverse cities spend a smaller portion of their budgets and less per capita on public services than do the more homogeneous cities.\nResearch psychologist Kenan Malik has criticized the views of Frank Salter, arguing that the main issue with Salter\u2019s argument is not so much the politically sensitive aspects, but rather the points he shares with broader debates on the evolution of ethnocentrism and identity politics. Malik argues that Salter pays insufficient attention to historical context. In Salter\u2019s view group differences are portrayed as a constant and universal feature of human nature. Malik argues that this approach can lead to a distorted interpretation of empirical data. Malik also criticized the theory of ethnic nepotism, and argued that the field studies of favoritism shown to beggars of the benefactor's ethnic group are best explained by cultural factors.\nWhile there is research that suggests that ethnic diversity increases chances of war, lower public goods provision and decreases democratization, there is also research that shows that ethnic diversity in itself is not detrimental to peace, public goods provision or democracy. Rather, it was found that promoting diversity actually helps in advancing disadvantaged students. A 2018 study in the \"American Political Science Review\" cast doubts on findings that ethnoracial homogeneity led to greater public goods provision. A 2015 study in the \"American Journal of Sociology\" challenged past research showing that racial diversity adversely affected trust.\nRacial and ethnic labels can have a significant impact: non-minorities primed to think of themselves as White (versus European American) were subsequently less in favor of multiculturalism and were more racially prejudiced. This was due to decreases in identification with ethnic minorities.\nIn multicultural societies the first-past-the-post voting system can increase ethnic conflict compared to proportional representation. Multicultural societies with identity politics can result in elections mirroring the identity or ethnic headcount, incentivizing demographic engineering. Electoral engineering to prevent ethnic conflict in multicultural societies was found ineffective.\nOpinions.\nSupport.\nMulticulturalism is seen by its supporters as a fairer system that allows people to truly express who they are within a society, that is more tolerant and that adapts better to social issues. They argue that culture is not one definable thing based on one race or religion, but rather the result of multiple factors that change as the world changes.\nHistorically, support for modern multiculturalism stems from the changes in Western societies after World War II, in what Susanne Wessendorf calls the \"human rights revolution\", in which the horrors of institutionalized racism and ethnic cleansing became almost impossible to ignore in the wake of the Holocaust; with the collapse of the European colonial system, as colonized nations in Africa and Asia successfully fought for their independence and pointed out the discriminatory underpinnings of the colonial system; and, in the United States in particular, with the rise of the civil rights movement, which criticized ideals of assimilation that often led to prejudices against those who did not act according to Anglo-American standards and which led to the development of academic ethnic studies programs as a way to counteract the neglect of contributions by racial minorities in classrooms. As this history shows, multiculturalism in Western countries was seen to combat racism, to protect minority communities of all types, and to undo policies that had prevented minorities from having full access to the opportunities for freedom and equality promised by the liberalism that has been the hallmark of Western societies since the Age of Enlightenment.\nWill Kymlicka argues for \"group differentiated rights\", that help both religious and cultural minorities operate within the larger state as a whole, without impinging on the rights of the larger society. He bases this on his opinion that human rights fall short in protecting the rights of minorities, as the state has no stake in protecting the minorities.\nC. James Trotman argues that multiculturalism is valuable because it \"uses several disciplines to highlight neglected aspects of our social history, particularly the histories of women and minorities [...and] promotes respect for the dignity of the lives and voices of the forgotten. By closing gaps, by raising consciousness about the past, multiculturalism tries to restore a sense of wholeness in a postmodern era that fragments human life and thought.\"\nTariq Modood argues that in the early years of the 21st century, multiculturalism \"is most timely and necessary, and [...] we need more not less\", since it is \"the form of integration\" that (1) best fits the ideal of egalitarianism, (2) has \"the best chance of succeeding\" in the \"post-9/11, post 7/7\" world, and (3) has remained \"moderate [and] pragmatic\".\nBhikhu Parekh counters what he sees as the tendencies to equate multiculturalism with racial minorities \"demanding special rights\" and to see these as promoting a \"thinly veiled racis[m]\". Instead, he argues that multiculturalism is in fact \"not about minorities\" but \"is about the proper terms of the relationship between different cultural communities\", which means that the standards by which the communities resolve their differences, e.g., \"the principles of justice\" must not come from only one of the cultures but must come \"through an open and equal dialogue between them.\"\nBalibar characterizes criticisms of multiculturalism as \"differentialist racism\", which he describes as a covert form of racism that does not purport ethnic superiority as much as it asserts stereotypes of perceived \"incompatibility of life-styles and traditions\".\nCriticism.\nCritics of multiculturalism often debate whether the multicultural ideal of benignly co-existing cultures that interrelate and influence one another, and yet remain distinct, is sustainable, paradoxical, or even desirable. It is argued that nation states, who would previously have been synonymous with a distinctive cultural identity of their own, lose out to enforced multiculturalism and that this ultimately erodes the host nations' distinct culture.\nSarah Song views cultures as historically shaped entities by its members, and that they lack boundaries due to globalization, thereby making them stronger than others might assume. She goes on to argue against the notion of special rights as she feels cultures are mutually constructive, and are shaped by the dominant culture. Brian Barry advocates a difference-blind approach to culture in the political realm and he rejects group-based rights as antithetical to the universalist liberal project, which he views as based on the individual.\nSusan Moller Okin, a feminist professor of political philosophy, argued in 1999, in \"Is multiculturalism bad for women?\", that the principle that all cultures are equal means that the equal rights of women in particular are sometimes severely violated.\nDick Lamm, former three-term Democratic governor of the US state of Colorado, argued that \"diverse peoples worldwide are mostly engaged in hating each other\u2014that is, when they are not killing each other. A diverse, peaceful, or stable society is against most historical precedent.\"\nThe American classicist Victor Davis Hanson used the perceived differences in \"rationality\" between Moctezuma and Cort\u00e9s to argue that Western culture was superior to every culture in the entire world, which thus led him to reject multiculturalism as a false doctrine that placed all cultures on an equal footing.\nIn New Zealand (Aotearoa), which is officially bi-cultural, multiculturalism has been seen as a threat to the M\u0101ori as an attempt by the New Zealand Government to undermine M\u0101ori demands for self-determination and encourage assimilation.\nFar-right sympathisers have been shown to increasingly take part in a multitude of online discursive efforts directed against global brands' multicultural advertisements.477\nAmericas.\nArgentina.\nThe preamble of Argentina's constitution explicitly promotes immigration and recognizes multiple citizenships held by its citizens. Though 97% of Argentina's population self-identify as of European descent and mestizo to this day a high level of multiculturalism remains a feature of Argentina's culture, allowing foreign festivals and holidays (e.g. Saint Patrick's Day), supporting all kinds of art or cultural expressions from ethnic groups, as well as their diffusion through an important multicultural presence in the media.\nIn Argentina there are recognized regional languages Guaran\u00ed in Corrientes, Quechua in Santiago del Estero, Qom, Mocov\u00ed, and Wich\u00ed in Chaco.\nAccording to the National Institute for Indigenous Affairs published on its website, there are 1,779 registered indigenous communities in Argentina, belonging to 39 indigenous peoples.\nBolivia.\nBolivia is a diverse country made up of 36 different types of indigenous groups. Over 62% of Bolivia's population falls into these different indigenous groups, making it the most indigenous country in Latin America. Out of the indigenous groups the Aymara and the Quechua are the largest. The latter 30% of the population is a part of the mestizo, which are a people mixed with European and indigenous ancestry. Bolivia's political administrations have endorsed multicultural politics and in 2009 Bolivia's Constitution was inscribed with multicultural principles. The Constitution of Bolivia recognizes 36 official languages besides Spanish, each language has its own culture and indigenous group. Bolivian culture is celebrated across the country and has heavy influences from the Aymara, the Quechua, the Spanish, and other popular cultures from around Latin America.\nBrazil.\nBrazil has been known to acclaim multiculturalism and has undergone many changes regarding this in the past few decades. Brazil is a controversial country when it comes to defining a multicultural country. There are two views: the Harvard Institute of Economic Research points to the fact that Brazil has a large mixed-race population, while researcher Erkan G\u00f6ren of the University of Oldenburg notes that virtually all Brazilians speaks Portuguese.\nCities such as S\u00e3o Paulo are home to migrants from Japan, Italy, Lebanon, Portugal, and Africa. There is a multicultural presence in this city, and this is prevalent throughout Brazil. Furthermore, Brazil is a country that has made great strides to embrace migrant cultures. There has been increased awareness of anti-blackness and active efforts to combat racism. However, there is still a lack of school engagement in these matters.\nCanada.\nCanadian society is often depicted as being \"very progressive, diverse, and multicultural,\" or a just society that formally acknowledges several different cultures and beliefs. Multiculturalism, however, is a misnomer often misidentified as a societal ideal with its associated natural moral sensitivity, whereas it functions as a political instrument for diversity management under official policy. Multiculturalism was adopted as the official policy of the Canadian government during the premiership of Pierre Elliott Trudeau in the 1970s and 1980s, influenced by factors such as the militant politics of Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois nationalism, rising Indigenous discontent over the assimilationist policies outlined in the 1969 White Paper, the threat of American cultural annexation, the need to secure ethnic votes in immigrant-rich urban centers, and the appeasement of other European ethnic groups.\nMulticulturalism is reflected in the law through the Canadian Multiculturalism Act and section 27 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Canadian multiculturalism is often seen as cherishing immigrant ways of life from outside the country, and as such, it is looked upon with admiration resulting in dismissing of most critics of the concept. The Broadcasting Act of 1991 asserts the Canadian broadcasting system should reflect the diversity of cultures in the country. This conceptual transition of multiculturalism is also reflected in Canada's official discourse, where attitudes about \"multiculturalism\" have shifted to focus on \"diversity,\" driven by increasing immigration rates. It now emphasizes Canada's growing multicultural makeup and the diversity of ethnic and racial groups within the country adhering to a politics of recognition, rather than a politics of interrogation that could have been instrumental in addressing dominant power dynamics and the privileges that affect marginalized groups. Multiculturalism in Canada is often globally recognized as one of the country's significant accomplishments in diversity management, and a key distinguishing element of Canadian national identity.\nIn a 2002 interview with \"The Globe and Mail\", Kar\u012bm al-Hussain\u012b, the 49th Aga Khan of the Ismaili Muslims, described Canada as \"the most successful pluralist society on the face of our globe\", citing it as \"a model for the world\". He explained that the experience of Canadian governance\u2014its commitment to pluralism and its support for the rich multicultural diversity of its people\u2014is something that must be shared and would be of benefit to all societies in other parts of the world. \"The Economist\" ran a cover story in 2016 praising Canada as the most successful multicultural society in the West. \"The Economist\" argued that Canada's multiculturalism was a source of strength that united the diverse population and by attracting immigrants from around the world was also an engine of economic growth as well. The influence of the transitioned ideology of multiculturalism in the public sphere has led many public and private groups in Canada to work toward supporting both multiculturalism and recent immigrants to Canada. In an effort to support recent Filipino immigrants to Alberta, for example, one school board partnered with a local university and an immigration agency to support these new families in their school and community.\nMexico.\nMexico has historically always been a multicultural country. After the betrayal of Hern\u00e1n Cort\u00e9s to the Aztecs, the Spanish conquered the Aztec Empire and colonized indigenous people. They influenced the indigenous religion, politics, culture and ethnicity. The Spanish opened schools in which they taught Christianity, and the Spanish language eventually surpassed indigenous languages, making it the most spoken language in Mexico. Mestizo was also born from the conquest, which meant being half-Indigenous and half-Spanish.\nMexico City has recently been integrating rapidly, doing much better than many cities in a sample conducted by the Intercultural Cities Index (being the only non-European city, alongside Montreal, on the index). Mexico is an ethnically diverse country with a population composed of approximately 123 million in 2017. There is a wide variety of ethnic groups, the major group being Mestizos followed by White Mexicans and Indigenous Mexicans. There are many other ethnic groups such as Arab Mexicans, Afro-Mexicans and Asian Mexicans.\nFrom the year 2000 to 2010, the number of people in Mexico that were born in another country doubled, reaching a total of 961,121 people, mostly coming from Guatemala and the United States. Mexico is quickly becoming a melting pot, with many immigrants coming into the country. It is considered to be a cradle of civilization, which influences their multiculturalism and diversity, by having different civilizations influence them. A distinguishable trait of Mexico's culture is the mestizaje of its people, which caused the combination of Spanish influence, their indigenous roots while also adapting the culture traditions from their immigrants.\nPeru.\nPeru is an exemplary country of multiculturalism, in 2016 the INEI reported a total population of 31 million people. They share their borders with Ecuador, Colombia, Brazil, Chile and Bolivia, and have welcomed many immigrants into their country creating a diverse community.\nPeru is the home to Amerindians but after the Spanish Conquest, the Spanish brought African, and Asian peoples as slaves to Peru creating a mix of ethnic groups. After slavery was no longer permitted in Peru, African-Peruvians and Asian-Peruvians have contributed to Peruvian culture in many ways. Today, Amerindians make up 25.8% of the population, Mestizos 60.2%, White 5.9% and 4.8% is composed by Black, Chinese, Japanese and others. In 1821, Peru's president Jos\u00e9 de San Mart\u00edn gave foreigners the freedom to start industries in Peru's ground, 2 years after, foreigners that lived in Peru for more than 5 years were considered naturalized citizens, which then decreased to 3 years.\nUnited States.\nAlthough official multiculturalism policy is not established at the federal level, ethnic and cultural diversity is common in rural, suburban and urban areas.\nContinuous mass immigration was a feature of the United States economy and society since the first half of the 19th century. The absorption of the stream of immigrants became, in itself, a prominent feature of America's national myth. The idea of the melting pot is a metaphor that implies that all the immigrant cultures are mixed and amalgamated without state intervention. The melting pot theory implied that each individual immigrant, and each group of immigrants, assimilated into American society at their own pace. This is different from multiculturalism as it is defined above, which does not include complete assimilation and integration. The melting pot tradition co-exists with a belief in national unity, dating from the American founding fathers:\nProvidence has been pleased to give this one connected country to one united people \u2013 a people descended from the same ancestors, speaking the same language, professing the same religion, attached to the same principles of government, very similar in their manners and customs... This country and this people seem to have been made for each other, and it appears as if it was the design of Providence, that an inheritance so proper and convenient for a band of brethren, united to each other by the strongest ties, should never be split into a number of unsocial, jealous, and alien sovereignties.\nAs a philosophy, multiculturalism began as part of the pragmatism movement at the end of the 19th century in Europe and the United States, then as political and cultural pluralism at the turn of the 20th century. It was partly in response to a new wave of European imperialism in sub-Saharan Africa and the massive immigration of Southern and Eastern Europeans to the United States and Latin America. Philosophers, psychologists and historians and early sociologists such as Charles Sanders Peirce, William James, George Santayana, Horace Kallen, John Dewey, W. E. B. Du Bois and Alain Locke developed concepts of cultural pluralism, from which emerged what we understand today as multiculturalism. In \"Pluralistic Universe\" (1909), William James espoused the idea of a \"plural society\". James saw pluralism as \"crucial to the formation of philosophical and social humanism to help build a better, more egalitarian society.\nThe educational approach to multiculturalism has since spread to the grade school system, as school systems try to rework their curricula to introduce students to diversity earlier \u2013 often on the grounds that it is important for minority students to see themselves represented in the classroom. Studies estimated 46 million Americans ages 14 to 24 to be the most diverse generation in American society. In 2009 and 2010, controversy erupted in Texas as the state's curriculum committee made several changes to the state's requirements, often at the expense of minorities. They chose to juxtapose Abraham Lincoln's inaugural address with that of Confederate president Jefferson Davis; they debated removing Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall and labor-leader Cesar Chavez and rejected calls to include more Hispanic figures, in spite of the high Hispanic population in the state.\nAccording to a 2000 analysis of domestic terrorism in the United States, \"A distinctive feature of American terrorism is the ideological diversity of perpetrators. White racists are responsible for over a third of the deaths, and black militants have claimed almost as many. Almost all of the remaining deaths are attributable to Puerto Rican nationalists, Islamic extremists, revolutionary leftists and emigre groups.\" Twenty years later, far-right and white racists were observed as the leading perpetrators of domestic terrorism in the U.S. According to a 2020 study by the Strategic &amp; International Studies, right-wing extremists are responsible for the murder of 329 people since 1994 (over half due to the terrorist bombing of the 1995 bombing of the Alfred P. Murrah building in Oklahoma City, which killed 168 people).\nEffect of diversity on civic engagement.\nA 2007 study by Robert Putnam encompassing 30,000 people across the US found that diversity had a negative effect on civic engagement. The greater the diversity, the fewer people voted and the less they volunteered for community projects; also, trust among neighbours was only half that of homogenous communities. Putnam says, however, that \"in the long run immigration and diversity are likely to have important cultural, economic, fiscal, and developmental benefits\", as long as society successfully overcomes the short-term problems. Putnam adds that his \"extensive research and experience confirm the substantial benefits of diversity, including racial and ethnic diversity, to our society.\"\nVenezuela.\nVenezuela is home to a variety of ethnic groups, with an estimated population of 32 million, as of 2018[ [update]]. Their population is composed of approximately 68% mestizo, which means of mixed race. Venezuelan culture is mainly composed of a mixture of their indigenous culture, Spanish, and African. There was a heavy influence of Spanish culture due to the Spanish Conquest, which influenced their religion, language and traditions. African influence can be seen in their music. While Spanish is Venezuela's main language, there are more than 40 indigenous languages spoken to this day.\nColombia.\nColombia, with an estimated population of 51 million inhabitants, is populated by a great variety of ethnic groups. Approximately 49% of its population is Mestizo, 37% White, 10% African descent, 3.4% Indigenous and 0.6 Romani.\nIt is estimated that 18.8 million Colombians are direct descendants of Europeans, either by one of their parents or grandparents. Mainly from Spain, Italy, Germany, Poland and England, they represent 37% of its population. The Arab descent also predominates in the country. The Syrians, Lebanese and Palestinians are the largest post-independence immigrants to the country, so much so that Colombia has the second largest Arab diaspora in Latin America, with a little more than 3.2 million descendants, which represents 6.4% of its population.\nEurope.\nHistorically, Europe has always been a mixture of Latin, Slavic, Germanic, Uralic, Celtic, Hellenic, Illyrian, Thracian and other cultures influenced by the importation of Jewish, Christian, Muslim and other belief systems; although the continent was supposedly unified by the super-position of Imperial Roman Christianity, it is accepted that geographic and cultural differences continued from antiquity into the modern age.\nIn the nineteenth century, the ideology of nationalism transformed the way Europeans thought about the state. Existing states were broken up and new ones created; the new nation-states were founded on the principle that each nation is entitled to its own sovereignty and to engender, protect, and preserve its own unique culture and history. Unity, under this ideology, is seen as an essential feature of the nation and the nation-state; unity of descent, unity of culture, unity of language, and often unity of religion. The nation-state constitutes a culturally homogeneous society, although some national movements recognised regional differences.\nWhere cultural unity was insufficient, it was encouraged and enforced by the state. The nineteenth century nation-states developed an array of policies \u2013 the most important was compulsory primary education in the national language. The language itself was often standardised by a linguistic academy, and regional languages were ignored or suppressed. Some nation-states pursued violent policies of cultural assimilation and even ethnic cleansing.\nSome countries in the European Union have introduced policies for \"social cohesion\", \"integration\", and (sometimes) \"assimilation\". The policies include:\nOther countries have instituted policies which encourage cultural separation. The concept of \"Cultural exception\" proposed by France in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) negotiations in 1993 was an example of a measure aimed at protecting local cultures.\nBulgaria.\nSince its establishment in the seventh century, Bulgaria has hosted many religions, ethnic groups and nations. The capital city Sofia is the only European city that has peacefully functioning, within walking distance of 300 metres, four Places of worship of the major religions: Eastern Orthodox (St Nedelya Church), Islam (Banya Bashi Mosque), Roman Catholicism (St. Joseph Cathedral), and Orthodox Judaism (Sofia Synagogue, the third-largest synagogue in Europe).\nThis unique arrangement has been called by historians a \"multicultural cliche\". It has also become known as \"The Square of Religious Tolerance\" and has initiated the construction of a 100-square-metre scale model of the site that is to become a symbol of the capital.\nFurthermore, unlike some other Nazi Germany allies or German-occupied countries excluding Denmark, Bulgaria managed to save its entire 48,000-strong Jewish population during World War II from deportation to Nazi concentration camps. According to Dr Marinova-Christidi, the main reason for the efforts of Bulgarian people to save their Jewish population during WWII is that within the region, they \"co-existed for centuries with other religions\" \u2013 giving it a unique multicultural and multiethnic history.\nConsequently, within the Balkan region, Bulgaria has become an example for multiculturalism in terms of variety of religions, artistic creativity and ethnicity. Its largest ethnic minority groups, Turks and Roma, enjoy wide political representation. In 1984, following a campaign by the Communist regime for a forcible change of the Islamic names of the Turkish minority, an underground organisation called \u00abNational Liberation Movement of the Turks in Bulgaria\u00bb was formed which headed the Turkish community's opposition movement. On 4 January 1990, the activists of the movement registered an organisation with the legal name Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) (in Bulgarian: \u0414\u0432\u0438\u0436\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435 \u0437\u0430 \u043f\u0440\u0430\u0432\u0430 \u0438 \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u0438: in Turkish: Hak ve \u00d6zg\u00fcrl\u00fckler Hareketi) in the Bulgarian city of Varna. At the moment of registration, it had 33 members, at present, according to the organisation's website, 68,000 members plus 24,000 in the organisation's youth wing https://. In 2012, Bulgarian Turks were represented at every level of government: local, with MRF having mayors in 35 municipalities, at parliamentary level with MRF having 38 deputies (14% of the votes in Parliamentary elections for 2009\u201313) and at executive level, where there is one Turkish minister, Vezhdi Rashidov. 21 Roma political organisations were founded between 1997\u20132003 in Bulgaria.\nFrance.\nAfter the end of World War II in 1945, immigration significantly increased. During the period of reconstruction, France lacked the labour to do so, and as a result; the French Government was eager to recruit immigrants coming from all over Europe, the Americas, Africa and Asia.\nAlthough there was a presence of, Vietnamese in France since the late-nineteenth century (mostly students and workers), a wave of Vietnamese migrated after 1954. These migrants consisted of those who were loyal to the colonial government and those married to French colonists. Following the partition of Vietnam, students and professionals from South Vietnam continued to arrive in France. Although many initially returned to the country after a few years, as the Vietnam War situation worsened, a majority decided to remain in France and brought their families over as well.\nThis period also saw a significant wave of immigrants from Algeria. As the Algerian War started in 1954, there were already 200,000 Algerian immigrants in France. However, because of the tension between the Algerians and the French, these immigrants were no longer welcome. This conflict between the two sides led to the Paris Massacre of 17 October 1961, when the police used force against an Algerian demonstration on the streets of Paris. After the war, after Algeria gained its independence, the free circulation between France and Algeria was once again allowed, and the number of Algerian immigrants started to increase drastically. From 1962\u201375, the Algerian immigrant population increased from 350,000 to 700,000. Many of these immigrants were known as the \"harkis\", and the others were known as the \"pieds-noirs\". The \"harkis\" were Algerians who supported the French during the Algerian War; once the war was over, they were deeply resented by other Algerians, and thus had to flee to France. The \"pieds-noirs\" were European settlers who moved to Algeria, but migrated back to France since 1962 when Algeria declared independence.\nAccording to Erik Bleich, multiculturalism in France faced stiff resistance in the educational sector, especially regarding recent Muslim arrivals from Algeria. Gatekeepers often warned that multiculturalism was a threat to the historic basis of French culture.\nJeremy Jennings finds three positions among elites regarding the question of reconciling traditional French Republican principles with multiculturalism. The traditionalists refuse to make any concessions and instead insist on clinging to the historic republican principles of \"la\u00efcit\u00e9\" and the secular state in which religion and ethnicity are always ignored. In the middle are modernising republicans who uphold republicanism but also accept some elements of cultural pluralism. Finally there are multiculturalist republicans who envision a pluralist conception of French identity and seek an appreciation of the positive values brought to France by the minority cultures.\nA major attack on multiculturalism came in Stasi Report of 2003 which denounces \"Islamism\" as deeply opposed to the mainstream interpretations of French culture. It is portrayed as a dangerous political agenda that will create a major obstacle for Muslims to comply with French secularism or \"la\u00efcit\u00e9 \". Murat Akan, however, argues that the Stasi Report and the new regulations against the hijab and religious symbols in the schools must be set against gestures toward multiculturalism, such as the creation of Muslim schools under contract with the government.\nGermany.\nIn October 2010, Angela Merkel told a meeting of younger members of her Christian Democratic Union (CDU) party at Potsdam, near Berlin, that attempts to build a multicultural society in Germany had \"utterly failed\", stating: \"The concept that we are now living side by side and are happy about it does not work\". She continued to say that immigrants should integrate and adopt Germany's culture and values. This has added to a growing debate within Germany on the levels of immigration, its effect on Germany and the degree to which middle eastern immigrants have integrated into German society. In 2015, Merkel again criticized multiculturalism on the grounds that it leads to parallel societies.\nThe Ahmadiyya Muslim Community of Germany is the first Muslim group to have been granted \"corporation under public law status\", putting the community on par with the major Christian churches and Jewish communities of Germany.\nLuxembourg.\nLuxembourg has one of the highest foreign-born populations in Europe, foreigners account for nearly half of the country's total population. The majority of foreigners are from: Belgium, France, Italy, Germany, and Portugal. In total, 170 different nationalities make up the population of Luxembourg, out of this; 86% are of European descent. The official languages of Luxembourg are German, French, and Luxembourgish all of which are supported in the Luxembourg government and education system. In 2005, Luxembourg officially promoted and implemented the objectives of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions. This Convention affirms multicultural policies in Luxembourg and creates political awareness of cultural diversity.\nNetherlands.\nMulticulturalism in the Netherlands began with major increases in immigration to the Netherlands during the mid-1950s and 1960s. As a consequence, an official national policy of multiculturalism was adopted in the early-1980s. Different groups could themselves determine religious and cultural matters, while state authorities would handle matters of housing and work policy.\nIn the 1990s, the public debate were generally optimistic on immigration and the prevailing view was that a multicultural policy would reduce the social economic disparities over time.\nThis policy subsequently gave way to more assimilationist policies in the 1990s and post-electoral surveys uniformly showed from 1994 onwards that a majority preferred that immigrants assimilated rather than retained the culture of their country of origin.\nFollowing the September 11 attacks in the United States and the murders of Pim Fortuyn (in 2002) and Theo van Gogh (in 2004), there was increased political debate on the role of multiculturalism in the Netherlands.\nLord Sacks, Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth, made a distinction between tolerance and multiculturalism, citing the Netherlands as a tolerant, rather than multicultural, society. In June 2011, the First Rutte cabinet said the Netherlands would turn away from multiculturalism: \"Dutch culture, norms and values must be dominant\" Minister Donner said.\nRomania.\nSince Antiquity, Romania has hosted many religious and ethnic groups, besides Romanians, including Roma people, Hungarians, Germans, Turks, Greeks, Tatars, Slovaks, Serbs, Jews and others. During WW2 and Communism, most of these ethnic groups chose to emigrate to other countries. However, since the 1990s, Romania has received a growing number of immigrants and refugees, most of them from the Arab world, Asia or Africa. Immigration is expected to increase in the future, as large numbers of Romanian workers leave the country and are being replaced by foreigners.\nScandinavia.\nMulticulturalism in Scandinavia has centered on discussions about marriage, dress, religious schools, Muslim funeral rites and gender equality. Forced marriages have been widely debated in Denmark, Sweden and Norway but the countries differ in policy and responses by authorities.\nSweden has the most permissive policies while Denmark the most restrictive ones.\nDenmark.\nIn 2001, Denmark, a liberal-conservative coalition government with the support of the Danish People's Party which instituted less pluralistic policy, geared more towards assimilation.\nA 2018 study found that increases in local ethnic diversity in Denmark caused \"rightward shifts in election outcomes by shifting electoral support away from traditional \"big government\" left\u2010wing parties and towards anti\u2010immigrant nationalist parties.\"\nFor decades, Danish immigration policy was built upon the belief that, with support, immigrants and their descendants would eventually reach the same levels of education as Danes. In a 2019 report, the Danish Immigration Service and the Ministry of Education found this to be false. The report found that, while the second-generation immigrants without a Western background do better than their parents, the same is not true for third-generation immigrants. One of the reasons given was that second-generation immigrants may marry someone from their country of origin, which may cause Danish not to be spoken at home, which would put the children at a disadvantage in school. Thereby, the process of integrating has to start from the beginning for each generation.\nNorway.\nApart from citizens of Nordic countries, all foreigners must apply for permanent residency in order to live and work in Norway. In 2017, the Norwegian immigrant population was made up of: citizens of EU and EEA countries (41.2%); citizens of Asian countries, including Turkey (32.4%); citizens of African countries (13.7%); and citizens of non-EU/EEA European, North American, South American and Oceanian countries (12.7%).\nIn 2015, during the European migrant crisis, a total of 31,145 asylum seekers, most of whom came from Afghanistan and Syria, crossed the Norwegian border. In 2016, the number of asylum seekers dramatically reduced by almost 90%, with 3460 asylum seekers coming to Norway. This was partly due to the stricter border control across Europe, including an agreement between the EU and Turkey.\nAs of September 2019, 15 foreign residents who had travelled from Norway to Syria or Iraq to join the Islamic State have had their residence permits revoked.\nThe Progress Party has named the reduction of high levels of immigration from non-European countries one of their goals:\n \"Immigration from countries outside the EEA must be strictly enforced to ensure a successful integration. It can not be accepted that fundamental Western values and human rights are set aside by cultures and attitudes that certain groups of immigrants bring with them to Norway.\"\nAn extreme form of opposition to immigration in Norway were the 22/7 attacks carried out by the terrorist Anders Behring Breivik on 22 July 2011. He killed 8 people by bombing government buildings in Oslo and massacred 69 young people at a youth summer camp held by the Labour Party, who were in power at the time. He blamed the party for the high level of Muslim immigration and accused it of \"promoting multiculturalism\".\nSweden.\nSweden has from the early 1970s experienced a greater share of non-Western immigration than the other Scandinavian countries, which consequently have placed multiculturalism on the political agenda for a longer period of time.\nSweden was the first country to adopt an official policy of multiculturalism in Europe. On 14 May 1975, a unanimous Swedish parliament passed an act on a new multiculturalist immigrant and ethnic minority policy put forward by the social democratic government, that explicitly rejected the ideal ethnic homogeneity and the policy of assimilation. The three main principles of the new policy were equality, partnership and freedom of choice. The explicit policy aim of the freedom of choice principle was to create the opportunity for minority groups in Sweden to retain their own languages and cultures. From the mid-1970s, the goal of enabling the preservation of minorities and creating a positive attitude towards the new officially endorsed multicultural society among the majority population became incorporated into the Swedish constitution as well as cultural, educational and media policies. Despite the anti-multiculturalist protestations of the Sweden Democrats, multiculturalism remains official policy in Sweden.\nA 2008 study which involved questionnaires sent to 5,000 people, showed that less than a quarter of the respondents (23%) wanted to live in areas characterised by cultural, ethnic and social diversity.\nA 2014 study published by G\u00e4vle University College showed that 38% of the population never interacted with anyone from Africa and 20% never interacted with any non-Europeans. The study concluded that while physical distance to the country of origin, also religion and other cultural expressions are significant for the perception of cultural familiarity. In general, peoples with Christianity as the dominant religion were perceived to be culturally closer than peoples from Muslim countries.\nA 2017 study by Lund University also found that social trust was lower among people in regions with high levels of past non-Nordic immigration than among people in regions with low levels of past immigration. The erosive effect on trust was more pronounced for immigration from culturally distant countries.\nSerbia.\nIn Serbia, there are 19 officially recognised ethnic groups with a status of national minorities. Vojvodina is an autonomous province of Serbia, located in the northern part of the country. It has a multiethnic and multicultural identity; there are more than 26 ethnic groups in the province, which has six official languages. Largest ethnic groups in Vojvodina are Serbs (67%), Hungarians (13%), Slovaks, Croats, Romani, Romanians, Montenegrins, Bunjevci, Bosniaks, Rusyns. The Chinese and Arabs, are the only two significant immigrant minorities in Serbia.\nRadio Television of Vojvodina broadcasts program in ten local languages. The project by the Government of AP Vojvodina titled \"Promotion of Multiculturalism and Tolerance in Vojvodina\", whose primary goal is to foster the cultural diversity and develop the atmosphere of interethnic tolerance among the citizens of Vojvodina, has been successfully implemented since 2005. Serbia is continually working on improving its relationship and inclusion of minorities in its effort to gain full accession to the European Union. Serbia has initiated talks through Stabilisation and Association Agreement on 7 November 2007.\nUnited Kingdom.\nMulticultural policies were adopted by local administrations from the 1970s and 1980s onwards. In 1997, the newly elected Labour government committed to a multiculturalist approach at a national level, but after 2001, there was something of a backlash, led by centre-left commentators such as David Goodhart and Trevor Phillips. The Government then embraced a policy of community cohesion instead. In 2011, Conservative Prime Minister David Cameron said in a speech that \"state multiculturalism has failed\". Critics argue that analyses which view society as 'too diverse' for social democracy and cohesion have \"performative\" effects regarding legitimate racism towards those classed as immigrants. Others, however, like author Ed West, criticize the notion that the United Kingdom is or should be a multicultural society in the first place and that the project of diversity is misguided.\nRussian Federation.\nThe idea of multiculturalism in Russia is closely linked to the territory and the Soviet concept of \"nationality\". The Federation is divided into a series of republics where each ethnic group has preponderance in deciding the laws that affect that republic. A distinction is then made between \"Rossiyane\" (Russian citizens) and \"Russkie\" (ethnic Russians).\nEach people within their territories has the right to practice their customs and traditions and even to impose their own laws, as is the case in Chechnya, as long as they do not violate federal and constitutional laws of the Russian Federation.\nAsia.\nIndia.\nAccording to the 1961 Census of India, there are 1652 indigenous languages in the country. The culture of India has been shaped by its long history, unique geography and diverse demography. India's languages, religions, dance, music, architecture and customs differ from place to place within the country, but nevertheless possess a commonality. The culture of India is an amalgamation of these diverse sub-cultures spread all over the Indian subcontinent and traditions that are several millennia old. The previously prevalent Indian caste system describes the social stratification and social restrictions in the Indian subcontinent, in which social classes are defined by thousands of endogamous hereditary groups, often termed \"j\u0101tis\" or castes.\nReligiously, Hindus form the majority, followed by Muslims. The statistics are: Hindu (79.8%), Muslim (14.2%), Christian (2.3%), Sikh (1.7%), Buddhist (0.7%), Jain (0.4%), Unaffiliated (0.23%), Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00eds, Jews, Zoroastrians, and others (0.65%). Linguistically, the two main language families in India are Indo-Aryan (a branch of Indo-European) and Dravidian. In India's northeast, people speaking Sino-Tibetan group of languages such as Meitei (Meitei-lon) and Bodo recognized by the Indian constitution and Austroasiatic languages are commonly found. India (officially) follows a three-language policy. Hindi (spoken in the form of Hindustani) is the official federal language, English has the federal status of associate/subsidiary official language and each state has its own state official language (in the Hindi \"sprachraum\", this reduces to bilingualism). Further, India does not have any national language. The Republic of India's state boundaries are largely drawn based on linguistic groups; this decision led to the preservation and continuation of local ethno-linguistic sub-cultures, except for the Hindi \"sprachraum\" which is itself divided into many states. Thus, most states differ from one another in language, culture, cuisine, clothing, literary style, architecture, music and festivities.\nIndia has encountered religiously motivated violence, such as the Moplah Riots, the Bombay riots, the 1984 Sikh genocide, the 1990 Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus, the 2002 Gujarat riots, the 2008 Mumbai attacks, the 2012 Assam violence, the 2013 Muzaffarnagar riots, and the 2020 Delhi riots. This has resulted from traditionally disadvantaged communities in public employment such as the policing of the same locality, apprehension of owners in giving properties for sale or rent and of society in accepting inter-marriages.\nCultural minorities in India.\nThe Indian constitution requires the various state-run institutions to provide quotas for minorities, which give these cultural minorities equal opportunities, as well as a forum through which they can actively participate in the institutions of the dominant culture. Indian polity after the 1990s has been marked by a shift from secular principles to a landscape that is dominated by pro-Hindu propaganda; the Bhartiya Janata Party has used this rhetoric by reconstructing Hinduism and bartering it under the guise of Indian nationalism. However, the rise of pro-Hindu ideology, commonly known as Hindutva, has impinged on the rights of cultural minorities. This can be seen in the large scale violence against cultural minorities, the votebank politics used by the Indian National Congress, and the promotion of issues faced by the larger religious communities over those faced by the backward groups in religious minorities.\nScheduled Castes (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) and Other Backward Castes (OBC).\nScheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are constitutionally recognized terms in India and constitute approximately 25% of the Indian population. Moreover more than 40 percent of India's population belongs to the Other Backward Castes as per the National Sample Survey Office or the NSSO which is a government organization for conducting surveys in India. So the total size of the lower castes in India is estimated to be around 70 percent of the country's population whereas the upper caste make up around 18 percent of the population. These groups have been provided with reservations that constitutionally guarantee them representation in governmental institutions, a mandate suggested by the Mandal Commission. The Indian constitution also provides SC's and ST's with protective measures that ensure equality, which is the main issue faced by members of both communities. However, while scheduled castes have turned into important political communities that the state concerns itself about, scheduled tribes continue to be politically marginalized.\nIndonesia.\nPluralism, diversity and multiculturalism is a daily fact of life in Indonesia. There are over 600 ethnic groups in Indonesia. 95% of those are of Native Indonesian ancestry. The Javanese are the largest ethnic group in Indonesia who make up nearly 42% of the total population. The Sundanese, Malay, and Madurese are the next largest groups in the country. There are also more than 700 living languages spoken in Indonesia and although predominantly Muslim the country also has large Christian and Hindu populations.\nIndonesia's national motto, \"Bhinneka Tunggal Ika\" (\"Unity in Diversity\" lit. \"many, yet one\") enshrined in Pancasila the national ideology, articulates the diversity that shapes the country. The government nurtures and promotes the diversity of Indonesian local culture; adopting a pluralist approach.\nDue to migration within Indonesia (as part of government transmigration programs or otherwise), there are significant populations of ethnic groups who reside outside of their traditional regions. The Javanese for example, moved from their traditional homeland in Java to the other parts of the archipelago. The expansion of the Javanese and their influence throughout Indonesia has raised the issue of Javanization, although Minangkabau, Malay, Madurese, Bugis and Makassar people, as a result of their \"merantau\" (migrating) culture are also quite widely distributed throughout the Indonesian archipelago, while Chinese Indonesians can be found in most urban areas. Because of urbanization, major Indonesian cities such as Greater Jakarta, Surabaya, Bandung, Palembang, Medan and Makassar have attracted large numbers of Indonesians from various ethnic, cultural and religious backgrounds. Jakarta in particular has almost all Indonesian ethnic groups represented.\nHowever, this transmigration program and close interactions between people of different cultural backgrounds caused socio-cultural problems, as the inter-ethnics interactions have not always been conducted harmoniously. After the fall of Suharto in 1998 into the 2000s, numbers of inter-ethnic and inter-religious clashes erupted in Indonesia. Like the clashes between native Dayak tribes against Madurese transmigrants in Kalimantan during Sambas riots in 1999 and the Sampit conflict in 2001. There were also clashes between Muslims and Christians, such as violence erupted in Poso between 1998 and into 2000, and violences in Maluku between 1999 and into 2002. Nevertheless, Indonesia today still struggles and has managed to maintain unity and inter-cultural harmony, through a national adherence of pro-pluralism policy of Pancasila; promoted and enforced by the government and its people.\nChinese Indonesians are the largest foreign-origin minority that has resided in Indonesia for generations. Despite centuries of acculturation with native Indonesians, because of their disproportionate influence on Indonesian economy, and alleged question of national loyalty, Chinese Indonesians have suffered discrimination. The Suharto \"Orde Baru\" or New Order adopted a forced assimilation policy; which indicated that Chinese cultural elements were unacceptable. Chinese Indonesians were forced to adopt Indonesian-sounding names, and the use of Chinese culture and language was banned. The violence targeting Chinese Indonesians erupted during riots in 1998. As the looting and destruction took place, a number of Chinese Indonesians, as well as looters, were killed. The Chinese Indonesians were treated as the scapegoat of 1997 Asian financial crisis, a result of ongoing discrimination and segregation policies enforced during Suharto's New Order regime. Soon after the fourth Indonesian President, Abdurrahman Wahid came into power in 1999, he quickly abolished some of the discriminatory laws in efforts to promote acceptance and to improve inter-racial relationships, such as abolishing the ban on Chinese culture; allowing Chinese traditions to be practised freely. Two years later President Megawati Sukarnoputri declared that the Chinese New Year (\"\") would be marked as a national holiday from 2003. Tense incidents however have included attacks on Chinese temples and Indonesian politician Basuki Tjahaja Purnama being given a two year prison sentence for blasphemy due to comments he made to his supporters in September 2016.\nKazakhstan.\nThere are sizeable populations of ethnic Kazakhs, Russians, Uzbeks, Ukrainians, Uighurs, Tatars, Germans and more in Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan was one of a few countries in post-Soviet territories that avoided interethnic clashes and conflicts in the period of USSR's final crisis and its eventual breakup. In 1995, Kazakhstan created the Assembly of People of Kazakhstan, an advisory body designed to represent the country's ethnic minorities. However, recent ethnic clashes and discrimination have been reported for groups such as Christians, ultraconservative Muslims, ethnic Dungans, Chechens, Tajiks, and LGBT people.\nMalaysia.\nMalaysia is a multiethnic country, with Malays making up the majority, close to 58% of the population. About 25% of the population are Malaysians of Chinese descent. Malaysians of Indian descent comprise about 7% of the population. The remaining 10% comprises:\nThe Malaysian New Economic Policy or NEP serves as a form of \"racial equalization\" in the view of the Malay-controlled government. It promotes structural changes in various aspects of life from education to economic to social integration. Established after the 13 May racial riots of 1969, it sought to address the \"significant imbalance\" in the economic sphere where the minority especially the Chinese population had substantial control over commercial activity in the country. Critics of this policy has called it synonymous to racial discrimination and synonymous to Apartheid.\nThe Malay Peninsula has a long history of international trade contacts, influencing its ethnic and religious composition. Predominantly Malays before the 18th century, the ethnic composition changed dramatically when the British introduced new industries, and imported Chinese and Indian labor. Several regions in the then British Malaya such as Penang, Malacca and Singapore became Chinese dominated. Until the riots 1969, co-existence between the three ethnicities (and other minor groups) was largely peaceful, although the three main racial groups for the most part lived in separate communities \u2013 the Malays in the villages, the Chinese in the urban areas, and the Indians in the towns and plantation. More Malays however have moved into the cities since the 1970s, and the proportion of the non-Malays have been decreasing continually, especially the Chinese, due in large part to lower birth-rate and emigration as a result of institutionalized discrimination.\nPreceding independence of the Federation of Malaya, a social contract was negotiated as the basis of a new society. The contract as reflected in the 1957 Malayan Constitution and the 1963 Malaysian Constitution states that the immigrant groups are granted citizenship, and Malays' special rights are guaranteed. This is often referred to the Bumiputra policy.\nThese pluralist policies have come under pressure from racialist Malay parties, who oppose perceived subversion of Malay rights. The issue is sometimes related to the controversial status of religious freedom in Malaysia.\nSingapore.\nDue to historical immigration trends, Singapore has a Chinese majority population with significant minority populations of Malays and Indians (predominantly Tamils). Other prominent smaller groups include Peranakans, Arabs, Armenians, Eurasians, Europeans, Americans, and Canadians. Besides English, Singapore recognizes three other languages\u2014Malay, Mandarin Chinese and Tamil. English was established as the medium of instruction in schools during the 1960s and 1970s and is the language of trade and government while the other three languages are taught as second languages (\"mother tongues\"). Besides being a multilingual country, Singapore also acknowledges festivals celebrated by the three main ethnic communities.\nUnder the Raffles Plan of Singapore, the city was divided into ethnic enclaves such as Geylang, Chinatown, and Little India. Housing in Singapore is governed by the Ethnic Integration Policy, which ensures an even ethnic distribution throughout Singapore. A similar policy exists in politics as all Group Representation Constituencies are required to field at least one candidate from an ethnic minority.\nToday, such ethnic enclaves has mostly been eliminated, due to the contemporary Singapore's government policy to encourage further ethnic integration between the different races of Singapore. A prominent example is its public housing system. Unlike other countries, public housing is not ostracised by a wide majority of the population and its government, and acts as a necessary and vital measure to provide immaculate and safe housing surrounded by public amenities at affordable prices, especially during its rapid development and industrialisation in the early years of independence. It is also meant to foster social cohesion between the social classes and races of Singapore, and prevent neglected areas or districts and ethnic enclaves from developing \u2013 known as the Ethnic Integration Policy (EIP). As such, it is considered a unique part of Singaporean culture, being commonly associated with the country.\nSouth Korea.\nSouth Korea remains a relatively homogenous country ethnically, linguistically, and culturally. Foreigners, expatriates, and immigrants are often rejected by the mainstream South Korean society and face discrimination. This can be seen as a result of World War II where the first noteworthy wave of multiculturalism between American servicemen and Korean women occurred. South Korea has been long regarded as an ethnic homogeneous country, therefore, the rise in mixed-race children was seen as a new phenomenon. Before the 1990s, the term \"honhyeol\" was commonly used to identify multiracial individuals in Korea \u2013 primarily in relation to the children of Korean women and American servicemen; this common term strengthened the association of multiracial people with a sense of alienation, rather than promoting cultural diversity within Korea. Not only did this term effectively discriminate against mixed-race Koreans but it also made a clear distinction between native Koreans and mixed-race Koreans.\nHan Geon-Soo 2007 notes the increased use of the word \"multiculturalism\" in South Korea: \"As the increase of foreign migrants in [South] Korea transforms a single-ethnic homogeneous [South] Korean society into multiethnic and multicultural one, [the South] Korean government and the civil society pay close attention to multiculturalism as an alternative value to their policy and social movement.\" He argued, however, that \"the current discourses and concerns on multiculturalism in [South] Korea\" lacked \"the constructive and analytical concepts for transforming a society\".\nThe same year, Stephen Castles of the International Migration Institute argued:\n\"Korea no longer has to decide whether it wants to become a multicultural society. It made that decision years ago \u2013 perhaps unconsciously \u2013 when it decided to be a full participant in the emerging global economy. It confirmed that decision when it decided to actively recruit foreign migrants to meet the economic and demographic needs of a fast-growing society. Korea is faced by a different decision today: what type of multicultural society does it want to be?\"\nThe \"Korea Times\" suggested in 2009 that South Korea was likely to become a multicultural society. In 2010, an opinion editorial written by Peter Underwood for the \"JoongAng Ilbo\" stated: \"Media in [South] Korea is abuzz with the new era of multiculturalism. With more than one million foreigners in [South] Korea, 2 percent of the population comes from other cultures.\" He further opined:\n\"If you stay too long, Koreans become uncomfortable with you. [...] Having a two percent foreign population unquestionably causes ripples, but having one million temporary foreign residents does not make Korea a multicultural society. [...] In many ways, this homogeneity is one of Korea's greatest strengths. Shared values create harmony. Sacrifice for the nation is a given. Difficult and painful political and economic initiatives are endured without discussion or debate. It is easy to anticipate the needs and behavior of others. It is the cornerstone that has helped Korea survive adversity. But there is a downside, too. [...] Koreans are immersed in their culture and are thus blind to its characteristics and quirks. Examples of group think are everywhere. Because Koreans share values and views, they support decisions even when they are obviously bad. Multiculturalism will introduce contrasting views and challenge existing assumptions. While it will undermine the homogeneity, it will enrich Koreans with a better understanding of themselves.\"\nIn 2010, results from the Korean Identity Survey suggested that government programs promoting multiculturalism had seen some success with over 60% of Koreans supporting the idea a multicultural society. However, the same poll in 2015 showed that support of a multicultural society had dropped to 49.7% suggesting a possible return to ethnic exclusivism.\nTurkey.\nTurkey is a country that straddles both Europe and Asia. It is home to several ethnic groups including Turkish, Arab, Armenian, Assyrian, Greek, Kurdish, and Jewish. There are cultural influences dating back to ancient Hellenic, Mediterranean, Semitic and Iranian civilizations which diffused and mingled in myriad ways over a period of centuries.\nThe Turkish migrant crisis (which is a part of the wider European migrant crisis) was a period during the 2010s characterised by a high number of people fleeing to Turkey, especially refugees fleeing the Syrian Civil War, and caused a backlash and anti-migrant sentiment in Turkish society.\nAfrica.\nCameroon.\nOfficially known as the Republic of Cameroon, Cameroon is found in central Africa consisting of a diverse geographical and cultural area that makes it one of the most diverse countries known today. Ranging from mountains, deserts, and rainforests, to coast-lands and savanna grasslands, its diverse geography makes a large diverse population possible. This diverse geography resembles Africa as a whole and due to this, many people commonly label Cameroon as \"Africa in Miniature\".\nDemographics and official languages.\nBefore Cameroon's independence, it was under British and French colonial rule from 1916\u20131961. Upon gaining sovereignty, a major colonial influence was evident, having both English and French become the national language to roughly 25,000,000 Cameroonian residents. Apart from these two major languages, a new language consisting of a mixture of French, English, and Pidgin known as Frananglais gained popularity among Cameroonian residents.\nIndigenous languages.\nAlthough these three languages are the most common in Cameroon, there are still approximately 273 indigenous languages being spoken throughout the country, making it not only culturally diverse but linguistically as well. Among those who speak these indigenous languages are people from Bantu, Sudanic, Baka, Wodaabe (or Mbororo) and even primitive hunter-gatherer groups known as Pygmies.\nIndigenous peoples' rights.\nAlthough native to Cameroonian land, they faced constant discrimination much like other indigenous groups around the world. The United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) adopted the United Nations' Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) in 2007. What this allowed was the protection of land and resource rights and prevented others from exploiting or violating them.2 In 2016, a group of indigenous Baka and Bagyeli groups united to form Gbabandi. Gbabandi allowed these indigenous groups to have a form of representation and a declared list of requirements that people of Cameroon had to abide by. Among these requirements were guaranteed land rights, peoples' consent to the usage of their sacred land, traditional chiefs and the ability to participate in \"local, regional, and national levels\" of political and economic matters. As a result, this established a sense of justice and acknowledgment among indigenous groups in Cameroon and posed for future battles for indigenous peoples' rights.\nMauritius.\nMulticulturalism has been a characteristic feature of the island of Mauritius. This is mainly because of colonization that has been present from, the English, the French, and the Dutch. However, the Mauritian society includes people from many different ethnic and religious groups: Hindu, Muslim and Indo-Mauritians, Mauritian Creoles (of African and Malagasy descent), Buddhist and Roman Catholic Sino-Mauritians and Franco-Mauritians (descendants of the original French colonists). Mauritius has embraced intertwining of cultures from the origin of the country, and has coined the term fruit-salad, which is a much more appealing term in comparison to melting-pot showing that they were not forced to these cultures.\nSouth Africa.\nSouth Africa is the fifth-most populous country and one of the most developed countries in Africa. South Africa also officially recognises 11 languages including English, making it third behind Bolivia and India in most official languages. The three most common languages are Zulu, Xhosa, and Afrikaans. Though South Africa's cultural traditions may decline as it becomes more and more Westernised due to its development, it is still known for its diverse culture.\nOceania.\nAustralia.\nThe next country to adopt an official policy of multiculturalism after Canada was Australia, a country with similar immigration situations and similar policies - for example, the formation of the Special Broadcasting Service. The Australian Government retains multiculturalism in policy and as a defining aspect of modern Australia.\nThe White Australia Policy was dismantled after World War II by various changes to immigration policy, although the official policy of multiculturalism was not formally introduced until 1972. The election of John Howard's Liberal-National Coalition government in 1996 was a major watershed for Australian multiculturalism. Howard had long been a critic of multiculturalism, releasing his One Australia policy in the late 1980s. \"A Practical Reference to Religious Diversity for Operational Police and Emergency Services\", first published in 1999, was a publication of the Australasian Police Multicultural Advisory Bureau designed to offer guidance to police and emergency services personnel on how religious affiliation can affect their contact with the public. The first edition covered Buddhist, Hindu, Islamic, Jewish and Sikh faiths, with participation of representatives of the various religions. The second edition, published in 2002, added Christian, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander religions and the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith to the list of religions.\nContact between people of different cultures in Australia has been characterised by tolerance and engagement, but have also occasionally resulted in conflict and rifts. Australia's diverse migrant communities have brought with them food, lifestyle and cultural practices, many of which have been absorbed into mainstream Australian culture.\nMembers of a multicultural community who are not of English-speaking Anglo-Australian, Anglo-Saxon or \u2018Anglo-Celtic\u2019 Australian background or not \"assimilated\" are often referred to in policy discourse as culturally and linguistically diverse (CALD), introduced in 1996 to replace non-English speaking background (NESB).\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand is a sovereign Oceanic country that adopted its multicultural policies post World War II. The country used to have immigration policies similar to Australia's White Australia Policy and the United States Immigration Act of 1924, but it would later follow suit with Australia and Canada in the 1970s and adopt similar multicultural policies. The relaxation of migration led to an influx of new migration to New Zealand in the 1980s. This led to an increase of Asian and Pacific islander peoples on the island, and ultimately a more diverse European population. In 1985, the Law Commission Act was passed which required the New Zealand Law Commission to review laws while taking into account both the indigenous M\u0101ori of New Zealand and New Zealand's multicultural character. In 1987, New Zealand officially recognized the indigenous M\u0101ori language as a national language. The revitalization in the M\u0101ori language led to its immersion in schools and television broadcast.\nIn 2001, the New Zealand government opened an Office of Ethnic Affairs to advise its local governments on the advancement of ethnic diversity and affairs of its multicultural communities. Many landmarks on the island have both their M\u0101ori and English names officially recognized. M\u0101ori makes up 3.7% of the population's speaking language. A 2013 census of New Zealand's population showed that 74% of the population identifies ethnically as European, while the latter 15% majority identify as M\u0101ori. The remainder identify as Asian, Arab, African, Pacific Islander and Latin American.\nPapua New Guinea.\nPapua New Guinea has one of the most heterogeneous indigenous populations in the world: there are several thousand separate communities, most with only a few hundred people.205 This Oceanian country is home to over eight million people that are divided into hundreds of different indigenous ethnic groups and cultures with over 820 different indigenous languages. A majority of the indigenous groups are Papuans who have ancestors that lived in New Guinea over ten thousand years ago. The latter majority are Austronesians whose ancestors arrived less than four thousand years ago. The island's population is also made up of many expatriate citizens from China, Australia, Indonesia, Europe and the Philippines. In 1975, the island population was found to be made up of 40,000 of these diverse expatriate citizens. Despite the large amount of culturally diverse locations on the island, the Kuk Early Agricultural Site is the only UNESCO World heritage location.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51887", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51887", "title": "Myth The Fallen Lords", "text": ""}
{"id": "51888", "revid": "50808796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51888", "title": "Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade", "text": "1989 film by Steven Spielberg\nIndiana Jones and the Last Crusade is a 1989 American action-adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg from a screenplay by Jeffrey Boam, based on a story by George Lucas and Menno Meyjes. It is the third installment in the \"Indiana Jones\" film series and the narrative sequel to \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" (1981). Harrison Ford reprises his role as the titular character, while Sean Connery co-stars as his father. Other cast members featured include Alison Doody, Denholm Elliott, Julian Glover, River Phoenix and John Rhys-Davies. In the film, set in 1938, Indiana Jones searches for his father, a Holy Grail scholar, who has been kidnapped and held hostage by the Nazis while on a journey to find the Holy Grail.\nAfter the criticism that \"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom\" (1984) received, Spielberg chose to make a more lighthearted film for the next installment, as well as bringing back several elements from \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\". During the five years between \"Temple of Doom\" and \"The Last Crusade\", he and executive producer Lucas reviewed several scripts before accepting Jeffrey Boam's. Filming locations included Spain, Italy, West Germany, Jordan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.\n\"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" was released in the United States on May 24, 1989, by Paramount Pictures. The film received positive reviews and was a financial success, earning $474.2 million worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film of 1989. It also won the Academy Award for Best Sound Effects Editing and was nominated for Best Original Score and Best Sound at the 62nd Academy Awards. Although Spielberg and Lucas originally intended for \"The Last Crusade\" to be the end of the series, a sequel, \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\", followed in May 2008, while a fifth and final film, \"Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny\", was released in June 2023.\nPlot.\nIn 1912, Boy Scout Indiana Jones lives with his father Henry Jones Sr. in Moab, Utah. One day, while undergoing a cave exploration, Indy takes a crucifix owned by Francisco V\u00e1zquez de Coronado from a group of graverobbers led by a man named Garth, and after a brief horse chase, flees to his home, where Garth and his men find him and retrieve the crucifix. Garth, however, admits his respect towards Indiana and gives him his fedora before leaving.\nIn 1938, Indy successfully takes back the crucifix from the employer of the graverobbers off the Portuguese coast. After returning to the United States, Indy learns Henry has disappeared while searching for the Holy Grail. Walter Donovan, his father's financial backer, tasks Indy with finding both Henry and the Grail. Indy receives a package containing Henry's diary, which includes his research on the Grail, and travels to Venice alongside Marcus Brody to meet Henry's associate Elsa Schneider. Beneath the library where Henry was last seen, Indy and Elsa discover a catacomb containing an inscribed shield which reveals that the path to the Grail begins in Alexandretta. The two are subsequently attacked by a mysterious group who reveal themselves to be the secret Brotherhood of the Cruciform Sword, dedicated to protecting the Grail. After saving the group's leader Kazim, Indy learns that Henry is being held at a castle in Austria. Indy entrusts Marcus with a map from the diary detailing a route to the Grail and sends him to Alexandretta to rendezvous with their old friend Sallah. Discovering their rooms have been ransacked, Indy reveals the diary's existence to Elsa before they sleep together.\nIn Austria, Indy and Elsa infiltrate the castle, discovering it to be under Nazi control. Indy finds Henry and tries to escape, but surrenders after Elsa is held captive by the Nazis. She reveals herself to be a Nazi collaborator and takes the diary, and Indy and Henry are tied up and learn that Donovan is also working with the Nazis. After arriving in Alexandretta, Marcus is captured by the Nazis as well. Elsa returns to Germany, while Indy and Henry escape the castle before traveling to Berlin to retrieve the diary. After recovering it from Elsa, Indy and Henry flee on a Zeppelin before evading two Luftwaffe planes pursuing them.\nOnce Indy and Henry arrive in Hatay, Sallah informs them that the Nazis have also traveled there using the map. While they are following the trail, the Nazis are attacked by the Brotherhood but defeat them. Henry takes advantage of the distraction to try to rescue Marcus but is captured; Indy attacks the Nazi convoy in response and is eventually able to destroy it with help from Henry and Marcus. Indy, Henry, Marcus and Sallah proceed to a temple containing the Grail, where they observe the Nazis attempting to overcome the temple's traps before being captured. Donovan forces Indy to find safe passage for them by mortally wounding Henry; a drink from the Grail can heal him. With the help of the diary, Indy overcomes the traps and finds a room with many cups and an ancient knight, who explains that only one cup is the true Grail. Donovan and Elsa enter the room, and Elsa deliberately gives him the wrong cup, killing Donovan after he drinks from it. Indy identifies the true Grail and rescues Henry. Elsa falls to her death when her attempt to leave with the Grail causes the temple to collapse, and Indy nearly suffers the same fate before Henry saves him. The Grail falls into an abyss as Indy and his companions escape and ride off into the sunset.\nCast.\nKevork Malikyan portrays Kazim, the leader of the Brotherhood of the Cruciform Sword, an organization that protects the Holy Grail through the centuries. Malikyan had impressed Spielberg with his performance in \"Midnight Express\" (1978) and would have auditioned for the role of Sallah in \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" had a traffic jam not delayed his meeting with the director. Robert Eddison appears as the Grail Knight, the guardian of the Grail who drank from the cup of Christ during the Crusades. Eddison was a stage and television veteran only appearing in a few films since the 1930s. Glover recalled Eddison was excited and nervous for his return to film, often asking if he had performed correctly. Laurence Olivier was originally considered to play the Grail Knight, but he was too ill and died the same year in which the film was released.\nMichael Sheard briefly appears as Adolf Hitler, whom Jones encounters at a book-burning rally in Berlin. Although a non-speaking role, Sheard could speak German and had already portrayed Hitler three times during his career. He had also appeared as the U-boat commander Oskar Schomburg in \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\". In the same scene, Ronald Lacey, who played SD agent Arnold Toht in \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\", cameos as Heinrich Himmler. Alexei Sayle played the fictional sultan of Hatay (the real Hatay State was a republic). Paul Maxwell portrayed \"the man with the Panama Hat\" who took possession of the Cross of Coronado. Wrestler and stuntman Pat Roach, who played three roles in the previous two films (notably the musclebound German soldier who gets into a fistfight with Jones in \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\"), made a short cameo as the Nazi who accompanies Vogel to the Zeppelin. Roach was set to film a fight with Ford, but it was cut. In a deleted scene, Roach's agent boards the second biplane on the Zeppelin with a World War I flying ace (played by Frederick Jaeger), only for the pair to fall to their deaths after the flying ace makes an error. Richard Young played Garth, the leader of the tomb robbers who chased young Indiana Jones and then gives him his hat. Eugene Lipinski portrayed the mysterious agent G-Man, while Vernon Dobtcheff appeared as the butler of Castle Brunwald.\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nGeorge Lucas and Steven Spielberg had intended to make a trilogy of \"Indiana Jones\" films since Lucas had first pitched \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" to Spielberg in 1977, though they signed for five films with Paramount Pictures by 1979. After the mixed critical and public reaction to \"Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom\", Spielberg decided to complete the trilogy to fulfill his promise to Lucas, with the intent to imbue the film with the spirit and tone of \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\". \"Temple of Doom\" writers Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz chose not to return due to both having other commitments and feeling satisfied with their work in the second film. Throughout the film's development and pre-production, Spielberg admitted he was \"consciously regressing\" in making the film. Due to his commitment to the film, the director had to drop out of directing \"Big\" and \"Rain Man\".\nLucas initially suggested making the film \"a haunted mansion movie\", for which \"Romancing the Stone\" writer Diane Thomas wrote a script. Spielberg rejected the idea because of the similarity to \"Poltergeist\", which he had co-written and produced. Lucas first introduced the Holy Grail in an idea for the film's prologue, which was to be set in Scotland. He intended the Grail to have a pagan basis, with the rest of the film revolving around a separate Christian artifact in Africa. Spielberg did not care for the Grail idea, which he found too esoteric, even after Lucas suggested giving it healing powers and the ability to grant immortality (much like the fictional magical power given to the Ark in the first film of the trilogy). In September 1984, Lucas completed an eight-page treatment titled \"Indiana Jones and the Monkey King\", which he soon followed with an 11-page outline. The story saw Indiana battling a ghost in Scotland before finding the Fountain of Youth in Africa.\nChris Columbus\u2014who had written the Spielberg-produced \"Gremlins\", \"The Goonies\", and \"Young Sherlock Holmes\"\u2014was hired to write the script. His first draft, dated May 3, 1985, changed the main plot device to a Garden of Immortal Peaches. It begins in 1937, with Indiana battling the murderous ghost of Baron Seamus Seagrove III in Scotland. Indiana travels to Mozambique to aid Dr. Clare Clarke (a Katharine Hepburn-type according to Lucas), who has found a 200-year-old pygmy. The pygmy is kidnapped by the Nazis during a boat chase, and Indiana, Clare and Scraggy Brier\u2014an old friend of Indiana\u2014travel up the Zambezi river to rescue him. Indiana is killed in the climactic battle but is resurrected by the Monkey King. Other characters include a cannibalistic African tribe; Nazi Sergeant Gutterbuhg, who has a mechanical arm; Betsy, a stowaway student who is suicidally in love with Indiana; and a pirate leader named Kezure (described as a Toshiro Mifune-type), who dies eating a peach because he is not pure of heart.\nColumbus's second draft, dated August 6, 1985, removed Betsy and featured Dash\u2014an expatriate bar owner for whom the Nazis work\u2014and the Monkey King as villains. The Monkey King forces Indiana and Dash to play chess with real people and disintegrates each person who is captured. Indiana subsequently battles the undead, destroys the Monkey King's rod, and marries Clare. Location scouting commenced in Africa but Spielberg and Lucas abandoned \"Monkey King\" because of its negative depiction of African natives, and because the script was too unrealistic. Spielberg acknowledged that it made him \"... feel very old, too old to direct it.\" Columbus's script was leaked onto the Internet in 1997, and many believed it was an early draft for the fourth film because it was mistakenly dated to 1995.\nDissatisfied, Spielberg suggested introducing Indiana's father, Henry Jones, Sr. Lucas was dubious, believing the Grail should be the story's focus, but Spielberg convinced him that the father\u2013son relationship would serve as a great metaphor in Indiana's search for the artifact. Spielberg hired Menno Meyjes, who had worked on Spielberg's \"The Color Purple\" and \"Empire of the Sun\", to begin a new script on January 1, 1986. Meyjes completed his script ten months later. It depicted Indiana searching for his father in Monts\u00e9gur, where he meets a nun named Chantal. Indiana travels to Venice, takes the \"Orient Express\" to Istanbul, and continues by train to Petra, where he meets Sallah and reunites with his father. Together they find the grail. At the climax, a Nazi villain touches the Grail and explodes; when Henry touches it, he ascends a stairway to Heaven. Chantal chooses to stay on Earth because of her love for Indiana. In a revised draft dated two months later, Indiana finds his father in Krak des Chevaliers, the Nazi leader is a woman named Greta von Grimm, and Indiana battles a demon at the Grail site, which he defeats with a dagger inscribed with \"God is King\". The prologue in both drafts has Indiana in Mexico battling for possession of Montezuma's death mask with a man who owns gorillas as pets.\nSpielberg suggested \"Innerspace\" writer Jeffrey Boam perform the next rewrite. Boam spent two weeks reworking the story with Lucas, which yielded a treatment that is largely similar to the final film. Boam told Lucas that Indiana should find his father in the middle of the story. \"Given the fact that it's the third film in the series, you couldn't just end with them obtaining the object. That's how the first two films ended,\" he said, \"So I thought, let them \"lose\" the Grail, and let the father\u2013son relationship be the main point. It's an archaeological search for Indy's own identity and coming to accept his father is more what it's about [than the quest for the Grail].\" Boam said he felt there was not enough character development in the previous films. In Boam's first draft, dated September 1987, the film is set in 1939. The prologue has adult Indiana retrieving an Aztec relic for a museum curator in Mexico and features the circus train. Henry and Elsa (who is described as having dark hair) were searching for the Grail on behalf of the Chandler Foundation, before Henry went missing. The character of Kazim is here named Kemal, and is an agent of the Republic of Hatay, which seeks the grail for its own. Kemal shoots Henry and dies drinking from the wrong chalice. The Grail Knight battles Indiana on horseback, while Vogel is crushed by a boulder while attempting to steal the Grail.\nBoam's February 23, 1988, rewrite used many of Connery's comic suggestions. It included the prologue that was eventually filmed; because of the mixed response to \"Empire of the Sun\", which was about a young boy, Lucas had to convince Spielberg to show Indiana as a boy. Spielberg\u2014who was later awarded the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award\u2014had the idea of making Indiana a Boy Scout. The 1912 prologue as seen in the film refers to events in the lives of Indiana's creators. When Indiana cracks the bullwhip to defend himself against a lion, he accidentally lashes and scars his chin. Ford gained this scar in a car accident as a young man. Indiana taking his nickname from his pet Alaskan Malamute is a reference to the character being named after Lucas's dog. The train carriage Indiana enters is named \"Doctor Fantasy's Magic Caboose\", which was the name producer Frank Marshall used when performing magic tricks. Spielberg suggested the idea, Marshall came up with the false-bottomed box through which Indiana escapes, and production designer Elliott Scott suggested the trick be done in a single, uninterrupted shot. Spielberg intended the shot of Henry with his umbrella\u2014after he causes the bird strike on the German plane\u2014to evoke \"Ryan's Daughter\". Indiana's mother, named Margaret in this version, dismisses Indiana when he returns home with the Cross of Coronado, while his father is on a long-distance call. Walter Chandler of the Chandler Foundation features, but is not the main villain; he plunges to his death in the tank. Elsa introduces Indiana and Brody to a large Venetian family that knows Henry. Leni Riefenstahl appears at the Nazi rally in Berlin. Vogel is beheaded by the traps guarding the Grail. Kemal tries to blow up the Grail Temple during a comic fight in which gunpowder is repeatedly lit and extinguished. Elsa shoots Henry, then dies drinking from the wrong Grail, and Indiana rescues his father from falling into the chasm while grasping for the Grail. Boam's revision of March 1 showed Henry causing the seagulls to strike the plane, and has Henry saving Indiana at the end.\nDuring an undated \"Amblin Entertainment\" revision and a rewrite by Tom Stoppard (under the pen name Barry Watson) dated May 8, 1988, further changes were made. Stoppard polished most of the dialogue, and created the \"Panama Hat\" character to link the prologue's segments featuring the young and adult Indianas. The Venetian family is cut. Kemal is renamed Kazim and now wants to protect the grail rather than find it. Chandler is renamed Donovan. The scene of Brody being captured is added. Vogel now dies in the tank, while Donovan shoots Henry and then drinks from the false grail, and Elsa falls into the chasm. The Grail trials are expanded to include the stone-stepping and leap of faith.\nFilming.\nPrincipal photography began on May 16, 1988, in the Tabernas Desert in Spain's Almer\u00eda province. Spielberg originally had planned the chase to be a short sequence shot over two days, but he drew up storyboards to make the scene an action-packed centerpiece. Thinking he would not surpass the truck pursuit from \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\" (because the truck was much faster than the tank), he felt this sequence should be more story-based and needed to show Indiana and Henry helping each other. He later said he had more fun storyboarding the sequence than filming it. The second unit had begun filming two weeks before. After approximately ten days, the production moved to the , to film the scenes set in the Sultan of Hatay's palace. Cabo de Gata-N\u00edjar Natural Park was used for the road, tunnel and beach sequence (at Playa de M\u00f3nsul) in which birds strike the plane. The shoot's Spanish portion wrapped on June 2, 1988, in Guadix, Granada, with filming of Brody's capture at Alexandretta train station. The filmmakers built a mosque near the station for atmosphere, rather than adding it as a visual effect.\nThe exteriors of \"Brunwald Castle\" were filmed at B\u00fcrresheim Castle in West Germany. In the movie the image of the castle has been flipped and the building was expanded with a Matte painting depicting a copy of the right facade to the left of the main tower. Filming for the castle interiors took place in the United Kingdom from June 5 to\u00a010, 1988, at Elstree Studios in Borehamwood, England. On June 16, Lawrence Hall, London, was used as the interior of Berlin Tempelhof Airport. Filming returned to Elstree the next day to capture the motorcycle escape, continuing at the studio for interior scenes until July 18. One day was spent at North Weald Airfield on June 29 to film Indiana leaving for Venice. Ford and Connery acted much of the Zeppelin table conversation without trousers on because of the overheated set. Spielberg, Marshall and Kennedy interrupted the shoot to make a plea to the Parliament of the United Kingdom to support the economically \"depressed\" British studios. July\u00a020\u201322 was spent filming the temple interiors. The temple set, which took six weeks to build, was supported on of hydraulics and ten gimbals for use during the earthquake scene. Resetting between takes took twenty minutes while the hydraulics were put to their starting positions and the cracks filled with plaster. The shot of the Grail falling to the temple floor\u2014causing the first crack to appear\u2014was attempted on the full-size set, but proved too difficult. Instead, crews built a separate floor section that incorporated a pre-scored crack sealed with plaster. It took several takes to throw the Grail from onto the right part of the crack. July\u00a025\u201326 was spent on night shoots at Stowe School, Stowe, Buckinghamshire, for the Nazi rally.\nFilming resumed two days later at Elstree, where Spielberg swiftly filmed the library, Portuguese freighter, and catacombs sequences. The steamship fight in the prologue's 1938 portion was filmed in three days on a sixty-by-forty-feet (eighteen-by-twelve-meter) deck built on gimbals at Elstree. A dozen dump tanks \u2013 each holding three hundred imperial gallons (360 U.S. gallons; 3000\u00a0lb.; 1363 liters) of water \u2013 were used in the scene. Henry's house was filmed at Mill Hill, London. Indiana and Kazim's fight in Venice in front of a ship's propeller was filmed in a water tank at Elstree. Spielberg used a long focus lens to make it appear the actors were closer to the propeller than they really were. Two days later, on August 4, another portion of the boat chase using Hacker Craft sport boats, was filmed at Tilbury Docks in Essex. The shot of the boats passing between two ships was achieved by first cabling the ships off so they would be safe. The ships were moved together while the boats passed between, close enough that one of the boats scraped the sides of the ships. An empty speedboat containing dummies was launched from a floating platform between the ships amid fire and smoke that helped obscure the platform. The stunt was performed twice because the boat landed too short of the camera in the first attempt. The following day, filming in England wrapped at the Royal Masonic School in Rickmansworth, which doubled for Indiana's college (as it had in \"Raiders of the Lost Ark\").\nShooting in Venice took place on August 8. For scenes such as Indiana and Brody greeting Elsa, shots of the boat chase, and Kazim telling Indiana where his father is, Robert Watts gained control of the Grand Canal from 7\u00a0am to 1\u00a0pm, sealing off tourists for as long as possible. Cinematographer Douglas Slocombe positioned the camera to ensure no satellite dishes would be visible. San Barnaba di Venezia served as the library's exterior. The next day, filming moved to the ancient city of Petra, Jordan, where Al Khazneh (The Treasury) stood in for the temple housing the Grail. The cast and crew became guests of King Hussein and Queen Noor. The Treasury had previously appeared in \"Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger\". The main cast completed their scenes that week, after 63 days of filming.\nThe second unit filmed part of the prologue's 1912 segment from August 29 to September 3. The main unit began two days later with the circus train sequence at Alamosa, Colorado, on the Cumbres and Toltec Scenic Railroad. They filmed at Pagosa Springs on September 7, and then at Cortez on September 10. From September 14 to\u00a016, filming of Indiana falling into the train carriages took place in Los Angeles. The production then moved to Utah's Arches National Park to shoot more of the opening. A house in Antonito, Colorado was used for the Jones family home. The production had intended to film at Mesa Verde National Park, but Native American representatives had religious objections to its use. When Spielberg and editor Michael Kahn viewed a rough cut of the film in late 1988, they felt it suffered from a lack of action. The motorcycle chase was shot during post-production at Mount Tamalpais and Fairfax near Skywalker Ranch. The closing shot of Indiana, Henry, Sallah and Brody riding into the sunset was filmed in Amarillo, Texas in early 1989 by the second unit, directed by Frank Marshall. Filming ended on September 16, 1988, after 123 days of filming.\nDesign.\nMechanical effects supervisor George Gibbs said the film was the most difficult one of his career. He visited a museum to negotiate renting a small French World War I tank, but decided he wanted to make one. The tank was based on the Tank Mark VIII, which was long and weighed . However, some liberties were taken with the design. Gibbs built the tank over the framework of a excavator and added tracks that were driven by two automatic hydraulic pumps, each connected to a Range Rover V8 engine. Gibbs built the tank from steel rather than aluminum or fiberglass because it would allow the realistically suspensionless vehicle to endure the rocky surfaces. Unlike its historic counterpart, which had only the two side guns, the tank had a turret gun added as well. It took four months to build and was transported to Almer\u00eda on a Short Belfast plane and then a low loader truck.\nThe tank broke down twice. The distributor's rotor arm broke and a replacement had to be sourced from Madrid. Then two of the device's valves used to cool the oil exploded, due to solder melting and mixing with the oil. It was very hot in the tank, despite the installation of ten fans, and the lack of suspension meant the driver was unable to stop shaking during filming breaks. The tank only moved at , which Vic Armstrong said made it difficult to film Indiana riding a horse against the tank while making it appear faster. A smaller section of the tank's top made from aluminum and which used rubber tracks was used for close-ups. It was built from a searchlight trailer, weighed eight tons, and was towed by a four-wheel drive truck. It had safety nets on each end to prevent injury to those falling off. A quarter-scale model by Gibbs was driven over a cliff on location; Industrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM) created further shots of the tank's destruction with models and miniatures.\nMichael Lantieri, mechanical effects supervisor for the 1912 scenes, noted the difficulty in shooting the train sequence. \"You can't just stop a train,\" he said, \"If it misses its mark, it takes blocks and blocks to stop it and back up.\" Lantieri hid handles for the actors and stuntmen to grab onto when leaping from carriage to carriage. The carriage interiors shot at Universal Studios Hollywood were built on tubes that inflated and deflated to create a rocking motion. For the close-up of the rhinoceros that strikes at (and misses) Indiana, a foam and fiberglass animatronic was made in London. When Spielberg decided he wanted it to move, the prop was sent to John Carl Buechler in Los Angeles, who resculpted it over three days to blink, snarl, snort and wiggle its ears. The giraffes were also created in London. Because steam locomotives are very loud, Lantieri's crew would respond to first assistant director David Tomblin's radioed directions by making the giraffes nod or shake their heads to his questions, which amused the crew. For the villains' cars, Lantieri selected a 1914 Ford Model T, a 1919 Ford Model T truck and a 1916 Saxon Model 14, fitting each with a Ford Pinto V6 engine. Sacks of dust were hung under the cars to create a dustier environment.\nSpielberg used doves for the seagulls that Henry scares into striking the German plane because the real gulls used in the first take did not fly. In December 1988, Lucasfilm ordered 1,000 disease-free gray rats for the catacombs scenes from the company that supplied the snakes and bugs for the previous films. Within five months, 5,000 rats had been bred for the sequence; 1,000 mechanical rats stood in for those that were set on fire. Several thousand snakes of five breeds\u2014including a boa constrictor\u2014were used for the train scene, in addition to rubber ones onto which Phoenix could fall. The snakes would slither from their crates, requiring the crew to dig through sawdust after filming to find and return them. Two lions were used, which became nervous because of the rocking motion and flickering lights.\nCostume designer Anthony Powell found it a challenge to create Connery's costume because the script required the character to wear the same clothes throughout. Powell thought about his own grandfather and incorporated tweed suits and fishing hats. Powell felt it necessary for Henry to wear glasses, but did not want to hide Connery's eyes, so chose rimless ones. He could not find any suitable, so he had them specially made. The Nazi costumes were genuine and were found in Eastern Europe by Powell's co-designer Joanna Johnston, to whom he gave research pictures and drawings for reference.\nThe motorcycles used in the chase from the castle were a mixed bag: the scout model with sidecar in which Indy and Henry escape was an original Dnepr, complete with machine gun pintle on the sidecar, while the pursuing vehicles were more modern machines dressed up with equipment and logos to make them resemble German army models.\nGibbs used two Swiss Pilatus P-2 air force training planes standing in as pursuing Luftwaffe Arado Ar 96s for the Zeppelin biplane escape sequence. He built a device based on an internal combustion engine to simulate gunfire, which was safer and less expensive than firing blanks. Baking soda was applied to Connery to create Henry's bullet wound. Vinegar was applied to create the foaming effect as the water from the Grail washes it away.\nAt least one reproduction K\u00fcbelwagen was used during filming despite the film being set two years prior to manufacture of said vehicles.\nVisual effects.\nIndustrial Light &amp; Magic built an foam model of the Zeppelin to complement shots of Ford and Connery climbing into the Gotha Go 145C biplane. A biplane model with a wingspan was used for the shot of the biplane detaching. Stop-motion animation was used for the shot of the German fighter's wings breaking off as it crashes through the tunnel. The tunnel was a model that occupied 14 of ILM's parking spaces for two months. It was built in eight-foot sections, with hinges allowing each section to be opened to film through. Ford and Connery were filmed against bluescreen; the sequence required their car to have a dirty windscreen, but to make the integration easier this was removed and later composited into the shot. Dust and shadows were animated onto shots of the plane miniature to make it appear as if it disturbed rocks and dirt before it exploded. Several hundred tim-birds were used in the background shots of the seagulls striking the other plane; for the closer shots, ILM dropped feather-coated crosses onto the camera. These only looked convincing because the scene's quick cuts merely required shapes that suggested gulls. ILM's Wes Takahashi supervised the film's visual effects sequences.\nSpielberg devised the three trials that guard the Grail. For the first, the blades under which Indiana ducks like a penitent man were a mix of practical and miniature blades created by Gibbs and ILM. For the second trial, in which Indiana spells \"Iehova\" on stable stepping stones, it was intended to have a tarantula crawl up Indiana after he mistakenly steps on \"J\". This was filmed and deemed unsatisfactory, so ILM filmed a stuntman hanging through a hole that appears in the floor, above a cavern. As this was dark, it did not matter that the matte painting and models were rushed late in production. The third trial, the leap of faith that Indiana makes over an apparently impassable ravine after discovering a bridge hidden by forced perspective, was created with a model bridge and painted backgrounds. This was cheaper than building a full-size set. A puppet of Ford was used to create a shadow on the by model because Ford had filmed the scene against bluescreen, which did not incorporate the shaft of light from the entrance.\nSpielberg wanted Donovan's death shown in one shot, so it would not look like an actor having makeup applied between takes. Inflatable pads were applied to Julian Glover's forehead and cheeks by Nick Dudman that made his eyes seem to recede during the character's initial decomposition, as well as a mechanical wig that grew his hair. The shot of Donovan's death was the first all-digital composite scene in a movie, and was created over three months by morphing together three puppets of Donovan created by Stephan Dupuis in separate stages of decay, a technique ILM mastered on \"Willow\" (1988). A fourth puppet was used for the decaying clothes, because the puppet's torso mechanics had been exposed. Complications arose because Alison Doody's double had not been filmed for the scene's latter two elements, so the background and hair from the first shot had to be used throughout, with the other faces mapped over it. Donovan's skeleton was hung on wires like a marionette; it required several takes to film it crashing against the wall because not all the pieces released upon impact.\nBen Burtt designed the sound effects. He recorded chickens for the sounds of the rats, and digitally manipulated the noise made by a Styrofoam cup for the castle fire. He rode in a biplane to record the sounds for the dogfight sequence, and visited the demolition of a wind turbine for the plane crashes. Burtt wanted an echoing gunshot for Donovan wounding Henry, so he fired a .357 Magnum in Skywalker Ranch's underground car park, just as Lucas drove in. A rubber balloon was used for the earthquake tremors at the temple. The film was released in select theaters in the 70\u00a0mm Full-Field Sound format, which allowed sounds to not only move from side to side, but also from the theater's front to its rear.\nMatte paintings of the Austrian castle and the Berlin airport were based on real buildings; the Austrian castle \"Schloss Brunwald\" is B\u00fcrresheim Castle near Mayen in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany, that was made to look larger. Rain was created by filming granulated Borax soap against black at high speed. It was only lightly double exposed into the shots so it would not resemble snow. The lightning was animated. The Administration Building at San Francisco's Treasure Island was used as the exterior of Berlin Tempelhof Airport. The structure already had period-appropriate art deco architecture, as it had been constructed in 1938 for planned use as an airport terminal. ILM added a control tower, Nazi banners, vintage automobiles and a sign stating \"Berlin Flughafen\". The establishing shot of the Hatayan city at dusk was created by filming silhouetted cutouts that were backlit and obscured by smoke. Matte paintings were used for the sky and to give the appearance of fill light in the shadows and rim light on the edges of the buildings.\nThemes.\nA son's relationship with his estranged father is a common theme in Spielberg's films, including \"E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial\" and \"Hook\". \nThe film's exploration of fathers and sons coupled with its use of religious imagery is comparable to two other 1989 films, \"\" and \"Field of Dreams\". Writing for \"The New York Times\", Caryn James felt the combination in these films reflected New Age concerns, where the worship of God was equated to searching for fathers. James felt that neither Indiana nor his father is preoccupied with finding the Grail or defeating the Nazis, but that, rather, both seek professional respect for one another in their boys' own adventure. James contrasted the temple's biblically epic destruction with the more effective and quiet conversation between the Joneses at the film's end. James noted that Indiana's mother does not appear in the prologue, being portrayed as already having died before the film's events began.\nRelease.\nMarketing.\nThe film's teaser trailer debuted in November 1988 with \"Scrooged\" and \"\". Rob MacGregor wrote the tie-in novelization that was released in June 1989; it sold enough copies to be included on the \"New York Times\" Best Seller list. MacGregor went on to write the first six \"Indiana Jones\" prequel novels during the 1990s. Following the film's release, Ford donated Indiana's fedora and jacket to the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History.\nNo toys were made to promote the film; Indiana Jones \"never happened on the toy level\", said Larry Carlat, senior editor of the journal \"Children's Business\". Rather, Lucasfilm promoted Indiana as a lifestyle symbol, selling tie-in fedoras, shirts, jackets and watches. Two video games based on the film were released by LucasArts in 1989: ' and '. A third game was produced by Taito and released in 1991 for the Nintendo Entertainment System. Ryder Windham wrote another novelization, released in April 2008 by Scholastic, to coincide with the release of \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\". Hasbro released toys based on \"The Last Crusade\" in July 2008.\nBox office.\nThe film was released in the United States and Canada on Wednesday, May 24, 1989, in 2,327 theaters, earning a record $37,031,573 over the 4-day Memorial Day weekend. The gross was boosted by high ticket prices in some venues ($7 a ticket). Its 3-day opening weekend figure of $29,355,021 was surpassed later that year by \"Ghostbusters II\" and \"Batman\", which grossed more in its opening 3 days than \"The Last Crusade\" in 4. The film would hold the record for having the highest Memorial Day weekend gross until 1994 when \"The Flintstones\" took it. Additionally, it had the largest opening weekend for a Harrison Ford film for eight years until \"Air Force One\" surpassed it in 1997. Its Saturday gross of $11,181,429 was the first time a film had made over $10\u00a0million in one day. It broke the record for the best seven-day performance with a gross of $50.2\u00a0million, beating the $45.7\u00a0million grossed by \"Temple of Doom\" in 1984 on 1,687 screens. It added another record with $77\u00a0million after twelve days, and earned $100\u00a0million in a record nineteen days. In France, the film broke a record by selling a million admissions within two and a half weeks. In the United Kingdom, it opened in three London theaters before opening two days later on 361 screens nationally, setting an opening weekend record of \u00a31,811,542 ($2,862,200), breaking the one set the year before by \"Crocodile Dundee II\". It spent six weeks at number one in the United Kingdom.\nThe film eventually grossed $197.1\u00a0million in the United States and Canada and $277\u00a0million internationally, for a worldwide total of $474.2 million. At the time of its release, the film was the 11th highest-grossing film of all time. Despite competition from \"Batman\", \"The Last Crusade\" became the highest-grossing film worldwide in 1989. In North America, \"Batman\" took top position. Behind \"Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" and \"Raiders\", \"The Last Crusade\" is the third-highest grossing Indiana Jones film in the United States and Canada, though it is also behind \"Temple of Doom\" when adjusting for inflation. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 49 million tickets in North America. The film was re-released in 1992 earning $139,000.\nHome media.\nThe film was released along with its two predecessors as part of a trilogy DVD box set in 2003. It contained extra materials and a special documentary covering the production of the films. Sales figures for the box set were extremely successful and 600,000 copies were sold in the US on the first day of release. In 2012, the film was released on Blu-ray along with the three other films in the Indiana Jones film series at the time. In 2021, a remastered 4K HDR version of the film was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray, produced using scans of the original negatives. It was released as part of a box set for the then four films in the Indiana Jones film series.\nReception.\nCritical response.\nOn Rotten Tomatoes, \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" has an approval rating of based on reviews, with an average rating of 8/10. The site's critics consensus reads, \"Lighter and more comedic than its predecessor, \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" returns the series to the brisk serial adventure of \"Raiders\", while adding a dynamite double act between Harrison Ford and Sean Connery.\" Metacritic calculated a weighted average score of 65 out of 100 based on 14 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of \"A\" on an A+ to F scale.\nJay Boyar of the \"Orlando Sentinel\" said that while the film \"lacks the novelty of \"Raiders\", and the breathless pacing of \"Temple of Doom\", it was an entertaining capper to the trilogy.\" Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" remarked the film was \"the wildest and wittiest Indy of them all\". Richard Corliss of \"Time\" and David Ansen of \"Newsweek\" praised it, as did Vincent Canby of \"The New York Times\". \"Though it seems to have the manner of some magically reconstituted B-movie of an earlier era, \"The Last Crusade\" is an endearing original,\" Canby wrote, calling the revelation that Jones had a father who was not proud of him to be a \"comic surprise\". Canby believed that while the film did not match the previous two in its pacing, it still had \"hilariously off-the-wall sequences\" such as the circus train chase. He also said that Spielberg was maturing by focusing on the father\u2013son relationship, a call echoed by McBride in \"Variety\". Roger Ebert praised the sequence depicting Jones as a Boy Scout with the Cross of Coronado, comparing it to the \"style of illustration that appeared in the boys' adventure magazines of the 1940s\". He said that Spielberg \"must have been paging through his old issues of \"Boys' Life\" magazine...the feeling that you can stumble over astounding adventures just by going on a hike with your Scout troop. Spielberg lights the scene in the strong, basic colors of old pulp magazines.\" \"The Hollywood Reporter\" felt Connery and Ford deserved Academy Award nominations.\nIt was panned by Andrew Sarris in \"The New York Observer\", David Denby in \"New York\" magazine, Stanley Kauffmann in \"The New Republic\" and Georgia Brown in \"The Village Voice\". Jonathan Rosenbaum of the \"Chicago Reader\" called the film \"soulless\". \"The Washington Post\" reviewed the film twice; Hal Hinson's review on the day of the film's release was negative, describing it as \"nearly all chases and dull exposition\". Although he praised Ford and Connery, he felt the film's exploration of Jones's character took away his mystery and that Spielberg should not have tried to mature his storytelling. Two days later, Desson Thomson published a positive review praising the film's adventure and action, as well as the father\u2013son relationship's thematic depth.\nIn 2025, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" listed \"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade\" as having the best stunts of 1989.\nAccolades.\nThe film won the Academy Award for Best Sound Effects Editing; it also received nominations for Best Original Score and Best Sound (Ben Burtt, Gary Summers, Shawn Murphy and Tony Dawe). Connery received a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Connery and the visual and sound effects teams were also nominated at the 43rd British Academy Film Awards. The film won the 1990 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, and was nominated for Best Motion Picture Drama at the Young Artist Awards. John Williams's score won a Broadcast Music Incorporated Award, and was nominated for a Grammy Award.\nThe prologue depicting Jones in his youth inspired Lucas to create \"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\" television series, which featured Sean Patrick Flanery as the young adult Indiana and Corey Carrier as the 8- to 10-year-old Indiana. According to Dark Horse Comics author Lee Marrs, Lucasfilm considered for a while to make a continuation to the film series starring Phoenix as a younger Jones, but these plans were dropped after his untimely death. The 13-year-old incarnation played by Phoenix in the film was the focus of a \"Young Indiana Jones\" series of young adult novels that began in 1990; by the ninth novel, the series had become a tie-in to the television show. German author Wolfgang Hohlbein revisited the prologue in one of his novels, in which Jones encounters the lead grave robber\u2014whom Hohlbein christens Jake\u2014in 1943. The film's ending begins the 1995 comic series \"Indiana Jones and the Spear of Destiny\", which moves forward to depict Jones and his father searching for the Holy Lance in Ireland in 1945. Spielberg intended to have Connery cameo as Henry in \"Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull\" (2008), but Connery turned it down as he had retired.\nPetra's use for the movie's climactic scenes greatly contributed to its popularity as an international tourist destination. Before the film's release, only a few thousand visitors per year made the trip; since then it has grown to almost a million annually. Shops and hotels near the site play up the connection, and it is mentioned prominently in itineraries of locations used in the film series. Jordan's tourism board mentions the connection on its website. In 2012, the satirical news site The Pan-Arabia Enquirer ran a mock story claiming that the board had officially renamed Petra \"That Place from \"Indiana Jones\"\" to reflect how the world more commonly refers to it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51890", "revid": "47501071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51890", "title": "Daubentonia", "text": "Genus of mammals\nDaubentonia is the sole genus of the Daubentoniidae, a family of lemuroid primate native to much of Madagascar.\nThe aye-aye \"(Daubentonia madagascariensis)\" is the only extant member. However, a second species known as the giant aye-aye \"(Daubentonia robusta)\" lived until recently, becoming extinct within the last 1000 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51892", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51892", "title": "Textile", "text": "Various fibre-based materials\nTextile is an umbrella term that includes various fibre-based materials, including fibres, yarns, filaments, threads, and different types of fabric. At first, the word \"textiles\" only referred to woven fabrics. However, weaving is not the only manufacturing method, and many other methods were later developed to form textile structures based on their intended use. Knitting and non-woven are other popular types of fabric manufacturing. In the contemporary world, textiles satisfy the material needs for versatile applications, from simple daily clothing to bulletproof jackets, spacesuits, and doctor's gowns.\nTextiles are divided into two groups: consumer textiles for domestic purposes and technical textiles. In consumer textiles, aesthetics and comfort are the most important factors, while in technical textiles, functional properties are the priority. The durability of textiles is an important property, with common cotton or blend garments (such as t-shirts) able to last twenty years or more with regular use and care.\nGeotextiles, industrial textiles, medical textiles, and many other areas are examples of technical textiles, whereas clothing and furnishings are examples of consumer textiles. Each component of a textile product, including fibre, yarn, fabric, processing, and finishing, affects the final product. Components may vary among various textile products as they are selected based on their fitness for purpose.\nFibre is the smallest fabric component; fibres are typically spun into yarn, and yarns are used to manufacture fabrics. Fibre has a hair-like appearance and a higher length-to-width ratio. The sources of fibres may be natural, synthetic, or both. The techniques of felting and bonding directly transform fibres into fabric. In other cases, yarns are manipulated with different fabric manufacturing systems to produce various fabric constructions. The fibres are twisted or laid out to make a long, continuous strand of yarn. Yarns are then used to make different kinds of fabric by weaving, knitting, crocheting, knotting, tatting, or braiding. After manufacturing, textile materials are processed and finished to add value, such as aesthetics, physical characteristics, and utility in certain use cases. The manufacturing of textiles is the oldest industrial art. Dyeing, printing, and embroidery are all different decorative arts applied to textile materials.\nEtymology.\nTextile.\nThe word 'textile' comes from the Latin adjective , meaning 'woven', which itself stems from , the past participle of the verb , 'to weave'. Originally applied to woven fabrics, the term \"textiles\" is now used to encompass a diverse range of materials, including fibres, yarns, and fabrics, as well as other related items.\nFabric.\nA \"fabric\" is defined as any thin, flexible material made from yarn, directly from fibres, polymeric film, foam, or any combination of these techniques. Fabric has a broader application than cloth. Fabric is synonymous with cloth, material, goods, or piece goods. The word 'fabric' also derives from Latin, with roots in the Proto-Indo-European language. Stemming most recently from the Middle French , or \"building,\" and earlier from the Latin ('workshop; an art, trade; a skillful production, structure, fabric'), the noun stems from the Latin \" artisan who works in hard materials', which itself is derived from the Proto-Indo-European \"dhabh-\", meaning 'to fit together'.\nCloth.\nAlthough cloth is a type of fabric, not all fabrics can be classified as cloth due to differences in their manufacturing processes, physical properties, and intended uses. Materials that are woven, knitted, tufted, or knotted from yarns are referred to as cloth, while wallpaper, plastic upholstery products, carpets, and nonwoven materials are examples of fabrics.\nCloth is a flexible substance typically created through the processes of weaving, felting, or knitting using natural or synthetic materials. The word 'cloth' derives from the Old English , meaning \"a cloth, woven, or felted material to wrap around one's body', from the Proto-Germanic , similar to the Old Frisian , the Middle Dutch , the Middle High German and the German , all meaning 'garment'.\nHistory.\nTextiles themselves are too fragile to survive across millennia; the tools used for spinning and weaving make up most of the prehistoric evidence for textile work. The earliest tool for spinning was the spindle, to which a whorl was eventually added. The weight of the whorl improved the thickness and twist of the spun thread. Later, the spinning wheel was invented. Historians are unsure where; some say China, others India.\nThe precursors of today's textiles include leaves, barks, fur pelts, and felted cloths.\nThe Banton Burial Cloth, the oldest existing example of warp ikat in Southeast Asia, is displayed at the National Museum of the Philippines. The cloth was most likely made by the native Asian people of northwest Romblon.\nThe first clothes, worn at least 70,000 years ago and perhaps much earlier, were probably made of animal skins and helped protect early humans from the elements. At some point, people learned to weave plant fibres into textiles.\nThe discovery of dyed flax fibres in a cave in the Republic of Georgia dated to 34,000 BCE suggests that textile-like materials were made as early as the Paleolithic era.\nThe speed and scale of textile production have been altered almost beyond recognition by industrialization and the introduction of modern manufacturing techniques. However, for the main types of textiles, plain weave, twill, or satin weave, there is little difference between the ancient and modern methods.\nTextile industry.\nThe textile industry grew out of art and craft and was kept going by craft guilds. In the 18th and 19th centuries, during the Industrial Revolution, it became increasingly mechanized. In 1765, when a machine for spinning wool or cotton called the spinning jenny was invented in the United Kingdom, textile production became the first economic activity to be industrialized. In the 20th century, science and technology were driving forces.\nThe textile industry exhibits inherent dynamism, influenced by a multitude of transformative changes and innovations within the domain. Textile operations can experience ramifications arising from shifts in international trade policies, evolving fashion trends, evolving customer preferences, variations in production costs and methodologies, adherence to safety and environmental regulations, as well as advancements in research and development.\nThe textile and garment industries exert a significant impact on the economic systems of numerous countries engaged in textile production.\nNaming.\nMost textiles were called by their base-fibre generic names, their place of origin, or were put into groups based loosely on manufacturing techniques, characteristics, and designs.\nBearskin\n(bearskin cloth) may have received its name from its \"shaggy nap\".\n\"Nylon\", \"olefin\", and \"acrylic\" are generic names for some of the more commonly used synthetic fibres.\nRelated terms.\nThe related words \"fabric\" and \"cloth\" and \"material\" are often used in textile assembly trades (such as tailoring and dressmaking) as synonyms for \"textile\". However, there are subtle differences in these terms in specialized usage. \"Material\" is an extremely broad term basically meaning consisting of matter, and requires context to be useful. A textile is any material made of interlacing fibres, including carpeting and geotextiles, which may not necessarily be used in the production of further goods, such as clothing and upholstery. A \"fabric\" is a material made through weaving, knitting, spreading, felting, stitching, crocheting or bonding that may be used in the production of further products, such as clothing and upholstery, thus requiring a further step of the production. \"Cloth\" may also be used synonymously with \"fabric\", but often specifically refers to a piece of fabric that has been processed or cut.\nTypes.\nTextiles are various materials made from fibres and yarns. The term \"textile\" was originally only used to refer to woven fabrics, but today it covers a broad range of subjects. Textiles are classified at various levels, such as according to fibre origin (natural or synthetic), structure (woven, knitted, nonwoven), finish, etc. However, there are primarily two types of textiles:\nConsumer textiles.\nTextiles have an assortment of uses, the most common of which are for clothing and for containers such as bags and baskets. In the household, textiles are used in carpeting, upholstered furnishings, window shades, towels, coverings for tables, beds, and other flat surfaces, and in art. Textiles are used in many traditional hand crafts such as sewing, quilting, and embroidery.\nTechnical textiles.\nTextiles produced for industrial purposes, and designed and chosen for technical characteristics beyond their appearance, are commonly referred to as \"technical textiles.\" Technical textiles include textile structures for automotive applications, medical textiles (such as implants), geotextile (used for reinforcement of embankments), agrotextiles (textiles for crop protection), and protective clothing (such as clothing resistant to heat, radiation, or molten metals, and clothing resistant to puncture (for example, stab-resistant or bulletproof clothing)).\nIn the workplace, textiles can be used in industrial and scientific processes such as filtering. Miscellaneous uses include flags, backpacks, tents, nets, cleaning rags, and transportation devices such as balloons, kites, sails, and parachutes; textiles are also used to provide strengthening in composite materials such as fibreglass and industrial geotextiles.\nDue to the often highly technical and legal requirements of these products, these textiles are typically tested to ensure they meet stringent performance requirements. Other forms of technical textiles may be produced to experiment with their scientific qualities and to explore the possible benefits they may have in the future. For example, threads coated with zinc oxide nanowires, when woven into fabric, have been shown capable of \"self-powering nanosystems\", using vibrations created by everyday actions like wind or body movements to generate energy.\nSignificance.\nTextiles are all around us. The textile is a component of basic needs like food and shelter. Textiles are everywhere in our lives, from bath towels to space suits. Textiles help humans by comforting, protecting, and extending their lives. Textiles meet our clothing needs, keeping us warm in the winter and cool in the summer. There are several applications for textiles, such as medical textiles, intelligent textiles, and automotive textiles. All of them contribute to the well-being of humans.\nServiceability in textiles.\nThe term \"serviceability\" refers to a textile product's ability to meet the needs of consumers. The emphasis is on knowing the target market and matching the needs of the target market to the product's serviceability. Serviceability or performance in textiles is the ability of textile materials to withstand various conditions, environments, and hazards. Aesthetics, durability, comfort and safety, appearance retention, care, environmental impact, and cost are the serviceability concepts employed in structuring the material.\nComponents.\nFibres, yarns, fabric construction, finishes and design are components of a textile product. The selection of specific components varies with the intended use, therefore the fibres, yarns, and fabric manufacturing systems are selected with consideration of the required performance.\nUse and applications.\nOther uses.\nTextiles, textile production, and clothing were necessities of life in prehistory, intertwined with the social, economic, and religious systems. Other than clothing, textile crafts produced utilitarian, symbolic, and opulent items. Archaeological artifacts from the Stone Age and the Iron Age in Central Europe are used to examine prehistoric clothing and its role in forming individual and group identities.\nSource of knowledge.\nArtifacts unearthed in various archaeological excavations informs us about the remains of past human life and their activities. Dyed flax fibres discovered in the Republic of Georgia indicate that textile-like materials were developed during the Paleolithic period. Radiocarbon dates the microscopic fibres to 36,000 years ago, when modern humans migrated from Africa.\nSeveral textile remnants, such as the Inca Empire's textile arts remnants, which embody the Incas' aesthetics and social ideals, serve as a means for disseminating information about numerous civilizations, customs, and cultures.\nThere are textile museums that display history related to many aspects of textiles. A textile museum raises public awareness and appreciation of the artistic merits and cultural significance of the world's textiles on a local, national, and international scale. The George Washington University Museum and Textile Museum in Washington, D.C., was established in 1925.\nNarrative art.\nThe Bayeux Tapestry is a rare example of secular Romanesque art. The art work depicts the Norman Conquest of England in 1066.\nDecorative art.\nTextiles are also used for decorative art. Appliqu\u00e9 work of pipili is decorative art of Odisha, a state in eastern India, used for umbrellas, wall hangings, lamp shades, and bags. To make a range of decorative products, coloured cloth in the shapes of animals, birds, flowers, are sewn onto a base cloth.\nArchitextiles.\nArchitextiles, a combination of the words architecture and textile, are textile-based assemblages. Awnings are a basic type of architectural textile. Mughal Shahi Lal Dera Tent, which was a movable palace, is an example of the architextiles of the Mughal period.\nCurrency.\nTextiles had been used as currency as well. In Africa, textiles were used as currency in addition to being used for clothing, headwear, swaddling, tents, sails, bags, sacks, carpets, rugs, curtains, etc. Along the east\u2013west axis in sub-Saharan Africa, cloth strip, which was typically produced in the savannah, was used as a form of currency.\nVotive offering.\nTextiles were among the objects offered to the gods [votive offering] in ancient Greece for religious purposes.\nFibre.\nThe smallest component of a fabric is fibre; fibres are typically spun into yarn, and yarns are used to make fabrics. Fibres are very thin and hair-like structures. The sources of fibres may be natural, synthetic, or both.\nGlobal consumption.\nGlobal fibre production per person has increased from 8.4 kilograms in 1975 to 14.3 kilograms in 2021. After a modest drop due to COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, global fibre output rebounded to 113 million tons in 2021. Global fibre output roughly doubled from 58\u00a0million tons in 2000 to 113\u00a0million tons in 2021 and is anticipated to reach 149\u00a0million tons in 2030.\nThe demand for synthetic fibres is increasing rapidly. This has numerous causes. Reasons include its low price, the demand-supply imbalance of cotton, and its [Synthetic fibres'] versatility in design and application. Synthetic fibres accounts for 70% of global fibre use, mainly polyester. By 2030, the synthetic fibre market will reach 98.21\u00a0billion US dollars. From 2022 to 2030, the market is anticipated to increase by 5.1% per year.\nFibre sources.\nMonomers are the building blocks of polymers. Polymers in fibres are of two types: additive or condensation. Natural fibres, such as cotton and wool, have a condensation polymer type, whereas synthetic fibres can have either an additive or a condensation polymer type. For example, acrylic fibre and olefin fibres have additive polymers, and nylon and polyester are condensation polymers.\nFibre properties.\nFibre properties influence textile characteristics such as aesthetics, durability, comfort, and cost.\nFineness is one of the important characteristics of the fibres. They have a greater length-to-width ratio [100 times the diameter]. Fibres need to be strong, cohesive, and flexible. The usefulness of fibres are characterized on the basis of certain parameters such as strength, flexibility, and length to diameter ratio, and spinnability. Natural fibres are relatively short [staple] in length. Synthetic fibres are produced in longer lengths called filaments. Silk is the only natural fibre that is a filament. The classification of fibres is based on their origin, derivation, and generic types.\nCertain properties of synthetic fibres, such as their diameter, cross section, and colour, can be altered during production.\nCotton: Cotton has a long history of use in the clothing due to its favourable properties. This fibre is soft, moisture-absorbent, breathable, and is renowned for its long durability.\nBlends (blended textiles).\nFabric or yarn produced with a combination of two or more types of different fibres, or yarns to obtain desired traits. Blending is possible at various stages of textile manufacturing. Final composition is liable for the properties of the resultant product. Natural and synthetic fibres are blended to overcome disadvantage of single fibre properties and to achieve better performance characteristics and aesthetic effects such as devor\u00e9, heather effect, cross dyeing and stripes pattern etc. Clothing woven from a blend of cotton and polyester can be more durable and easier to maintain than material woven solely from cotton. Other than sharing functional properties, blending makes the products more economical.\nUnion or Union fabrics is the 19th century term for blended fabrics. While it is no longer in use. \"Mixture\" or \"mixed cloth\" is another term used for blended cloths when different types of yarns are used in warp and weft sides.\nBlended textiles are not new.\nComposition.\nFibre composition the fibre blend composition of mixtures of the fibres, is an important criterion to analyse the behaviour, properties such as functional aspects, and commercial classification of the merchandise.\nThe most common blend is cotton and polyester. Regular blended fabric is 65% polyester and 35% cotton. It is called a \"reverse blend\" if the ratio of cotton predominates\u2014the percentage of the fibres changes with the price and required properties.\nBlending adds value to the textiles; it helps in reducing the cost (artificial fibres are less expensive than natural fibres) and adding advantage in properties of the final product. For instance, a small amount of spandex adds stretch to the fabrics. Wool can add warmth.\nUses of different fibres.\nNatural fibres.\nPlant.\nFibres from the stalks of plants, such as hemp, flax, and nettles, are also known as 'bast' fibres. Hemp fibre is yellowish-brown fibre made from the hemp plant. The fibre characteristics are coarser, harsher, strong and lightweight. Hemp fibre is used primary to make twine, rope and cordage.\nAnimal.\nAnimal textiles are commonly made from hair, fur, skin, or silk (in the case of silkworms).\nMicrobes.\nBacterial cellulose can be made from industrial organic and agricultural waste, and used as material for textiles and clothing.\nMineral.\nMinerals and natural and synthetic fabrics may be combined, as in emery cloth, a layer of emery abrasive glued to a cloth backing. Also, \"sand cloth\" is a US term for fine wire mesh with abrasive glued to it, employed like emery cloth or coarse sandpaper.\nSynthetic.\nIn the 20th century, they were supplemented by artificial fibres made from petroleum. Textiles are made in various strengths and degrees of durability, from the finest microfibre made of strands thinner than one denier to the sturdiest canvas.\nSynthetic textiles are used primarily in the production of clothing, as well as the manufacture of geotextiles. Synthetic fibres are those that are constructed by humans through chemical synthesis.\nProduction methods.\nTextile manufacturing has progressed from prehistoric crafts to a fully automated industry. Over the years, there have been continuous improvements in fabric structure and design.\nImportant parameters in fabric selection:\nThe primary consideration in fabric selection is the end use. The fabric needs vary greatly depending on the application. Similar types of fabric may not be suitable for all applications.\nFabric weight is an important criteria while producing different fabrics. A carpet requires a fabric with 1300 GSM, but a robe may be made with 160 GSM. Certainly, fabrics for clothes and carpets have distinct weights.\nStretchable fabrics have greater movability and are thus more comfortable than fabrics with no stretch or less stretch.\nTextile exports.\nAccording to the UN Commodity Trade Statistics Database, the global textiles and apparel export market reached $772\u00a0billion in 2013.\nChanging dynamics of the market.\nChina is the largest exporter of textile goods. Most of China's exports consist of apparel, apparel accessories, textile yarns, and textile products. The competitive advantages of the China are low prices and abundant labor, lowered commercial obstacles, and a ready supply of raw materials. China, along with the United States and India, is a major producer of cotton.\nChina's apparel market share has declined in recent years due to various reasons and a shift toward high-end, sophisticated products. Additionally, the investors from China made stakes in Myanmar, Vietnam, and Cambodia. Last year, its market share was 36.7%, or $161\u00a0billion, a decline of 8% year-over-year. In other words, China lost $14\u00a0billion in garment work orders to other countries in a single year. In 2016, Bangladesh's apparel market share was valued at $28\u00a0billion, increasing 7.69 percent from the previous year.\nIn 2016 the leading exporters of apparel were China ($161\u00a0billion), Bangladesh ($28\u00a0billion), Vietnam ($25\u00a0billion), India ($18\u00a0billion), Hong Kong ($16\u00a0billion), Turkey ($15\u00a0billion), and Indonesia ($7\u00a0billion).\nGarment exports from Bangladesh reached record high in the 2021\u20132022 fiscal year; China ($220,302\u00a0billion), Bangladesh ($38.70\u00a0billion), India ($8.127\u00a0billion), Pakistan ($19.33\u00a0billion).\nFinishing.\nThe fabric, when it leaves a loom or knitting machine, is not readily usable. It may be rough, uneven, or have flaws like skewing. Hence, it is necessary to finish the fabric. Finishing techniques enhance the value of the treated fabrics. After manufacturing, textiles undergo a range of finishing procedures, including bleaching, dyeing, printing, as well as mechanical and chemical finishing.\nColoration.\nTextiles are often dyed, with fabrics available in almost every colour. The dyeing process often requires several dozen gallons of water for each pound of clothing. Coloured designs in textiles can be created by weaving together fibres of different colours (tartan or Uzbek Ikat), adding coloured stitches to finished fabric (embroidery), creating patterns by resist dyeing methods, tying off areas of cloth and dyeing the rest (tie-dyeing), drawing wax designs on cloth and dyeing in between them (batik), or using various printing processes on finished fabric. Woodblock printing, still used in India and elsewhere today, is the oldest of these dating back to at least 220 CE in China. Textiles are also sometimes bleached, making the textile pale or white.\nColour matching.\nIn textiles, colour matching extends beyond selecting the appropriate dyestuffs or pigments and combining them in precise proportions to achieve the desired end product colour. Meeting criteria for fastness, cost, and quality is also essential. This process plays a critical role in materializing a designer's concept into an actual product.\nFinishes.\nTextile finishing is the process of converting the loomstate or raw goods into a useful product, which can be done mechanically or chemically. Finishing is a broad term that refers to a variety of physical and chemical techniques and treatments that finish one stage of textile production while also preparing for the next. Textile finishing can include aspects like improving surface feel, aesthetical enhancement, and adding advanced chemical finishes. A finish is any process that transforms unfinished products into finished products. This includes mechanical finishing and chemical applications which alter the composition of treated textiles (fibre, yarn or fabric.)\nSince the 1990s, with advances in technologies such as permanent press process, finishing agents have been used to strengthen fabrics and make them wrinkle free. More recently, nanomaterials research has led to additional advancements, with companies such as Nano-Tex and NanoHorizons developing permanent treatments based on metallic nanoparticles for making textiles more resistant to things such as water, stains, wrinkles, and pathogens such as bacteria and fungi.\nTextiles receive a range of treatments before they reach the end-user. From formaldehyde finishes (to improve crease-resistance) to biocidic finishes and from flame retardants to dyeing of many types of fabric, the possibilities are almost endless. However, many of these finishes may also have detrimental effects on the end user. A number of disperse, acid and reactive dyes, for example, have been shown to be allergenic to sensitive individuals. Further to this, specific dyes within this group have also been shown to induce purpuric contact dermatitis.\n, meaning \"iron yarn\" in English, is a light-reflecting, strong material invented in Germany in the 19th century. It is made by soaking cotton threads in a starch and paraffin wax solution. The threads are then stretched and polished by steel rollers and brushes. The result of the process is a lustrous, tear-resistant yarn which is extremely hardwearing.\nEnvironmental and health impacts.\nAfter the oil industry, the fashion industry is the second biggest polluter of agricultural land, which has several harmful impacts on the environment. As the industry grows, the effect on the environment is worsening. Textile manufacturing is one of the oldest and most technologically complicated industries. This industry's fundamental strength stems from its solid manufacturing base of a diverse range of fibres/yarns ranging from natural fibres such as jute, silk, wool, and cotton,\u00a0to synthetic or manufactured fibres that include polyester, viscose, nylon, and acrylic.\nTextile mills and their wastewater have grown in proportion to the increase in demand for textile products, generating a severe pollution concern around the world. Numerous textile industry chemicals pose environmental and health risks. Among the compounds in textile effluent, dyes are considered significant contaminants. Water pollution generated by the discharge of untreated wastewater and the use of toxic chemicals, particularly during processing, account for the majority of the global environmental concerns linked with the textile industry.\nEnvironmental impacts.\nClothing is necessary to meet the fundamental needs of humans. Increased population and living standards have increased the need for clothing, enhancing the demand for textile manufacturing; wet processing needs more water consumption. Conventional machinery and treatment procedures use enormous quantities of water, especially for natural fibres, which require up to 150\u00a0kg of water per kg of material.\nThe textile sector is accountable for a substantial number of environmental impacts. However, the discharge of untreated effluents into water bodies is responsible for the majority of environmental harm produced by the textile sector.\nThe textile sector is believed to use 79\u00a0trillion litres of water per year and to discharge around 20% of all industrial effluent into the environment. Reportedly, aromatic and heterocyclic compounds with colour-display and polar groups make up most of the dyes used in textile coloration processes. The structure is more complex and stable, making it more difficult to degrade printing and dyeing wastewater.\nIn addition, textiles constitute a significant percentage of landfill waste. In 2023, North Carolina State University researchers used enzymes to separate cotton from polyester in an early step towards reducing textile waste, allowing each material to be recycled.\nTextiles containing various kinds of plastics like polyesther, polyamide, elastan, polyacrylonitrile, aramid, polypropylene, etc. are also a significant source of environmental pollution and impose health risks through the emission of microplastics.\nHealth impacts.\nMany kinds of respiratory diseases, skin problems, and allergies may be caused by dyes and pigments discharged into the water.\nAlthough formaldehyde levels in clothing are unlikely to be at levels high enough to cause an allergic reaction, due to the presence of such a chemical, quality control and testing are of utmost importance. Flame retardants (mainly in the brominated form) are also of concern where the environment, and their potential toxicity, are concerned.\nChemicals use, advantage and health impacts.\nCertain chemical finishes contain potential hazards to health and the environment. Perfluorinated acids are considered to be hazardous to human health by the US Environmental Protection Agency.\nTesting.\nTesting for these additives is possible at a number of commercial laboratories. It is also possible to have textiles tested according to the Oeko-tex certification standard, which contains limits levels for the use of certain chemicals in textiles products.\nLaws and regulations.\nDifferent countries have certain laws and regulations to protect consumers' interests. The Textile Fiber Products Identification Act is a law that protects consumers in the United States. The act protects producer and consumer interests by implementing labelling (required content disclosure) and advertising requirements on textile products. The Textile Fiber Products Identification Act applies to all textile fibre products besides wool, which is governed by the Wool Product Label Number. The law prohibits misinformation about the fibre content, misbranding, and any unfair advertising practice, as well as requires businesses to operate in a particular manner.\nTesting of textiles.\nTesting occurs at various stages of the textile manufacturing process, from raw material to finished product. The purpose of testing is to evaluate and analyse the regulatory compliance, the product's quality and performance, as well as to measure its specifications. Textile testing encompasses a wide range of methodologies, procedures, equipment, and sophisticated laboratories. Local governments and authorized organization's such as ASTM International, International Organization for Standardization, and American Association of Textile Chemists and Colorists establish standards for testing of textiles.\nSome examples of tests at different stages:\nFor fibre: Fibre identification is a necessary test for determining fibre content and classifying products. The labelling of items with their fibre content percentage is a regulatory requirement. Using microscopy, solubility, and burn tests, fibres are distinguished from one another. More fibre relating tests include fibre length, diameter, Micronaire.\nFor yarn: Yarn count, Denier, Strength, evenness.\nFor fabric: Dimensional stability, colour fastness, thread count, G.S.M, pilling, flammability.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51894", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51894", "title": "Putrescine", "text": "Foul-smelling organic chemical compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPutrescine is an organic compound with the formula (CH2)4(NH2)2. It is a colorless solid that melts near room temperature. It is classified as a diamine. Together with cadaverine, it is largely responsible for the foul odor of putrefying flesh, but also contributes to other unpleasant odors.\nProduction.\nPutrescine is produced on an industrial scale by the hydrogenation of succinonitrile.\nBiotechnological production of putrescine from a renewable feedstock has been investigated. A metabolically engineered strain of \"Escherichia coli\" that produces putrescine at high concentrations in glucose mineral salts medium has been described.\nBiochemistry.\nSpermidine synthase uses putrescine and \"S\"-adenosylmethioninamine (decarboxylated \"S\"-adenosyl methionine) to produce spermidine. Spermidine in turn is combined with another \"S\"-adenosylmethioninamine and gets converted to spermine.\nPutrescine is synthesized in small quantities by healthy living cells by the action of ornithine decarboxylase.\nPutrescine is synthesized biologically via two different pathways, both starting from arginine.\nPutrescine, via metabolic intermediates including \"N\"-acetylputrescine, \u03b3-aminobutyraldehyde (GABAL), \"N\"-acetyl-\u03b3-aminobutyric acid (\"N\"-acetyl-GABAL), and \"N\"-acetyl-\u03b3-aminobutyric acid (\"N\"-acetyl-GABA), biotransformations mediated by diamine oxidase (DAO), monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B), aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase (ABALDH), and other enzymes, can act as a minor biological precursor of \u03b3-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the brain and elsewhere. In 2021, it was discovered that MAO-B does not mediate dopamine catabolism in the rodent striatum but instead participates in striatal GABA synthesis and that synthesized GABA in turn inhibits dopaminergic neurons in this brain area. It has been found that MAO-B, via the putrescine pathway, importantly mediates GABA synthesis in astrocytes in various brain areas, including in the hippocampus, cerebellum, striatum, cerebral cortex, and substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc).\nOccurrence.\nPutrescine is found in all organisms. Putrescine is widely found in plant tissues, often being the most common polyamine present within the organism. Its role in development is well documented, but recent studies have suggested that putrescine also plays a role in stress responses in plants, both to biotic and abiotic stressors. The absence of putrescine in plants is associated with an increase in both parasite and fungal population in plants.\nPutrescine serves an important role in a multitude of ways, which include: a cation substitute, an osmolyte, or a transport protein. It also serves as an important regulator in a variety of surface proteins, both on the cell surface and on organelles, such as the mitochondria and chloroplasts. A recorded increase of ATP production has been found in mitochondria and ATP synthesis by chloroplasts with an increase in mitochondrial and chloroplastic putrescine, but putrescine has also been shown to function as a developmental inhibitor in some plants, which can be seen as dwarfism and late flowering in \"Arabidopsis\" plants.\nPutrescine production in plants can also be promoted by fungi in the soil. Piriformospora indica (\"P.\u00a0indica\") is one such fungus, found to promote putrescine production in \"Arabidopsis\" and common garden tomato plants. In a 2022 study it was shown that the presence of this fungus had a promotional effect on the growth of the root structure of plants. After gas chromatography testing, putrescine was found in higher amounts in these root structures.\nPlants that had been inoculated with \"P.\u00a0indica\" had presented an excess of arginine decarboxylase. This is used in the process of making putrescine in plant cells. One of the downstream effects of putrescine in root cells is the production of auxin. That same study found that putrescine added as a fertilizer showed the same results as if it was inoculated with the fungus, which was also shown in \"Arabidopsis\" and barley. The evolutionary foundations of this connection and putrescine are still unclear.\nPutrescine is a component of bad breath and bacterial vaginosis. It is also found in semen and some microalgae, together with spermine and spermidine.\nUses.\nPutrescine reacts with adipic acid to yield the polyamide nylon 46, which is marketed by Envalior (formerly DSM) under the trade name Stanyl.\nApplication of putrescine, along with other polyamines, can be used to extend the shelf life of fruits by delaying the ripening process. Pre-harvest application of putrescine has been shown to increase plant resistance to high temperatures and drought. Both of these effects seem to result from lowered ethylene production following exogenous putrescine exposure.\nDue to its role in putrification, putrescine has also been proposed as a biochemical marker for determining how long a corpse has been decomposing.\nPutrescine together with chitosan has been successfully used in postharvest physiology as a natural fruit coating. Putrescine with chitosan treated fruits had higher antioxidant capacity and enzyme activities than untreated fruits. Fresh strawberries coated have lower decay percentage, higher tissue firmness, contents of total soluble solids. Nanoparticles of putrescine with chitosan are effective in preserving the nutritional quality and prolonging the post-harvest life of strawberries during storage up to 12 days.\nHistory.\nPutrescine and cadaverine were first described in 1885 by the Berlin physician Ludwig Brieger (1849\u20131919).\nToxicity.\nIn rats, putrescine has a low acute oral toxicity of 2000\u00a0mg/kg body weight, with no-observed-adverse-effect level of 2000 ppm (180\u00a0mg/kg body weight/day).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51895", "revid": "218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51895", "title": "Putrescin", "text": ""}
{"id": "51896", "revid": "10289486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51896", "title": "Cadaverine", "text": "Foul-smelling diamine compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nCadaverine is an organic compound with the formula (CH2)5(NH2)2. Classified as a diamine, it is a colorless liquid with an unpleasant odor. It is present in small quantities in living organisms but is often associated with the putrefaction of animal tissue. Together with putrescine, it is largely responsible for the foul odor of putrefying flesh, but also contributes to other unpleasant odors.\nProduction.\nCadaverine is produced by decarboxylation of lysine. It can be synthesized by many methods including the hydrogenation of glutaronitrile and the reactions of 1,5-dichloropentane.\nHistory.\nPutrescine and cadaverine were first described in 1885 by the Berlin physician Ludwig Brieger (1849\u20131919). It was named from the English adjective \"cadaverous\".\nReceptors.\nIn zebrafish, the trace amine-associated receptor 13c (or TAAR13c) has been identified as a high-affinity receptor for cadaverine. In humans, molecular modelling and docking experiments have shown that cadaverine fits into the binding pocket of the human TAAR6 and TAAR8.\nClinical significance.\nSeminal plasma contains cadaverine as basic amines. Elevated levels of cadaverine have been found in the urine of some patients with defects in lysine metabolism. The odor commonly associated with bacterial vaginosis has been linked to cadaverine and putrescine.\nToxicity.\nAcute oral toxicity of cadaverine is 2,000\u00a0mg/kg body weight; its no-observed-adverse-effect level is 2,000 ppm (180\u00a0mg/kg body weight/day).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51897", "revid": "91715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51897", "title": "The Archers", "text": "British radio soap opera (since 1951)\nThe Archers is a British radio soap opera currently broadcast on BBC Radio 4, the corporation's main spoken-word channel. Broadcast since 1951, it was famously billed as \"an everyday story of country folk\" and is now promoted as \"a contemporary drama in a rural setting\". Having aired more than 20,000 episodes, it is the world's longest-running drama, by both number of episodes and duration.\nThe first of five pilot episodes was aired on Whit Monday, 29 May 1950, on the BBC Midlands Home Service, and the first episode broadcast nationally went out on New Year's Day 1951. A significant show in British popular culture, and with more than five million listeners, it is Radio 4's most listened-to non-news programme, and with more than one million listeners via the internet, the programme holds the record for BBC Radio online listening figures. In February 2019, a panel of 46 broadcasting industry experts, of whom 42 had a professional connection to the BBC, listed \"The Archers\" as the second-greatest radio programme of all time. Established partly with the aim of educating farmers following World War II, \"The Archers\" soon became a popular source of entertainment for the population at large, attracting nine million listeners by 1953.\nSetting.\n\"The Archers\" is set in the fictional village of Ambridge in the fictional county of Borsetshire, in England. Borsetshire is situated between what are in reality the contiguous counties of Worcestershire and Warwickshire, south of Birmingham in The Midlands of England. Ambridge is possibly based on the village of Cutnall Green, though various other villages claim to be the inspiration for Ambridge; The Bull, Ambridge's pub, is modelled on The Old Bull in Inkberrow, and Hanbury's St Mary the Virgin is often used as a stand-in for Ambridge's parish church, St Stephen's.\nOther fictional villages include Penny Hassett, Loxley Barrett, Darrington, Hollerton, Edgeley, Waterley Cross and Lakey Green. The county town of Borsetshire is Borchester, and the nearest big city is the cathedral city of Felpersham. Felpersham also has a university. Anywhere further from Ambridge may be referred to humorously with comments such as \"That's on the other side of Felpersham!\", but characters do occasionally venture further: several attended the Countryside Alliance march in London, and there have been references to the gay scene in Manchester's Canal Street. There have been scenes set in other places in the United Kingdom and abroad, and characters have moved overseas to countries including South Africa and Hungary.\nAmbridge.\nAmbridge has a village shop and post office, which survived thanks to the philanthropy of Jack Woolley (d. 2014). The business subsequently became a community shop managed by Susan and staffed by a team of volunteers. \nTopicality.\nUnlike some soap operas, \"The Archers\" sometimes portrays events that take place on the date of broadcast, which allows topical subjects to be included. Real-life events which can be readily predicted are often written into the script, such as the annual Oxford Farming Conference and the FIFA World Cup. On some occasions, scenes recorded at these events are planned and edited into episodes shortly before transmission.\nMore challengingly for the production team, some significant but unforeseen events require scenes to be rewritten and rerecorded at short notice, such as the death of Princess Margaret (particularly poignant because she had appeared as herself on the programme), the World Trade Center attacks, and the 7 July 2005 London bombings. The events and implications of the 2001 foot-and-mouth crisis required many \"topical inserts\" and the rewriting of several storylines.\nIn January 2012, Oliver Sterling, owner of Grange Farm, together with the son of his tenant, Ed Grundy, elected to vaccinate the badgers on their farm in an attempt to prevent the spread of bovine tuberculosis. The plotline came within weeks of the government confirming a badger cull trial.\nIt was announced on 29 March 2020 that the programme would include references to the COVID-19 pandemic from 4 May onwards.\nThe death of Queen Elizabeth II on 8 September 2022 was discussed by Lynda Snell and Lilian Bellamy as the first section of the episode broadcast on Sunday 11\u00a0September.\nActors.\n\"The Archers\" actors are not held on retainers and usually work on episodes for a few days a month. Because storylines concentrate on a particular group for a period, in any one week, the episodes include approximately 20\u201330 speaking characters out of a cast of about 60. Most of the cast do acting work on other projects and can disappear for long periods if they are have commitments such as films or television series. Tamsin Greig plays Debbie Aldridge and has appeared on many television series such as \"Green Wing\", \"Love Soup\", \"Black Books\" and \"Episodes\", so Debbie manages a farm in Hungary and her visits to Ambridge are infrequent. Felicity Jones played Emma Carter from the age of 15 but after a period of studying at Wadham College, Oxford, she gave up the role to move into television and cinema.\nSome of the actors, when not playing their characters, earn their money through different jobs altogether. Charlotte Connor, when not playing Susan Carter (credited as Charlotte Martin), works full-time as a senior research psychologist at the Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health Foundation; her office is a short walk from BBC Birmingham, and thus she is able to fit her work around recordings. Graham Blockey, who played Robert Snell before his death in 2022, worked until 2017 as a full-time general practitioner in Surrey, commuting to and from BBC Birmingham at weekends and on his days off. He kept his role secret from his patients, for fear of losing their respect, until his retirement from medicine in March 2017. Felicity Finch (Ruth Archer) works as a BBC journalist and has travelled on a number of occasions to Afghanistan. Ian Pepperell (Roy Tucker), before his death at the age of 53 on 22 December 2023, managed a pub in the New Forest.\nHistory.\nA five-episode pilot series started on Whit Monday, 29 May 1950, and continued throughout that week. It was created by Godfrey Baseley and was broadcast to the English Midlands in the Regional Home Service, as 'a farming Dick Barton'. Recordings were sent to London, and the BBC decided to commission the series for a longer national run. In the pilot the Archers owned Wimberton Farm, rather than Brookfield. Baseley subsequently edited \"The Archers\" for 22 years.\nFrom 1 January 1951, five 15-minute episodes were transmitted each week, from Monday to Friday, at first on the BBC Light Programme and subsequently on the BBC Home Service (Radio 4 from 1 October 1967). In 1998 this changed to six 12\u00bd-minute episodes, from Sunday to Friday. Early afternoon repeats of the previous evening's episode began on 14 December 1964. The original scriptwriters were Geoffrey Webb and Edward J. Mason, who were also working on the nightly thriller series about the special agent Dick Barton. The popularity of his adventures partly inspired \"The Archers\", which eventually took over Barton's evening slot. At first, however, the national launch placed the serial at the \"terrible\" time of 11.45\u00a0am, but it moved to Dick Barton's former slot of 6.45\u00a0pm from 2 April 1951. An omnibus edition of the week's episodes began on 5 January 1952.\nOriginally produced with collaborative input from the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, \"The Archers\" was conceived as a means of disseminating information to farmers and smallholders to help increase productivity in the Postwar era of rationing and food shortages.\n\"The Archers\" originally centred on the lives of three farmers: Dan Archer, farming efficiently with little cash, Walter Gabriel, farming inefficiently with little cash, and George Fairbrother, a wealthy businessman farming at a loss for tax purposes (which one could do in those days). The programme was hugely successful, winning the National Radio Awards' 'Most entertaining programme of the Year' award jointly with \"Take It from Here\" in 1954, and winning the award outright in 1955, in which year the audience was reported to have peaked at 20 million.\nIn the late 1950s, despite the growth of television and radio's consequent decline, the programme was still claiming 11 million listeners and was being transmitted in Canada, Australia and New Zealand. By the mid-1970s, however, the audience for the two daily broadcasts and the weekend omnibus combined was less than three million and in 1976 the BBC Radio Four Review Board twice considered axing the programme. The serial's woes at this time were seen to mirror the poor standing of radio drama in general, described as \"a failure to fully shake off the conventions of non-realism which had prevailed in the 1940s and 1950s.\"\nProgramme chief Jock Gallagher, responsible for \"The Archers\", described these as the serial's \"dog days\". Sweeping editorial reforms followed, included the introduction of women writers (there had been none before 1975), two of whom, Helen Leadbeater and Margaret Phelan, were credited with giving the programme a new definitive style of writing and content, although some listeners complained about their radical feminism.\nIn 1980 Julie Burchill commented that the women of Ambridge were no longer stuck with \"the gallons of greengage jam old-guard male scriptwriters kept them occupied with for over twenty years\", but were 'into post-natal depression and alcoholism on the way to self-discovery'. In the mid-1980s the Radio Four Review Board noted that scripts, directing and acting were \"very good\" and sometimes \"better than ever\". In August 1985 \"The Listener\" said that the programme's revival was \"sustained by some of the best acting, direction and writing on radio.\"\nTony Shryane MBE was the programme's producer from 1 January 1951 to 19 January 1979. Vanessa Whitburn was the programme's editor from 1992 till 2013. Whitburn took service leave from March to July 2012, and John Yorke, a former executive producer of \"EastEnders\", came in as acting editor. Yorke's arrival prompted charges that the programme was importing the values of \"EastEnders\" to Borsetshire, with fans and commentators complaining that characters were behaving unrealistically simply to generate conflict. This was denied by Yorke, who wrote that he agreed to take over \"on one condition \u2013 that it stayed exactly as it was and that I didn't have to change anything.\"\nWhitburn was succeeded as editor by Sean O'Connor in September 2013. In September 2016, Huw Kennair-Jones took over as editor, though O'Connor continued to oversee the Helen and Rob storyline until its conclusion. Kennair-Jones announced in October 2017 that he was to leave the BBC to work as commissioning editor for ITV. The short tenure of two successive Archers editors led to concerns of a trend of radio drama editing being seen as \"training ground\" for higher-paid positions in TV. Alison Hindell, the BBC's head of Audio Drama until October 2018, took over as acting editor before and after Kennair-Jones's time in charge. She effectively swapped roles with Jeremy Howe when she succeeded him as the BBC's commissioning editor for drama and fiction and he started as editor of the Archers in late August 2018.\nSince 2007, \"The Archers\" has been available as a podcast.\nSince Easter Sunday 1998, there have been six episodes a week, from Sunday to Friday, broadcast at around 19:03 following the news summary. Episodes are repeated the following day at 14:02, except the Friday evening episode, which repeats on Saturday at 14:45 (from 6 April 2024). The six episodes were re-run unabridged in the Sunday morning omnibus at 10:00. On Remembrance Sunday, the omnibus edition begins at the earlier time of 09:15. In March 2024, the BBC announced scheduling changes that would see the Sunday omnibus begin at 11.00.\nDeath of Grace Archer.\nOne of the most controversial \"Archers\" episodes was broadcast on 22 September 1955, coinciding with the launch of the UK's first commercial television station. Phil and Grace Archer had been married just a few months earlier, and their blossoming relationship was the talk of the nation. However, searching for a story which would demonstrate real tragedy among increasingly unconvincing episode cliff-hangers, Godfrey Baseley decided that Grace would have to die. The scripts for the week commencing 19 September 1955 were written, recorded and broadcast on each day, with an \"exercise in topicality\" given as the explanation to the cast. On Thursday, listeners heard the sound effects of Grace trying to rescue Midnight, her horse, from a fire in the stable at Brookfield and the crash of a falling timber beam.\nWhether the timing of the episode was a deliberate attempt to overshadow the opening night of the BBC's first commercial rival has been debated ever since. It was certainly planned some months in advance, but it may well be that the actual date of the death was changed during the scriptwriting stage to coincide with the launch of Associated-Rediffusion. Whether the timing was deliberate or not, the episode attracted widespread media attention, being reported by newspapers around the world.\nThis controversy has been parodied twice:, in \"The Bowmans\", an episode of the television comedy programme \"Hancock\", and in the play \"The Killing of Sister George\" and its 1968 film adaptation. On the 50th anniversary of ITV's launch, Ysanne Churchman, who played Grace, sent them a congratulatory card signed \"Grace Archer\".\nIn 1996, William Smethurst recounted a conversation with Baseley in which he reveals his real motivation for killing off Grace Archer: Churchman had been encouraging the other actors to join a trade union.\nCast longevity.\nThe actor Norman Painting played Phil Archer continuously from the first trial series in 1950 until his death on 29 October 2009. His last \"Archers\" performance was recorded just two days before his death, and was broadcast on 22 November. He is cited in \"Guinness World Records\" as the longest-serving actor in a single soap opera. Under the pseudonym \"Bruno Milna\", Painting also wrote around 1,200 complete episodes, the last being the 10,000th episode.\nJune Spencer, who celebrated her 100th birthday in 2019, played Peggy Archer (later Woolley) in the pilot episode and continued in the role until 2022.\nSixtieth anniversary.\nThe Archers reached its 60th anniversary on 1 January 2011; to mark this achievement a special half-hour episode was broadcast on Sunday 2 January, on BBC Radio 4 at 7pm. The episode had been advertised as containing events that would \"shake Ambridge to the core\". This phrase even gave rise to the initialism #SATTC trending on the website Twitter during that weekend as listeners speculated about what might happen, and then reported their views as the story unfolded.\nThe main events in the episode were Helen Archer giving birth to her son Henry and Nigel Pargetter falling to his death from the roof of Lower Loxley Hall. The latter unlikely event provoked interest in the frequency and causes of death in the series. In fact, although the incidence of accidental death and suicide is seven times the national average, the overall mortality rate in Ambridge is almost exactly what would be expected.\nThe demise of Nigel caused controversy among some listeners,; a number of complaints variously expressed dismay at the death of a popular character, concerns over the manner of the dismissal of the actor, a belief that the promise to \"shake Ambridge to the core\" had been over-hyped, and criticism of the credibility of the script (for example, the duration of his plummeting cry caused the building's height to be calculated at considerably more than had been imagined); there was also a perceived unwillingness of the editorial team to engage with these listener complaints.\nCOVID-19 pandemic.\nTopical subjects have been added to the script, but this was not possible during the COVID-19 pandemic. Actors were initially recorded in their homes and included references to the pandemic from some of the characters sharing their private thoughts with the listener. From 4 May 2020 to 14 August 2021, because of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, weekly programming was reduced to four episodes, omitting the episodes on Sunday and Friday. The Sunday omnibus was correspondingly reduced in length. After the broadcast of some pre-recorded episodes and the repeat of some classic episodes, new episodes were aired that had been recorded remotely, to a mixed reception. On 15 August 2021, the Sunday evening episode resumed regular broadcast, as did the Friday evening episode on 3 June 2022.\n'Final' episodes.\nOn two occasions, special 'final' episodes of \"The Archers\" have been produced for the benefit of broadcasters outside the UK who had been running the series but were no longer willing or able to continue. The first was in 1969, for stations in Canada, Kenya and Hong Kong. The second occasion was in 1982, when rising costs meant Radio New Zealand could no longer afford to continue running the series, and a concluding episode was written and produced for them to end \"The Archers\" with in September that year.\nThemes.\nThe programme has tackled many serious, contemporary social issues: rural drug addiction; rape, including rape in marriage; inter-racial relationships; direct action against genetically modified crops and badger culling; family break-ups; civil partnerships; and a family being threatened by a gang of farm thieves. There has been criticism from conservative commentators, such as Peter Hitchens in 1999, that the series has become a vehicle for liberal and left-wing values and agendas, with characters behaving out of character to achieve those goals. However, one of the show's charms is to make much out of everyday, small concerns, such as the possible closure of the village shop, the loss and rediscovery of a pair of spectacles, competitive marmalade-making, or nonsense such as a 'spile troshing' competition, rather than the large-scale and improbable events that form the plots of many soap operas. Godfrey Baseley was quoted in \"The Independent\" as objecting to the homosexuality in the programme, saying, \"It is disgusting ... It is distasteful because being gay is such a minority interest. Country folk don't do that kind of thing. They have sex the proper way.\"\nAccording to some of the actors, and confirmed in the writings of Godfrey Baseley, in its early days the show was used as a conduit for educational announcements from the Ministry of Agriculture, one actor reading an announcement almost verbatim to another. Direct involvement of the government ended in 1972. The show has reacted within a day to agricultural emergencies, such as outbreaks of foot and mouth disease which affect farmers nationwide if livestock movements are restricted.\nCameo appearances.\nMany famous people have made cameo appearances on the programme:\nMusic.\nTheme tune.\nThe theme tune of \"The Archers\" is called \"Barwick Green\" and is a maypole dance from the suite \"My Native Heath\", written in 1924 by the Yorkshire composer Arthur Wood. The Sunday omnibus broadcast of \"The Archers\" starts with a more rustic, accordion-arranged rendition by The Yetties. The theme for BBC Radio 4 Extra's \"The Archers\" spinoff, \"Ambridge Extra\", is a version arranged by Bellowhead.\nA library music recording of Barwick Green was used for the pilot and during the early years of the national version, because a bid by Godfrey Baseley to have a special theme composed had been turned down on the grounds of cost, put at (then) \u00a3250\u2013\u00a3300. However, once the serial had become undeniably established, a new recording of Barwick Green was authorised and performed by the BBC Midland Light Orchestra on 24 March 1954. This mono recording was accompanied by four movements entitled \"A Village Suite\", composed by Kenneth Pakeman to complement Barwick Green. Excerpts from these movements were used for a time as bridging music between scenes. The 1954 recordings were never made available to the public and their use was restricted even inside the BBC, partly because of an agreement with the Musicians' Union.\nIn 1992, the theme was re-recorded in stereo, retaining the previous arrangements. The venue was Symphony Hall, Birmingham, the conductor Ron Goodwin, the producer David Welsby, and the sound mixer Norman McLeod. The slightly different sound mixing and more leisurely tempo reportedly led some listeners to consider the new version inferior, specifically that it lacked \"brio\", although the BBC publicised the fact that the orchestra contained some of the musicians who had played in the previous recording, including Harold Rich (piano) and Norman Parker (percussion). \nRobert Robinson once compared the tune to \"the genteel abandon of a lifelong teetotaller who has suddenly taken to drink\". On April Fool's Day 2004 both \"The Independent\" and \"The Today Programme\" claimed that BBC executives had commissioned composer Brian Eno to record an electronic version of \"Barwick Green\" as a replacement for the current theme, while comedian Billy Connolly included in his act the joke that the theme was so typically British that it should be the national anthem of the United Kingdom.\nIn 2009, comedian Rainer Hersch conducted the Philharmonia Orchestra in a performance of the theme, live from the Royal Festival Hall to a listening BBC Radio 3 audience in an attempt to confuse them. He then went on to show how similar it is to \"Montagues and Capulets\" \u2013 \"Dance of the Knights\" \u2013 from \"Romeo and Juliet\" by Sergei Prokofiev, claiming that this was a result of Russian spies going through the BBC's rubbish bins looking for the scripts.\nSerious events.\nAt times, a cliffhanger involving the death of a major character or a disaster was marked by the replacement of the traditional closing theme with the final, dramatic section of \"Barwick Green\", which included trombones, cymbals and the closing bars of the signature tune and was known as the \"doom music\" to some fan groups. This tradition has been dropped, events such as the death of Nigel Pargetter being followed by the normal closing music despite the gravity of the incident. This has irritated some followers, who consider the jollity of the normal segment inappropriate in such circumstances.\nA brief extract from \"The Dream of Gerontius\" was played following the death of Phil Archer. When John Archer died, no music was played.\nThere was a nod to \"The Archers\" in in London on 27 July 2012, where the theme tune was played at the beginning of a segment celebrating British culture: the sound of a radio could be heard being tuned in as \"Barwick Green\" was played.\n\"Ambridge Extra\".\nBBC Radio 4 Extra ran an occasional short supplement, \"Ambridge Extra\", between 2011 and 2013, featuring characters away from the Ambridge environs. Series 1 and 2 had 26 episodes and series 3, 4 and 5 had 20. The reason offered for non-renewal was limited resources.\nFan clubs.\nTwo organisations dedicated to the programme were established in the 1990s. Archers Addicts was the official body, run by members of the cast. The club had five thousand members and an online shop where Archers memorabilia was sold under licence. It closed as a club on 31 December 2013 but still has a Facebook page and a Twitter feed. Archers Anarchists was formed some time later, objecting to the \"castist\" assumptions propagated by the BBC, and claiming that the characters are real.\nThe usenet newsgroup uk.media.radio.archers (referred to as UMRA by its users, who call themselves umrats) has been running since 1995. Its users include experts on subjects covered by the programme, such as the many aspects of farming, the running of small businesses, and bell ringing; lengthy discussions ensue \u2013 as well as coverage of light-hearted matters and plot speculation. Various gatherings of umrats occur, including a series of about ten annual barbecues. The first was attended by Carole Boyd (Lynda Snell). They have included participants from Europe and the Americas. The group has nicknames for most of the regular Archers characters, such as S'aint for Shula. Perhaps because it was initially more accessible in academia, the discussions can be quite detailed, though UMRA considers itself to be a friendly and welcoming group, where in particular flamewars and the like are not welcome. Despite the general decline of usenet with the advent of trendier media such as Facebook and Twitter, UMRA remains a very active newsgroup compared to many. Its one-time T-shirts and mugs bore the legend (in yellow on \"Barwick Green\", of course) \"An everyday story of internet folk\", in humorous reference to the programme's initial billing.\nThe Academic Archers, founded in 2016, is a community of fans who share an academic approach to the programme. It organises an annual conference at which papers are presented which draw on academic expertise along with enjoyment. Papers from these have been published as \"The Archers in Fact and Fiction: Academic Analyses of Life in Rural Borsetshire\" (2016, Peter Lang: ), \"Custard, Culverts and Cake\" (2017, Emerald: and \"Gender, Sex and Gossip: Women in The Archers\" (2019, Emerald: ) The group aims to be \"curious, generous and joyful\".\nThere are four weekly fan podcasts about \"The Archers\": \"All About The Archers\", \"DumTeeDum\", \"The Cider Shed\" and \"Ambridge on the Couch\".\nParallels.\nIn 1994, the BBC World Service began broadcasting in Afghanistan \"Naway Kor, Naway Jwand\" (\"New Home, New Life\") an everyday story of country folk incorporating pieces of useful information. Although the useful information was more likely to concern unexploded land mines and opium addiction than the latest farming techniques, the inspiration and model of \"Naway Kor, Naway Jwand\" was \"The Archers\", and the initial workshopping with Afghan writers included an \"Archers\" scriptwriter. A 1997 study found that listeners to the soap opera were significantly less likely to be injured by a mine than non-listeners.\nIn Rwanda, the BBC World Service's Rwanda-Rundi service has been broadcasting the Archers-inspired soap opera \"Urunana\" (\"Hand in Hand\") since 1999.\n\"The Archers\" was the model for the Russian radio soap opera \"Dom 7, Podyezd 4\" (\"House 7, Entrance 4\"), on which the former Prime Minister, Tony Blair, once made a cameo appearance.\nParodies.\nTony Hancock starred in the Galton and Simpson spoof \"The Bowmans\" in an episode of BBC Television's \"Hancock's Half Hour\".\nNed Sherrin produced a short 1973 film called \"The Cobblers of Umbridge\". The cast included Joan Sims, Lance Percival, Roy Kinnear, Derek Griffiths and John Fortune.\n\"John Finnemore's Souvenir Programme\" has parodied \"The Archers\" with its recurring \"The Archers Accidentally\" sketches; the sketches claim to portray \"The Archers\" as it sounds to people who only listen to the show inadvertently.\nThe radio series of \"Dead Ringers\" has frequently parodied characters from \"The Archers\", including a special edition.\nThe subtitle was parodied by Bill Tidy in his long-running cartoon of \"The Cloggies\", \"an Everyday Saga in the Life of Clog Dancing Folk\", which ran in the satirical magazine \"Private Eye\", and later in \"The Listener\".\nIn Series 12 episode 4 of the BBC series \"Father Brown\", the plot concerns a radio programme called \"The Muckles\", which is clearly based on \"The Archers\".\nBooks and audiobooks.\nMaps.\nIn addition to books and audiobooks, purported maps of Ambridge and Borsetshire have been published.\nDocumentaries.\nThe BBC occasional arts series \"Arena\" has featured \"The Archers\" on several occasions:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51898", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51898", "title": "Round The Horne", "text": ""}
{"id": "51899", "revid": "1295360118", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51899", "title": "Douglas Smith (broadcaster)", "text": "British radio actor and announcer\nDouglas Arthur Smith (11 February 1924 \u2013 15 October 1972) was a British radio announcer and comedian who spent 25 years with the BBC. He began his broadcasting career with the BBC European Service (now the World Service) in 1946 and later worked as an announcer and newsreader on the Home Service and the Third Programme. \nHe is probably best remembered as the formal announcer on \"Beyond Our Ken\" (1958\u20131964), its successor \"Round the Horne\" (1965\u20131968) and the short-lived \"Stop Messing About\" (1969\u20131970), where his \"BBC accent\" was used to comic effect. In this role, he advertised \"Dobbiroids\" (a fictional product for horses) and the huge number of na\u00efve sound effects he made to assist in the development of humorous and often bizarre plots. Smith performed \"Nobody Loves a Fairy When She's Forty\" in an episode of \"Round the Horne\". Many of his roles were portrayals of inanimate objects, e.g., volcanoes, \"and I, Douglas Smith, play the part of the volcano\", and \"I, Douglas Smith, in my most taxing role to date, play the part of the world.\" (spoof on 'Around the World in 80 Days').\nA Croydonian, he died aged 48 in Kingston upon Thames.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51900", "revid": "7945708", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51900", "title": "Betty Marsden", "text": "British actor and comedian (1919\u20131998)\nBetty Marsden (24 February 1919 \u2013 18 July 1998) was an English comedy actress. She is particularly remembered as a cast member of the radio series \"Beyond Our Ken\" and \"Round the Horne\". Marsden appeared in two Carry On films, \"Carry On Regardless\" (1961) and \"Carry On Camping\" (1969).\nEarly life.\nMarsden was born in West Derby, Liverpool, and grew up in near poverty in Somerset. Her music teacher recognised her talent at the age of six, and became her guardian. She attended the Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts and during the Second World War she entertained the troops as a member of ENSA.\nCareer.\nFrom 1958 to 1968, Marsden was a cast member of the radio series \"Beyond Our Ken\" and \"Round the Horne\", where she played most of the female characters. Perhaps her most famous catchphrase was \"many, many, many times\", delivered in the dry, reedy tones of Bea Clissold, the ancient actress who was renowned for having given pleasure to many, particularly in \"The Little Hut\" on Shaftesbury Avenue. This long outlasted the Clissold character and was deployed to much audience appreciation on a few occasions in later series, possibly as an ad lib. Another was \" 'allo, cheeky face!\", shouted into the microphone in the less-than-couth London tones of Buttercup Gruntfuttock. Marsden's vocal range was impressive and also included the husky Daphne Whitethigh, the strident stereotypical Aussie tones of the ultra feminist (but conflicted) Judy Coolibar, and the cut-glass Received Pronunciation of Dame Celia Molestrangler (in a series of loose pastiches of the stilted dialogue in 1930s and 1940s romances and melodramas \u2013 for example, \"The Astonished Heart\" became \"The Hasty Nose\", and \"Brief Encounter\" became \"Brief Ecstasy\" \u2013 partnered with Hugh Paddick's 'ageing juvenile Binkie Huckaback', with the denouement inevitably bringing the lovers crashing back to earth).\nIn 1958, Marsden played the Fairy Godmother, in Rodgers and Hammerstein's \"Cinderella\" at the London Coliseum with Tommy Steele, Kenneth Williams, Yana and Jimmy Edwards.\nHer two Carry On films were \"Carry On Regardless\" (1961), as Mata Hari, and \"Carry On Camping\" (1969), as Terry Scott's wife Harriet, with a braying laugh and jolly bossiness.\nHer other film roles included \"Ramsbottom Rides Again\" (1956), \"The Big Day\" (1960), \"The Boys\" (1962), \"The Wild Affair\" (1964), \"The Leather Boys\" (1964), \"The Best House in London\" (1969), and \"Eyewitness\" (1970). She later played Hermione in \"Britannia Hospital\" (1982), Violet Manning in \"The Dresser\" (1983), Princess Troubetskaya in \"\" (1986 TV movie), and Mrs. Barnacle in \"Little Dorrit\" (1987).\nHer theatre roles included Mrs. Prentice in \"What the Butler Saw\" at the Royal Court Theatre in 1975, and Mrs. Hardcastle in \"She Stoops to Conquer\" at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith, in 1982. Her role of Aunt Dahlia was removed from Andrew Lloyd Webber's flop musical \"Jeeves\" (1975) before opening night.\nHer television appearances included \"Blake's 7\" (Series 4, 1981), \"The Bill\" (Series 5, 1989) and \"Inspector Morse\" (1990).\nPersonal life and death.\nDuring the Second World War, Marsden met and married Dr Jimmy Wilson Muggoch, an army doctor from Edinburgh. From 1963 the couple lived in Brentford on their houseboat \"Chilham\", a converted Thames lighter.\nPrior to her death, Marsden had been suffering from heart problems and pneumonia. She was believed to be recovering, but died suddenly while socialising with friends in the bar of Denville Hall, a retirement home for actors, in Northwood in London.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51901", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51901", "title": "Michael Howard (disambiguation)", "text": "Michael Howard, Baron Howard of Lympne (born 1941) is a British politician.\nMichael Howard may also refer to:\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about people with the same name. "}
{"id": "51902", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51902", "title": "Brooklyn Trolley Museum", "text": ""}
{"id": "51903", "revid": "43744280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51903", "title": "Tyrosine kinase", "text": "Enzyme\nA tyrosine kinase is an enzyme that can transfer a phosphate group from ATP to the tyrosine residues of specific proteins inside a cell. It functions as an \"on\" or \"off\" switch in many cellular functions.\nTyrosine kinases belong to a larger class of enzymes known as protein kinases which also attach phosphates to other amino acids such as serine and threonine. Phosphorylation of proteins by kinases is an important mechanism for communicating signals within a cell (signal transduction) and regulating cellular activity, such as cell division.\nProtein kinases can become mutated, stuck in the \"on\" position, and cause unregulated growth of the cell, which is a necessary step for the development of cancer. Therefore, kinase inhibitors, such as imatinib and osimertinib, are often effective cancer treatments.\nMost tyrosine kinases have an associated protein tyrosine phosphatase, which removes the phosphate group.\nReaction.\nProtein kinases are a group of enzymes that possess a catalytic subunit that transfers the gamma (terminal) phosphate from nucleoside triphosphates (often ATP) to one or more amino acid residues in a protein substrate side-chain, resulting in a conformational change affecting protein function. The enzymes fall into two broad classes, characterised with respect to substrate specificity: serine/threonine-specific, and tyrosine-specific (the subject of this article).\nFunction.\nKinase is a large family of enzymes that are responsible for catalyzing the transfer of a phosphoryl group from a nucleoside triphosphate donor, such as ATP, to an acceptor molecule. Tyrosine kinases catalyze the phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in proteins. The phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in turn causes a change in the function of the protein that they are contained in.\nPhosphorylation at tyrosine residues controls a wide range of properties in proteins such as enzyme activity, subcellular localization, and interaction between molecules. Furthermore, tyrosine kinases function in many signal transduction cascades wherein extracellular signals are transmitted through the cell membrane to the cytoplasm and often to the nucleus, where gene expression may be modified. Finally mutations can cause some tyrosine kinases to become constitutively active, a nonstop functional state that may contribute to initiation or progression of cancer.\nTyrosine kinases function in a variety of processes, pathways, and actions, and are responsible for key events in the body. The receptor tyrosine kinases function in transmembrane signaling, whereas tyrosine kinases within the cell function in signal transduction to the nucleus. Tyrosine kinase activity in the nucleus involves cell-cycle control and properties of transcription factors. In this way, in fact, tyrosine kinase activity is involved in mitogenesis, or the induction of mitosis in a cell; proteins in the cytosol and proteins in the nucleus are phosphorylated at tyrosine residues during this process. Cellular growth and reproduction may rely to some degree on tyrosine kinase. Tyrosine kinase function has been observed in the nuclear matrix, which comprises not the chromatin but rather the nuclear envelope and a \u201cfibrous web\u201d that serves to physically stabilize DNA. To be specific, Lyn, a type of kinase in the Src family that was identified in the nuclear matrix, appears to control the cell cycle. Src family tyrosine kinases are closely related but demonstrate a wide variety of functionality. Roles or expressions of Src family tyrosine kinases vary significantly according to cell type, as well as during cell growth and differentiation. Lyn and Src family tyrosine kinases in general have been known to function in signal transduction pathways. There is evidence that Lyn is localized at the cell membrane; Lyn is associated both physically and functionally with a variety of receptor molecules.\nFibroblasts \u2013 a type of cell that synthesizes the extracellular matrix and collagen and is involved in wound healing \u2013 that have been transformed by the polyomavirus possess higher tyrosine activity in the cellular matrix. Furthermore, tyrosine kinase activity has been determined to be correlated to cellular transformation. It has also been demonstrated that phosphorylation of a middle-T antigen on tyrosine is also associated with cell transformation, a change that is similar to cellular growth or reproduction.\nThe transmission of mechanical force and regulatory signals are quite fundamental in the normal survival of a living organism. Protein tyrosine kinase plays a role in this task, too. A protein tyrosine kinase called pp125, also referred to as focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is likely at hand in the influence of cellular focal adhesions, as indicated by an immunofluorescent localization of FAK. Focal adhesions are macromolecular structures that function in the transmission of mechanical force and regulatory signals.\nCellular proliferation, as explained in some detail above, may rely in some part on tyrosine kinase. Tyrosine kinase function has been observed in the nuclear matrix. Lyn, the type of kinase that was the first to be discovered in the nuclear matrix, is part of Src family of tyrosine kinases, which can be contained in the nucleus of differentiating, calcium-provoked kertinocytes. Lyn, in the nuclear matrix, among the nuclear envelope and the \u201cfibrous web\u201d that physically stabilizes DNA, was found functioning in association with the matrix. Also, it appeared to be conditional to cell cycle. The contribution of the Lyn protein to the total tyrosine kinase activity within the nuclear matrix is unknown, however; because the Lyn was extracted only partially, an accurate measurement of its activity could not be managed. Indications, as such, are that, according to Vegesna \"et al.\" (1996), Lyn polypeptides are associated with tyrosine kinase activity in the nuclear matrix. The extracted Lyn was enzymatically active, offering support for this notion.\nYet another possible and probable role of protein tyrosine kinase is that in the event of circulatory failure and organ dysfunction caused by endotoxin in rats, where the effects of inhibitors tyrphostin and genistein are involved with protein tyrosine kinase. Signals in the surroundings received by receptors in the membranes of cells are transmitted into the cell cytoplasm. Transmembrane signaling due to receptor tyrosine kinases, according to Bae \"et al.\" (2009), relies heavily on interactions, for example, mediated by the SH2 protein domain; it has been determined via experimentation that the SH2 protein domain selectivity is functional in mediating cellular processes involving tyrosine kinase. Receptor tyrosine kinases may, by this method, influence growth factor receptor signaling. This is one of the more fundamental cellular communication functions metazoans.\nRegulation.\nMajor changes are sometimes induced when the tyrosine kinase enzyme is affected by other factors. One of the factors is a molecule that is bound reversibly by a protein, called a ligand. A number of receptor tyrosine kinases, though certainly not all, do not perform protein-kinase activity until they are occupied, or activated, by one of these ligands. Although more research indicates that receptors remain active within endosomes, it was once thought that endocytosis caused by ligands was the event responsible for the process in which receptors are inactivated. Activated receptor tyrosine kinase receptors are internalized (recycled back into the system) in short time and are ultimately delivered to lysosomes, where they become work-adjacent to the catabolic acid hydrolases that partake in digestion. Internalized signaling complexes are involved in different roles in different receptor tyrosine kinase systems, the specifics of which were researched. In addition, ligands participate in reversible binding, with inhibitors binding non-covalently (inhibition of different types are effected depending on whether these inhibitors bind the enzyme, the enzyme-substrate complex, or both). Multivalency, which is an attribute that bears particular interest to some people involved in related scientific research, is a phenomenon characterized by the concurrent binding of several ligands positioned on one unit to several coinciding receptors on another. In any case, the binding of the ligand to its partner is apparent owing to the effects that it can have on the functionality of many proteins. Ligand-activated receptor tyrosine kinases, as they are sometimes referred to, demonstrate a unique attribute. Once a tyrosine receptor kinase is bonded to its ligand, it is able to bind to tyrosine kinase residing in the cytosol of the cell.\nErythrocytes.\nAn example of this trigger-system in action is the process by which the formation of erythrocytes is regulated. Mammals possess this system, which begins in the kidneys where the developmental signal is manufactured. The developmental signal, also called a cytokine, is erythropoietin in this case. (Cytokines are key regulators of hematopoietic cell proliferation and differentiation.) Erythropoietin's activity is initiated when hematopoietic cytokine receptors become activated. In erythrocyte regulation, erythropoietin is a protein containing 165 amino acids that plays a role in activating the cytoplasmic protein kinase JAK. The results of some newer research have also indicated that the aforementioned cytokine receptors function with members of the JAK tyrosine kinase family. The cytokine receptors activate the JAK kinases. This then results in the phosphorylation of several signaling proteins located in the cell membrane. This subsequently affects both the stimulation of ligand-mediated receptors and intracellular signaling pathway activation. Substrates for JAK kinases mediate some gene responses and more. The process is also responsible for mediating the production of blood cells. In this case, erythropoietin binds to the corresponding plasma membrane receptor, dimerizing the receptor. The dimer is responsible for activating the kinase JAK via binding. Tyrosine residues located in the cytoplasmic domain of the erythropoietin receptor are consequently phosphorylated by the activated protein kinase JAK. Overall, this is also how a receptor tyrosine kinase might be activated by a ligand to regulate erythrocyte formation.\nOther examples.\nAdditional instances of factor-influenced protein tyrosine kinase activity, similar to this one, exist. An adapter protein such as Grb2 will bind to phosphate-tyrosine residues under the influence of receptor protein kinases. This mechanism is an ordinary one that provokes protein-protein interactions.\nFurthermore, to illustrate an extra circumstance, insulin-associated factors have been determined to influence tyrosine kinase. Insulin receptor substrates are molecules that function in signaling by regulating the effects of insulin. Many receptor enzymes have closely related structure and receptor tyrosine kinase activity, and it has been determined that the foundational or prototypical receptor enzyme is insulin. Insulin receptor substrates IRS2 and IRS3 each have unique characteristic tissue function and distribution that serves to enhance signaling capabilities in pathways that are initiated by receptor tyrosine kinases. Activated IRS-1 molecules \"enhance\" the signal created by insulin. The insulin receptor system, in contrast, appears to \"diminish\" the efficacy of endosomal signaling.\nThe epidermal growth factor receptor system, as such, has been used as an intermediate example. Some signals are produced from the actual cell surface in this case but other signals seem to emanate from within the endosomes. This variety of function may be a means to create ligand-specific signals. This supports the notion that trafficking, a term for the modification of proteins subsequent to mRNA translation, may be vital to the function of receptor signaling.\nStructure.\nProtein tyrosine kinase proteins contain a Protein kinase domain, which consists of an N-terminal lobe comprising 5 beta sheet strands and an alpha helix called the C-helix, and a C-terminal domain usually comprising 6 alpha helices (helices D, E, F, G, H, and I). Two loops in the center of the kinase domain control catalysis. The catalytic loop contains the HRD motif (usually with sequence His-Arg-Asp). The aspartic acid of this motif forms a hydrogen bond with the substrate OH group on Tyr during catalysis. The other loop is the activation loop, whose position and conformation determine in part whether the kinase is active or inactive. The activation loop begins with the DFG motif (usually with sequence Asp-Phe-Gly).\nThere are over 1800 3D structures of tyrosine kinases available in the Protein Data Bank. An example is PDB: https://\u200b, the crystal structure of the tyrosine kinase domain of the human insulin receptor.\nFamilies.\nThere are 90 human genes that contain a total of 94 protein tyrosine kinase domains (PTKs). Four genes contain both a catalytically active kinase domain and a pseudokinase domain (a kinase domain with no catalytic activity: JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, and TYK2). Including these four genes, there are 82 human genes that contain a catalytically active tyrosine kinase domain They are divided into two classes, receptor and non-receptor tyrosine kinases.\nReceptor.\nBy 2004, 58 human receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) were known, grouped into 20 subfamilies. Eight of these membrane proteins which contain tyrosine protein kinase domains are actually pseudokinases, without catalytic activity (EPHA10, EPHB6, ERBB3, PTK7, ROR1, ROR2, RYK, and STYK1). Receptor tyrosine kinases play pivotal roles in diverse cellular activities including growth (by signaling neurotrophins), differentiation, metabolism, adhesion, motility, and death.\nRTKs are composed of an extracellular domain, which is able to bind a specific ligand, a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular catalytic domain, which is able to bind and phosphorylate selected substrates. Binding of a ligand to the extracellular region causes a series of structural rearrangements in the RTK that lead to its enzymatic activation. In particular, movement of some parts of the kinase domain gives free access to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and the substrate to the active site. This triggers a cascade of events through phosphorylation of intracellular proteins that ultimately transmit (\"transduce\") the extracellular signal to the nucleus, causing changes in gene expression.\nMany RTKs are involved in oncogenesis, either by gene mutation, or chromosome translocation, or simply by over-expression. In every case, the result is a hyper-active kinase, that confers an aberrant, ligand-independent, non-regulated growth stimulus to the cancer cells.\nCytoplasmic/non-receptor.\nIn humans, there are 32 cytoplasmic protein tyrosine kinases (EC https://).\nThe first non-receptor tyrosine kinase identified was the \"v-src\" oncogenic protein. Most animal cells contain one or more members of the \"Src\" family of tyrosine kinases. A chicken sarcoma virus, the Rous sarcoma virus mentioned above, was found to carry mutated versions of the normal cellular Src gene. The mutated v-\"src\" gene has lost the normal built-in inhibition of enzyme activity that is characteristic of cellular SRC (c-\"src\") genes. SRC family members have been found to regulate many cellular processes. For example, the T-cell antigen receptor leads to intracellular signalling by activation of \"Lck\" and \"Fyn\", two proteins that are structurally similar to \"Src\".\nClinical significance.\nTyrosine kinases are particularly important today because of their implications in the treatment of cancer. A mutation that causes certain tyrosine kinases to be constitutively active has been associated with several cancers. Imatinib (brand names Gleevec and Glivec) is a drug able to bind the catalytic cleft of these tyrosine kinases, inhibiting its activity.\nTyrosine kinase activity is also significantly involved in other events that are sometimes considered highly unfavorable. For instance, enhanced activity of the enzyme has been implicated in the derangement of the function of certain systems, such as cell division. Also included are numerous diseases related to local inflammation such as atherosclerosis and psoriasis, or systemic inflammation such as sepsis and septic shock. A number of viruses target tyrosine kinase function during infection. The polyoma virus affects tyrosine kinase activity inside the nuclear matrix. Fibroblasts are cells involved in wound healing and cell structure formation in mammalian cells. When these cells are transformed by the polyoma virus, higher tyrosine activity is observed in the cellular matrix, which is also correlated to cellular proliferation. Another virus that targets tyrosine kinase is the Rous sarcoma virus, a retrovirus that causes sarcoma in chickens. Infected cells display obvious structure modifications and cell growth regulation that is extremely unusual. Protein tyrosine kinases that are encoded by the Rous sarcoma virus cause cellular transformation, and are termed oncoproteins. In addition, tyrosine kinase can sometimes function incorrectly in such a way that leads to non-small cell lung cancer. A common, widespread cancer, non-small cell lung cancer is the cause of death in more people than the total number in breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer together.\nResearch has shown that protein phosphorylation occurs on residues of tyrosine by both transmembrane receptor- and membrane-associated protein tyrosine kinases in normal cells. Phosphorylation plays a significant role in cellular signalling that regulates the number and variety of growth factors. This is evidenced by the observation that cells affected by the Rous sarcoma virus display obvious structural modifications and a total lack of normal cell growth regulation. Rous sarcoma virus-encoded oncoproteins are protein tyrosine kinases that are the cause of, and are required for, this cellular transformation. Tyrosine phosphorylation activity also increases or decreases in conjunction with changes in cell composition and growth regulation. In this way, a certain transformation exhibited by cells is dependent on a role that tyrosine kinase demonstrates. Protein tyrosine kinases, have a major role in the activation of lymphocytes. In addition, they are functional in mediating communication pathways in cell types such as adrenal chromaffin, platelets, and neural cells.\nA tyrosine kinase can become an unregulated enzyme within an organism due to influences discussed, such as mutations and more. This behavior causes havoc; essential processes become disorganized. Systems on which the organism relies malfunction, resulting often in cancers. Preventing this type of circumstance is highly desirable. Much research has already noted the significant effect that inhibitors of the radically functioning protein tyrosine kinase enzymes have on related ailments. (See Tyrosine-kinase inhibitor )\nNon-small cell lung cancer.\nCancer's response to an inhibitor of tyrosine kinase was assessed in a clinical trial. In this case, Gefitinib is the inhibitor of tyrosine kinase. Incorrect tyrosine kinase function can lead to non-small cell lung cancer. Gefitinib is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets the epidermal growth factor receptor, inducing favorable outcomes in patients with non-small cell lung cancers. A common, widespread cancer, non-small cell lung cancer is the cause of death in more people than breast, colorectal, and prostate cancer together. This is strong motivation to perform research on tyrosine kinase inhibitors as potential targets in cancer treatment. Gefitinib, functioning as an epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, improved symptoms related to non-small cell lung cancer and resulted in radiographic tumor regressions. This is an example of the efficacy of such an inhibitor. The process of inhibition shows how the cancer sustains. Mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor activate signalling pathways that promote cell survival. Non-small cell lung cancer cells become dependent on these survival signals. Gefitinib's inhibition of the survival signals may be a contributing factor to its efficacy as a drug for non-small cell cancer treatment.\nGefitinib is well endured by humans, and treatment resulted in a symptom improvement rate of 43% (with 95% confidence in a 33%\u201353% interval) for patients that received 250\u00a0mg of Gefitinib and 35% (with 95% confidence in a 26%\u201345% interval) for those that received 500\u00a0mg. In the trial, epidermal growth factor receptor showed a rapid response to the inhibitor, as demonstrated by the improvement of the cancer symptoms. In each group, improvements were noted after a single week of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment. Gefitinib application once per day caused \u201crapid\u201d symptom improvement and tumor regressions in non-small cell lung cancer patients. In the field of medical research, this is an especially significant example of the use of an inhibitor to treat tyrosine kinase-associated cancer. Chemotherapy, surgery, and radiotherapy were the only major options available prior to the discoveries made in this trial. The side-effects of Gefitinib oral treatment once per day were considered significant. Diarrhea was reported in 57% of patients in the 250\u00a0mg group and in 75% of the 500\u00a0mg group. One patient had diarrhea more severe than Grade 2, with up to six bowel movements in only one day. Also, a death occurred possibly due to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment; however, the correlation is not exactly clear. In addition, skin toxicity was observed in 62% of patients in the 250\u00a0mg group. Nevertheless, the side-effects of Gefitinib were only \u201cgenerally mild, manageable, noncumulative, and reversible.\u201d Unfortunately, ceasing to take the inhibitor may be the only reversal strategy of the unfavorable symptoms. Gefitinib still represents a reasonably safe and effective treatment compared to other cancer therapies.\nFurthermore, epidermal growth factor receptor plays a crucial role in tumorigenesis, which is the production of a new tumor. By 2010 Two monoclonal antibodies and another small-molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor called Erlotinib had also been developed to treat cancer.\nJuly 12, 2013 FDA approved afatinib \"multiple receptor, irreversible TKI\" for the first-line treatment of patients with metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) whose tumors have epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation\nChronic myeloid leukemia.\nBCR-ABL is a constitutively activated tyrosine kinase that is associated with chronic myeloid leukemia. It is formed from a fusion gene when pieces of chromosomes 9 and 22 break off and trade places. The ABL gene from chromosome 9 joins to the BCR gene on chromosome 22, to form the BCR-ABL fusion gene. Tyrosine kinase activity is crucial for the transformation of BCR-ABL. Therefore, inhibiting it improves cancer symptoms. Among currently available inhibitors to treat CML are imatinib, dasatinib, nilotinib, bosutinib and ponatinib.\nGastrointestinal stromal tumors.\nGastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are known to withstand cancer chemotherapy treatment and do not respond to any kind of therapy (in 2001) in advanced cases. However, tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571 (imatinib) is effective in the treatment of patients with metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors consist of a cluster of mesenchymal neoplasms that are formed from precursors to cells that make up the connective-tissue in the gastrointestinal tract. Most of these tumors are found in the stomach, though they can also be located in the small intestine or elsewhere in the intestinal tract. The cells of these tumors have a growth factor receptor associated with tyrosine kinase activity. This growth factor receptor is called c-kit and is produced by a proto-oncogene (\"c-kit\"). Mutation of c-kit causes the constitutive activity of tyrosine kinase, which results in cancerous gastrointestinal stromal tumors. Results of c-kit mutation include unrestricted tyrosine kinase activity and cell proliferation, unregulated phosphorylation of c-kit, and disruption of some communication pathways. Therapy with imatinib can inhibit the non-normal cell signaling mechanisms in gastrointestinal stromal tumors. This results in significant responses in patients and sustained disease control. By 2001 it was no longer doubted that this inhibitor can be effective and safe in humans. In similar manner, protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571 was found to significantly reduce the physical size of tumors; they decreased roughly 65% in size in 4 months of trialing, and continued to diminish. New lesions did not appear, and a number of the liver metastases completely reduced to non-existence. The single patient in the study remained healthy following treatment. There are no effective means of treatment for advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors, but that STI571 represents an effective treatment in early stage cancer associated with constitutively active c-kit, by inhibiting unfavourable tyrosine kinase activity. \nInhibitors.\nTo reduce enzyme activity, inhibitor molecules bind to enzymes. Reducing enzyme activity can disable a pathogen or correct an incorrectly function system; as such, many enzyme inhibitors are developed to be used as drugs by the general public.\nGIST and Imatinib.\nGastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are mesenchymal tumors that affect the gastrointestinal tract. Treatment options have been limited. However Imatinib, as an inhibitor to the malfunctioning enzyme, can be effective.\nChronic myelogenous leukemia and nilotinib.\nIf imatinib does not work, patients with advanced chronic myelogenous leukemia can use nilotinib, dasatinib, bosutinib, ponatinib, or another inhibitor to the malfunction enzyme that causes the leukemia. This inhibitor is a highly selective Bcr-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor.\nOthers.\nSunitinib is an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor that acts upon vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR), platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR), stem cell factor receptor, and colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (Burstein \"et al.\" 2008)\nGefitinib and erlotinib inhibit the tyrosine kinase domain of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and can be used to treat lung and pancreatic cancer where there is often over-expression of this cell-surface receptor tyrosine kinase.\nKinase inhibitors can also be mediated. Paracrine signalling mediates the response to epidermal growth factor receptor kinase inhibitors. Paracrine activates epidermal growth factor receptor in endothelial cells of the tumor to do this.\nDasatinib is a Src tyrosine kinase inhibitor that is effective both as a senolytic and as therapy for chronic myelogenous leukemia.\nExamples.\nHuman proteins containing this domain include:\nAATK; ABL; ABL2; \nALK;\nAXL;\nBLK;\nBMX;\nBTK; CSF1R;\nCSK; DDR1; \nDDR2;\nEGFR;\nEPHA1; EPHA2; EPHA3; EPHA4; EPHA5; EPHA6; EPHA7; EPHA8; EPHA10;\nEPHB1; EPHB2; EPHB3; EPHB4; EPHB6; ERBB2; ERBB3; ERBB4;\nFER;\nFES;\nFGFR1; FGFR2; FGFR3; FGFR4;\nFGR; FLT1; FLT3; FLT4;\nFRK; FYN; GSG2; HCK; IGF1R; ILK; INSR;\nINSRR; IRAK4; \nITK; JAK1; JAK2; JAK3;\nKDR; KIT; KSR1; LCK; LMTK2; LMTK3;\nLTK; LYN; MATK; MERTK; MET; MLTK;\nMST1R; MUSK; NPR1; NTRK1; NTRK2; NTRK3; PDGFRA; PDGFRB; PKDCC;\nPLK4; PTK2; PTK2B; PTK6; PTK7;\nRET; ROR1; ROR2; ROS1; RYK; SRC;\nSRMS; STYK1;\nSYK; TEC;\nTEK; TEX14; TIE1; TNK1; TNK2; TNNI3K; TXK;\nTYK2; TYRO3; YES1; ZAP70\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51905", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51905", "title": "Henry Mancini", "text": "American film composer (1924\u20131994)\nHenry Mancini ( ; born Enrico Nicola Mancini; April 16, 1924 \u2013 June 14, 1994) was an American composer, conductor, arranger, pianist and flutist. Often cited as one of the greatest composers in the history of film, he won four Academy Awards, a Golden Globe, and twenty Grammy Awards, plus a posthumous Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1995.\nHis works include the theme and soundtrack for the \"Peter Gunn\" television series as well as the music for \"The Pink Panther\" film series (\"The Pink Panther Theme\") and \"Moon River\" from \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\". \"The Music from Peter Gunn\" won the inaugural Grammy Award for Album of the Year. Mancini enjoyed a long collaboration in composing film scores for film director Blake Edwards. Mancini also scored a No. 1 hit single during the rock era on the Hot 100: his arrangement and recording of the \"Love Theme from \"Romeo and Juliet\"\" spent two weeks at the top, starting with the week ending June 28, 1969.\nEarly life.\nHenry Mancini was born Enrico Nicola Mancini in Cleveland, Ohio, and raised in West Aliquippa, Pennsylvania. Both his parents were Italian immigrants. Originally from Scanno, Abruzzo, his father Quintiliano \"Quinto\" Mancini was a laborer at the Jones and Laughlin Steel Company and amateur musician who first came to the U.S. as a teenager around 1910. His mother Anna (n\u00e9e\u00a0Pece) came to the U.S. from Forl\u00ec del Sannio, Molise, as an infant.\nAt age eight, Mancini began learning the piccolo. Mancini said that hearing Rudolph G. Kopp's score in the 1935 Cecil B. DeMille film \"The Crusades\" inspired him to pursue film music composition despite his father's wishes for him to become a teacher.\nAt age 12, he began studying piano and orchestral arrangement under Pittsburgh concert pianist and Stanley Theatre (now Benedum Center) conductor Max Adkins. Not only did Mancini produce arrangements for the Stanley Theatre bands, but he also wrote an arrangement for Benny Goodman, an up-and-coming bandleader introduced to him by Adkins. According to Mancini biographer John Caps, the young Mancini \"preferred music arranging to any kind of musical performance, but taking apart a Chopin mazurka or Schumann sonata in order to play it helped him see...how the puzzle of form, meter, melody, harmony, and counterpoint had been solved by previous composers.\"\nAfter graduating from Aliquippa High School in 1942, Mancini first attended the Carnegie Institute of Technology (now Carnegie Mellon University) in Pittsburgh. Later that year, Mancini transferred to the Juilliard School of Music in New York City following a successful audition in which he performed a Beethoven sonata and improvisation on \"Night and Day\" by Cole Porter. Because he could only take orchestration and composition courses in his second year, Mancini studied only piano in his first year at Juilliard, in a condition Caps called \"aimless and oppressed\u2014a far cry from Adkins's enabling protective environment.\"\nAfter turning 18, Mancini enlisted in the United States Army Air Forces in 1943. While in basic training in Atlantic City, New Jersey, he met musicians being recruited by Glenn Miller. Owing to a recommendation by Miller, Mancini was first assigned to the 28th Air Force Band before being reassigned overseas to the 1306th Engineers Brigade in France. In 1945, he helped liberate the Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp in Austria.\nCareer.\nNewly discharged from the military, Mancini entered the music industry. In 1946, he became a pianist and arranger for the newly re-formed Glenn Miller Orchestra, led by Tex Beneke. After World War II, Mancini broadened his skills in composition, counterpoint, harmony and orchestration during studies, opening with the composers Ernst Krenek and Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco.\nIn 1952, Mancini joined Universal-International's music department. During the next six years, he contributed music to over 100 movies, most notably \"Creature from the Black Lagoon\", \"The Creature Walks Among Us\", \"It Came from Outer Space\", \"Tarantula\", \"This Island Earth\", \"The Glenn Miller Story\" (for which he received his first Academy Award nomination), \"The Benny Goodman Story\" and Orson Welles' \"Touch of Evil\". His first hit as a pop songwriter was a single by Guy Lombardo and His Royal Canadians titled \"I Won't Let You Out of My Heart\".\nMancini left Universal-International to work as an independent composer/arranger in 1958. Soon afterward, he scored the television series \"Peter Gunn\" for writer/producer Blake Edwards. This was the genesis of a relationship in which Edwards and Mancini collaborated on 30 films over 35 years. Along with Alex North, Elmer Bernstein, Leith Stevens and Johnny Mandel, Henry Mancini was a pioneer of the inclusion of jazz elements in the late romantic orchestral film and TV scoring prevalent at the time. Mancini's scores for Blake Edwards included \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (with the standard \"Moon River\") and \"Days of Wine and Roses\" (with the title song, \"Days of Wine and Roses\"), as well as \"Experiment in Terror\", \"The Pink Panther\" (and all of its sequels), \"The Great Race\", \"The Party\", \"10\" (including \"It's Easy to Say\") and \"Victor Victoria\". Another director with whom Mancini had a longstanding partnership was Stanley Donen (\"Charade\", \"Arabesque\", \"Two for the Road\"). Mancini also composed for Howard Hawks (\"Man's Favorite Sport?\", \"Hatari!\" \u2013 which included the \"Baby Elephant Walk\"), Martin Ritt (\"The Molly Maguires\"), Vittorio de Sica (\"Sunflower\"), Norman Jewison (\"Gaily, Gaily\"), Paul Newman (\"Sometimes a Great Notion\", \"The Glass Menagerie)\", Stanley Kramer (\"Oklahoma Crude\"), George Roy Hill (\"The Great Waldo Pepper\"), Arthur Hiller (\"Silver Streak\"), Ted Kotcheff (\"Who Is Killing the Great Chefs of Europe?\"), and others. Mancini's score for the Alfred Hitchcock film \"Frenzy\" (1972) in Bachian organ andante, for organ and an orchestra of strings was rejected and replaced by Ron Goodwin's work.\nMancini scored many TV movies, including \"The Moneychangers\", \"The Thorn Birds\" and \"The Shadow Box\". He wrote many television themes, including \"Mr. Lucky\" (starring John Vivyan and Ross Martin), \"NBC Mystery Movie\", \"Tic Tac Dough\" (1990 version), \"Once Is Not Enough\", and \"What's Happening!!\" In the 1984\u201385 television season, four series featured original Mancini themes: \"Newhart\", \"Hotel\", \"Remington Steele\", and \"Ripley's Believe It or Not\". Mancini also composed the \"Viewer Mail\" theme for \"Late Night with David Letterman\". Mancini composed the theme for \"NBC Nightly News\" used beginning in 1975, and a different theme by him, titled \"Salute to the President\" was used by NBC News for its election coverage (including primaries and conventions) from 1976 to 1992. \"Salute to the President\" was published only in a school-band arrangement, although Mancini performed it frequently with symphony orchestras on his concert tours.\nSongs with music by Mancini were staples of the easy listening radio format from the 1960s to the 1980s. To advertisers, Mancini's style symbolized the bright, confident, hospitable voice of bourgeois America. Some of the artists who have recorded Mancini songs include Duane Eddy, Andy Williams, Paul Anka, Pat Boone, Anita Bryant, Jack Jones, Frank Sinatra, Perry Como, Connie Francis, Eydie Gorme, Steve Lawrence, Trini Lopez, George Maharis, Johnny Mathis, Jerry Vale, Ray Conniff, Quincy Jones, The Lennon Sisters, The Lettermen, Herb Alpert, Eddie Cano, Frank Chacksfield, Warren Covington, Sarah Vaughan, Shelly Manne, James Moody, Percy Faith, Ferrante &amp; Teicher, Horst Jankowski, Andre Kostelanetz, Peter Nero, Liberace, Mantovani, Tony Bennett, Julie London, Wayne Newton, Arthur Fiedler, Secret Agent and the Boston Pops Orchestra, Peggy Lee, and Matt Monro. The Anita Kerr Quartet won a Grammy award (1965) for their album \"We Dig Mancini\", a cover of his songs. Lawrence Welk held Mancini in very high regard, and frequently featured Mancini's music on \"The Lawrence Welk Show\" (Mancini made at least two guest appearances on the show). Mancini briefly hosted his own musical variety TV show in a similar format to Welk's, \"The Mancini Generation\", which aired in syndication during the 1972\u201373 season.\nMancini recorded over 90 albums, in styles ranging from big band to light classical to pop. Eight of these albums were certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America. He had a 20-year contract with RCA Victor, resulting in 60 commercial record albums that made him a household name among artists of easy listening music. Mancini's earliest recordings in the 1950s and early 1960s were of the jazz idiom; with the success of \"Peter Gunn\", \"Mr. Lucky\", and \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\", Mancini shifted to recording primarily his own music in record albums and film soundtracks. (Relatively little of his music was written for recordings compared to the amount that was written for film and television.) Beginning with his 1969 hit arrangement of Nino Rota's \"A Time for Us\" (as his only \"Billboard\" Hot 100 top 10 entry, the No. 1 hit \"Love Theme from \"Romeo and Juliet\"\") and its accompanying album \"A Warm Shade of Ivory\", Mancini began to function more as a piano soloist and easy-listening artist recording music primarily written by other people. In this period, for two of his best-selling albums he was joined by trumpet virtuoso and \"The Tonight Show\" bandleader Doc Severinsen.\nAmong Mancini's orchestral scores are (\"Lifeforce\", \"The Great Mouse Detective\", \"Sunflower\", \"Tom and Jerry: The Movie\", \"Molly Maguires\", \"The Hawaiians\"), and darker themes (\"Experiment in Terror\", \"The White Dawn\", \"Wait Until Dark\", \"The Night Visitor\").\nMancini was also a concert performer, conducting over fifty engagements per year, resulting in over 600 symphony performances during his lifetime. He conducted nearly all of the leading symphony orchestras of the world, including the London Symphony Orchestra, the Israel Philharmonic, the Boston Pops, the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra. One of his favorites was the Minnesota Orchestra, where he debuted the \"Thorn Birds Suite\" in June 1983. He appeared in 1966, 1980 and 1984 in command performances for the British royal family. He also toured several times with Johnny Mathis and also with Andy Williams, who had both sung many of Mancini's songs; Mathis and Mancini collaborated on the 1986 album \"The Hollywood Musicals\". In 1987 he conducted an impromptu charity concert in London in aid of Children In Need. The concert included Tchaikovsky's \"1812 Overture\" with firework accompaniment over the River Thames.\nCameos.\nShortly before his death in 1994, he made a one-off cameo appearance in the first season of the sitcom series \"Frasier\", as a call-in patient to Dr. Frasier Crane's radio show. Mancini voiced the character Al, who speaks with a melancholy drawl and hates the sound of his own voice, in the episode \"Guess Who's Coming to Breakfast?\" Moments after Mancini's cameo ends, Frasier's radio broadcast plays \"Moon River\".\nMancini also had an uncredited performance as a pianist in the 1967 film \"Gunn\", based on the \"Peter Gunn\" television series.\nIn the 1966 Pink Panther cartoon \"Pink, Plunk, Plink\", the panther commandeered an orchestra and proceeded to conduct Mancini's theme for the series. At the end, the shot switched to rare live action, and Mancini was seen alone applauding in the audience. Mancini also made a brief appearance in the title sequence of 1993's \"Son of the Pink Panther\", allowing the panther to conduct Bobby McFerrin in performing the film's theme tune.\nIn 1969 at the 41st Academy Awards ceremony, Mancini played the harpsichord in a special number. Marni Nixon sang the rules for nomination in the category of Best Score of a Musical Motion Picture (Original or Adaptation), and together they sang the names of the films and musicians nominated. Mancini was the music director of the 41st Academy Awards broadcast.\nPersonal life and death.\nMancini married singer Virginia \"Ginny\" O'Connor in 1947, who died on October 25, 2021, at age 97. They had three children, Christopher, Monica, and Felice.\nMancini died of pancreatic cancer in Los Angeles on June 14, 1994. He was working at the time on the Broadway stage version of \"Victor/Victoria\", which he never saw on stage.\nLegacy.\nHenry Mancini created a scholarship at UCLA and some of his library and works are archived in the music library at UCLA, with additional materials preserved at the Library of Congress.\nIn 1996, the Henry Mancini Institute, an academy for young music professionals, was founded by Jack Elliott in Mancini's honor, and was later under the direction of composer-conductor Patrick Williams. By the mid-2000s, however, the institute could not sustain itself and closed its doors on December 30, 2006. The American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) Foundation \"Henry Mancini Music Scholarship\" has been awarded annually since 2001.\nIn 2005, the Henry Mancini Arts Academy was opened as a division of the Lincoln Park Performing Arts Center. The center is located in Midland, Pennsylvania, minutes away from Mancini's hometown of Aliquippa. The Henry Mancini Arts Academy is an evening-and-weekend performing arts program for children from pre-K to grade 12, with some classes also available for adults. The program includes dance, voice, musical theater, and instrumental lessons.\nIn 2017, the Municipality of Scanno dedicated a street to Mancini, called \"Via Henry Mancini\".\nThe American Film Institute ranked Mancini's songs \"Moon River\" No. 4 and \"Days of Wine and Roses\" No. 39 on their 100 Years...100 Songs list, and his score for \"The Pink Panther\" No. 20 on their list of the greatest film scores. His scores for \"\" (1961), \"Charade\" (1963), \"Hatari!\" (1962), \"Touch of Evil\" (1958) and \"Wait Until Dark\" (1967) were also nominated for the list.\nAwards and nominations.\nMancini was nominated for 72 Grammy Awards and won 20. He was nominated for 18 Academy Awards and won four. He also won a Golden Globe Award and was nominated for two Emmy Awards.\nIn 1961, Mancini won two Academy Awards, one for \"Moon River\" for Best Original Song and one for Best Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture for the movie \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\". In 1962, he won Best Original Song again, this time for \"Days of Wine and Roses\". He won Best Original Song Score and Its Adaptation or Best Adaptation Score again in 1982 for the movie \"Victor/Victoria\".\nIn 1989, Mancini received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nIn 1997, Mancini was posthumously awarded an honorary doctorate of music from Berklee College of Music.\nOn April 13, 2004, the United States Postal Service honored Mancini with a thirty-seven cent commemorative stamp. Painted by artist Victor Stabin, the stamp shows Mancini conducting in front of a list of some of his film and television themes.\nDiscography.\nAlbums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSoundtracks.\nMost of Mancini's scores were not released on LP soundtrack albums. His TV movie music albums were not soundtrack albums but are titled \"Music from ...\" or \"Music from the Motion Picture ...\" He routinely retained the rights to his music. Mancini's contracts allowed him to release his own albums for which he rearranged the score music into arrangements more appropriate for listening outside of the context of the film/theater. Actual film scores using players from Hollywood unions recording under major motion picture studio contracts were expensive to release on LP (ex: the soundtrack for \"Our Man Flint\" (not a Mancini score) cost $1 more than other LP albums of the day). Many soundtrack albums used to claim \"Original Soundtrack\" or words to that effect, but were not necessarily the actual soundtrack recordings. These albums were usually recorded with a smaller orchestra than that used for the actual scoring (ex: Dimitri Tiomkin's score to \"The Alamo\"). However, many Hollywood musicians were featured on Mancini's albums recorded in RCA's Hollywood recording studios and faux \"Original Soundtrack\" albums. Eventually some of his scores and faux \"Original Soundtrack\" scores by numerous composers were released in limited edition CDs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilmography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTV themes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51906", "revid": "5020932", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51906", "title": "Breakfast at Tiffany's (film)", "text": "1961 film by Blake Edwards\nBreakfast at Tiffany's is a 1961 American romantic comedy film directed by Blake Edwards from a screenplay by George Axelrod and based on the 1958 novella by Truman Capote. It stars Audrey Hepburn, George Peppard, Patricia Neal, Buddy Ebsen, Martin Balsam, and Mickey Rooney. In the film, Holly Golightly (Hepburn), a na\u00efve, eccentric socialite, meets Paul Varjak (Peppard), a struggling writer who moves into her apartment building.\nDevelopment for the film began soon after the publication of Capote's novel, with several actors, including Marilyn Monroe, Shirley MacLaine, Kim Novak, Steve McQueen, Jack Lemmon, and Robert Wagner, considered for the lead roles prior to Hepburn and Peppard being cast. The screenplay, which deviates from Capote's novella, was originally completed by Axelrod and director John Frankenheimer, who was replaced by Edwards well into pre-production. Principal photography began on October 2, 1960, with filming taking place in New York City and at the Studios at Paramount in Hollywood, California. The film's music was composed by Henry Mancini and its theme song, \"Moon River\", was written by Johnny Mercer.\n\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" was released in the United States on October 5, 1961, by Paramount Pictures. It grossed $14 million worldwide and received critical acclaim for its music and Hepburn's style and performance, being nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Actress for Hepburn, and winning two (Music Score of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture and Best Song for Mancini). The film also received numerous other accolades, although Rooney's portrayal of the character I. Y. Yunioshi garnered significant subsequent controversy for being perceived as racist. In 2012, the film was preserved in the U.S. National Film Registry by the Library of Congress.\nPlot.\nFending off a date from the night before, Holly Golightly visits the Tiffany &amp; Co. flagship store but her date finds her at her apartment building. Holly, who cannot find her keys, buzzes her landlord, Mr. Yunioshi, to let her in. Holly meets her new neighbor Paul Varjak as she readies to leave for her weekly visit to incarcerated mobster Sally Tomato. Tomato's lawyer pays her $100 a week to deliver \"the weather report\". Holly meets Paul's \"decorator\" Emily Eustace Failenson, a wealthy older woman, whom Paul nicknames \"2E\". That night, when Holly crawls out onto the fire escape to elude an over-eager date, she sees 2E leaving Paul money and kissing him goodbye.\nHolly visits Paul and learns he is a writer who has not had anything published in five years, and has no ribbon in his typewriter. Holly explains she is saving money to support her brother, Fred, after he completes his Army service. The pair fall asleep but are awakened when Holly has a nightmare about Fred. When Paul questions her about this, Holly chides him for prying. Holly buys Paul a typewriter ribbon to apologize, and invites him to a party at her apartment. There, he meets her Hollywood agent, Berman, who describes Holly's transformation from a country girl into a Manhattan \"socialite\", along with wealthy Brazilian politician Jos\u00e9 da Silva Pereira and the wealthy American Rusty Trawler.\nSome time later, 2E enters Paul's apartment, worried about someone loitering outside the building. Paul confronts the elderly man who explains he is Holly's husband, Doc Golightly. Doc informs him that Holly ran away and he has come to take her back to rural Texas. After Paul reunites them, Holly informs Paul the marriage was annulled and she declines to return with Doc. After drinking at a club, Paul and Holly return to her apartment, where she tells him she plans to marry Trawler for his money. A few days later, Paul learns a short story inspired by Holly will be published. On the way to tell Holly, he sees a newspaper headline stating that Trawler has married someone else.\nHolly and Paul agree to spend the day together, taking turns doing things each has never done before. At Tiffany's, he has the ring from a box of Cracker Jack engraved as a present for her. After spending the night together, Paul awakens to find Holly gone. 2E arrives and calmly accepts when he ends their affair, realizing he loves Holly. Returning from a date with Jos\u00e9, Holly learns Fred has been killed and trashes her apartment.\nMonths later, Holly readies to move to Brazil and marry Jos\u00e9 but is arrested in connection to a drug ring run by Sally Tomato. Berman pays her bail and Paul picks her up in a cab with all her things, including her nameless pet cat, and a breakup letter from Jos\u00e9. Holly decides to go to Brazil anyway, breaking bail, as Paul declares that he loves her. Resistant to being in a relationship, Holly chastises him and releases the cat into an alley. Paul storms out of the cab, leaving the engraved ring with Holly. After she puts it on, Holly runs back to the alley, where Paul is looking for the cat. After Holly finds him, she cradles him in her coat and, smiling, walks into Paul's embrace.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\nAfter Paramount producers Martin Jurow and Richard Shepherd optioned the film rights to Capote's novella, they hired Sumner Locke Elliott to write its screenplay. Although this was generally faithful to the source material, Jurow and Shepherd disliked it and he was replaced by George Axelrod. Axelrod, who previously made structural changes to the source material while adapting \"The Seven Year Itch\" (1955), worked with Jurow and Shepherd to deviate from Capote's novella. This included altering its plot and tone to be a romantic comedy, replacing its unnamed gay narrator with a named, heterosexual male love interest, adding new characters, and reducing the gay subtext.\nCapote wanted Marilyn Monroe to play Holly Golightly: he considered Monroe to best reflect the character, with Axelrod required to \"tailor\" the screenplay to accommodate Monroe. Monroe declined to star in the film, opting for \"The Misfits\" (1961), after theatre director Lee Strasberg advised her that playing a \"lady of the evening\" would be bad for her image. The role was then offered to Shirley MacLaine, who turned it down in favor of starring in \"Two Loves\" (1961), and Kim Novak also turned it down.\nCapote was angry at the studio's eventual decision, remarking, \"Paramount double-crossed me in every way and cast Audrey\". Hepburn was hesitant to star in the film, citing difficulty playing an extroverted character. Steve McQueen was offered the role of Paul Varjak, but declined the offer due to being under contract with United Artists, and Jack Lemmon was also approached, but was unavailable. Robert Wagner was also considered.\nThe film's original director, John Frankenheimer, worked with Axelrod for three months on the project before he was replaced by Edwards after Hepburn's agent requested a higher-profile director. Edwards also supported Axelrod's changes to the novella, stating the changes made were for \"audience approval\".\nFilming.\nFilming began on Fifth Avenue outside the Tiffany &amp; Co. flagship store on October 2, 1960. Most of the exteriors were filmed in New York City, and all of the interiors, except for portions set inside Tiffany &amp; Co., were filmed on the Paramount Studios lot in Hollywood.\nAccording to one report, the film's on-location opening sequence outside Tiffany &amp; Co. was extremely difficult to shoot, due to issues related to crowd control, Hepburn's dislike of pastries, and an accident that nearly resulted in the electrocution of a crew member. However, another report claims the sequence was captured rather quickly, owing to an unexpected lull in city traffic.\nMusic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt took me time to figure out what Holly Golightly was all about. I don't drink much, but I was sipping and it came to me one night. I wrote [the song] in half an hour.\nHenry Mancini on writing \"Moon River\".\nDuring the film, Hepburn sang the film's signature song, \"Moon River\", written by Henry Mancini and Johnny Mercer. The song was tailored to Hepburn's limited vocal range and its sequencing was inspired by songs she performed in \"Funny Face\" (1957). After the film's test preview in San Francisco, Martin Rankin, Paramount's head of production, wanted \"Moon River\" replaced with music sung by somebody else. Shepherd claimed he and Jurow refused to replace it \u2013 a response attributed to Hepburn herself in another account.\nAccording to \"Time\", Mancini \"sets off [the] melodies with a walking bass, extends them with choral and string variations and varies them with the brisk sounds of combo jazz. \"Moon River\" is sobbed by a plaintive harmonica, repeated by strings, hummed and then sung by the chorus and finally resolved with the harmonica.\" The soundtrack featured a score composed and conducted by Mancini, with several unreleased musical compositions not featuring in the final film. One piece, \"Carousel Cue\", appears in a deleted scene, while another piece titled \"Outtake 1\" also appears in a deleted scene. In 2013, Intrada Records released the complete score in its original film performance: as with many soundtrack albums from the time period, the album initially released alongside the film was a re-recording.\nRelease.\n\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" was theatrically released by Paramount Pictures on October 5, 1961.\nHome media.\nThe film was first released on VHS in 1989 and on DVD in 2001, and was one of the first films featuring Hepburn released on home video. On February 7, 2006, a 45th anniversary special edition DVD was released in North America, containing featurettes not included on the prior releases. These included a photo gallery, the film's theatrical trailer, a history featurette on Tiffany &amp; Co., audio commentary by Shepherd, a making-of featurette with interviews from Edwards and Neal, and a tribute to Hepburn, which contained a letter written by Hepburn to Tiffany &amp; Co. for their 150th anniversary in 1987.\nOn January 13, 2009, a remastered Centennial Collection version of the film was released on DVD, which added several new featurettes, including interviews with the cast, a documentary discussing the controversy regarding Rooney's portrayal of I.Y. Yunioshi, an interactive tour of the Paramount Studios lot where filming took place, and a tribute to Mancini. On June 29, 2011, the film was digitally restored in high-definition and released on Blu-ray to commemorate its 50th anniversary.\nReception.\nBox office.\n\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" was a commercial success, grossing $14 million on a $2.5 million budget. The film was screened at Radio City Music Hall before its theatrical release, where \"Variety\" called it \"a bright box office contender\".\nCritical response.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 88% of 56 critics' reviews are positive, with an average score of 7.5/10. The website's consensus reads, \"It contains some ugly anachronisms, but Blake Edwards is at his funniest in this iconic classic, and Audrey Hepburn absolutely lights up the screen.\" Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 77 out of 100, based on 13 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews.\n\"Time\" magazine noted \"[Hepburn's portrayal] is not much different from Capote's [character]. She has kicked the weed but she is still jolly Holly who runs away to find some of the finer things of life.\" It also pointed out the differences from Capote's novella, stating \"after that out-of-Capote beginning, Edwards goes on to an out-of-character end.\" Hepburn's performance received rave reviews, with it considered to be one of her most memorable and identifiable roles. Almost a half century later, Richard Corliss of \"Time\" emphasized the level of Hepburn's performance, stating, \"\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" set Hepburn on her Hollywood course\" and argued her performance in the film influenced her later roles.\nTinee Mae of the \"Chicago Tribune\" also gave a positive review, saying, \"In the wrong hands, the unconventional, disorganized, sophisticated, innocent, utterly contradictory [lead] character could be a tiresome idiot. Audrey makes her as sweet as she is silly, as appealing as she is affected, a playgirl without scruples, a moth who doesn't quite deserve to die in a flame.\" Mae also praised the \"slick\" and \"perceptive\" screenplay and the \"fine\" supporting cast, singling out Peppard, Ebsen, Balsam and Rooney. Henry T. Murdock of \"The Philadelphia Inquirer\" wrote, \"\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" shines like a gem. Much of the iridescence comes from the richly impulsive performance by Hepburn as the scatterbrained, pathetic, fiercely independent lead. [Peppard] plays with understanding. Ebsen appears briefly, but to good effect [and] Rooney is too slapstick as the Japanese photographer. Edwards keeps things moving with a lilt.\" The film helped rejuvenate Ebsen's career, as it helped him land the role as Jed Clampett on \"The Beverly Hillbillies\" (1962\u20131971).\nA.H. Weiler of \"The New York Times\" called the film a \"completely unbelievable but wholly captivating flight into fancy composed of unequal dollops of comedy, romance, poignancy, funny colloquialisms and Manhattan's swankiest East Side areas captured in the loveliest of colors\". Weiler called Hepburn \"a genuinely charming, elfin waif who will be believed and adored when seen\" and further praised the performances of Peppard, Balsam, Rooney, Neal and Ebsen. Capote infamously disliked the film and Hepburn's performance for deviating from his novella. Capote's biographer, Gerald Clarke, characterized the film as a \"valentine to free-spirited women, [not] a cautionary tale about a little girl lost in the big city\". He later labelled the film \"a sugar and spice confection\" and claimed Capote praised it as an independent work, but not as an adaptation. In later years, American Film Institute ranked the film No. 61 in 100 Years ... 100 Passions and \"Moon River\" as No. 4 in 100 Years ... 100 Songs. The film was also ranked No. 486 on \"Empire\"'s The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time list.\nThe success of the film helped revive George Peppard's movie career after \"The Subterraneans\".\nInfluence.\nThe image of Hepburn with her hair in a high chignon and carrying an oversized cigarette holder is considered one of the most iconic images of 20th century American cinema. The sunglasses worn by Hepburn, another popular item, were designed and manufactured in London by Oliver Goldsmith. In 2011, the sunglasses were re-released to mark the film's 50th anniversary. One of three dresses designed by Givenchy for Hepburn to use in the film sold at auction by Christie's on December 5, 2006, for \u00a3467,200 (~US$947,000), about seven times the reserve price.\nThe black Givenchy dress worn by Hepburn is cited as one of the most iconic clothing items of the twentieth century and was described by \"Glamour\" as the most famous little black dress of all time. A second little black dress by Givenchy, which was styled with a wide-brimmed hat, influenced the comic book design for Catwoman by artist Adam Hughes and later inspired the costume for the character in \"The Dark Knight Rises\" (2012).\nA diamond necklace at Tiffany's that Hepburn's character scorns as too flashy was the Tiffany Yellow Diamond, which Hepburn wore in publicity photos for the film. Tiffany and Co.'s established profile as a pre-eminent luxury retailer was further boosted by the popularity of the film.\nControversy.\nSince the 1990s, Rooney's portrayal of I. Y. Yunioshi, which featured makeup and a prosthetic mouthpiece, has been labelled as a caricature of a Japanese man. In the Bruce Lee biopic \"\" (1993), \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" is used as an illustration of Hollywood's racist depiction of East Asians: it is claimed that Lee and his future wife, Linda Lee Cadwell, walked out of a screening of the film upon viewing Rooney's performance.\nPromotional materials released by Paramount for the film between October and December 1960 did not reveal Rooney to play Yunioshi, with press releases stating that an upcoming Japanese comedian named \"Ohayo Arigatou\" (\"hello\" and \"thank you\" in Japanese) would play the character. Other press releases featured false quotes, written in phonetically broken English, attributed to the fake comedian. Rooney eventually revealed his involvement in \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" in a statement while wearing the makeup and prosthetic mouthpiece seen in the film.\nShepherd later said that he wanted to recast the role, \"not because he [Rooney] didn't play the part well\" but to have a Japanese actor play Mr. Yunioshi instead, though Edwards overruled him. Shepherd later apologized for Rooney's casting and performance, saying, \"If we could just change Mickey, I'd be thrilled with the [film].\" Although Axelrod expanded the role of Yunioshi in the screenplay compared to the novella, Edwards sought to use the character for comic relief and hired Rooney, his old roommate. Axelrod clashed with Edwards regarding the placement of Yunioshi in the film and convinced Hepburn to reshoot scenes for free in the hope that scenes featuring Yunioshi could be edited out, but was overruled by Edwards. Edwards later stated he \"would give anything to recast [Rooney]\" and he \"wished [he] had never done it\" but stressed it was not something he could \"undo\".\nIn a 2008 interview, Rooney said he was \"heartbroken\" regarding the criticism, saying, \"Edwards wanted me to [portray] the character because he was a comedy director. We had fun doing it. Never [since] we made it [has] there been [any] complaints. Every place I've gone in the world people say [I] was so funny.\" Rooney later said that he would not have taken the role if he thought it was offensive.\nThe film continues to draw criticism for the character, with film historian Robert Osborne calling it \"such a racial slur. I blame Edwards. The caricature was totally embarrassing\". In 2011, a group of Asian-American viewers opposed a screening held by SyFy and the Brooklyn Bridge Park Corporation to commemorate the film because of the character.\nAdaptations.\nIn 2004, a musical adaptation of the film made its debut at The Muny in St. Louis. In May 2009, Anna Friel starred in a London stage adaptation that opened in September 2009 at the Haymarket Theatre. In March 2013, a new stage adaptation made its debut at the Cort Theater in New York City, starring Emilia Clarke.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51908", "revid": "42895628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51908", "title": "Luke Helder", "text": "American domestic terrorist\nLucas John Helder (born May 5, 1981) also known as the Midwest Pipe Bomber, is a former University of Wisconsin\u2013Stout student from Pine Island, Minnesota, known for being the suspect in a series of pipe bombings.\nHe was arrested in 2002 as a suspect in pipe bombings in mailboxes, which injured several people. In 2004, he was found mentally incompetent to stand trial and is still incarcerated in a federal medical facility.\nBombings.\nIn 2002, while attending the University of Wisconsin\u2013Stout, Helder planned to plant pipe bombs in mailboxes across the United States to create a smiley face shape on the United States map. The bombs, which were packed with BBs and nails, were rigged to explode as the mailboxes were opened. Completed and rigged bombs were found in Nebraska, Colorado, Texas, Illinois and Iowa. In Iowa, six people, including four mail carriers, were injured when the bombs detonated. Ultimately, Helder planted 18 bombs and covered . \nHe was stopped by police in Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Colorado for speeding and failure to wear a seat belt, but was not arrested.\nEventually he was captured in rural Nevada before he managed to complete the full smile. At the time of his arrest, police were looking for an unknown suspect driving a black Honda Accord. Many newspapers reported that he was wearing a Kurt Cobain T-shirt. When he was intercepted after a 40-mile car chase, Helder held a gun to his head, but was convinced to lower it by Federal Bureau of Investigation negotiators. Law enforcement discovered more IEDs in his vehicle. The bombings were widely covered by the US news media.\nPersonality, writings and theories.\nHelder was not at the top of his college class, but his professors described him as a reasonably good, quiet and polite student, and at first there was confusion as to what the motivation for the bombings could be. Family, friends, and many acquaintances referred to Helder as normal and without a propensity to hurt people. But his roommate noted that Helder had recently become obsessed with death, had begun smoking marijuana, and had been reciting extended monologues about his new spiritual beliefs to his friends (which they had mostly \"laughed off\").\nWithin the year prior to his arrest, Helder had become passionate about astral projection techniques and came to believe that death of the flesh and body is not the end of existence, as evidenced by the manifesto he sent to \"The Badger Herald\" of the University of Wisconsin\u2013Madison at the beginning of the bombing spree. The essay also includes statements such as: \"I'm taking very drastic measure in attempt to provide this information to you... I will die/change in the end for this, but that's ok, hahaha paradise awaits! I'm dismissing a few individuals from reality, to change all of you for the better\"\nNotes attached to the bombs denounced government control over daily lives, denied that anyone who had died was really dead, and promised more of the same kind of message.\nTrial.\nIn April 2004, a federal judge found Helder incompetent to stand trial. While a judge could free Helder if doctors find he is not a threat to society, legal experts doubt this possibility due to the violent nature of his crimes. He has been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder.\nIn 2013, a federal judge ordered Helder re-evaluated for competency to stand trial. Helder remains incarcerated in the Federal Medical Center in Rochester, Minnesota, as of March 2025, with BOP Register Number 36460-048.\nMusical background.\nPrior to his bombing spree, Helder was a member of Apathy, a Rochester, Minnesota, three-piece grunge band. Although the band was successful only on a local scale, they recorded a CD, \"Sacks of People\", at the end of their first summer together. They funded and released the album themselves. Helder was a fan of Kurt Cobain. He heavily decorated his dorm room with Nirvana posters and ephemera. A bandmate in Apathy remarked Helder had \"an interesting style of singing\" and would write much of the lyrics of the group's tracks, not having a full understanding of their meaning.\nWhen the news broke that Helder was the pipe bomber, the media made significant mention of his status as a musician.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51910", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51910", "title": "Quantum key distribution", "text": "Secure communication method\nQuantum key distribution (QKD) is a secure communication method that implements a cryptographic protocol based on the laws of quantum mechanics, specifically quantum entanglement, the measurement-disturbance principle, and the no-cloning theorem. The goal of QKD is to enable two parties to produce a shared random secret key known only to them, which then can be used to encrypt and decrypt messages. This means, when QKD is correctly implemented, one would need to violate fundamental physical principles to break a quantum protocol. The QKD process should not be confused with quantum cryptography in general.\nAn important and unique property of QKD is the ability of the two communicating users to detect the presence of any third party trying to gain knowledge of the key. This results from a fundamental aspect of quantum mechanics: the process of measuring a quantum system in general disturbs the system. This means, a third party attempting to eavesdrop on the key must in some way measure it, thus introducing detectable anomalies, thereby revealing the presence of the eavesdropper. This unique property ensures that the distributed keys remain secure, as any attempt at interception will be immediately apparent and will invalidate the exchanged key. By using quantum superpositions or quantum entanglement and transmitting information in quantum states, a communication system can be implemented that detects eavesdropping. If the level of eavesdropping is below a certain threshold, a key can be produced that is guaranteed to be secure (i.e., the eavesdropper has no information about it). Otherwise no secure key is possible, and communication is aborted.\nThe security of encryption that uses quantum key distribution relies on the foundations of quantum mechanics, in contrast to traditional public key cryptography, which relies on the computational difficulty of certain mathematical functions, which although conjectured to be strong has not to date been formally proved. In contrast, QKD has provable security based on information theory, and forward secrecy.\nThe main drawback of quantum-key distribution is that it usually relies on having an authenticated classical channel of communication. In modern cryptography, having an authenticated classical channel means that one already has exchanged either a symmetric key of sufficient length or public keys of sufficient security level. With such information already available, in practice one can achieve authenticated and sufficiently secure communication without using QKD, such as by using the Galois/Counter Mode of the Advanced Encryption Standard. Thus QKD does the work of a stream cipher at many times the cost.\nQuantum key distribution is used to produce and distribute only a key, not to transmit any message data. This key can then be used with any chosen encryption algorithm to encrypt (and decrypt) a message, which can then be transmitted over a standard communication channel. The algorithm most commonly associated with QKD is the one-time pad, as it is provably secure when used with a secret, random key. In real-world situations, it is often also used with encryption using symmetric key algorithms like the Advanced Encryption Standard algorithm.\nQuantum key exchange.\nQuantum communication involves encoding information in quantum states, or qubits, as opposed to classical communication's use of bits. Usually, photons are used for these quantum states. Quantum key distribution exploits certain properties of these quantum states to ensure its security. There are several different approaches to quantum key distribution, but they can be divided into two main categories depending on which property they exploit.\nThese two approaches can each be further divided into three families of protocols: discrete variable, continuous variable and distributed phase reference coding. Discrete variable protocols were the first to be invented, and they remain the most widely implemented. The other two families are mainly concerned with overcoming practical limitations of experiments. The two protocols described below both use discrete variable coding.\nBB84 protocol: Charles H. Bennett and Gilles Brassard (1984).\nThis protocol, known as BB84 after its inventors and year of publication, was originally described using photon polarization states to transmit the information. However, any two pairs of conjugate states can be used for the protocol, and many optical-fibre-based implementations described as BB84 use phase encoded states. The sender (traditionally referred to as Alice) and the receiver (Bob) are connected by a quantum communication channel which allows quantum states to be transmitted. In the case of photons this channel is generally either an optical fibre or simply free space. In addition they communicate via a public classical channel, for example using broadcast radio or the internet. The protocol is designed with the assumption that an eavesdropper (referred to as Eve) can interfere in any way with the quantum channel, while the classical channel needs to be authenticated.\nThe security of the protocol comes from encoding the information in non-orthogonal states. Quantum indeterminacy means that these states cannot in general be measured without disturbing the original state (see \"No-cloning theorem\"). BB84 uses two pairs of states, with each pair conjugate to the other pair, and the two states within a pair orthogonal to each other. Pairs of orthogonal states are referred to as a basis. The usual polarization state pairs used are either the rectilinear basis of vertical (0\u00b0) and horizontal (90\u00b0), the diagonal basis of 45\u00b0 and 135\u00b0 or the circular basis of left- and right-handedness. Any two of these bases are conjugate to each other, and so any two can be used in the protocol. Below the rectilinear and diagonal bases are used.\nThe first step in BB84 is quantum transmission. Alice creates a random bit (0 or 1) and then randomly selects one of her two bases (rectilinear or diagonal in this case) to transmit it in. She then prepares a photon polarization state depending both on the bit value and basis, as shown in the adjacent table. So for example a 0 is encoded in the rectilinear basis (+) as a vertical polarization state, and a 1 is encoded in the diagonal basis (x) as a 135\u00b0 state. Alice then transmits a single photon in the state specified to Bob, using the quantum channel. This process is then repeated from the random bit stage, with Alice recording the state, basis and time of each photon sent.\nAccording to quantum mechanics (particularly quantum indeterminacy), no possible measurement distinguishes between the 4 different polarization states, as they are not all orthogonal. The only possible measurement is between any two orthogonal states (an orthonormal basis). So, for example, measuring in the rectilinear basis gives a result of horizontal or vertical. If the photon was created as horizontal or vertical (as a rectilinear eigenstate) then this measures the correct state, but if it was created as 45\u00b0 or 135\u00b0 (diagonal eigenstates) then the rectilinear measurement instead returns either horizontal or vertical at random. Furthermore, after this measurement the photon is polarized in the state it was measured in (horizontal or vertical), with all information about its initial polarization lost.\nAs Bob does not know the basis the photons were encoded in, all he can do is to select a basis at random to measure in, either rectilinear or diagonal. He does this for each photon he receives, recording the time, measurement basis used and measurement result. After Bob has measured all the photons, he communicates with Alice over the public classical channel. Alice broadcasts the basis each photon was sent in, and Bob the basis each was measured in. They both discard photon measurements (bits) where Bob used a different basis, which is half on average, leaving half the bits as a shared key.\nTo check for the presence of an eavesdropper, Alice and Bob now compare a predetermined subset of their remaining bit strings. If a third party (usually referred to as Eve, for \"eavesdropper\") has gained any information about the photons' polarization, this introduces errors in Bob's measurements. Other environmental conditions can cause errors in a similar fashion. If more than formula_1 bits differ they abort the key and try again, possibly with a different quantum channel, as the security of the key cannot be guaranteed. formula_1 is chosen so that if the number of bits known to Eve is less than this, privacy amplification can be used to reduce Eve's knowledge of the key to an arbitrarily small amount at the cost of reducing the length of the key.\nE91 protocol: Artur Ekert (1991).\nArtur Ekert's scheme uses entangled pairs of photons. These can be created by Alice, by Bob, or by some source separate from both of them, including eavesdropper Eve. The photons are distributed so that Alice and Bob each end up with one photon from each pair.\nThe scheme relies on two properties of entanglement. First, the entangled states are perfectly correlated in the sense that if Alice and Bob both measure whether their particles have vertical or horizontal polarizations, they always get the same answer with 100% probability. The same is true if they both measure any other pair of complementary (orthogonal) polarizations. This necessitates that the two distant parties have exact directionality synchronization. However, the particular results are completely random; it is impossible for Alice to predict if she (and thus Bob) will get vertical polarization or horizontal polarization. Second, any attempt at eavesdropping by Eve destroys these correlations in a way that Alice and Bob can detect.\nSimilarly to BB84, the protocol involves a private measurement protocol before detecting the presence of Eve. The measurement stage involves Alice measuring each photon she receives using some basis from the set formula_3 while Bob chooses from formula_4 where formula_5 is the formula_6 of their key bits (thus discarding them as key bits, as they are no longer secret) the probability they find disagreement and identify the presence of Eve is\nSo to detect an eavesdropper with probability formula_7 Alice and Bob need to compare formula_8 key bits.\nMan-in-the-middle attack.\nQuantum key distribution is vulnerable to a man-in-the-middle attack when used without authentication to the same extent as any classical protocol, since no known principle of quantum mechanics can distinguish friend from foe. As in the classical case, Alice and Bob cannot authenticate each other and establish a secure connection without some means of verifying each other's identities (such as an initial shared secret). If Alice and Bob have an initial shared secret then they can use an unconditionally secure authentication scheme (such as Carter-Wegman,) along with quantum key distribution to exponentially expand this key, using a small amount of the new key to authenticate the next session. Several methods to create this initial shared secret have been proposed, for example using a 3rd party or chaos theory. Nevertheless, only \"almost strongly universal\" family of hash functions can be used for unconditionally secure authentication.\nPhoton number splitting attack.\nIn the BB84 protocol Alice sends quantum states to Bob using single photons. In practice many implementations use laser pulses attenuated to a very low level to send the quantum states. These laser pulses contain a very small number of photons, for example 0.2 photons per pulse, which are distributed according to a Poisson distribution. This means most pulses actually contain no photons (no pulse is sent), some pulses contain 1 photon (which is desired) and a few pulses contain 2 or more photons. If the pulse contains more than one photon, then Eve can split off the extra photons and transmit the remaining single photon to Bob. This is the basis of the photon number splitting attack, where Eve stores these extra photons in a quantum memory until Bob detects the remaining single photon and Alice reveals the encoding basis. Eve can then measure her photons in the correct basis and obtain information on the key without introducing detectable errors.\nEven with the possibility of a PNS attack a secure key can still be generated, as shown in the GLLP security proof; however, a much higher amount of privacy amplification is needed reducing the secure key rate significantly (with PNS the rate scales as formula_9 as compared to formula_10 for a single photon sources, where formula_10 is the transmittance of the quantum channel).\nThere are several solutions to this problem. The most obvious is to use a true single photon \nsource instead of an attenuated laser. While such sources are still at a developmental stage QKD has been carried out successfully with them. However, as current sources operate at a low efficiency and frequency key rates and transmission distances are limited. Another solution is to modify the BB84 protocol, as is done for example in the SARG04 protocol, in which the secure key rate scales as formula_12. The most promising solution is the decoy states in which Alice randomly sends some of her laser pulses with a lower average photon number. These decoy states can be used to detect a PNS attack, as Eve has no way to tell which pulses are signal and which decoy. Using this idea the secure key rate scales as formula_10, the same as for a single photon source. This idea has been implemented successfully first at the University of Toronto, and in several follow-up QKD experiments, allowing for high key rates secure against all known attacks.\nDenial of service.\nBecause currently a dedicated fibre optic line (or line of sight in free space) is required between the two points linked by quantum key distribution, a denial of service attack can be mounted by simply cutting or blocking the line. This is one of the motivations for the development of quantum key distribution networks, which would route communication via alternate links in case of disruption.\nTrojan-horse attacks.\nA quantum key distribution system may be probed by Eve by sending bright light into the quantum channel and analyzing the back-reflections in a Trojan-horse attack. In a recent research study it has been shown that Eve discerns Bob's secret basis choice with higher than 90% probability, breaching the security of the system.\nSecurity proofs.\nIf Eve is assumed to have unlimited resources, for example both classical and quantum computing power, there are many more attacks possible. BB84 has been proven secure against any attacks allowed by quantum mechanics, both for sending information using an ideal photon source which only ever emits a single photon at a time, and also using practical photon sources which sometimes emit multiphoton pulses. These proofs are unconditionally secure in the sense that no conditions are imposed on the resources available to the eavesdropper; however, there are other conditions required:\nQuantum hacking.\nHacking attacks target vulnerabilities in the operation of a QKD protocol or deficiencies in the components of the physical devices used in construction of the QKD system. If the equipment used in quantum key distribution can be tampered with, it could be made to generate keys that were not secure using a random number generator attack. Another common class of attacks is the Trojan horse attack which does not require physical access to the endpoints: rather than attempt to read Alice and Bob's single photons, Eve sends a large pulse of light back to Alice in between transmitted photons. Alice's equipment reflects some of Eve's light, revealing the state of Alice's basis (e.g., a polarizer). This attack can be detected, e.g. by using a classical detector to check the non-legitimate signals (i.e. light from Eve) entering Alice's system. It is also conjectured that most hacking attacks can similarly be defeated by modifying the implementation, though there is no formal proof.\nSeveral other attacks including faked-state attacks, phase remapping attacks, and time-shift attacks are now known. The time-shift attack has even been demonstrated on a commercial quantum cryptosystem. This is the first demonstration of quantum hacking against a non-homemade quantum key distribution system. Later on, the phase-remapping attack was also demonstrated on a specially configured, research oriented open QKD system (made and provided by the Swiss company Id Quantique under their Quantum Hacking program). It is one of the first 'intercept-and-resend' attacks on top of a widely used QKD implementation in commercial QKD systems. This work has been widely reported in media.\nThe first attack that claimed to be able to eavesdrop the whole key without leaving any trace was demonstrated in 2010. It was experimentally shown that the single-photon detectors in two commercial devices could be fully remote-controlled using specially tailored bright illumination. In a spree of publications thereafter, the collaboration between the Norwegian University of Science and Technology in Norway and Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light in Germany, has now demonstrated several methods to successfully eavesdrop on commercial QKD systems based on weaknesses of avalanche photodiodes (APDs) operating in gated mode. This has sparked research on new approaches to securing communications networks.\nCounterfactual quantum key distribution.\nThe task of distributing a secret key could be achieved even when the particle (on which the secret information, e.g. polarization, has been encoded) does not traverse through the quantum channel using a protocol developed by Tae-Gon Noh. Here Alice generates a photon which, by not taking a measurement until later, exists in a superposition of being in paths (a) and (b) simultaneously. Path (a) stays inside Alice's secure device and path (b) goes to Bob. By rejecting the photons that Bob receives and only accepting the ones he doesn't receive, Bob &amp; Alice can set up a secure channel, i.e. Eve's attempts to read the \"counterfactual\" photons would still be detected. This protocol uses the quantum phenomenon whereby the possibility that a photon can be sent has an effect even when it is not sent. So-called interaction-free measurement also uses this quantum effect, as for example in the bomb testing problem, whereby an experimenter can conceptually determine which bombs are not duds without setting them off, except in a counterfactual sense.\nHistory.\nQuantum cryptography was proposed first by Stephen Wiesner, then at Columbia University in New York, who, in the early 1970s, introduced the concept of quantum conjugate coding. His seminal paper titled \"Conjugate Coding\" was rejected by IEEE Information Theory but was eventually published in 1983 in SIGACT News (15:1 pp.\u00a078\u201388, 1983). In this paper he showed how to store or transmit two messages by encoding them in two \"conjugate observables\", such as linear and circular polarization of light, so that either, but not both, of which may be received and decoded. He illustrated his idea with a design of unforgeable bank notes. A decade later, building upon this work, Charles H. Bennett, of the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, and Gilles Brassard, of the University of Montreal, proposed a method for secure communication based on Wiesner's \"conjugate observables\". In 1990, Artur Ekert, then a PhD student at Wolfson College, University of Oxford, developed a different approach to quantum key distribution based on quantum entanglement.\nChallenges.\nDespite the achievements in QKD, several challenges need to be addressed to fully realize its benefits. The primary challenge lies in the inevitable imperfections that occur during the preparation, transmission, and measurement of quantum states. These imperfections make it difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish between the actions of legitimate parties and those of eavesdroppers. This is one reason why errors must be attributed to eavesdropping, necessitating very high system performance for QKD protocols. These challenges impact various aspects of QKD schemes, particularly the secret key rate, transmission distance, cost, and practical security. While alternative QKD implementations, such as decoy-state or device-independent QKD, have been proposed to tackle these issues, large-scale deployment remains difficult due to channel loss and decoherence, which result in a relatively low secret key rate. As a result of these challenges associated with implementing QKD protocols, governments have advised against their use for commercial and military applications. Therefore, to achieve full-scale practical QKD for secure everyday communications, it is crucial to develop efficient methods and models that address these challenges.\nFuture.\nThe current commercial systems are aimed mainly at governments and corporations with high security requirements. Key distribution by courier is typically used in such cases, where traditional key distribution schemes are not believed to offer enough guarantee. This has the advantage of not being intrinsically distance limited, and despite long travel times the transfer rate can be high due to the availability of large capacity portable storage devices. The major difference of quantum key distribution is the ability to detect any interception of the key, whereas with courier the key security cannot be proven or tested. QKD (quantum key distribution) systems also have the advantage of being automatic, with greater reliability and lower operating costs than a secure human courier network.\nKak's three-stage protocol has been proposed as a method for secure communication that is entirely quantum unlike quantum key distribution in which the cryptographic transformation uses classical algorithms.\nFactors preventing wide adoption of quantum key distribution outside high security areas include the cost of equipment, and the lack of a demonstrated threat to existing key exchange protocols. However, with optic fibre networks already present in many countries the infrastructure is in place for a more widespread use.\nAn Industry Specification Group (ISG) of the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) has been set up to address standardisation issues in quantum cryptography.\nEuropean Metrology Institutes, in the context of dedicated projects, are developing measurements required to characterise components of QKD systems.\nToshiba Europe has been awarded a prestigious Institute of Physics Award for Business Innovation. This recognises Toshiba's pioneering QKD technology developed over two decades of research, protecting communication infrastructure from present and future cyber-threats, and commercialising UK-manufactured products which pave the road to the quantum internet.\nToshiba also took the Semi Grand Prix award in the Solutions Category for the QKD has won the Minister of Economy, Trade and Industry Award in CEATEC AWARD 2021, the prestigious awards presented at CEATEC, Japan's premier electronics industry trade show.\nDeprecation of quantum key distributions from governmental institutions.\nGiven the practical challenges raised below, several organizations recommend using \"post-quantum cryptography (or quantum-resistant cryptography)\" instead of quantum key distribution.\nFor example, the US National Security Agency addresses five issues:\nIn response to problem 1 above, attempts to deliver authentication keys using post-quantum cryptography (or quantum-resistant cryptography) have been proposed worldwide. On the other hand, quantum-resistant cryptography is cryptography belonging to the class of computational security. In 2015, a research result was already published that \"sufficient care must be taken in implementation to achieve information-theoretic security for the system as a whole when authentication keys that are not information-theoretic secure are used\" (if the authentication key is not information-theoretically secure, an attacker can break it to bring all classical and quantum communications under control and relay them to launch a man-in-the-middle attack). Ericsson, a private company, also cites and points out the above problems and then presents a report that it may not be able to support the zero trust security model, which is a recent trend in network security technology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51912", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51912", "title": "Romance language", "text": ""}
{"id": "51913", "revid": "50741763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51913", "title": "Legislation", "text": "Legislative or parliamentary law\nLegislation is the process or result of enrolling, enacting, or promulgating laws by a legislature, parliament, or analogous governing body. Before an item of legislation becomes law it may be known as a bill, and may be broadly referred to as \"legislation\" while it remains under consideration to distinguish it from other business. Legislation can have many purposes: to regulate, to authorize, to outlaw, to provide (funds), to sanction, to grant, to declare, or to restrict. It may be contrasted with a non-legislative act by an executive or administrative body under the authority of a legislative act.\nOverview.\nLegislation to design or amend a bill requires identifying a concrete issue in a comprehensive way. When engaging in legislation, drafters and policy-makers must take into consideration the best possible avenues to address problem areas. Possible solutions within bill provisions might involve implementing sanctions, targeting indirect behaviors, authorizing agency action, etc.\nLegislation is usually proposed by a member of the legislature (e.g. a member of Congress or Parliament), or by the executive, whereupon it is debated by members of the legislature and is often amended before passage. Most large legislatures enact only a small fraction of the bills proposed in a given session. Whether a given bill will be proposed is generally a matter of the legislative priorities of the government.\nLegislation is regarded as one of the three main functions of government, which are often distinguished under the doctrine of the separation of powers. Those who have the formal power to \"create\" legislation are known as legislators; a judicial branch of government will have the formal power to \"interpret\" legislation (see statutory interpretation); the executive branch of government can act only within the powers and limits set by the law, which is the instrument by which the fundamental powers of government are established.\nThe function and procedures are primarily the responsibility of the legislature. However, there are situations where legislation is made by other bodies or means, such as when constitutional law or secondary legislation is enacted. Such other forms of law-making include referendums, orders in council or regulations. The term \"legislation\" is sometimes used to include these situations, or the term \"primary legislation\" may be used to exclude these other forms.\nPublic participation in legislation.\nAll modern constitutions and fundamental laws contain and declare the concept and principle of popular sovereignty, which essentially means that the people are the ultimate source of public power or government authority. The concept of popular sovereignty holds simply that in a society organized for political action, the will of the people as a whole is the only right standard of political action. It can be regarded as an important element in the system of checks and balances and representative democracy. Therefore, the people are implicitly entitled even to directly participate in the process of law-making. This role of linking citizens and their government and legislators is closely related to the concept of legitimacy. The exercise of democratic control over the legislative system and the policy-making process can occur even when the public has only an elementary understanding of the national legislative institution and its membership. Civic education is a vital strategy for strengthening public participation and confidence in the legislative process.\nDead letter.\nThe term \"dead letter\" refers to legislation that has not been revoked, but that has become inapplicable or obsolete, or is no longer enforced. In more simple terms, it means that the legislation is gone. There are several types of dead letter laws. Some laws become obsolete because they are so hateful to their community that no one wishes them to be enforced (e.g., slavery). Similarly, some laws are unenforced because a majority wishes to circumvent them, even if they believe in the moral principle behind the law (e.g., prohibition). Finally, some laws are unenforced because no mechanism or resources were provided to enforce them. Such laws often become selectively enforced or tacked onto other crimes in the judicial process.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51914", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51914", "title": "I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again", "text": "BBC radio comedy series\nI'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again (often abbreviated as ISIRTA) was a BBC radio comedy programme that was developed from the 1964 Cambridge University Footlights revue, \"Cambridge Circus\", as a scripted sketch show. It had a devoted youth following, with the live tapings enjoying very lively audiences, particularly when familiar themes and characters were repeated, a tradition that continued into the spinoff show \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\".\nThe show ran for nine series and was first broadcast on 3 April 1964, a pilot programme having been broadcast on 30 December 1963 under the title \"Cambridge Circus\", on the BBC Home Service (renamed BBC Radio 4 in September 1967). Series 1 comprised three episodes. Subsequent series were broadcast on the BBC Light Programme (renamed BBC Radio 2 in September 1967). Series 2 (1965) had nine episodes, series 3 (1966) and series 6 to 8 (1968\u20131970) each had thirteen episodes, while series 4 (1966\u201367) and 5 (1967) both had fourteen episodes. After a three-year hiatus, the ninth and final series was transmitted in November and December 1973, with eight episodes. An hour-long 25th anniversary show was broadcast in 1989, comically introduced as \"full frontal radio\".\nThe title of the show derives from a phrase commonly used by BBC announcers in the age of live radio, following an on-air flub: \"I'm sorry, I'll read that again.\" Basing the show's title on the phrase used to recover from a mistake set the tone for the series as an irreverent and loosely produced comedy show.\n\"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", an unscripted comedy panel game which is a spin-off from ISIRTA, was first produced in 1972 (invented by ISIRTA regular Graeme Garden, who was anxious to develop a comedy format that did not involve a script deadline each week).\nInfluence.\nAs well as giving rise to The Goodies team, ISIRTA shows the roots of the Monty Python team very clearly, with Cleese, Chapman and Eric Idle all regular script contributors. The show's creator Humphrey Barclay went on to create the TV show \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\", featuring the rest of the Python team, as well as Idle.\n\"ISIRTA\"'s roots can be traced back to classic radio comedies like \"It's That Man Again\" and \"The Goon Show\". As with \"Round the Horne\", the cast's adventures would sometimes be episodic with cliff-hanger endings each week as with \"The Curse of the Flying Wombat\" (3rd series), and \"Professor Prune And The Electric Time Trousers\" (7th series). Christmas specials normally included a spoof of a traditional pantomime (or several combined). They had few qualms about the use of puns \u2013 old, strained or inventive \u2013 and included some jokes and catchphrases now considered politically incorrect. Garden's impressions of the rugby league commentator Eddie Waring and the Scottish TV presenter Fyfe Robertson, Oddie's frequent parodies of the game-show host Hughie Green, and Cleese's occasional but manic impressions of Patrick Moore (astronomer and broadcaster) also featured.\nAs the only woman on the show, Jo Kendall voiced all the female characters (with the exception of Brooke-Taylor's oversexed harridan, Lady Constance de Coverlet) and occasionally extended into having conversations with herself in different voices. (In one episode of the serial \"The Curse of the Flying Wombat\", not only did Kendall play two characters in the same scene but so did Tim Brooke-Taylor, resulting in a four way conversation between the two actors). Kendall also wrote some of her own material.\nThe show ended with an unchanging sign-off song, which Bill Oddie performed as \"Angus Prune\" and was referred to by the announcer as \"The Angus Prune Tune\". Spoof dramas were billed as Prune Playhouse and many parodies of commercial radio were badged as Radio Prune.\nRepeats and spinoffs.\nSeveral cast members appeared in the radio comedy panel game \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", a spinoff from \"ISIRTA\" that has outlived it by decades. Graeme Garden and Tim Brooke-Taylor continued as regulars on the show.\nAll series of \"ISIRTA\" have been rebroadcast on BBC Radio 4 Extra (available on digital television, DAB digital radio and the web), though some episodes (series 5 episodes 9 &amp; 12, series 8 episode 2, and series 9 episodes 5 &amp; 6) were not transmitted due to potentially offensive content. Infrequently, Australian listeners found \"ISIRTA\" in the 5.30am vintage comedy timeslot on ABC Radio National (available on the web to overseas listeners). It is not certain of the reasons due to its being pulled off-air, as this slot has now since been replaced with a business program.\nThe official story of ISIRTA was published in The Clue Bible by Jem Roberts, in 2009.\nIn 2015, plans were announced for a live \"Best Of\" homage show, using material by Garden and Oddie reworked by Barnaby Eaton-Jones, Jem Roberts and Dirk Maggs and performed by Hannah Boydell, David Clarke, Barnaby Eaton-Jones, William KV Browne and Ben Perkins. The show was a sell-out success at The Bacon Theatre, Cheltenham in February 2016 and a tour was licensed by Graeme Garden and Bill Oddie to the same company, the Offstage Theatre Group. In February 2017, it was announced that the British tour would take place later in the year, with guest appearances by Garden, Oddie, Taylor and Jo Kendall. In 2019 four new episodes with the slightly modified title \"I'm Sorry I'll Read That Again... Again\" were recorded and broadcast on Radio 4 Extra with some original cast including Tim Brooke Taylor, together with newer performers such as Barnaby Eaton-Jones.\nEpisode and sketch titles.\nThe episode titles (for shows from series 3 onwards) are unofficial and mostly come from the last sketch in each episode, which usually took the form of a short play. Figures in parentheses after each title are the Series and Episode numbers, where known. For example, '(S9E7)' refers to Series 9 Episode 7.\n played by John Cleese. Continually sends memos to the \"ISIRTA\" team with the most ridiculous requests. One week, he decides that \"Radio Prune\" will become a music channel, a rival to Radio 1. His reason is \"We at the BBC may be very, very silly, but we can write letters\". He is constantly offended by the contents of the show.\n is a parody of Hughie Green usually played by Oddie, although on one occasion, in the 3rd series, he is voiced by Garden. His catchphrases include \"Thank-you, Thank-you\" and \"Wasn't that just great?\" Invariably, when he hands over to Kendall for details of the Prune Play of the Week, she refers to him by another personality's name \u2013 Simon (Dee), Jimmy (Young, or possibly Savile), David (Frost), or Eamonn (Andrews). On one occasion, after Kendall announces the title of the Prune Play of the Week \"Jorrocks: The Memoirs of a Fox-Hunting Man\" (or a man-hunting fox...), by Stanley Stamps, author of Stanley Stamps' Gibbon catalogue, Bill/Hughie says to the audience, \"So will you please put your hands together ... and pray ...\"\n is a character adopted by Bill Oddie to sing the playoff.\nA Bill Oddie character, Grimbling is a \"dirty old man\" who often appears as a groundsman, butler, or some similar profession. Due to the limitations of an audio-only medium, the true nature of Grimbling is never revealed, but he is greeted with universal revulsion by all bar the audience. He memorably introduces himself in the 25th anniversary episode \"I am Grimbling, but don't worry, I'll clean it up later.\" In the same episode, Cleese asks him \"Aren't you a little past it, old man?\" with the response, \"No, I'm a little dirty old man\". In the \"Robin Hood\" sketch in the 3rd series, Grimbling is in the employ of the Sheriff of Nottingham (Garden), who tells him, \"You have done well, Grimbling; take this tennis racquet for your services\".\n is a ridiculous female character who was played by Tim Brooke-Taylor. Once the character had become more established, Lady Constance was usually introduced by a statement along the lines of \"what is that coming towards us? \u2013 It's huge \u2013 It's a rhinoceros!\" \u2013 \"No, it's me!!!\" and this was often accompanied by a rousing rendition of \"Happy Days Are Here Again\", and a thunderous reception from the audience. Her size is legendary; in the \"Henry VIII\" sketch, Katharine of Aragon and Lady Constance (masquerading as Anne of Cleavage) fight a duel to decide who is to be Queen. Brooke-Taylor introduces her in the style of a boxing MC: \"..and in the blue corner, at 15 hundredweight, your own, your very own \u2013 and there's enough to go round \u2013 twice -...\". In the \"Dentisti\" sketch, a parody on the 1960s TV series \"Daktari\", Lady Constance plays (appropriately) an elephant; and in \"Jack The Ripper\", Lady Constance is invited to: \"please, sit down anywhere ... or in your case, everywhere\". In the \"Radio Prune Greek Tragedy\" sketch, she plays the mother of Oedipus Rex \u2013 according to the Oracle, she was hoping for a dog \u2013 and she tells Oedipus: \"Now let me get on with my housework, I've got a little behind ..\" (pause for the \"double-entendre\" to register) \".. oh all right, I've got a colossal behind!!\" In the \"Colditz\" sketch, the lads' escape route is through the plug hole of her bath, and Bill Oddie exclaims \"She's like a ruddy great iceberg: one eighth above the water, 76 eighths below!\". She also in her own way is a bit of a nymphomaniac \u2013 she's described in the 25th anniversary show version of \"Jack The Ripper\" as a steaming volcano of eroticism \u2013 and there are frequent references to unfulfilled sexual desire: in the \"3.17 to Cleethorpes\" sketch, she and the other players in the drama are adrift on a raft in the ocean; Lady Constance offers to take all her clothes off and use them for a sail, and when Hatch says, \"Yes, and then what?\", Lady Constance replies, \"Well, that's rather up to you ...\"\nAnother recurring character, Arnold Totteridge (played by Garden) is a doddering old man who gets lost in the middle of his sentences. He invariably begins with: \"How do you do, do you do, do you do...do you?\" and after rambling incoherently for a few minutes returns to where he started. In the 25th anniversary episode, he has been appointed \"The Dynamic new-de-oo-do-de-oo-do-de-oo Head of Radio-do-do-de-do Comedy\"\n John Cleese and Jo Kendall frequently performed poignant \u2013 almost romantic \u2013 dialogues as the respectable but dysfunctional couple \"John and Mary\", a forerunner of the relationship between Basil and Sybil in \"Fawlty Towers\". They bear a passing resemblance to Fiona and Charles of \"Round the Horne\".\nA kind-hearted simpleton (played by John Cleese), who often appears as an unlikely villain or henchman. He is prone to malapropisms: \"I've been trailing you through this impenetrable ferret-- I mean 'forest'\" - but these are often the intro to clever running jokes - in this case the line continues: \"Oh no, not ferret, I mean stoat\". \"Stoat?\" \"Yes, 'stoatally impenetrable\". At some point, a female character would often call out \"Oh, Masher, Masher!\" - followed by a chorus of \"All fall down!\" by the remaining cast. In one show, the topic on \"The Money Programme\" is fiscal policy and other matters monetary, and Masher asks some very abstruse questions about the Bank of England and its role in the economy. His last question, however is: 'An' wot's the combination o' de safe: oooh wot a giveaway!!'\nPrune Plays.\nWriters and cast in order of appearance:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"ISIRTA\" songs.\nComedy songs replaced traditional songs during episodes.\nCommercial Releases.\nA vinyl compilation album of sketches was released on the Parlophone label in 1967, and later reissued on a double cassette by EMI in 1993 alongside the London recording of \"Cambridge Circus\". Another compilation was released by BBC Records in 1978, reissued on CD in 2011 as part of the Vintage Beeb range.\nFour volumes of compilation cassettes were released by the BBC Radio Collection between 1989 and 1997 containing complete episodes. These were re-released on CD in 2007 alongside a fifth volume.\nA tie-in book of sketches was published by Javelin in 1985, illustrated by Graeme Garden.\nNotes.\n\"ISIRTA\" is referenced in \"The Goodies\"'s episode \"Chubbie Chumps\", where the initials are printed on the wall in chalk.\n\"Spot the dog\" is referenced in \"The Goodies\"'s episode \"Camelot\" as the royal dog \"Spot\", where it received an immediate cheer.\nIn the computer game , there is a magic spell called Kendall, found just before a reference to a magic plane shared with people who own ferrets.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51915", "revid": "757900", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51915", "title": "Pythonite", "text": ""}
{"id": "51916", "revid": "42335939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51916", "title": "Transcontinental railroad", "text": "Contiguous railroad trackage crossing a continental landmass\nA transcontinental railroad or transcontinental railway is contiguous railroad trackage that crosses a continental land mass and has terminals at different oceans or continental borders. Such networks may be via the tracks of a single railroad, or via several railroads owned or controlled by multiple railway companies along a continuous route. Although Europe is crisscrossed by railways, the railroads within Europe are usually not considered transcontinental, with the possible exception of the historic Orient Express.\nTranscontinental railroads helped open up interior regions of continents not previously colonized to exploration and settlement that would not otherwise have been feasible. In many cases, they also formed the backbones of cross-country passenger and freight transportation networks. Many of them continue to have an important role in freight transportation, and some such as the Trans-Siberian Railway even have passenger trains going from one end to the other.\nNorth America.\nUnited States.\nA transcontinental railroad in the United States is any continuous rail line connecting a location on the U.S. Pacific coast with one or more of the railroads of the nation's eastern trunk line rail systems operating between the Missouri or Mississippi Rivers and the U.S. Atlantic coast. The first concrete plan for a transcontinental railroad in the United States was presented to Congress by Asa Whitney in 1845.\nA series of transcontinental railroads built over the last third of the 19th century created a nationwide transportation network that united the country by rail. The first of these, the \"Pacific Railroad\", was built by the Central Pacific Railroad and Union Pacific Railroad, as well as the Western Pacific Railroad (1862\u20131870), to link the San Francisco Bay at Alameda, California, with the nation's existing eastern railroad network at Omaha, Nebraska/Council Bluffs, Iowa\u2014thereby creating the world's second transcontinental railroad when it was completed from Omaha to Alameda on September 6, 1869. Its construction was made possible by the US government under Pacific Railroad Acts of 1862, 1864, and 1867. Its original course was very close to current Interstate 80.\nThe first transcontinental railroad was the much shorter Panama Railroad of 1855, now part of the country of Panama.\nTranscontinental railroad.\nThe United States' first transcontinental railroad was built between 1863 and 1869 that connected the existing eastern U.S. rail network at Council Bluffs, Iowa, with the Pacific coast at the Oakland Long Wharf on San Francisco Bay. Its construction was considered to be one of the greatest American technological feats of the 19th century. Known as the \"Pacific Railroad\" when it opened, it served as a vital link for trade, commerce, and travel and opened up vast regions of the North American heartland for settlement. Much of the original route, especially on the Sierra grade west of Reno, Nevada, is currently used by Amtrak's \"California Zephyr\", although many parts have been rerouted.\nThe resulting coast-to-coast railroad connection revolutionized the settlement and economy of the American West. It brought the western states and territories into alignment with the northern Union states and made transporting passengers and goods coast-to-coast considerably quicker, safer and less expensive. It replaced most of the far slower and more hazardous stagecoach lines and wagon trains. The number of emigrants taking the Oregon and California Trails declined dramatically. The sale of the railroad land grant lands and the transport provided for timber and crops led to the rapid settling of the \"Great American Desert\".\nThe Union Pacific recruited laborers from Army veterans and Irish immigrants, while most of the engineers were ex-Army men who had learned their trade keeping the trains running during the American Civil War.\nThe Central Pacific Railroad faced a labor shortage in the more sparsely settled West. It recruited Cantonese laborers in China, who built the line over and through the Sierra Nevada mountains and then across Nevada to their meeting in northern Utah. Chinese workers made up ninety percent of the workforce on the line. The Chinese Labor Strike of 1867 was peaceful, with no violence, organized across the entire Sierra Nevada route, and was carried out according to a peaceful Confucian model of protest. The strike began with the Summer Solstice in June, 1867 and lasted for eight days.\nChinese Labor.\nAt first, the Central Pacific Railroad was hesitant to employ Chinese immigrants due to anti-Chinese sentiment and fears that white laborers would refuse to work alongside them. However, since the discovery of gold in 1849, California had already drawn large numbers of Chinese migrants. Many from Guangdong, a southern province of China marked by civil war, poverty, and instability. Seeking steady wages to send home, men crossed the Pacific in search of opportunities, leaving their families behind. Once in California, discriminatory policies such as the foreign miners' taxes made it difficult for them to stake mining claims. Shut out of the goldfields, many turned to other forms of labor, eventually including working on the railroad. During the construction of the Transcontinental Railroad in the United States (1863\u20111869), Chinese immigrants played a vital role in providing labor. The Chinese Labor Strike of 1867 was peaceful, with no violence, and was organized across the entire Sierra Nevada route. However, Chinese immigrants became targets of formal exclusion and political mobilization. Before and during the 1860s, America sought to expand its foreign relations, trade, and influence in the world. Minister Anson Burlingame, in 1862, became the first U.S. representative to reside in Beijing and took an active role in China's international relations. In Eastern Asia, the Burlingame Treaty, signed by the U.S. Secretary of State William H. Seward and Burlingame of China Anson Burlingame:\u00a0former U.S. Congressman, became the American Minister to China in 1861, and later served as China's envoy to the West. This treaty expanded on an earlier agreement, ensuring immigrants' rights to travel and reside freely between the two nations in 1868. This treaty ensured immigrants' rights to travel, residence, and study.\nChinese consuls were to be given full diplomatic rights in U.S. ports. Chinese laborers were encouraged to immigrate to the United States, offering official U.S. support for Chinese territorial sovereignty. Chinese laborers were essential to the Central Pacific. Estimates suggest that up to 90% of its workforce was Chinese during the height of construction. They worked in some of the most dangerous and challenging terrain (Sierra Nevada tunnels, snow, intense winds), often for lower wages and under worse housing, food, and safety conditions than their white counterparts. After the railroad was completed in 1869, an economic downturn, specifically the Panic of 1873, greatly intensified job competition. By the late 1870s, U.S. industrial leaders and politicians had begun to view increasing anti-Chinese sentiment in the United States, particularly in the western states. Industrialists and politicians often promoted anti-Chinese activities.\nChinese workers became scapegoats in public and political rhetoric. White labor groups and political leaders mobilized campaigns whose goal was to curb Chinese Immigration and pressure for anti\u2010Chinese laws. In 1875, the Page Act was passed, One of the first federal laws restricting Immigration, it effectively barred many Chinese women from entering the U.S., under the pretext of preventing prostitution. An 1880 treaty with China revised the Burlingame-Seward agreement. The United States restricted Immigration with the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, a landmark law that prohibited further Chinese laborers from entering the U.S and barred Chinese nationals from naturalization/citizenship. The legal decisions on Asian values represented a significant shift: from American reliance on Chinese labor in the 1860s to the official exclusion of Chinese labor in the 1880s. Furthermore, the Geary Act (1892) and related laws (such as the Scott Act of 1888) further restricted Chinese immigrants' rights, required them to carry residence certificates, and denied them rights like bail in habeas corpus proceedings.\nLand grants.\nThe Transcontinental Railroad required land and a complex federal policy for purchasing, granting, conveying land. \nSome of these land-related acts included:\nThe Gould system.\nGeorge J. Gould attempted to assemble a truly transcontinental system in the 1900s. The line from San Francisco, California, to Toledo, Ohio, was completed in 1909, consisting of the Western Pacific Railway, Denver and Rio Grande Railroad, Missouri Pacific Railroad, and Wabash Railroad. Beyond Toledo, the planned route would have used the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railroad (1900), Wabash Pittsburgh Terminal Railway, Little Kanawha Railroad, West Virginia Central and Pittsburgh Railway, Western Maryland Railroad, and Philadelphia and Western Railway, but the Panic of 1907 strangled the plans before the Little Kanawha section in West Virginia could be finished. The Alphabet Route was completed in 1931, providing the portion of this line east of the Mississippi River. With the merging of the railroads, only the Union Pacific Railroad and the BNSF Railway remain to carry the entire route.\nCanada.\nThe completion of Canada's first transcontinental railway with the driving of the Last Spike at Craigellachie, British Columbia, on November 7, 1885, was an important milestone in Canadian history. Between 1881 and 1885, the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) completed a line that spanned from the port of Montreal to the Pacific coast, fulfilling a condition of British Columbia's 1871 entry into the Canadian Confederation. The City of Vancouver, incorporated in 1886, was designated the western terminus of the line. The CPR became the first transcontinental railway company in North America in 1889 after its International Railway of Maine opened, connecting CPR to the Atlantic coast.\nThe construction of a transcontinental railway strengthened the connection of British Columbia and the North-West Territories to the country they had recently joined, and acted as a bulwark against potential incursions by the United States.\nSubsequently, two other transcontinental lines were built in Canada: the Canadian Northern Railway (CNoR) opened another line to the Pacific in 1915, and the combined Grand Trunk Pacific Railway (GTPR)/National Transcontinental Railway (NTR) system opened in 1917 following the completion of the Quebec Bridge, although its line to the Pacific opened in 1914. The CNoR, GTPR, and NTR were nationalized to form the Canadian National Railway, which currently is now Canada's largest transcontinental railway, with lines running all the way from the Pacific Coast to the Atlantic Coast.\nSouth and Central America.\nThere is activity to revive the connection between Valpara\u00edso and Santiago in Chile and Mendoza, Argentina, through the \"Transandino\" project. Mendoza has an active connection to Buenos Aires. The old Transandino began in 1910 and ceased passenger service in 1978 and freight 4 years later. Technically a complete transcontinental link exists from Arica, Chile, to La Paz, Bolivia, to Buenos Aires, but this trans-Andean crossing is for freight only.\nOn December 6, 2017 the Brazilian President Michel Temer and his Bolivian counterpart Evo Morales signed an agreement for an Atlantic - Pacific railway. The construction will start in 2019 and will be finished in 2024. The new railway is planned to be 3750\u00a0km in length. There are two possible tracks in discussion: Both have an Atlantic end in Santos, Brazil but the Pacific ends are in Ilo and Matarani in Peru.\nAnother longer Transcontinental freight-only railroad linking Lima, Peru, to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil is under development.\nPanama.\nThe first railroad to directly connect two oceans (although not by crossing a broad \"continental\" land mass) was the Panama Canal Railway. Opened in 1855, this line was designated instead as an \"inter-oceanic\" railroad crossing Country at its narrowest point, the Isthmus of Panama, when that area was still part of Colombia. (Panama split off from Colombia in 1903 and became the independent Republic of Panama). By spanning the isthmus, the line thus became the first railroad to completely cross any part of the Americas and physically connect ports on the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Given the tropical rain forest environment, the terrain, and diseases such as malaria and cholera, its completion was a considerable engineering challenge. The construction took five years after ground was first broken for the line in May, 1850, cost eight million dollars, and required more than seven thousand workers drawn from \"every quarter of the globe.\"\nThis railway was built to provide a shorter and more secure path between the United States' East and West Coasts. This need was mainly triggered by the California Gold Rush. Over the years the railway played a key role in the construction and the subsequent operation of the Panama Canal, due to its proximity to the canal. Currently, the railway operates under the private administration of the Panama Canal Railroad Company, and its upgraded capacity complements the cargo traffic through the Panama Canal.\nGuatemala.\nA second Central American inter-oceanic railroad began operation in 1908 as a connection between Puerto San Jos\u00e9 and Puerto Barrios in Guatemala, but ceased passenger service to Puerto San Jos\u00e9 in 1989.\nCosta Rica.\nA third Central American inter-oceanic railroad began operation in 1910 as a connection between Puntarenas and Lim\u00f3n in gauge. It currently (2019) sees no passenger service.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51917", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51917", "title": "Bill Haley &amp; His Comets", "text": "American rock and roll band\nBill Haley &amp; His Comets were an American rock and roll band formed in 1947 and continuing until Haley's death in 1981. The band was also known as Bill Haley and the Comets and Bill Haley's Comets. From late 1954 to late 1956, the group recorded nine Top 20 singles, one of which was number one and three that were Top Ten. The single \"Rock Around the Clock\" was the best-selling rock single in the history of the genre and maintained that position for several years.\nBand leader Bill Haley had previously been a Western swing performer; after recording a rockabilly version of Ike Turner and his Kings of Rhythm's \"Rocket 88\", one of the first rock and roll recordings, Haley changed his band's musical direction to rock music. They went on to record hit versions of \"Crazy Man, Crazy\", \"Shake, Rattle &amp; Roll\", the aforementioned \"Rock Around the Clock\", \"Dim, Dim the Lights\", \"Rock-A-Beatin' Boogie\", \"Razzle-Dazzle\", \"See You Later, Alligator\", \"The Saints Rock 'N' Roll\" and \"Rip It Up\". In 1956, the group appeared in two early rock and roll movies with disc jockey Alan Freed: \"Rock Around the Clock\" and \"Don't Knock the Rock\".\nThough the group was considered to be at the forefront of rock and roll during the genre's formative years, the arrival of more risqu\u00e9 acts such as Elvis Presley and Little Richard by 1956 led the more clean-cut Haley and his Comets to decline in popularity. Haley would remain popular in Europe and go on to have a comeback as a nostalgia act in the 1970s, along with many of his contemporaries. Following Haley's death, no fewer than seven different groups have existed under the Comets name, all claiming (with varying degrees of authority) to be the continuation of Haley's group. As of the end of 2014, four such groups were still performing in the United States and internationally.\nEarly history.\nIn around the mid-1940s, Bill Haley performed with the Down Homers and formed a group called the Four Aces of Western Swing. The group that later became the Comets initially formed as \"Bill Haley and the Saddlemen\" c.\u20091949\u20131952, and performed mostly country and western songs, though occasionally with a bluesy feel. The group was also the first to record a cover version (in July 1951) of \"Rocket 88\", originally a jump blues song by Jackie Brenston and his Delta Cats, who were actually Ike Turner and his Kings of Rhythm. He did so for the Philadelphia-based Holiday Records label, in what is now recognized as a rockabilly style. It sold well and was followed in 1952 by a cover of a 1940s rhythm and blues song called \"Rock the Joint\" for Holiday's sister company, Essex Records.\nDuring those years however, Haley was considered one of the top cowboy yodelers in America. Many Saddlemen recordings were not released until the 1970s and 1980s, and highlights included romantic ballads such as \"Rose of My Heart\" and western swing tunes such as \"Yodel Your Blues Away\". The original members of this group were Haley, pianist and accordion player Johnny Grande and steel guitarist Billy Williamson. Al Thompson was the group's first bass player, followed by Al Rex and Marshall Lytle. During the group's early years, it recorded under several other names, including Johnny Clifton and His String Band and Reno Browne and Her Buckaroos (although Browne, a female matinee idol of the time, did not actually appear on the record).\n\"Rocket 88\", \"Rock the Joint\", and their immediate follow-ups were released under the increasingly incongruous Saddlemen name. It soon became apparent that a new name for the group was needed to fit the new musical style. A friend of Haley's, making note of the common mispronunciation of the name Halley's Comet to rhyme with \"Bailey\", suggested that Haley call his band the Comets. This event is cited in the Haley biographies \"Sound and Glory\" by John Haley and John von Hoelle; \"Bill Haley\" by John Swenson; and in \"Still Rockin' Around the Clock\", a memoir by Comets bass player Marshall Lytle.\nThe new name for the group was adopted in the fall of 1952, before the 1953 release of \"Crazy Man, Crazy\" which had some elements of rock and roll and rockabilly music. Members of the group at that time were Haley, Johnny Grande, Billy Williamson and Marshall Lytle. Grande usually played piano on records but switched to accordion for live shows as it was more portable than a piano and easier to deal with during musical numbers that involved a lot of dancing around. Soon after renaming the band Haley hired his first drummer, Earl Famous. Displeased with the lineup, Haley sought out Dick Boccelli (also known as Dick Richards), who turned down the job but recommended a young drummer Charlie Higler. Soon after, Haley asked Richards again, who then accepted the role. During this time (and as late as the fall of 1955), Haley did not have a permanent lead guitar player, choosing to use session musicians on records and either playing lead guitar himself or having Williamson play steel solos.\nEven before the release of more successful records, the group had achieved greatness in some respects: \"No one had blended country and R&amp;B on a single before the Comets' \"Rock the Joint\". No one had scored an American Top 20 hit with anything that could really qualify as rock'n'roll before their single \"Crazy Man Crazy\" in 1953\".\nNational success and \"Rock Around the Clock\".\nIn 1953, Haley scored his first national success with his original song, \"Crazy Man, Crazy\", a phrase Haley said he heard from his teenage audience, again released on Essex. Haley later claimed the recording sold a million copies, but this is considered an exaggeration. Some sources indicate that the recording\u2014a blend of R&amp;B, western and pop music\u2014is a contender for the title of \"first rock'n'roll record\" while others state that it was merely \"the first rock and roll song to be a hit on the pop charts\". It was also said to be the first rock'n'roll recording to be played on national television in the United States (in an episode of Omnibus in 1953).\nOn their last release from Essex, new band member Joey Ambrose is heard on the B-side, \"Straight Jacket\".\nIn the spring of 1954, Haley and His Comets left Essex for New York-based Decca Records, where they were placed under the auspices of veteran producer Milt Gabler, who would produce all of the band's recordings for the label and who had been involved in creating many proto-rock and roll recordings by the likes of the Andrews Sisters and Louis Jordan dating back to the 1940s. One of Jordan's records, Saturday Night Fish Fry (1949), is considered to be a contender for the title of \"first rock'n' roll record. Gabler later commented that \"all the tricks I used with Louis Jordan, I used with Bill Haley\".\nThe group's first session, on April 12, 1954, yielded \"Rock Around the Clock\", which would become Haley's biggest hit and one of the most important records in rock and roll history. Sales of \"Rock Around the Clock\" started slowly, since it was the B-side of the single, but it performed well enough, that a second Decca session was commissioned.\n\"Shake, Rattle and Roll\" followed, a somewhat bowdlerized cover version of the Big Joe Turner recording released earlier in 1954. The single was one of Decca's best-selling records of 1954 and the seventh-best-selling record in November 1954.\nIn 1954, Anita Gordon starred in \"Round Up of Rhythm\", a film short in which she, and Disc Jockey Bill Delzell, played ' Straight Jacket ' and 'Shake Rattle and Roll', which the group are seen playing.\nIn March 1955, the group had four songs in Cash Box magazine's top 50 songs: \"Dim, Dim the Lights (I Want Some Atmosphere)\"; \"Birth of the Boogie\"; \"Mambo Rock\"; and \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\".\nHaley's \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\" never achieved the same level of historical importance as \"Rock Around the Clock\" but it predated it as the first international rock and roll hit. It did not attain the Number 1 position on the American charts, but it became Haley's first gold record. Elvis Presley recorded the song in 1956, combining Haley's arrangement with Turner's original lyrics, but his version was not a substantial hit. Late in 1954, Haley recorded another hit, \"Dim, Dim The Lights\", which was one of the first R&amp;B songs recorded by a white group to cross over to the R&amp;B charts. Johnnie Ray had reached Number 1 with \"Cry\" in 1952.\nThe belated success of \"Rock Around the Clock\" is attributed to its use in the soundtrack of the film \"Blackboard Jungle,\" which was released on March 19, 1955. The song was re-released to coincide with the film and shifted to the single's A-side. Haley's recording became an anthem for rebellious 1950s youth and reached Number 1 on the pop charts, remaining there for eight weeks, and went to Number 3 on the R&amp;B chart. According to The Guardian, the group was \"the first rock'n'roll band\" and the song was particularly \"important because it was the first rock'n'roll record heard by millions of people worldwide\".\nAmbrose's acrobatic saxophone playing, along with Lytle on the double bass \u2013 literally on it, riding it like a pony, and holding it over his head \u2013 were highlights of the band's live performances during this time. Their music and their act were part of a tradition in jazz and rhythm and blues, but it all came like a thunderclap to most of their audience. In late 1954, Haley and His Comets appeared in a short subject entitled \"Round Up of Rhythm\", performing three songs. This was the earliest known theatrical rock and roll film release.\nIn 1955, Lytle, Richards and Ambrose quit the Comets in a salary dispute and formed their own group, the Jodimars. Haley hired several new musicians to take their place: Rudy Pompilli on sax, Al Rex (a former member of the Saddlemen) on double bass, and Ralph Jones on drums. In addition, lead guitarist Franny Beecher, who had been a session musician for Haley since Danny Cedrone's death in the spring of 1954, became a full-time Comet and Haley's first performing lead guitarist (Cedrone had played the guitar solo on the original recording of \"Rock Around the Clock\" and died shortly after the recording session for \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\" in the summer of 1954). This version of the band became more popular than the earlier manifestation and appeared in several motion pictures over the next few years.\nOther hits recorded by the band included \"See You Later, Alligator\" in which Haley's frantic delivery contrasted with the Louisiana languor of the original by Bobby Charles, \"Don't Knock the Rock\", \"Rock-a-Beatin' Boogie\", \"Rudy's Rock\" (the first instrumental hit of the rock and roll era), and \"Skinny Minnie\".\nBill Haley and the Comets performed \"Rock Around the Clock\" in an a cappella and a lip-synched version on the NBC television program \"Texaco Star Theater\" hosted by Milton Berle on May 31, 1955. Berle predicted that the song would go to Number 1, calling the band \"A group of entertainers who are going right to the top.\" Berle also sang and danced to the song, which was performed by the entire cast of the show. This was one of the earliest nationally televised performances by a rock and roll band and provided the new musical genre a much wider audience.\nBill Haley and the Comets were the first rock and roll performers to appear on the CBS television musical variety program \"The Ed Sullivan Show, or Toast of the Town\" on Sunday, August 7, 1955, in a broadcast from the Shakespeare Festival Theater in Stratford, Connecticut. They performed a live version of \"Rock Around the Clock\" featuring Franny Beecher on lead guitar and Dick Richards on drums. The group made a second and final appearance on the \"Ed Sullivan Show\" on Sunday, April 28, 1957, performing \"Rudy's Rock\" and \"Forty Cups of Coffee\".\nBill Haley and the Comets appeared on \"American Bandstand\" hosted by Dick Clark on ABC television twice in 1957, on the prime-time show on October 28 and on the regular daytime show on November 27. The band also appeared on Dick Clark's \"Saturday Night Beechnut Show\" (also known as \"The Dick Clark Show\"), a prime-time TV series from New York on March 22, 1958, during the first season (performing \"Rock Around the Clock\" and \"Ooh, Look-a There, Ain't She Pretty\") and on February 20, 1960 (performing \"Rock Around the Clock\" and \"Tamiami\").\nIn 1956, the group appeared in two of the earliest full-length rock and roll movies with Alan Freed: \"Rock Around the Clock\" and \"Don't Knock the Rock.\" The Platters were co-stars in the first movie, and Little Richard appeared in the second. \"Rock Around the Clock\" was produced by Sam Katzman (who would produce several Elvis Presley films in the 1960s) and directed by Fred F. Sears.\nDecline in popularity.\nThe band's popularity in the United States began to wane in 1956\u201357 as sexier, wilder acts such as Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis and Little Richard began to dominate the record charts (although Haley's cover version of Little Richard's \"Rip It Up\", released in direct competition with Little Richard's original recording, outsold the original). After \"Skinny Minnie\" hit the charts in 1958, Haley had little further success in the United States, although a spin-off group made up of Comets musicians dubbed The Kingsmen (no relation to the later group of \"Louie, Louie\" fame) had a hit with an instrumental, \"Weekend\", that same year.\nOverseas, however, Haley and his band continued to be popular, touring the United Kingdom in February 1957, when Haley and his crew were mobbed by thousands of fans at Waterloo station in London at an incident which the media dubbed the \"Second Battle of Waterloo\". The group also toured Australia in 1957, and in 1958 enjoyed a successful (if riot-dominated) tour of the European mainland. Bill Haley &amp; His Comets were the first major American rock and roll act to tour the world in this way. Elvis, who was on military duty in Germany, visited them backstage at some shows. On a free day in Berlin they performed two songs in the Caterina Valente movie \"Hier Bin ich Hier Bleib Ich (Here I Am Here I Stay)\".\nBack in the U.S., Haley attempted to start his own record label, Clymax, and establish his own stable of performers, notably Sally Starr (the hostess of a Philadelphia television children's program) and the Matys Brothers. Members of the Comets were commissioned to work as session musicians on many of these recordings, many of which were written or co-written by Haley and members of the Comets. The Clymax experiment only lasted about a year. In 1959, Haley's relationship with Decca collapsed; after a final set of instrumental-only recordings in the fall, Haley announced he was leaving Decca for the new Warner Bros. Records label, which released two more albums in 1960, which were moderately successful. In 1960 Franny Beecher and Rudi Pompilli left the Comets to start their own record label. Replacing Beecher was a 20-year-old guitarist, Johnny Kay, from Chester, Pennsylvania. Beecher later returned briefly to play with the Comets, when his record label failed to take off, sharing guitar duties with Kay. Kay left the band in 1966 but returned in the early 1970s for an aborted world tour. He appeared in the Wembley show, which was filmed and released as the London Rock and Roll Show.\nMexico and the late 1960s.\nIn 1961\u20131962, Bill Haley y sus Cometas (as the band was known in Hispanic America) signed with the Orfe\u00f3n label of Mexico and scored an unexpected hit with \"Twist Espa\u00f1ol\", a Spanish-language recording based on the twist dance craze, which was sweeping America at the time. Haley followed up with \"Florida Twist\" (#3 MEX, according to Billboard Hits Of The World 04.21.62), which was for a time the biggest-selling single in Mexican history. Although Chubby Checker and Hank Ballard were credited with starting the twist craze in America, in Mexico and Latin America, Bill Haley and His Comets were proclaimed the Kings of the Twist. Thanks to the success of \"Twist Espa\u00f1ol\" and \"Florida Twist\", among others, the band had continued success in Mexico and Latin America over the next few years, selling many recordings of Spanish and Spanish-flavored material and simulated live performances (overdubbed audience over studio recordings) on the Orfeon label and its subsidiary, Dimsa. They hosted a television series, \"Orfeon a Go-Go\", and made cameo appearances in several movies, lip-synching some of their old hits. Haley, who was fluent in Spanish, recorded a number of songs in the language, but most of the band's output during these years was instrumental recordings, many utilizing local session musicians playing trumpet. There was also some experimentation with Haley's style during this time; one single for Orfeon was a folk ballad, \"Jimmy Martinez\", which Haley recorded without the Comets.\nIn 1966, the Comets (without Bill Haley) cut an album for Orfeon as session musicians for Big Joe Turner, who had always been an idol to Haley; no joint performance of \"Shake, Rattle and Roll\" was recorded, however. In a 1974 interview with BBC Radio, Haley said Turner's career was in a slump at this time, so he used his then-considerable influence with Orfeon to get Turner a recording session. The Comets' association with Orfeon/Dimsa ended later that year.\nBy 1967, as related by Haley in an interview with radio host Red Robinson in that year, the group was \"a free agent\" without any recording contracts at all, although the band continued to perform regularly in North America and Europe. During this year, Haley\u2014without the Comets\u2014recorded a pair of demos in Phoenix, Arizona: a country-western song, \"Jealous Heart\", on which he was backed by a local mariachi band (similar in style to the earlier \"Jimmy Martinez\"), and a late-60s-style rocker, \"Rock on Baby\", backed by a group called Superfine Dandelion. Neither recording would be released for 30 years. In 1968, Haley and the Comets recorded a single for the United Artists label, a version of Tom T. Hall's \"That's How I Got to Memphis\", but no long-term association with the label resulted. In order to revive his recording career, Haley turned to Europe.\nRevival.\nBy the late 1960s, Haley and the Comets were considered an \"oldies\" act. The band's popularity never waned in Europe. The group signed a lucrative deal with Sonet Records of Sweden in 1968 and recorded a new version of \"Rock Around the Clock\", which hit the European charts that year. The band recorded a mixture of live and studio albums for the label over the next decade.\nIn the United States in 1969, promoter Richard Nader launched a series of rock and roll revival concert tours featuring artists of the 1950s and 1960s. At one of the first of these shows, held at the Felt Forum at Madison Square Garden in New York City, Haley received an eight-and-a-half-minute standing ovation following his performance, as Nader related in his recorded introduction to Haley's live album \"Bill Haley Scrapbook\", which was recorded a few weeks later at the Bitter End club in New York.\nThe band appeared in several concert films in the early 1970s, including \"The London Rock and Roll Show\" (for which Haley's 1960\u201366 lead guitarist, John Kay, briefly rejoined the band) and \"Let the Good Times Roll\". After 1974, tax and management problems prevented Haley from performing in the United States, so he performed in Europe almost exclusively, though he also toured South America in 1975. The band was also kept busy in the studio, recording numerous albums for Sonet and other labels in the 1970s, several with a country music flavor. In 1974, Haley's original Decca recording of \"Rock Around the Clock\" hit the American sales charts once again, thanks to its use in the film \"American Graffiti\" and for two years, on the television program \"Happy Days\".\nLate career.\nIn February 1976, Haley's saxophone player and best friend, Rudy Pompilli, died of cancer after a nearly 20-year career with the Comets. Haley continued to tour for the next year with a succession of new sax players, but his popularity was waning again, and his 1976 performance in London was critically lambasted in the music media, such as \"Melody Maker\". That year, the group also recorded an album, \"R-O-C-K\" at Muscle Shoals Sound Studio for Sonet Records. According to one source, \"he had conflicted feelings about fame, was extremely private, suffered chronic alcoholism, and troubled relationships\". Having admitted to an alcohol problem in a 1974 radio interview for the BBC, Haley continued to battle alcoholism into the 1970s. \nIn early 1977, Haley announced his retirement from performing and settled down at his home in Mexico. According to the John Swenson biography of Haley, the musician was quoted as saying that he and Pompilli had an agreement that if one died, the other would retire.\nThe Comets continued to tour on their own during this period.\nIn 1979, Haley was persuaded to return to performing with the offer of a lucrative contract to tour Europe. An almost completely new group of musicians, mostly British, including saxophonist Pete Thomas, were assembled to perform as the Comets. Haley appeared on numerous television shows and in the movie \"Blue Suede Shoes\", filmed at one of his London concerts in March 1979. A few days later, a performance in Birmingham was videotaped and aired on UK television; it was released on DVD in 2005. During the March tour, Haley recorded several tracks in London for his next album for Sonet, completing the work that summer in Muscle Shoals; the album, \"Everyone Can Rock &amp; Roll\", issued later in 1979, was the last release of new recordings by Haley before his death.\nOn November 26, 1979, Haley and the Comets performed for Queen Elizabeth II, a moment Haley considered the proudest of his career. It was also the last time he performed in Europe and the last time most fans saw him perform \"Rock Around the Clock\".\nHaley made his final performances in South Africa in May and June 1980. Just before the South African tour commenced, Haley's health was reportedly failing, and he was reportedly diagnosed with a brain tumor; a planned tour of Germany in the autumn of 1980 was subsequently cancelled. The tour was critically lambasted, but surviving recordings of a performance in Johannesburg show Haley in good spirits and good voice. Nonetheless, according to the Haley News fan club newsletter and the Haley biography \"Sound and Glory\", planned concerts (such as a fall 1980 tour of Germany) and proposed recording sessions in New York and Memphis were cancelled, including a potential reunion with past members of the Comets.\nDespite his illness, Haley started compiling notes for possible use as a basis for either a biographical film based on his life, or a published autobiography (accounts differ), and there were plans for him to record an album in Memphis, Tennessee, when the brain tumor began affecting his behavior and he returned to his home in Harlingen, Texas. \nThe October 25, 1980, issue of German tabloid \"Bild\" reported that Haley had a brain tumor. Haley's British manager, Patrick Malynn, was quoted as saying that \"Haley had taken a fit [and] didn't recognize anyone anymore.\" In addition, a doctor who examined Haley said that the tumor was inoperable. Haley's widow Martha, who was with him in these troubling times, denied he had a brain tumor, as did his close friend Hugh McCallum. Martha and friends related that Haley did not want to go on the road anymore and that ticket sales for that planned tour of Germany in the fall of 1980 were slow. McCallum said, \"It's my unproven gut feeling that that [the brain tumor] was said to curtail talks about the tour and play the sympathy card.\"\nHaley returned to his home in Harlingen, Texas. At this time, Haley's alcoholism appeared to be worsening. According to Martha, by this time, she and Haley fought all the time, and she told him to stop drinking or move out. Eventually, he moved into a room in their pool house. Martha still took care of him and sometimes, he would come in the house to eat, but he ate very little. \"There were days we never saw him,\" said his daughter Martha Maria. In addition to Haley's drinking problems, it was becoming evident that he was also developing serious mental health issues. Martha Maria said, \"It was like sometimes he was drunk even when he wasn't drinking.\" After being picked up by the police in Harlingen several times for alleged intoxication, Martha had a judge put Haley in the hospital, where he was seen by a psychiatrist, who said Haley's brain was overproducing a chemical, like adrenaline. The doctor prescribed a medication to stop the overproduction, but said Haley would have to stop drinking. Martha said, \"This is pointless.\" She took him home, however, fed him and gave him his first dose. As soon as he felt better, he went back out to his room in the pool house, and the downward spiral continued until his death.\nMedia reports immediately following his death indicated that Haley displayed deranged and erratic behavior in the final weeks of his life. According to a biography of Haley by John Swenson, released in 1982, Haley made a succession of bizarre, mostly monologue late-night phone calls to friends and relatives toward the end of his life in which he was semi-coherent. His first wife has been quoted as saying, \"He would call you and ramble, dwelling on the past...\" The biography also describes Haley painting the windows of his home black, but there is little other information available about his final days.\nHaley died in his sleep of an apparent heart attack on February 9, 1981, at the age of 55, at his home in Harlingen, Texas. He was discovered lying motionless on his bed by a friend who had stopped by to visit him. The friend immediately called the police, and Haley was pronounced dead at the scene. Haley's death certificate gave \"natural causes, most likely a heart attack\" as the cause of death. Following a small funeral service attended by 75 people, Haley was cremated in Brownsville, Texas.\nIn April 1981, Bill Haley &amp; His Comets returned to the British musical charts once again when MCA Records (inheritors of the Decca catalogue) released \"Haley's Golden Medley\", a hastily compiled edit of the band's best-known hits in the style of the then-popular \"Stars on 45\" format. The single reached Number 50 in the UK but was not released in the United States.\nIn 1987, Bill Haley was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. At that time, supporting bands were not also named to the Hall of Fame. This policy was subsequently changed, and in 2012 a special committee of the Hall of Fame inducted Joey Ambrose, Fran Beecher, Danny Cedrone, Johnny Grande, Ralph Jones, Marshall Lytle, Billy Pompilli, Al Rex, Dick Richards, and Billy Williamson.\nBill Haley and His Comets were also inducted into the Rockabilly Hall of Fame. In June 2005, Bill Haley And His Comets were inducted into the Michigan Rock and Roll Legends Hall of Fame. In July 2005, the surviving members of the 1954\u201355 Comets (see below) represented Haley when Bill Haley and His Comets were inducted into Hollywood's Rockwalk, a ceremony also attended by Haley's second wife and youngest daughter. The Comets placed their handprints in cement, leaving a space blank for Haley.\nThe Comets.\nMore than 100 musicians performed with Bill Haley &amp; His Comets between 1952 and Haley's death in 1981, many becoming fan favorites along the way. Several short-lived Comets reunions were attempted in the 1970s and 1980s, including one contingent (organized by Baltimore-based piano player Joey Welz, who played piano for the Comets from 1962 to 1965) that appeared on \"The Tomorrow Show\", and another run by an Elvis Presley impersonator, Joey Rand (this group later lost a legal action over the right to use the Comets name). Only one group was sent out to perform by Haley himself and his management and production company, consisting of musicians who had played with Haley throughout the 1960s and 1970s\u2014lead guitarist \"Nick Masters\" (Mathias Nicholas Nastos), bassist Ray Cawley, singer Ray \"Pudge\" Parsons, and drummer Buddy Dee\u2014and who had continued to perform as the Comets between gigs and during Haley's retirement. This group rerecorded \"Rock Around the Clock\" for the television series \"Happy Days\".\nThe Comets, featuring musicians who performed with Haley in 1954\u20131955, reunited in 1987 and are still touring the world as of 2007, playing showrooms in the United States and Europe. They have also recorded a half-dozen albums for small labels in Europe and the United States. This version of the group has also been credited as Bill Haley's Original Comets and, in circumstances in which the use of the Comets name is in dispute, A Tribute to Bill Haley and The Original Band. The basic lineup of this group from 1987 to May 2006 was Marshall Lytle (bass), Joey Ambrose (sax), Johnny Grande (piano), Dick Richards (drums) and Franny Beecher (guitar). British singer Jacko Buddin augmented the group on vocals during most of their European tours, with Lytle taking over on vocals for US and Canadian tours beginning in 2000 and full-time in Europe in the mid-2000s. Since they connected with Klaus Kettner's Rock It Concerts (Germany) in 1991, they have played hundreds of shows all over Europe and have appeared on dozens of television shows. In March 2007 they opened the Bill-Haley-Museum in Munich, Germany.\nTwo additional groups claim the name Bill Haley's Comets and have extensively toured in the United States since forming in the 1980s: one originally led by Haley's 1965\u201368 drummer John \"Bam-Bam\" Lane, the other run by Al Rappa, who played bass for Haley off and on between late 1959 and early 1969. (The 1959 album \"Strictly Instrumental\" on Decca was Rappa's first recording session with Bill Haley &amp; His Comets. Haley had used Rappa as a fill-in player on live gigs for several years prior to that.) Both these musicians claim trademark ownership of the name \"Bill Haley's Comets\"; this dates back to Lane and Rappa (during a period when they worked together as one band) winning a trademark infringement lawsuit against the aforementioned Joey Rand group in 1989. Both Rappa's and Lane's bands have, from time to time, recruited other former Comets for their lineups (for example, in 2005, Rappa joined forces with Joey Welz), but for the most part the bandleaders are the only regular members who have worked with Bill Haley directly. Lane died in 2007, but his group continues to perform, led by bandleader Lenny Longo, who has no direct connection with Bill Haley. Rappa incorporated numerous professional musicians from the southern Indiana area (Guitarist Warren Batts, Joe Esarey, Dave Matthews, Joe Denton, saxophonist John Urbina, bassist Jody Hamilton Miley (previous bassist with the George Jones Show), and others) to make a full band. Rappa performed his Upright Bass show before thousands in audiences all over the country. Members of Rappa's \"Comets\" went on to form the LocoMotion Showband and continued touring the United States without Rappa adding Galen Deig (Drums) and Jimmy Baze (Bass) before eventually disbanding. Esarey went on to graduate from Cedarville University and Luther Rice Theological Seminary. He has since pastored churches and produced his own saxophone instrumental albums. Several of the members are now active in a very popular Southern Indiana 50's / 60's band called The Duke Boys.\nIn March and July 2005, the members of the 1954\u201355 group, now billed as simply the Comets after decades of controversy over the use of the name, made several high-profile concert appearances in New York City and Los Angeles organized by Martin Lewis as part of celebrations marking the 50th anniversary of rock and roll, the release of \"Blackboard Jungle\", the 50th anniversary of \"Rock Around the Clock\" hitting Number 1, and the 80th birthday of Bill Haley. During a concert at the Viper Room in West Hollywood on July 6, 2005, the Comets were joined on stage for one song by Gina Haley, the youngest daughter of Bill Haley; at a similar appearance in March they were joined by Haley's eldest son, John W. Haley. The 1954\u201355 Comets were also joined on stage by Bill Haley Jr. during several appearances in 2005 at Bubba Mac's in Somers Point, New Jersey, and at a 2005 concert recognizing the tenure of Bill Haley and the Saddlemen at the Twin Bars in Gloucester City, New Jersey.\nIn 2006, the 1954\u201355 Comets spent much of the year in residence at Dick Clark's American Bandstand Theater in Branson, Missouri. Meanwhile, the John Lane edition of Bill Haley's Comets recorded an album in Tennessee in early 2006, which has yet to be released.\nOn June 2, 2006, Johnny Grande, keyboardist with the 1954\u201355 Comets and a founding member of the band, died after a short illness. The following month, 85-year-old guitarist Franny Beecher announced his retirement, though he was at one point announced as participating in an early 2007 tour of Germany. The three remaining original Comets (Lytle, Richards, and Ambrose) continued to perform in Branson with new musicians taking over the keyboard and lead guitar positions. During September 2006, PBS in the United States aired a series of programs videotaped in Branson during the spring of 2006; these shows include the last recorded performances of the complete Original Comets lineup, including Grande. Lytle died in 2013, Beecher in 2014. The last remaining members of the 1954\u201355 Comets, Dick Richards and Joey Ambrose, continued to perform as the Comets as of mid-2018, sometimes augmented by 1970s-era Comet Bill Turner on lead guitar.\nJohn \"Bam-Bam\" Lane died on February 18, 2007 but his edition of Bill Haley's Comets is expected to continue touring, with the 2006 recordings to be released in Lane's memory.\nOn October 27, 2007, ex-Comets guitar player Bill Turner opened the aforementioned Bill-Haley-Museum in Munich, Germany. He will also join the New Comets during their Remember Bill Haley Tour 2011 with Haley's daughter Gina Haley.\nSeveral bands patterning themselves after the Comets are also active in Europe, including Bill Haley's New Comets in Germany.\nIn 2011, Haley's son Bill Jr. formed the band Bill Haley Jr. and the Comets, and created a Rock 'n' Roll History Show.\nOn July 12, 2019, drummer Dick Richards died at age 95 in Ocean City, New Jersey. He was born Richard Marley Boccelli on February 12, 1924, in Yeadon, Pennsylvania.\nOn May 24, 2020, ex-Comet bassist, Albert \"Al Rex\" Piccirilli, died.\nAl Rappa died on July 25, 2021, aged 94.\nOriginal saxophone player Joseph Frank D'Ambrosio (stage name Joey Ambrose; March 23, 1934 \u2013 August 9, 2021), played on the hit recording of \"Rock Around the Clock\" in 1954 but from September 1955 was replaced long-term by Rudy Pompilli until Rudy's death 20 years later. Joey Ambrose remained a musician and was the last Comet to pass away, at 87, on August 9, 2021.\nGrammy Hall of Fame.\n\"Rock Around the Clock\" was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, a Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have \"qualitative or historical significance.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51919", "revid": "9092818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51919", "title": "United States Constitution", "text": ""}
{"id": "51920", "revid": "9155723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51920", "title": "Ren\u00e9 Dumont", "text": "French engineer, sociologist, and politician\nRen\u00e9 Dumont (13 March 1904 \u2013 18 June 2001) was a French engineer in agronomy, a sociologist, and an environmental politician.\nBiography.\nDumont was born in Cambrai, Nord, in the north of France. His father was a professor in agriculture and his grandfather was a farmer. He graduated from the INA P-G, as an engineer in agronomy. First sent to Vietnam (1929) at the end of his studies, he was disgusted by colonialism and returned to Paris to spend most of his career as a professor of agricultural sciences (1933\u201374).\nRen\u00e9 Dumont started his career as a promoter of the use of chemical fertilizers and mechanisation. He wrote articles in \"La Terre Fran\u00e7aise\" (P\u00e9tainist weekly journal), favoring agricultural corporatism. However, he was one of the first to denounce damages from the Green Revolution (\"R\u00e9volution Verte\") and to fight agricultural productivism. He was an expert with the United Nations and FAO, and wrote about 30 books. He traveled widely and had a good understanding of farming issues in underdeveloped countries.\nHe advocated:\nHe considered development not to be so much a question of money, fertilizer, or seeds, but a careful balance of the three. He advocated relations between humans and their fields that relied foremost on relations between humans themselves, social relationships being the basis for proper agricultural and industrial development. Finally, he believed the basis for good social relationships between humans was good relationships between men and women, thus arguing demographic control relied on female emancipation.\nAhead of his time, the most famous French agronomist, well known for his red-pullover, surprised French people by showing on TV an apple and a glass of water, telling them how precious these natural resources were, and predicting the future price of oil. Dumont was one of the first to explain the consequences of what was to be called globalization, demographic explosion, productivism, pollution, shantytowns, malnutrition, rift between northern and southern countries. He was also one of the first to use the term \"d\u00e9veloppement durable\" (sustainable development).\nHe was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt a Constitution for the Federation of Earth.\nHe ran for President in 1974 as the first ecologist candidate, and won 1.32% of the votes. His campaign director was Brice Lalonde. That election opened the way to political ecology. The French political ecology was founded by Dumont and is under-developed countries oriented, against war, against capitalism and for solidarity. Some consider it not sufficiently rooted in deep ecology.\nDumont is considered to be the forefather of the French Green Party. In a statement, France's Green Party called Dumont \"the man who made it possible to bring environmental policies in a direct and natural manner into the political world\".\nHe wrote a best-selling book, \"L\u2019Afrique noire est mal partie\" (1962).\nDumont was a founding member of ATTAC.\nHe died in 2001 in Fontenay-sous-Bois.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51921", "revid": "17311078", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51921", "title": "Motorway", "text": ""}
{"id": "51922", "revid": "9134799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51922", "title": "Ring road", "text": "Type of road encircling a settlement\nA ring road (also known as circular road, beltline, beltway, circumferential (high)way, loop or orbital) is a road or a series of connected roads encircling a town, city or country. The most common purpose of a ring road is to assist in reducing traffic volumes in the urban centre, such as by offering an alternate route around the city for drivers who do not need to stop in the city core. Ring roads can also serve to connect suburbs to each other, allowing efficient travel between them.\nNomenclature.\nThe name \"ring road\" is used for the majority of metropolitan circumferential routes in Europe, such as the Berliner Ring, the Brussels Ring, the Amsterdam Ring and the Leeds Inner and Outer ring roads. Australia, Pakistan, and India also use the term ring road, as in Melbourne's Western Ring Road, Lahore's Lahore Ring Road and Hyderabad's Outer Ring Road. In Canada the term is the most commonly used, with \"orbital\" also used, but to a much lesser extent.\nIn Europe and Australia, some ring roads, particularly longer ones of motorway standard, are known as \"orbital motorways\". Examples are the London Orbital (generally known as the M25; 188\u00a0km), Sydney Orbital Network (110\u00a0km), and Rome Orbital (68\u00a0km).\nIn the United States many ring roads are called beltlines, beltways or loops, such as the Capital Beltway around Washington, D.C. Some ring roads, such as Washington's Capital Beltway, use \"Inner Loop\" and \"Outer Loop\" terminology for directions of travel, since cardinal (compass) directions cannot be signed uniformly around the entire loop. The term 'ring road' is occasionally \u2013 and inaccurately \u2013 used interchangeably with the term 'bypass'.\nBackground.\nBypasses around many large and small towns were built in many areas when many old roads were converted to four-lane status in the 1930s to 1950s, such as those along the Old National Road (now generally U.S. 40 or Interstate 70) in the United States, leaving the old road in place to serve the town or city, but allowing through travelers to continue on a wider, faster and safer route.\nConstruction of fully circumferential ring roads has generally occurred more recently, beginning in the 1960s in many areas, when the U.S. Interstate Highway System and similar-quality roads elsewhere were designed. Ring roads have now been built around numerous cities and metropolitan areas, including cities with multiple ring roads, irregularly shaped ring roads and ring roads made up of various other long-distance roads.\nLondon has three ring roads (the M25 motorway, the North and South Circular roads and the Inner Ring Road). Birmingham also has three ring roads which consist of the Birmingham Box; the A4540, commonly known as the Middleway; and the A4040, the Outer Ring Road. Birmingham once had a fourth ring road, the A4400. This has been partially demolished and downgraded to improve traffic flow into the city. Other British cities have two: Leeds, Sheffield, Norwich and Glasgow. Cleveland, OH and San Antonio, TX, in the United States, also each have two, while Houston, Texas will have three official ring roads (not including the downtown freeway loop). Some cities have far more\u00a0\u2013 Beijing, for example, has six ring roads, simply numbered in increasing order from the city center (though skipping #1), while Moscow has five, three innermost (Central Squares of Moscow, Boulevard Ring and Garden Ring) corresponding to the concentric lines of fortifications around the ancient city, and the two outermost (MKAD and Third Ring) built in the twentieth century, though, confusingly, the Third Ring was built last.\nGeographical constraints can complicate the construction of a complete ring road. For example, the Baltimore Beltway in Maryland formerly crossed Baltimore Harbor on a high arch bridge prior to its collapse in 2024, and much of the partially completed Stockholm Ring Road in Sweden runs through tunnels or over long bridges. Some towns or cities on sea coasts or near rugged mountains cannot have a full ring road. Examples of such partial ring roads are Dublin's ring road; and, in the US, Interstate 287, mostly in New Jersey (bypassing New York City), and Interstate 495 around Boston, none of which completely circles these seaport cities.\nIn other cases, adjacent international boundaries may prevent ring road completion. Construction of a true ring road around Detroit is effectively blocked by its location on the border with Canada and the Detroit River; although constructing a route mostly or entirely outside city limits is technically feasible, a true ring around Detroit would necessarily pass through Canada, and so Interstate 275 and Interstate 696 together bypass but do not encircle the city. Sometimes, the presence of significant natural or historical areas limits route options, as for the long-proposed Outer Beltway around Washington, D.C., where options for a new western Potomac River crossing are limited by a nearly continuous corridor of heavily visited scenic, natural, and historical landscapes in the Potomac River Gorge and adjacent areas.\nWhen referring to a road encircling a capital city, the term \"beltway\" can also have a political connotation, as in the American term \"Inside the Beltway\", derived metonymically from the Capital Beltway encircling Washington, D.C.\nImpact.\nRing roads decentralize traffic by providing alternative routes around the city, allowing through-traffic and freight flows to bypass the urban core. This relieves pressure on heavily congested inner-city roads and reduces the volume of unwanted transit movements that would otherwise enter central districts. At the same time, orbitals reshape metropolitan structure: accessibility often becomes highest along the ring, drawing economic activity and population towards suburban areas. This decentralization can increase car dependence and generate new inter-suburban traffic, which over time may erode some of the initial congestion benefits.\nA comparative analysis of ring-road schemes in multiple cities concluded that orbital roads tend to relieve congestion only temporarily, as traffic volumes rise again through induced demand. The study found that long-term congestion reduction requires combining ring roads with comprehensive travel-demand management measures, such as improved public transport, congestion charging, and compact land-use planning, rather than relying on road construction alone.\nRing roads have been criticised for inducing demand, leading to more car journeys being taken and thus higher levels of pollution being created. By creating easy access by car to large areas of land, they can also act as a catalyst for development, leading to urban sprawl and car-centric planning. Ring roads have also been criticised for splitting communities and being difficult to navigate for pedestrians and cyclists.\nExamples.\nMost orbital motorways (or beltways) are purpose-built major highways around a town or city, typically without either signals or road or railroad crossings. In the United States, beltways are commonly parts of the Interstate Highway System. Similar roads in the United Kingdom are often called \"orbital motorways\". Although the terms \"ring road\" and \"orbital motorway\" are sometimes used interchangeably, \"ring road\" often indicates a circumferential route formed from one or more existing roads within a city or town, with the standard of road being anything from an ordinary city street up to motorway level. An excellent example of this is London's North Circular/South Circular ring roads, which are largely made up of (mainly congested) ordinary city streets.\nIn some cases, a circumferential route is formed by the combination of a major through highway and a similar-quality loop route that extends out from the parent road, later reconnecting with the same highway. Such loops not only function as a bypass for through traffic, but also to serve outlying suburbs. In the United States, an Interstate highway loop is usually designated by a three-digit number beginning with an even digit before the two-digit number of its parent interstate. Interstate spurs, on the other hand, generally have three-digit numbers beginning with an odd digit.\nUnited States.\nWithin the United States, even numbered three digit interstate highways act a circumferential route of the two digit parent interstate. Some instances (such as Interstate 495, DC) completely circle, while some (such as Interstate 495, MA) partially loop, either due to geographical or cancelled/non-completed highways. Within cities, ring roads sometimes have local nicknames; these include Washington DC's Interstate 495 (The \"Capital Beltway\"), Interstate 270 in Columbus, Ohio (The \"Outerbelt\"), and Interstate 285 in Atlanta (The \"Perimeter\").\nThe longest complete beltway in the United States is the Charles W. Anderson Loop, a loop in Texas that forms a complete loop around the Greater San Antonio area.\nThe longest complete belt road, or a beltway that is only two lanes, in the United States is Hawaii Belt Road, a belt in Hawaii that forms a complete belt road around Hawaii Island.\nOther major U.S. cities with such a beltway superhighway:\nThere are other U.S. superhighway beltway systems that consist of multiple routes that require multiple interchanges and thus do not provide true ring routes. Two designated examples are the Capital Beltway around Harrisburg, Pennsylvania using Interstate 81, Interstate 83, and Pennsylvania Route 581 and \"The Bypass\" around South Bend, Indiana using Interstate 80, Interstate 90, U.S. Route 31, and Indiana State Road 331.\nCanada.\nEdmonton, Alberta, has two ring roads. The first is a loose conglomeration of four major arterial roads with an average distance of from the downtown core. Yellowhead Trail forms the northern section, Wayne Gretzky Drive/75\u00a0Street forms the eastern section, Whitemud Drive forms the southern and longest section, and 170\u00a0Street forms the western and shortest section. Whitemud Drive is the only section that is a true controlled-access highway, while Yellowhead Trail and Wayne Gretzky Drive have interchanges and intersections and are therefore both limited-access roads. Yellowhead Trail is currently being upgraded to full freeway standards. 170\u00a0Street and 75\u00a0Street are merely large arterial roads with intersections only. The second and more prominent ring road is named Anthony Henday Drive; it circles the city at an average distance of from the downtown core. It is a freeway for its entire length, and was built to reduce inner-city traffic congestion, created a bypass of Yellowhead Trail, and has improved the movement of goods and services across Edmonton and the surrounding areas. It was completed in October 2016 as the first free-flowing orbital road in Canada.\nStoney Trail is a ring road that circles the city of Calgary, Alberta, for an entire length of .\nWinnipeg, Manitoba, has a ring road which is called the Perimeter Highway. It is designated as Manitoba Highway 101 on the north, northwest and east sides and as Manitoba Highway 100 on the south and southwest sides. The majority of it is a four-lane divided expressway. It has a second ring road, planned since the 1950s and not yet completed, called the Suburban Beltway. It consists of several roads\u2014Lagimodi\u00e8re Boulevard, Abinojii Mikanah, the Fort Garry Bridge, the Moray Bridge, William R Clement Parkway, Chief Peguis Trail and the Kildonan Bridge.\nSaskatoon, Saskatchewan, has a ring road named Circle Drive. It is cosigned as Saskatchewan Highway 16 and Saskatchewan Highway 11 along the whole route since the 2013 opening of Circle Drive South.\nRegina, Saskatchewan has a partial ring road that is named Ring Road; however, due to the city's urban growth since the road was originally constructed, it no longer functions as a true ring road and has instead come to be used partially for local arterial traffic. The Regina Bypass, a new partial ring road, has replaced it, although Ring Road must still be used in the northeast quadrant of the city.\nHamilton, Ontario, has the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway, Highway 403 and the Red Hill Valley Parkway which form a ring on three sides.\nSudbury, Ontario, has a partial ring road consisting of the Southwest and Southeast Bypasses segment of Highway 17, and the Northwest Bypass segment of Highway 144. An unofficial northeast \"bypass\" route can also be completed on city arterial roads that largely bypass the urban core of the city, but are not fully controlled-access and must be shared with local traffic in the Nickel Centre and Rayside-Balfour districts of the city.\nEurope.\nMost major cities in Europe are served by a ring road that circles either the inner core of their metropolitan areas or the outer borders of the city proper or both. In major transit hubs, such as the \u00cele-de-France region surrounding Paris and the Frankfurt area, major national highways converge just outside city limits before forming one of several routes of an urban network of roads circling the city. Unlike in United States, route numbering is not a challenge on European ring roads as routes merge to form the single designated road. However, exit and road junction access can be challenging due to the complexity of other routes branching from or into the ring road.\nOne of the most renowned ring roads is the Vienna Ring Road (\"Ringstra\u00dfe\"), a grand boulevard constructed in the mid-19th century and filled with representative buildings. Due to its unique architectural beauty and history, it has also been called the \"Lord of the ring roads\", and is declared by UNESCO as part of Vienna's World Heritage Site.\nMajor European cities that are served by a ring road or ring road system:\nIn Iceland, there is a 1,332\u00a0km ring road, called the ring road (or Route 1), around most of the island (excluding only the remote Westfjords). Most of the country's settlements are on or near this road.\nAsia-Pacific.\nMajor cities that are served by a ring road or ring road system:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51923", "revid": "1325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51923", "title": "Buddy Holley", "text": ""}
{"id": "51924", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51924", "title": "Timeline of United States diplomatic history", "text": " \nThe diplomatic history of the United States oscillated among three positions: isolation from diplomatic entanglements of other (typically European) nations (but with economic connections to the world); alliances with European and other military partners; and unilateralism, or operating on its own sovereign policy decisions. The US always was large in terms of area, but its population was small, only 4 million in 1790. Population growth was rapid, reaching 7.2 million in 1810, 32 million in 1860, 76 million in 1900, 132 million in 1940, and 316 million in 2013. Economic growth in terms of overall GDP was even faster. However, the nation's military strength was quite limited in peacetime before 1940.\n\u2014 Robert R. Livingston named first United States Secretary of Foreign Affairs\n\u2014 May 7 Congress votes to begin negotiations with Morocco.\n\u2014 New York\u2013based merchants open trade with China, followed by Salem, Boston and Philadelphia merchants.\n\u2014 October 11 Moroccan corsair seizes the American ship \"Betsey\" and enslaves the crew; the Moroccans demand that the US pay a ransom to release the crew and a treaty to pay tribute to avoid future such incidents.\n\u2014 March 11 Congress votes to appropriate $80,000 to pay in tribute to the Barbary states of Morocco, Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli.\n\u2014 July 9 The Moroccans release the \"Betsy\" and her crew.\n\u2014 July 25 Algerine pirates seizes the American ship \"Maria\" off the coast of Portugal; Algiers declares war on the US, and the \"dey\" Muhammad V of Algiers demands that the US pay $1 million in tribute to end the war.\n\u2014 June 23 Moroccan-American treaty is signed in the US agrees to pay tribute to Morocco in exchange for a promise that Moroccan corsairs will not attack American ships.\n\u2014 March 1 United States Congress succeeds Congress of the Confederation\n\u2014 July 27 Department of Foreign Affairs signed into law\n\u2014 September, changed to Department of State; Jefferson appointed; John Jay continues to act as foreign affairs secretary until Jefferson's return from France; from 1789 to 1883. Much of the routine overseas business is the responsibility of navy officers.\n\u2014 February 22 Congress votes to send another team of diplomats to Algiers to pay a ransom for the enslaved Americans and to negotiate a tribute treaty.\n\u2014 June 24 Jay Treaty with Britain. Averts war, opens 10 years of peaceful trade with Britain, fails to settle neutrality issues; British eventually evacuate western forts; boundary lines and debts (in both directions) to be settled by arbitration. Barely approved by Senate (1795) after revision; intensely opposed, became major issue in the formation of First Party System.\n\u2014 September 5 United States signs a treaty agreeing to pay tribute to Algiers in exchange for which the \"dey\" Ali Hassan will free the 85 surviving American slaves. The treaty with Algiers is considered a national humiliation.\n\u2014 July 11 Algiers frees the 85 American slaves.\n\u2014 The pasha Yusuf Karamanli of Tripoli, hoping for a similar treaty that Algiers has achieved starts attacking and seizing American ships.\n\u2014 President George Washington, preparing to leave office and troubled by the French Revolutionary Wars in Europe, issues his famous Farewell Address urging Americans to avoid involvement in foreign wars, beginning a century of isolationism as the predominant foreign policy of the United States.\n\u2014 President Adams asks Congress to spend more money on the navy and to arm American merchantmen in response to the Barbary pirate attacks.\n\u2014 August 28 Treaty of Tripoli; treaty with Barbary state of Tripoli approved unanimously by Senate and signed into law by President John Adams on June 10; states \"the Government of the United States of America is not, in any sense, founded on the Christian religion.\"\n\u2014 April Tripoli threatens war if the US does not pay more tribute.\n\u2014 July The Tripolitan warship \"Tripolino\" takes the American merchantman \"Catherine\" and enslaves the crew. Much outrage in the US\n\u2014 September 30 Convention of 1800 (Treaty of Mortefontaine) with France ends the Quasi-War and ends alliance of 1778. The treaty frees up the US Navy for operations against the Barbary pirates.\n1801 \u2013 1865.\n The beginning of the First Barbary War. President Jefferson does not ask Congress for a declaration of war against Tripoli, but instead decides to begin military operations against Tripoli, arguing that the president has the right to begin military operations in self-defense without asking for permission from Congress.\n\u2014 July 24 An American naval squadron begins the blockade of Tripoli.\n\u2014 August 1 The U.S.S. \"Enterprise\" takes the Tripolitan ship \"Tripoli\".\n1802 \u2014\n\u2014 April 18 Second American naval squadron sent to the Mediterranean.\n\u2014 June 19 Morocco declares war on the United States.\n\u2014 June 2 Captain David Porter leads raid into Tripoli; first American amphibious landing in the Old World.\n\u2014 February 23 The American diplomat William Eaton meets with Hamet Karanmanli, the exiled brother of the pasha Yusuf Karamanli of Tripoli in Egypt and agrees that the US will depose Yusuf and put Hamet on the throne; the first American effort at \"regime change\".\n\u2014 March 8 A force of American sailors, marines, Tripolian exiles and Egyptian mercenaries under the leadership of Eaton leaves Alexandria with the aim of deposing pasha Yusuf of Tripoli.\n\u2014 April 28 Eaton's force takes Derna, the road is wide open to Tripoli.\n\u2014 June 4 Tripoli and the US sign a peace treaty.\n\u2014 Treaty of Ghent is ratified by both sides and goes in effect in February; opens long era of friendly trade and peaceful settlement of boundary issues.\n\u2014 March 2 The US declares war on Algiers. The beginning of the Second Barbary War.\n\u2014 June 28 Commodore Stephen Decatur arrives off Algiers, after threatening bombardment, the \"dey\" agrees to a peace treaty two days later in which he releases the American slaves and agrees to the end of the United States's tributary status.\n\u2014 Siam (Thailand), The Roberts Treaty of 1833; stipulates free trade with few limitations, most favored nation status, and relief for US citizens in cases of shipwreck, piracy, or bankruptcy.\n\u2014 Second Sumatran expedition, in retaliation for the massacre of the crew of an American merchant ship.\n\u2014 Spanish\u2013American War; \"splendid little war\" with American quick victory\n\u2014 Treaty of Paris; US gains Philippines, Guam and Puerto Rico; pays Spain for claims; Cuba comes under temporary US control\n\u2014 Hawaii seeks to join US; with votes lacking for 2/3 approval of a treaty on July 7. The Newlands Resolution in Congress annexes the Republic of Hawaii, with full US citizenship for Hawaiian citizens regardless of race\n\u2014 July 29 Japan occupies the southern half of French Indochina, seen as a threatening move.\n\u2014 July 30 US together with Britain and the Dutch government in exile imposes trade embargo against Japan, most crucially in oil.\n\u2014 August 13 Atlantic Charter. Anglo-American summit off the coast of Newfoundland. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill agree (1) no territorial gains sought by America or Great Britain, (2) territorial adjustments must conform to people involved, (3) people have right to choose their own govt. (4) trade barriers lowered, (5) there must be disarmament, (6) there must be freedom from want and fear (\"Four Freedoms\" of FDR), (7) there must be freedom of the seas, (8) there must be an association of nations. Charter is accepted by Allies, who call themselves \"the United Nations\".\n\u2014 October 31 American destroyer USS \"Reuben James\" sunk by a U-boat. Rise in German-American tensions.\n\u2014 December 6 American intelligence fails to predict attack on Pearl Harbor.\n\u2014 December 7 Attack on Pearl Harbor. United States is hit by surprise by Japanese Navy.\n\u2014 December 11 Germany and Italy declare war on the U.S.\n\u2014 January Casablanca Conference. Roosevelt and Churchill meet to plan European strategy. Unconditional surrender of Axis countries demanded, Soviet aid and participation, invasion of Sicily and Italy planned\n\u2014 October 30 Moscow Declaration. Joint statement by the United States, United Kingdom and the Soviet Union promises that German leaders will be tried for war crimes after the Allied victory.\n\u2014 November Cairo Conference. Roosevelt, Churchill and Chiang Kai-shek meet to make decisions about postwar Asia: Japan returns all territory, independent Korea.\n\u2014 November Tehran Conference. Roosevelt and Churchill meet with Stalin.\n\u2014 June 24 Berlin Blockade imposed by the Soviet Union, blocking traffic into western sectors of Berlin, followed by Operation Vittles, America airlifted massive amounts of food, fuel and supplies into city. Soviet blockade lifted on May 12, 1949.\n\u2014 January 21 Dean Acheson appointed Secretary of State. He will hold this office until 1953 and is remembered as one of the more abler Secretaries of State.\n\u2014 April 4 America and eleven other nations sign the North Atlantic Treaty, creating NATO, a military alliance with the purpose of countering the Soviet Union and its allies.\n\u2014 23 May 1949 The United States, Britain and France grant independence in their zones in Germany to a new state called the Federal Republic of Germany.\n\u2014 June 25 Korean War begins. US sends in troops to stop North Korean invasion; UN votes support; (Soviet Union boycotted UN and did not veto.) US forces deployed in Korea exceeded 300,000 during the last year of the conflict.\n\u2014 September US-led invasion defeats North Korean army; UN authorizes rollback strategy, with North Korea to come under UN control\n\u2014 November Chinese forces enter North Korea; roll back UN-US-South Korean forces to below 38th parallel\n\u2014 March 28 President Vincent Auriol of France visits Washington to meet President Truman. During his visit, the US agrees to pay for entire French war effort in Vietnam, and to provide unlimited military aid.\n\u2014 April President Truman fires General Douglas MacArthur as blame game escalates regarding Korean war stalemate.\n\u2014 June Talks for an armistice in the Korean War open. The major issue that divides the Communist and UN sides is the return of the POWs with the Communists demanding that all POWs from their nations be repatriated while the UN insists on voluntary repatriation.\n\u2014 September 1 ANZUS Treaty united America, Australia and New Zealand in a defensive regional pact\n\u2014 May Eisenhower threatens use of nuclear weapons in Korean War; China agrees to negotiate.\n\u2014 July 27 armistice signed ending the Korean War (it is still in effect).\n\u2014 March 13 The Battle of Dien Bien Phu begins. As the French are faced with defeat in Vietnam, Eisenhower considers intervention with tactical nuclear weapons to break the siege of Dien Bien Phu, and orders the Joint Chiefs of Staff to start work on Operation Vulture, the plan to intervene in Vietnam. Operation Vulture is ultimately rejected as a policy option.\n\u2014 April 26 Geneva conference opens. Through called to consider a peace treaty for the Korean War, the conference is soon dominated by the question of Vietnam. The Secretary of State John Foster Dulles heads the American delegation.\n\u2014 June 18 Guatemala. Dwight D. Eisenhower authorizes Operation PBSuccess, a program of \"psychological warfare and political action\" against anti-US regime; Guatemalan military overthrows the left-wing government of Jacobo \u00c1rbenz and installs Carlos Castillo Armas.\n\u2014 July 20 The Geneva conference closes with an agreement on the partition of Vietnam into two states with a promise to hold a general election in both by June 1956. Dulles does not sign the Geneva accords, but promises that the US will abide by them.\n\u2014 September 8 SEATO alliance in Southeast Asia is founded. South Vietnam not a signatory\n1945 \u2013 2000.\n1955\n\u2014 February 24 Baghdad Pact is founded. Later known as the Central Treaty Organization (or CENTO) initiated by John Foster Dulles, members were Iran, Iraq, United Kingdom, Pakistan, and Turkey, US aid.\n\u2014 The annual People's Republic of China-United States Ambassadorial Talks begin.\n\u2014 November 1 The first \"accelerated pacification\" of launching land reforms in South Vietnam intended to persuade South Vietnamese peasants not to support the Viet Cong is launched; a success.\n\u2014 The United States signs the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.\n\u2014 January 28 Nixon launches policy of Vietnamization, in which American ground troops in Vietnam were to be steadily reduced and the American role was to provide military training, equipment, and air support for the South Vietnamese military. Vietnamization was intended to reduce American losses in Vietnam, and thus reduce the domestic pressure for a total withdrawal of American forces. At the same time Nixon intensified the war by beginning Operation Menu, the secret bombing of Cambodia. Nixon's aim in Vietnam is to force a Korean War-type armistice, which requires that the war go on until Hanoi agreed to the American terms while at the same time forcing Nixon to deflect pressure from domestic anti-war protests. With the same aim of achieving an armistice that would allow South Vietnam to continue to exist, Nixon begins a policy of seeking better relations with the Soviet Union and China, hoping those two states would reduce, if not end their arm supplies to North Vietnam in return for better relations with Washington, and thus forcing Hanoi to accept peace on American terms.\n\u2014 February Following the success of the first \"accelerated pacification\" and the Phoenix Program of \"neutralizing\" (i.e. assassinating) Viet Cong operatives, Nixon applies strong pressure for more \"accelerated pacification\" campaigns and the Phoenix Program killings in South Vietnam as a part of the effort at breaking the Viet Cong. For Nixon, \"accelerated pacification\" and the Phoenix Program killings both have the effect of weakening the Viet Cong without the use of American troops, which serves to achieve both his aims of reducing American forces and applying pressure for the Vietnamese Communists to accept peace on American terms.\n\u2014 March 8 President Nasser of Egypt launches the War of Attrition against Israel. The US supports Israel while the Soviet Union supports Egypt.\n\u2014 July 25 Nixon announces the Nixon Doctrine in which Nixon warns that the United States will not go to any lengths to defend its allies, especially in Asia, and henceforth American allies must do more for their own defense. The doctrine is especially aimed at South Vietnam and is intended to pressure the South Vietnamese government to do a more effective job of fighting the Communists.\n\u2014 July Nixon visits Pakistan and meets with the Pakistani President General Agha Yahya Khan, tells him that he wants to use Pakistan as an intermediary for talks with China. Yahya Khan agrees to Nixon's request.\n\u2014 September 9 Walter Stoessel, the American ambassador to Poland is ordered by Nixon to make contacts with Chinese diplomats in an informal way.\n\u2014 October 16 Pakistani ambassador to the United States Agha Hilaly tells Kissinger that President Yahya is going to visit China early the next year, and is there any message that Kissinger would like Yahya to pass on to Mao.\n\u2014 November 3 Nixon gives a TV speech claiming that there was a \"silent majority\" supporting his Vietnam policies, states that he needs some more time for his policies to work, denounces anti-war protestors as a threat to world peace, and asks for the support of the \"silent majority\" to help him \"to end the war in a way that we could win the peace.\"\n\u2014 November 17 The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks begin. \n\u2014 February 23 Hilaly tells Kissinger that after Yahya's visit to Beijing that the Chinese were interested in the American offer, but did not want to negotiate from a position of weakness.\n\u2014 March Under the \"accelerated pacification\", more than million hectares of land have been redistributed in American-encouraged land reform in South Vietnam.\n\u2014 March 7 Chiang Kai-shek who has heard reports of Sino-American talks in Warsaw writes to Nixon to protest.\n\u2014 April 29 Nixon orders the Cambodian Incursion. American and South Vietnamese force invade eastern provinces of Cambodia with the aim of clearing out the Viet Cong/North Vietnamese forces based there. Sparks much protest in the United States.\n\u2014 June By this point in the War of Attrition between Israel and Egypt, there are regular clashes occurring between Israel and Soviet forces in Egypt, leading to fears that this might cause a world war, which in turn leads to strong pressure for a ceasefire.\n\u2014 October 25 During a Pakistani-American summit, President Nixon asks President Yahya to pass on another message to Beijing about the American wish for rapprochement with China.\n\u2014 October 31 Kissinger meets with Romanian President Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu and asks him to pass on a message to China that the US wishes for a normalization of relations with the People's Republic of China.\n\u2014 January 12 Corneliu Bogdan, the Romanian ambassador to the US tells Kissinger that Ceau\u0219escu has passed on the American message, and that for Mao, normalization would be possible if the US would end the \"occupation\" of Taiwan as Mao calls American support for Taiwan. This poses a major problem for Nixon as allow China to take Taiwan would greatly damage America's image and pose domestic problems.\n\u2014 March 4 Nixon gives press conference, and warns that better Sino-American relations cannot come at the expense of Taiwan.\n\u2014 March 26 Pakistan launches Operation Searchlight intended by President Agha Yahya Khan to crush the Awami League in East Pakistan, and to eliminate the \"intelligentsia\", political class and Hindu minority of East Pakistan. As General Yahya is a key conduit in the talks between the US and China, the Nixon administration does not protest Operation Searchlight as it fears this might offend General Yahya, as part of its marked \"tilt\" towards Pakistan.\n\u2014 April 6 The Blood telegram sent by Archer Blood, the American consul in Dhaka and 20 other diplomats protesting the Nixon administration's silence about the Pakistani government's repression in East Pakistan and what the telegram argues is a campaign of genocide by the government against the Hindu minority in East Pakistan. The Blood telegram does not affect American policy towards Pakistan, and effectively cuts the career of Blood and the other diplomats.\n\u2014 April 14 Ping-pong diplomacy. The American table tennis team is allowed to visit China, causes a sensation. During a phone conversation, Kissinger says \"It's a tragedy that it has to happen to Chiang at the end of his life but we have to be cold about it\", to which Nixon replies \"We have to do what's best for us\".\n\u2014 April 21 Pakistani President Yahya informs Nixon that he had spoken with Zhou Enlai, and that the Chinese wished for a senior American envoy to make a secret visit to Beijing.\n\u2014 April 27 About the Chinese offer of a secret American envoy to visit Beijing, Kissinger tells Nixon that \"If we get this thing working, we will end Vietnam this year.\"\n\u2014 July 9 Kissinger visits Islamabad, Pakistan, and from there goes on to a secret trip to Beijing to meet Zhou Enlai and Mao Zedong. During the secret summit in Beijing, it is agreed that President Nixon will visit China the next year.\n\u2014 December 3 Indo-Pakistani war begins. The US supports Pakistan while the Soviet Union supports India.\n\u2014 December 11 Nixon orders Task Force 74 to the Bay of Bengal in an attempt to intimidate India into accepting a ceasefire before the Indians defeat Pakistan.\n\u2014 December 16 The war ends in Pakistan's defeat. Nixon fails in his efforts preserve Pakistan's unity, and East Pakistan secedes as the independent People's Republic of Bangladesh.\n\u2014 February 21 Nixon visits China, and at the end of the trip the United States and China issue the Shanghai Communiqu\u00e9 endorsing the One-China policy. Nixon in Beijing opens era of d\u00e9tente with China.\n\u2014 May 9 Nixon orders Operation Linebacker with the aiming of destroying North Vietnam's logistical capacity.\n\u2014 May 22 Moscow summit. Nixon in Moscow opens era of d\u00e9tente with Soviet Union; SALT I.\n\u2014 June 3 Quadripartite Agreement governing the status of Berlin.\n\u2014 October 8 Kissinger meets with the North Vietnamese negotiator Le Duc Tho in Paris for peace talks to end the Vietnam War, and initially the talks go well.\n\u2014 October 18 President Nguyen Van Thieu of South Vietnam rejects the proposed Paris peace agreement, complaining that Kissinger had not consulted him.\n\u2014 December 17 Paris peace talks break down.\n\u2014 December 18 Nixon orders \"Christmas Bombings\" against North Vietnam following the breakdown in the Paris peace talks.\n\u2014 27 January Paris Peace Accords ends the American war in Vietnam; POW's returned in March.\n\u2014 October 6 October War begins with a surprise attack on Israel by Egypt and Syria. The US supports Israel while the Soviet Union supports Egypt and Syria.\n\u2014 October 12 Nixon orders Operation Nickel Grass, a major American effort to supply Israel with weapons to make good the IDF's heavy initial losses.\n\u2014 October 20 Arab oil embargo led by King Faisal of Saudi Arabia against the US and other Western nations begins as punishment for support of Israel. The oil embargo sparks major inflation in the United States.\n\u2014 October 24 The Soviet Union announces that it will send troops to Egypt, which in turn leads Kissinger to warn that the United States will send troops to fight the Soviet forces deployed to Egypt. Nixon places the United States military on DEFCON 3, one of the highest states of alert. The Soviets back down.\n\u2014 October 25 A ceasefire brokered by the US and the Soviet Union ends the October War.\n1974\u2013\n\u2014 January 18 Under an American disengagement plan negotiated by Kissinger, Israeli forces pull back from the Suez Canal.\n\u2014 March 17 Arab oil embargo against the West ends.\n\u2014 November President Gerald Ford and General Secretary Leonid Brezhnev agree to the framework of SALT II at the Vladivostok Summit Meeting on Arms Control.\n\u2014 September 29 MNF comprising forces from the United States, France, and Italy set to Lebanon to stabilize the nation in the middle of its civil war.\n\u2014 April 18 A suicide attack by the Iranian-supported Hezbollah terrorist group destroys the American embassy in Beirut.\n\u2014 October 23 A suicide attack by Hezbollah kills 241 American servicemen, mostly Marines in Beirut.\n\u2014 October 25 US invades Grenada in response to a coup d\u2019\u00e9tat by Deputy Prime Minister Bernard Coard on the Caribbean island.\n\u2014 February 26 Reagan orders the Marines in Lebanon to be \"redeployed to the fleet\" as the withdrawal from Lebanon is euphemistically known.\n\u2014 April 10 Senate votes to condemn Reagan for mining Nicaraguan waters.\n\u2014 September 20 Another suicide attack by Hezbollah damages the American embassy in Beirut.\n\u2014 March 24 Gulf of Sidra incident. Libyan attacks on American warships in the Gulf of Sidra.\n\u2014 April 5 \"La Belle\" discotheque in Berlin bombed by Libyan agents. The discotheque is popular with American servicemen and two out of the three killed are American. As the NSA has broken the Libyan diplomatic codes, it is established that the bombing was planned out of the Libyan \"people's bureau\" (embassy) in East Berlin.\n\u2014 April 15 Operation El Dorado Canyon. The US bombs Libya in response to the bombing in Berlin.\n\u2014 November The news of the Iran\u2013Contra affair breaks: White House officials sell weapons to Iran and give the profits to Contras; President Reagan embarrassed.\n\u2014 June 12 President Reagan gives the \"Tear down this wall!\" speech in Berlin, saying \"Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!\". Reagan argues that tearing the Berlin Wall would be a symbol of Soviet good faith to prove Gorbachev was sincere in seeking better relations with the West.\n\u2014 September 12 Four plus two treaty signed by the US, Britain, France, the Soviet Union, West Germany and East Germany formally ends World War II in Europe, grants the two German states the right to unify and ends all of the sovereign rights held by the Allies in Germany since 1945.\n\u2013 September 11 terrorist attacks, orchestrated by Al-Qaeda terrorist network, occur on American soil.\n\u2013 US and NATO forces invade Afghanistan and overthrow the Taliban.\n\u2013 US removes all military forces from Iraq\n\u2013 New START treaty with Russia goes into effect.\n \u2013 Navy SEALs raid Al-Qaeda founder Osama bin Laden's compound in Pakistan, killing him and seizing his computers. Pakistan was not informed.\n\u2013 The United States kills Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps leader Qasem Soleimani in a drone strike, intensifying the tense relations with Iran.\n\u2013 The United States closes several of its borders in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.\n\u2013 Canada and Mexico send firefighters, equipment and assistance, including firefighting aircraft, to California in response to devastating wildfires in Southern California. Ukraine and the Iranian Red Crescent Society offered assistance.\n\u2013 The U.S. enters a trade-war with Mexico and Canada after Donald Trump establishes tariffs on the two nations and China. Canada and Mexico claim Trump's actions violate the United States\u2013Mexico\u2013Canada Agreement.\n\u2013 Donald Trump and JD Vance get into an argument with Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy at the White House over U.S. support for Ukraine. This occurs after the U.S. sided with Russia in a United Nations resolution that condemned Russian aggression against Ukraine. This is a major reversal of the Ukraine policy of the Biden Administration.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51926", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51926", "title": "Secotioid", "text": "Type of fungi\nSecotioid fungi produce an intermediate fruiting body form that is between the mushroom-like hymenomycetes and the closed bag-shaped gasteromycetes, where an evolutionary process of gasteromycetation has started but not run to completion. Secotioid fungi may or may not have opening caps, but in any case they often lack the vertical geotropic orientation of the hymenophore needed to allow the spores to be dispersed by wind, and the basidiospores are not forcibly discharged or otherwise prevented from being dispersed (e.g. gills completely inclosed and never exposed as in the secotioid form of \"Lentinus tigrinus\")\u2014note\u2014some mycologists do not consider a species to be secotioid unless it has lost ballistospory.\nExplanation of secotioid development and gasteromycetation.\nHistorically agarics and boletes (which bear their spores on a hymenium of gills or tubes respectively) were classified quite separately from the gasteroid fungi, such as puff-balls and truffles, of which the spores are formed in a large mass enclosed in an outer skin. However, in spite of this apparently very great difference in form, recent mycological research, both at microscopic and molecular level has shown that sometimes species of open mushrooms are much more closely related to particular species of gasteroid fungi than they are to each other. Fungi which do not open up to let their spores be dispersed in the air, but which show a clear morphological relation to agarics or boletes, constitute an intermediate form and are called secotioid.\nThe word is derived from the name of the genus \"Secotium\", which was defined in 1840 by Kunze for a South African example, \"S. gueinzii\", which is the type species. In the following years numerous secotioid species were added to this genus, including ones which according to modern taxonomy belong to other genera or families.\nOn a microscopic scale, secotioid fungi do not expel their spores forcibly from the basidium; their spores are \"statismospores\". Like gasteroid fungi, secotioid species rely on animals such as rodents or insects to distribute their spores.\nIt can at times be disadvantageous for a mushroom to open up and free its spores in the usual way. If this development is aborted, a secotioid form arises, perhaps to be followed eventually by an evolutionary progression to a fully gasteroid form. This type of progression is called gasteromycetation and seems to have happened several times independently starting from various genera of \"normal\" mushrooms. This means that the secotioid and also the gasteroid fungi are polyphyletic. According to the paper by Thiers, in certain climates and certain seasons, it may be an advantage to remain closed, because moisture can be conserved in that way.\nFor example, the gasteroid genus \"Hymenogaster\" has been shown to be closely related to agaric genera such as \"Hebeloma\", which were formerly placed in family Cortinariaceae or Strophariaceae. This is found by DNA analysis and also indicated on a microscopic scale by the resemblance of the spores and basidia. According to a current classification system, \"Hebeloma\" now belongs to family Hymenogastraceae, and is considered more narrowly related to the closed \"Hymenogaster\" fungi than, for instance, to the ordinary mushrooms in genus \"Cortinarius\".\nA similar case is the well-known \"Deceiver\" mushroom \"Laccaria laccata\" which is now classified in the \"Hydnangiaceae\", \"Hydnangium\" being a gasteroid genus.\nIt has been found that a change in a single locus of a gene of the gilled mushroom \"Lentinus tigrinus\" causes it to have a closed fruiting body. This suggests that the emergence of a secotioid species may not require many mutations.\nThere is a spectrum of secotioid species ranging from the open form to the closed form in the following respects:\nThe adjective \"sequestrate\" is sometimes used as a general term to mean \"either secotioid or gasteroid\".\nExamples.\n\"Cortinarius\" is a very widespread genus of agarics, but also contains some secotioid species, such as \"C. leucocephalus\", \"C. coneae\" and \"C. cartilagineus\".\n\"Pholiota nubigena\" is a secotioid species found early in the year at high altitude in the western United States. It was originally assigned to \"Secotium\" and later to a more specific secotioid genus \"Nivatogastrium\", but in fact it is closely allied to \"Pholiota squarrosa\" and it has now been moved to genus \"Pholiota\" itself, although the latter consists primarily of agarics.\n\"Gastroboletus\" is a secotioid bolete genus where the fruiting bodies may or may not open, but in any case the tubes are not aligned vertically as in a true bolete.\nSecotioid mushrooms of the genus \"Endoptychum\" (such as \"E. agaricoides\", \"E. arizonicum\") have been now moved to genus \"Chlorophyllum\", closely related to \"Macrolepiota\". \n\"Agaricus deserticola\" is a secotioid species of \"Agaricus\" (the genus of common cultivated mushrooms) which at one time was placed in the genus \"Secotium\". Similarly, \"Agaricus inapertus\" was formerly known as \"Endoptychum depressum\" until molecular analysis revealed it to be closely aligned with \"Agaricus\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51928", "revid": "50595102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51928", "title": "Amtrak", "text": "American intercity passenger rail operator\nThe National Railroad Passenger Corporation, doing business as Amtrak (; reporting marks AMTK, AMTZ), is the national passenger railroad company of the United States. It operates intercity rail service in every contiguous U.S. state except for Wyoming and South Dakota as well as in three Canadian provinces. \"Amtrak\" is a portmanteau of the words \"America\" and \"track.\"\nFounded in 1971 as a quasi-public corporation to operate many U.S. passenger rail routes, Amtrak receives a combination of state and federal subsidies but is managed as a for-profit organization. The company's headquarters is located one block west of Union Station in Washington, D.C. Amtrak is headed by a Board of Directors, two of whom are the secretary of transportation and chief executive officer (CEO) of Amtrak, while the other eight members are nominated to serve a term of five years.\nAmtrak's network includes over 500 stations along of track. It directly owns approximately of this track and operates an additional of track; the remaining mileage is over rail lines owned by other railroad companies. While most track speeds are limited to or less, several lines have been upgraded to support top speeds of , and parts of the Northeast Corridor support top speeds of .\nIn fiscal year 2025, Amtrak served 34.5 million passengers and had $2.7 billion in adjusted ticket revenue, with more than 22,100 employees. Nearly 87,000 passengers ride more than 300 Amtrak trains daily. Nearly two-thirds of passengers come from the 10 largest metropolitan areas and 83% of passengers travel on routes shorter than .\nHistory.\nPrivate passenger service.\nIn 1916, 98% of all commercial intercity travelers in the United States moved by rail, and the remaining 2% moved by inland waterways. Nearly 42\u00a0million passengers used railways as primary transportation. Passenger trains were owned and operated by the same privately owned companies that operated freight trains. As the 20th century progressed, patronage declined in the face of competition from buses, air travel, and the car. New streamlined diesel-powered trains, such as the \"Pioneer Zephyr\", were popular with the traveling public but could not reverse the trend. By 1940, railroads held 67 percent of commercial passenger-miles in the United States. In real terms, passenger-miles had fallen by 40% since 1916, from 42\u00a0billion to 25\u00a0billion.\nTraffic surged during World War II, aided by troop movement and gasoline rationing. The railroad's market share surged to 74% in 1945, with a massive 94\u00a0billion passenger-miles. After the war, railroads rejuvenated their overworked and neglected passenger fleets with fast and luxurious streamliners. These new trains brought only temporary relief to the overall decline. Even as postwar travel exploded, passenger travel percentages of the overall market share fell to 46% by 1950, and then 32% by 1957. The railroads had lost money on passenger service since the Great Depression, but deficits reached $723\u00a0million in 1957. For many railroads, these losses threatened financial viability.\nThe causes of this decline were heavily debated. The National Highway System and airports, both funded by the government, competed directly with the railroads, which, unlike the airline, bus, and trucking companies, paid for their own infrastructure. American car culture was also on the rise in the post\u2013World War II years. Progressive Era rate regulation limited the railroads' ability to turn a profit. Railroads also faced antiquated work rules and inflexible relationships with trade unions. To take one example, workers continued to receive a day's pay for workdays. Streamliners covered that in two hours.\nMatters approached a crisis in the 1960s. Passenger service route-miles fell from in 1958 to in 1970, the last full year of private operation. The diversion of most United States Post Office Department mail from passenger trains to trucks, airplanes, and freight trains in late 1967 deprived those trains of badly needed revenue. In direct response, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railway filed to discontinue 33 of its remaining 39 trains, ending almost all passenger service on one of the largest railroads in the country. The equipment the railroads had ordered after World War II was now 20 years old, worn out, and in need of replacement.\nFormation.\nAs passenger service declined, various proposals were brought forward to rescue it. The 1961 Doyle Report proposed that the private railroads pool their services into a single body. Similar proposals were made in 1965 and 1968 but failed to attract support. The federal government passed the High Speed Ground Transportation Act of 1965 to fund pilot programs in the Northeast Corridor, but this did nothing to address passenger deficits. In late 1969, multiple proposals emerged in the United States Congress, including equipment subsidies, route subsidies, and, lastly, a \"quasi-public corporation\" to take over the operation of intercity passenger trains. Matters were brought to a head on June 21, 1970, when the Penn Central, the largest railroad in the Northeastern United States and teetering on bankruptcy, filed to discontinue 34 of its passenger trains.\nIn October 1970, Congress passed, and President Richard Nixon signed into law (against the objections of most of his advisors), the Rail Passenger Service Act. Proponents of the bill, led by the National Association of Railroad Passengers (NARP), sought government funding to ensure the continuation of passenger trains. They conceived the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (NRPC), a quasi-public corporation that would be managed as a for-profit organization, but which would receive taxpayer funding and assume operation of intercity passenger trains \u2013 while many involved in drafting the bill did not believe the NRPC would actually be profitable, this was necessary in order for the White House and more conservative members of Congress to support the bill.\nThere were several key provisions:\nOf the 26 railroads still offering intercity passenger service in 1970, only six declined to join the NRPC.\nNearly everyone involved expected the experiment to be short-lived. The Nixon administration and many Washington insiders viewed the NRPC as a politically expedient way for the President and Congress to give passenger trains a \"last hurrah\" as demanded by the public. They expected the NRPC to quietly disappear as public interest waned. After \"Fortune\" magazine exposed the manufactured mismanagement in 1974, Louis W. Menk, chairman of the Burlington Northern Railroad, remarked that the story was undermining the scheme to dismantle Amtrak. Proponents also hoped that government intervention would be brief and that Amtrak would soon be able to support itself. Neither view had proved to be correct; popular support allowed Amtrak to continue in operation longer than critics imagined, while financial results made passenger train service returning to private railroad operations infeasible.\nSelection of initial routes.\nThe Rail Passenger Service Act gave the Secretary of Transportation, at that time John A. Volpe, thirty days to produce an initial draft of the endpoints of the routes the NRPC would be required by law to serve for four years. On November 24 Volpe presented his initial draft consisting of 27 routes to Nixon, which he believed would make a $24-million profit by 1975. The Office of Management and Budget believed Volpe and the DOT's analysis was far too optimistic, with director George Shultz arguing to cut the number of routes by around half. Nixon agreed with Shultz, and the public draft presented by Volpe on November 30 consisted of only 16 routes.\nThe initial reaction to this heavily-cut-back proposed system from the public, the press, and congressmen was strongly negative. It made front-page headlines across the country and it was quickly leaked that the DOT had wanted a far larger system than the White House would approve. The ICC produced its own report on December 29, criticising the proposed draft and arguing for the inclusion of 15 additional routes, giving further ammunition to the congressmen who wanted an expanded system. Further wrangling between the DOT and the White House produced the final list of routes on January 28, 1971, adding 5 additional routes to the November 30 draft.\nThese required routes had only their endpoints specified; the selection of the actual routes to be taken between the endpoints was left to the NRPC, which had just three months to decide them before it was due to start service. Consultants from McKinsey &amp; Company were hired to perform this task, and their results were publicly announced on March 22.\nAt the same time, the NRPC had hired Lippincott &amp; Margulies to create a brand for it and replace its original working brand name of Railpax. On March 30, L&amp;M's work was presented to the NRPC's board of incorporators, who unanimously agreed on the \"headless arrow\" logo and on the new brand name \"Amtrak\", a portmanteau of the words \"America\" and \"trak\", the latter itself a sensational spelling of \"track\". The name change was publicly announced less than two weeks before operations began.\n1970s: The Rainbow Era.\nAmtrak began operations on May 1, 1971. Amtrak received no rail tracks or rights-of-way at its inception. All of Amtrak's routes were continuations of prior service, although Amtrak pruned about half the passenger rail network. Of the 366 train routes that operated previously, Amtrak continued only 184. Several major corridors became freight-only, including the ex-New York Central Railroad's Water Level Route from New York to Ohio and Grand Trunk Western Railroad's Chicago to Detroit route. The reduced passenger-train schedules created confusion amongst staff. At some stations, Amtrak service was available only late at night or early in the morning, prompting complaints from passengers. Disputes with freight railroads over track usage caused some services to be rerouted, temporarily cancelled, or replaced with buses. On the other hand, the creation of the Los Angeles\u2013Seattle \"Coast Starlight\" from three formerly separate train routes was an immediate success, resulting in an increase to daily service by 1973.\nNeeding to operate only half the train routes that had operated previously, Amtrak would lease around 1,200 of the best passenger cars from the 3,000 that the private railroads owned. All were air-conditioned, and 90% were easy-to-maintain stainless steel. When Amtrak took over, passenger cars and locomotives initially retained the paint schemes and logos of their former owners which resulted in Amtrak's running trains with mismatched colors \u2013 the \"Rainbow Era\". In mid-1971, Amtrak began purchasing some of the equipment it had leased, including 286 EMD E and F unit diesel locomotives, 30 GG1 electric locomotives and 1,290 passenger cars. By 1975, the official Amtrak color scheme was painted on most Amtrak equipment and newly purchased locomotives and the rolling stock began appearing.\nAmtrak inherited problems with train stations (most notably deferred maintenance) and redundant facilities from the competing railroads that once served the same communities. Chicago is a prime example; on the day prior to Amtrak's inception, intercity passenger trains used five different Chicago terminals: LaSalle, Dearborn, North Western Station, Central, and Union. The trains at LaSalle remained there, as their operator Rock Island could not afford to opt into Amtrak. Of all the trains serving Dearborn Station, Amtrak retained only a pair of Santa Fe trains, which relocated to Union Station beginning with the first Amtrak departures on May 1, 1971. Dearborn Station closed after the last pre-Amtrak trains on the Santa Fe arrived in Chicago on May 2. None of the intercity trains that had served North Western Station became part of the Amtrak system, and that terminal became commuter-only after May 1. The trains serving Central Station continued to use that station until an alternate routing was adopted in March 1972. In New York City, Amtrak had to maintain two stations (Penn and Grand Central) due to the lack of track connections to bring trains from upstate New York into Penn Station; a problem that was rectified once the Empire Connection was built in 1991. The Amtrak Standard Stations Program was launched in 1978 and proposed to build a standardized station design across the system with an aim to reduce costs, speed construction, and improve its corporate image. However, the cash-strapped railroad would ultimately build relatively few of these standard stations.\nAmtrak soon had the opportunity to acquire rights-of-way. Following the bankruptcy of several northeastern railroads in the early 1970s, including Penn Central, which owned and operated the Northeast Corridor (NEC), Congress passed the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of 1976. A large part of the legislation was directed to the creation of Conrail, but the law also enabled the transfer of the portions of the NEC not already owned by state authorities to Amtrak. Amtrak acquired the majority of the NEC on April 1, 1976. (The portion in Massachusetts is owned by the Commonwealth and managed by Amtrak. The route from New Haven to New Rochelle is owned by New York's Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Connecticut Department of Transportation as the New Haven Line.) This mainline became Amtrak's \"jewel\" asset, and helped the railroad generate revenue. While the NEC ridership and revenues were higher than those of any other segment of the system, the cost of operating and maintaining the corridor proved to be overwhelming. As a result, Amtrak's federal subsidy was increased dramatically. In subsequent years, other short-route segments not needed for freight operations were transferred to Amtrak.\nIn its first decade, Amtrak fell far short of financial independence, a shortage that continues today, but it did find modest success rebuilding trade. Outside factors discouraged competing transport, such as fuel shortages which increased costs of automobile and airline travel, and strikes which disrupted airline operations. Investments in Amtrak's track, equipment and information also made Amtrak more relevant to America's transportation needs. Amtrak's ridership increased from 16.6\u00a0million in 1972 to 21\u00a0million in 1981.\nIn February 1978, Amtrak moved its headquarters to 400 North Capitol Street NW, Washington, D.C.\n1980s and 1990s: The Building Era.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn 1982, former Secretary of the Navy and retired Southern Railway head William Graham Claytor Jr. came out of retirement to lead Amtrak. During his time at Southern, Claytor was a vocal critic of Amtrak's prior managers, who all came from non-railroading backgrounds. Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis cited this criticism as a reason that the Democrat Claytor was acceptable to the Reagan White House.7 Despite frequent clashes with the Reagan administration over funding, Claytor enjoyed a good relationship with Lewis, John H. Riley, the head of the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), and with members of Congress. Limited funding led Claytor to use short-term debt to fund operations.\nBuilding on mechanical developments in the 1970s, high-speed Washington\u2013New York Metroliner Service was improved with new equipment and faster schedules. Travel time between New York and Washington, D.C., was reduced to under 3 hours due to system improvements and limited stop service. This improvement was cited as a reason that Amtrak grew its share of intercity trips between the cities along the corridor. Elsewhere in the country, demand for passenger rail service resulted in the creation of five new state-supported routes in California, Illinois, Missouri, Oregon and Pennsylvania, for a total of 15 state-supported routes.\nAmtrak added two trains in 1983, the \"California Zephyr\" between Oakland and Chicago via Denver and revived the \"Auto Train\", a unique service that carries both passengers and their vehicles. Amtrak advertised it as a great way to avoid traffic along the I-95 running between Lorton, Virginia, (near Washington, D.C.) and Sanford, Florida, (near Orlando) on the Silver Star alignment.\nIn 1980s and 1990s, stations in Baltimore, Chicago, and Washington, D.C., received major rehabilitation and the Empire Connection tunnel opened in 1991, allowing Amtrak to consolidate all New York services at Penn Station. Despite the improvements, Amtrak's ridership stagnated at roughly 20 million passengers per year, amid uncertain government aid from 1981 to about 2000.\nIn the early 1990s, Amtrak tested several different high-speed trains from Europe on the Northeast Corridor. An X 2000 train was leased from Sweden for test runs from October 1992 to January 1993, followed by revenue service between Washington, D.C., and New York City from February to May and August to September 1993. Siemens showed the ICE 1 train from Germany, organizing the ICE Train North America Tour which started to operate on the Northeast Corridor on July 3, 1993.\nIn 1993, Thomas Downs succeeded Claytor as Amtrak's fifth president. The stated goal remained \"operational self-sufficiency\". By this time, however, Amtrak had a large overhang of debt from years of underfunding. In the mid-1990s, Amtrak suffered through a serious cash crunch. Under Downs, Congress included a provision in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 that resulted in Amtrak's receiving a $2.3\u00a0billion tax refund that resolved their cash crisis. However, Congress also instituted a \"glide path\" to financial self-sufficiency, excluding railroad retirement tax act payments.\nGeorge Warrington became the sixth president in 1998, with a mandate to make Amtrak financially self-sufficient. Under Warrington, the company tried to expand into express freight shipping, placing Amtrak in competition with the \"host\" freight railroads and the trucking industry.\nOn March 9, 1999, Amtrak unveiled its plan for the \"Acela Express,\" a high-speed train on the Northeast Corridor between Washington, D.C., and Boston. Several changes were made to the corridor to make it suitable for higher-speed electric trains. The Northend Electrification Project extended existing electrification from New Haven, Connecticut, to Boston to complete the overhead power supply along the route, and several grade crossings were improved or removed.\n2000s: Growth in the 21st century.\nRidership increased during the first decade of the 21st century after the implementation of capital improvements in the NEC and rises in automobile fuel costs. The inauguration of the high-speed \"Acela\" in late 2000 generated considerable publicity and led to major ridership gains. However, through the late 1990s and very early 21st century, Amtrak could not add sufficient express freight revenue or cut sufficient other expenditures to break even. By 2002, it was clear that Amtrak could not achieve self-sufficiency, but Congress continued to authorize funding and released Amtrak from the requirement. In early 2002, David L. Gunn replaced Warrington as seventh president. In a departure from his predecessors' promises to make Amtrak self-sufficient in the short term, Gunn argued that no form of passenger transportation in the United States is self-sufficient as the economy is currently structured. Highways, airports, and air traffic control \"all\" require large government expenditures to build and operate, coming from the Highway Trust Fund and Aviation Trust Fund paid for by user fees, highway fuel and road taxes, and, in the case of the General Fund, from general taxation. Gunn dropped most freight express business and worked to eliminate deferred maintenance.\nA plan by the Bush administration \"to privatize parts of the national passenger rail system and spin off other parts to partial state ownership\" provoked disagreement within Amtrak's board of directors. Late in 2005, Gunn was fired. Gunn's replacement, Alexander Kummant (2006\u201308), was committed to operating a national rail network, and like Gunn, opposed the notion of putting the Northeast Corridor under separate ownership. He said that shedding the system's long-distance routes would amount to selling national assets that are on par with national parks, and that Amtrak's abandonment of these routes would be irreversible. In late 2006, Amtrak unsuccessfully sought annual congressional funding of $1 billion for ten years. In early 2007, Amtrak employed 20,000 people in 46 states and served 25\u00a0million passengers a year, its highest number since its founding in 1970. \"Politico\" noted a key problem: \"the rail system chronically operates in the red. A pattern has emerged: Congress overrides cutbacks demanded by the White House and appropriates enough funds to keep Amtrak from plunging into insolvency. But, Amtrak advocates say, that is not enough to fix the system's woes.\"\nJoseph H. Boardman replaced Kummant as president and CEO in late 2008.\nIn 2011, Amtrak announced its intention to improve and expand the high-speed rail corridor from Penn Station in NYC, under the Hudson River in new tunnels, and double-tracking the line to Newark, NJ, called the Gateway Program, initially estimated to cost $13.5\u00a0billion (equal to $ billion in 2024).\nFrom May 2011 to May 2012, Amtrak celebrated its 40th anniversary with festivities across the country that started on National Train Day (May 7, 2011). A commemorative book entitled \"Amtrak: An American Story\" was published, a documentary was created, six locomotives were painted in Amtrak's four prior paint schemes, and an Exhibit Train toured the country visiting 45 communities and welcoming more than 85,000 visitors.\nAfter years of almost revolving-door CEOs at Amtrak, in December 2013, Boardman was named \"Railroader of the Year\" by \"Railway Age\" magazine, which noted that with over five years in the job, he is the second-longest serving head of Amtrak since it was formed more than 40 years ago. On December 9, 2015, Boardman announced in a letter to employees that he would be leaving Amtrak in September 2016. He had advised the Amtrak Board of Directors of his decision the previous week. On August 19, 2016, the Amtrak Board of Directors named former Norfolk Southern Railway President &amp; CEO Charles \"Wick\" Moorman as Boardman's successor with an effective date of September 1, 2016. During his term, Moorman took no salary and said that he saw his role as one of a \"transitional CEO\" who would reorganize Amtrak before turning it over to new leadership.\nOn November 17, 2016, the Gateway Program Development Corporation (GDC) was formed for the purpose of overseeing and effectuating the rail infrastructure improvements known as the Gateway Program. GDC is a partnership of the States of New York and New Jersey and Amtrak. The Gateway Program includes the Hudson Tunnel Project, to build a new tunnel under the Hudson River and rehabilitate the existing century-old tunnel, and the Portal North Bridge, to replace a century-old moveable bridge with a modern structure that is less prone to failure. Later projects of the Gateway Program, including the expansion of track and platforms at Penn Station New York, construction of the Bergen Loop and other improvements will roughly double capacity for Amtrak and NJ Transit trains in the busiest, most complex section of the Northeast Corridor.\nIn June 2017, it was announced that former Delta and Northwest Airlines CEO Richard Anderson would become Amtrak's next President &amp; CEO. Anderson began the job on July 12, assuming the title of President immediately and serving alongside Moorman as \"co-CEOs\" until the end of the year. On April 15, 2020, Atlas Air Chairman, President and CEO William Flynn was named Amtrak President and CEO. In addition to Atlas Air, Flynn has held senior roles at CSX Transportation, SeaLand Services and GeoLogistics Corp. Anderson would remain with Amtrak as a senior advisor until December 2020.\nAs Amtrak approached profitability in 2020, the company undertook planning to expand and create new intermediate-distance corridors across the country. Included were several new services in Ohio, Tennessee, Colorado, and Minnesota, among other states.\nDuring the COVID-19 pandemic, Amtrak continued operating as an essential service. It started requiring face coverings the week of May 17, and limited sales to 50% of capacity. Most long-distance routes were reduced to three weekly round trips in October 2020.\nIn March 2021, following President Joe Biden's American Jobs Plan announcement, Amtrak CEO Bill Flynn outlined a proposal called Amtrak Connects US that would expand state-supported intercity corridors with an infusion of upfront capital assistance. This would expand service to cities including Las Vegas, Phoenix, Baton Rouge, Nashville, Chattanooga, Louisville, Columbus (Ohio), Wilmington (North Carolina), Cheyenne, Montgomery, Concord, and Scranton. Also in March 2021, Amtrak announced plans to return 12 of its long-distance routes to daily schedules later in the spring. Most of these routes were restored to daily service in late-May 2021. However, a resurgence of the virus caused by the Omicron variant caused Amtrak to modify and/or suspend many of these routes again from January to March 2022.\nStephen Gardner, a former Amtrak intern and longtime executive, became the company's CEO in January 2022. He resigned abruptly on March 19, 2025, amid reports that the Trump administration had pressured him to step down. Earlier that month, Trump advisor Elon Musk had expressed an intention to privatize Amtrak.\nOperations.\nRoutes.\nAmtrak is required by law to operate a national route system. Amtrak has presence in 46 of the 48 contiguous states, as well as the District of Columbia (with only thruway connecting services in Wyoming and no services in South Dakota). Amtrak services fall into three groups: inter-city services on the Northeast Corridor, state-supported inter-city services outside the Northeast Corridor, and medium- and long-distance services (known within Amtrak as the National Network). Amtrak receives federal funding for the vast majority of its operations including the central spine of the Northeast Corridor as well as for its National Network routes. In addition to the federally funded routes, Amtrak partners with transportation agencies in 18 states to operate other inter-city and medium-distance routes outside of the Northeast Corridor, some of which connect to it or extend beyond it. In addition to its inter-city services, Amtrak also operates commuter services under contract for three public agencies: the MARC Penn Line in Maryland, Shore Line East in Connecticut, and Metrolink in Southern California.\nService on the Northeast Corridor (NEC), between Boston, and Washington, D.C., as well as between Philadelphia and Harrisburg, is powered by overhead lines; for the rest of the system, diesel-electric locomotives are used. Routes vary widely in the frequency of service, from three-days-a-week trains on the \"Sunset Limited\" and the Cardinal, to several times per hour on the Northeast Corridor. For areas not served by trains, Amtrak Thruway routes provide guaranteed connections to trains via buses, vans, ferries and other modes.\nThe most popular and heavily used services are those running on the Northeast Corridor (NEC), including the \"Acela\" and \"Northeast Regional\". The NEC runs between Boston and Washington, D.C. via New York City and Philadelphia. Some services continue into Virginia. The NEC services accounted for 4.4\u00a0million of Amtrak's 12.2 million passengers in fiscal year 2021. Outside the NEC the most popular services are located in California, including the \"Pacific Surfliner\", \"Capitol Corridor\", and \"Gold Runner\", which are supplemented by an extensive network of connecting buses. Together, the California corridor trains accounted for a combined 2.35 million passengers in fiscal year 2021. Other popular routes include the \"Empire Service\" between New York City and Niagara Falls, via Albany and Buffalo, which carried 613.2 thousand passengers in fiscal year 2021, and the \"Keystone Service\" between New York City and Harrisburg via Philadelphia that carried 394.3 thousand passengers that same year.\nFour of the six busiest stations by boardings are on the NEC: New York Penn Station (first), Washington Union Station (second), Philadelphia 30th Street Station (third), and Boston South Station (fifth). The other two are Chicago Union Station (fourth) and Los Angeles Union Station (sixth).\nOn-time performance.\nOn-time performance is calculated differently for airlines than for Amtrak. A plane is considered on-time if it arrives within 15 minutes of the schedule. Amtrak uses a sliding scale, with trips under considered late if they are more than 10 minutes behind schedule, up to 30 minutes for trips over in length.\nOutside the Northeast Corridor and stretches of track in Southern California and Michigan, most Amtrak trains run on tracks owned and operated by privately owned freight railroads. BNSF is the largest host to Amtrak routes, with 6.3 million train-miles. Freight rail operators are required under federal law to give dispatching preference to Amtrak trains. Amtrak has accused freight railroads of violating or skirting these regulations, resulting in passenger trains having to wait for freight traffic to clear the track.\nThe railroads' dispatching practices were investigated in 2008, resulting in stricter laws about train priority. Subsequently, Amtrak's overall on-time performance went up from 74.7% in fiscal 2008 to 84.7% in 2009, with long-distance trains and others outside the NEC seeing the greatest benefit. The \"Missouri River Runner\" jumped from 11% to 95%, becoming one of Amtrak's best performers. The \"Texas Eagle\" went from 22.4% to 96.7%, and the \"California Zephyr\", with a 5% on-time record in 2008, went up to 78.3%. This improved performance coincided with a general economic downturn, resulting in the lowest freight-rail traffic volumes since at least 1988, meaning less freight traffic to impede passenger traffic.\nIn 2018, Amtrak began issuing \"report cards\" to host railroads, grading each based on the railroad's impact to on-time performance. The first report card, issued in March 2018, includes one A (given to Canadian Pacific) and two Fs (given to Canadian National and Norfolk Southern). Amtrak's 2020 host report card gives Canadian Pacific and Canadian National an A, BNSF and CSX a B, Union Pacific a C+, and Norfolk Southern a D\u2212. Amtrak's 2023 host report card gives Canadian Pacific Kansas City an A, CSX and Canadian National a B+, BNSF a B, Norfolk Southern a B\u2212, and Union Pacific a C\u2212.\nAmtrak's median on-time performance between 2018 and 2023 was 74.5%, reaching a high of 80% in 2020. It was highest on the Northeast Corridor (81.3%). The vast majority of hours of delay, about 57.5% on average, were caused by the host railroad. Long-distance routes performed similarly to the total weighted on-time percentage.\nRidership.\nAmtrak carried 15.8\u00a0million passengers in 1972, its first full year of operation. Ridership has increased steadily ever since, carrying a record 32\u00a0million passengers in fiscal year (FY) 2019, more than double the total in 1972. For the fiscal year ending on September 30, 2020, Amtrak reported 16.8 million passengers, with the decline resulting from effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. FY 2021 saw ridership decrease more, with 12.2 million passengers reported. FY 2022 saw an increase to 22.9 million passengers, further increasing to 28.6 million passengers in FY 2023. In FY 2024, Amtrak's ridership increased to 32.8 million passengers, surpassing the record set in FY 2019. FY 2025 saw ridership continue to increase to 34.5 million passengers, setting an all-time record for the second year in a row.\nGuest Rewards.\nAmtrak's loyalty program, Guest Rewards, is similar to the frequent-flyer programs of many airlines. Guest Rewards members accumulate points by riding Amtrak and through other activities, and can redeem these points for free Amtrak tickets and other rewards.\nRail passes.\nAmtrak offers the USA rail pass, valid for 10 segments (rides) in 30 days; and the California rail pass which is valid for 7 days of travel in a period of 21 days.\nLines.\nAlong the NEC and in several other areas, Amtrak owns of track, including 17 tunnels comprising of track and 1,186 bridges comprising of track. In several places, primarily in New England, Amtrak leases tracks, providing track maintenance and controlling train movements. Most often, these tracks are leased from state, regional, or local governments. The lines are further divided into services. Amtrak owns and operates the following lines:\nIn addition to these lines, Amtrak owns station and yard tracks in Chicago, Los Angeles, New Orleans, New York City, Oakland, Orlando, Portland, Oregon, Seattle, Philadelphia, and Washington, D.C. Amtrak leases station and yard tracks in Hialeah, near Miami, Florida, from the State of Florida.\nAmtrak owns New York Penn Station, Chicago Union Station, Philadelphia 30th Street Station, Baltimore Penn Station and Providence Station. Through the Washington Terminal Company, in which it owns a 99.7 percent interest, it owns the rail infrastructure around Washington Union Station. It also holds a 99% interest in 30th Street Limited, a partnership responsible for redeveloping the area in and around Philadelphia's 30th Street Station. Amtrak also owns Passenger Railroad Insurance.\nService lines.\nAmtrak organizes its business into six \"service lines\", which are treated like divisions at most companies. Three service lines relate directly to rail operations: Northeast Corridor, which operates Amtrak's high-speed Acela and Northeast Regional trains; State Supported, which provides service on corridor routes of less than through cost-sharing agreements with state governments; and Long Distance, which operates routes over and receives financial support from the federal government.\nThree additional service lines manage Amtrak's additional revenue services, net profit from which is used to fund rail operations: Real Estate &amp; Commercial manages property owned by Amtrak, Infrastructure Access/Reimbursable charges other railroads for access to Amtrak owned tracks and performs maintenance work that can be reimbursed by other railroads or state governments, and Ancillary provides other services including operating commuter trains under contract, establishing Amtrak Thruway connecting services, operating charter trains, and hauling private railcars.\nAccessibility.\nAs of July 2023, 117 of 385 stations were in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.\nOn-board services.\nClasses of service.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAmtrak offers four classes of service: First Class, First Class Sleeper Service, Business Class, and Coach Class:\nWi-Fi and electronic services.\nAmtrak first offered free Wi-Fi service to passengers aboard the \"Downeaster\" in 2008, the \"Acela\" and the \"Northeast Regional\" trains on the NEC in 2010, and the \"Amtrak Cascades\" in 2011. In February 2014, Amtrak rolled out Wi-Fi on corridor trains out of Chicago. When all the Midwest cars offer the AmtrakConnect service, about 85% of all Amtrak passengers nationwide will have Wi-Fi access. As of 2014[ [update]], most Amtrak passengers have access to free Wi-Fi. The service has developed a reputation for being unreliable and slow due to its cellular network connection; on some routes it is usually unusable, either freezing on the login page or, if it manages to log in, failing to provide any internet bandwidth.\nWi-Fi service is considered to be more reliable on routes running east of the Mississippi River and along the coastlines; service is less reliable on east\u2013west routes such as Sunset Limited, Southwest Chief and Texas Eagle, as these contain rail segments passing through large sections of wilderness with sparse cell coverage.\nAmtrak launched an e-ticketing system on the \"Downeaster\" in November 2011 and rolled it out nationwide on July 30, 2012. Amtrak officials said the system gives \"more accurate knowledge in realtime of who is on the train which greatly improves the safety and security of passengers; en route reporting of onboard equipment problems to mechanical crews which may result in faster resolution of the issue; and more efficient financial reporting\".\nBaggage and cargo services.\nAmtrak allows carry-on baggage on all routes; services with baggage cars allow checked baggage at selected stations. With the passage of the Wicker Amendment in 2010, passengers are allowed to put lawfully owned, unloaded firearms in checked Amtrak baggage, reversing a decade-long ban on such carriage.\nThe Amtrak Express cargo service used to provide small-package and less-than-truckload shipping between most Amtrak stations that handle checked baggage (over 100 cities). Cargo traveled alongside checked luggage in baggage cars. However, the service was suspended in 2020. As of July\u00a02025[ [update]], there have been no plans to resume service.\nAmtrak is popular among bicycle touring enthusiasts due to the ease of riding with a bike. In contrast to airlines, which require riders to dismantle their bicycles and place them in specialized bags, most Amtrak trains have onboard bike racks in either the coaches or checked baggage car. Bicycle reservations are required on most routes and cost up to $20.\nFood services.\nOn most routes, Amtrak provides a Cafe where passengers can purchase food and drinks. On long distance trains, passengers in sleeper accommodations are provided complimentary meals. Passengers on the Cardinal, City of New Orleans, Crescent, Lake Shore Limited, and the Texas Eagle from Chicago to San Antonio have Flex Dining, which features microwaved meals. Passengers on all other routes like the California Zephyr and Sunset Limited have Traditional Dining, which features chef-cooked meals. \nLabor issues.\nAs of 2023, the average Amtrak employee annual salary was $121,000 per year.\nMost Amtrak workers are legally classified as \"railroad employees\" and thus make contributions to the federal Railroad Retirement system. The contribution rate is determined on an industry-wide basis, rather than with reference to the employer for whom the employees work; while most freight railroads employ a large number of contract workers to reduce the amount owed, Amtrak is prohibited by law from contracting out many positions and thus contributes disproportionately more funding to the system. Some critics, such as the National Association of Railroad Passengers, argue that Amtrak is thereby \"subsidizing\" freight railroad pensions by as much as US$150\u00a0million/year.\nIn recent times, efforts at reforming passenger rail have addressed labor issues. In 1997 Congress released Amtrak from a prohibition on hiring contractors outside the corporation (and outside its unions); since that time, many of Amtrak's employees have been working without a contract. The most recent contract, signed in 1999, was mainly retroactive.\nBecause of the fragmentation of railroad unions, Amtrak workers are represented by 14 separate trade unions, with as many as 24 simultaneous contracts between them as of 2009, a situation which has made contract negotiations more difficult. Former Amtrak president Alexander Kummant followed a cooperative posture with Amtrak's unions, ruling out plans to privatize large parts of the company's workforce.\nEnvironmental impact.\nPer passenger mile, Amtrak is 30\u201340 percent more energy-efficient than commercial airlines and automobiles overall, though the exact figures for particular routes depend on load factor along with other variables. Amtrak's rolling stock is mostly diesel, with electric locomotives being used along the Northeast Corridor and a limited number of dual-mode locomotives along the Empire Corridor; electrified trains are considerably more efficient than diesels, produce less carbon dioxide, and can feed energy captured from regenerative braking back into the electrical grid.\nIn 2005, Amtrak's carbon dioxide equivalent emissions per passenger were 0.411 lbs/mi (0.116\u00a0kg per km). This amount is similar to that of a car with two people, about twice as high as the UK rail average (where more of the system is electrified), about four times the average US motorcoach, and about eight times a Finnish electric intercity train or fully loaded fifty-seat coach. It is, however, about two thirds of the raw CO2-equivalent emissions of a long-distance domestic flight.\nDiesel trains cause additional regional air pollution, impacting the ecosystems around the sites of operation. More stops along train routes can lead to higher greenhouse gas emissions.\nAmtrak rail facilities located in Delaware were cited as the state's largest source of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) contamination into the Delaware River, which build up in the tissue of animals and are human carcinogens.\nEnvironmental effects on Amtrak.\nAmtrak railways and surrounding infrastructure are susceptible to degradation by natural causes over time. Railways experience water damage from climate-change backed increases in rainfall in wet areas, and rail buckling caused by hotter and dryer seasons in naturally dry areas.\nIn September 2021, the remnants of Hurricane Ida flooded the Amtrak Northeast Corridor running from Boston to Washington, D.C., and caused it to shut down for an entire day. In February 2023, heavy snowfall and debris on tracks caused major disruptions from delays to cancellations.\nPublic funding.\nAmtrak receives annual appropriations from federal and state governments to supplement operating and capital programs.\nFunding history.\n1970s to 1990s.\nAmtrak commenced operations in 1971 with $40\u00a0million in direct federal aid, $100\u00a0million in federally insured loans, and a somewhat larger private contribution. Officials expected that Amtrak would break even by 1974, but those expectations proved unrealistic and annual direct federal aid reached a 17-year high in 1981 of $1.25\u00a0billion. During the Reagan administration, appropriations were halved and by 1986, federal support fell to a decade low of $601\u00a0million, almost none of which were capital appropriations. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Congress continued the reductionist trend even while Amtrak expenses held steady or rose. Amtrak was forced to borrow to meet short-term operating needs, and by 1995 Amtrak was on the brink of a cash crisis and was unable to continue to service its debts. In response, in 1997 Congress authorized $5.2\u00a0billion for Amtrak over the next five years \u2013 largely to complete the \"Acela\" capital project \u2013 on the condition that Amtrak submit to the ultimatum of self-sufficiency by 2003 or liquidation. While Amtrak made financial improvements during this period, it did not achieve self-sufficiency.\n2000s.\nIn 2004, a stalemate in federal support of Amtrak forced cutbacks in services and routes as well as the resumption of deferred maintenance. In fiscal 2004 and 2005, Congress appropriated about $1.2\u00a0billion for Amtrak, $300\u00a0million more than President George W. Bush had requested. However, the company's board requested $1.8\u00a0billion through fiscal 2006, the majority of which (about $1.3\u00a0billion) would be used to bring infrastructure, rolling stock, and motive power back to a state of good repair. In Congressional testimony, the DOT Inspector General confirmed that Amtrak would need at least $1.4\u00a0billion to $1.5\u00a0billion in fiscal 2006 and $2\u00a0billion in fiscal 2007 just to maintain the status quo. In 2006, Amtrak received just under $1.4\u00a0billion, with the condition that Amtrak would reduce (but not eliminate) food and sleeper service losses. Thus, dining service was simplified and now requires two fewer on-board service workers. Only \"Auto Train\" and \"Empire Builder\" services continue regular made-on-board meal service. In 2010 the Senate approved a bill to provide $1.96\u00a0billion to Amtrak, but cut the approval for high-speed rail to a $1\u00a0billion appropriation.\nState governments have partially filled the breach left by reductions in federal aid. Several states have entered into operating partnerships with Amtrak, notably California, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Michigan, Oregon, Missouri, Washington, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Texas, Wisconsin, Vermont, Maine, and New York, as well as the Canadian province of British Columbia, which provides some of the resources for the operation of the \"Cascades\" route.\nWith the dramatic rise in gasoline prices during 2007\u201308, Amtrak saw record ridership. Capping a steady five-year increase in ridership overall, regional lines saw 12% year-over-year growth in May 2008. In October 2007, the Senate passed S. 294, the Passenger Rail Improvement and Investment Act of 2007 (70\u201322), sponsored by Senators Frank Lautenberg and Trent Lott. Despite a veto threat by President Bush, a similar bill passed the House on June 11, 2008, with a veto-proof margin (311\u2013104). The final bill, spurred on by the September 12 Metrolink collision in California and retitled Passenger Rail Investment and Improvement Act of 2008, was signed into law by President Bush on October 16, 2008. The bill appropriates $2.6\u00a0billion a year in Amtrak funding through 2013.\n2010s.\nAmtrak points out that in 2010, its farebox recovery (percentage of operating costs covered by revenues generated by passenger fares) was 79%, the highest reported for any U.S. passenger railroad. This increased to 94.9% in 2018.\nAmtrak has argued that it needs to increase capital program costs in 2013 in order to replace old train equipment because the multi-year maintenance costs for those trains exceed what it would cost to simply buy new equipment that would not need to be repaired for several years. However, despite an initial request for more than $2.1\u00a0billion in funding for the year, the company had to deal with a year-over-year cut in 2013 federal appropriations, dropping to under $1.4\u00a0billion for the first time in several years. Amtrak stated in 2010 that the backlog of needed repairs of the track it owns on the Northeast Corridor included over 200 bridges, most dating to the 19th century, tunnels under Baltimore dating to the American Civil War era and functionally obsolete track switches which would cost $5.2\u00a0billion to repair (more than triple Amtrak's total annual budget). Amtrak's budget is allocated on only a yearly basis, and it has been argued by Joseph Vranich that this makes multi-year development programs and long-term fiscal planning difficult if not impossible.\nIn Fiscal Year 2011, the U.S. Congress granted Amtrak $563\u00a0million for operating and $922\u00a0million for capital programs.\n2020s.\nIn 2021, the 117th United States Congress passed and President Joe Biden signed the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which directly appropriated $66 billion for rail over a five-year period, of which at least $18 billion is designated for expanding passenger rail service to new corridors, and it authorized an additional $36 billion. Amtrak received $22 billion in advance appropriations and $19 billion in fully authorized funds.\nControversy.\nGovernment aid to Amtrak was controversial from the beginning. The formation of Amtrak in 1971 was criticized as a bailout serving corporate rail interests and union railroaders, not the traveling public. Critics have asserted that Amtrak has proven incapable of operating as a business and that it does not provide valuable transportation services meriting public support, a \"mobile money-burning machine\". Many fiscal conservatives have argued that subsidies should be ended, national rail service terminated, and the NEC turned over to private interests. Critics also question Amtrak's energy efficiency, though the U.S. Department of Energy considers Amtrak among the most energy-efficient forms of transportation.\nThe Rail Passenger Service Act of 1970, which established Amtrak, specifically states that, \"The Corporation will not be an agency or establishment of the United States Government\". Then common stock was issued in 1971 to railroads that contributed capital and equipment; these shares convey almost no benefits, but their holders declined a 2002 buy-out offer by Amtrak. There are currently 109.4 million shares of preferred stock, at a par value of $100 per share, all held by the US government. As of February 2015, there were 9.4 million shares of common stock, with a par value of $10 per share, held by American Premier Underwriters (53%), BNSF (35%), Canadian Pacific (7%) and Canadian National (5%).\nLeadership.\nIn addition to the United States Secretary of Transportation and its CEO, Amtrak's Board of Directors has eight presidentially-nominated and senate-confirmed seats. Presidentially appointed members serve nominally five-year terms but are allowed to serve until their successor is confirmed, and no more than five of the eight may belong to one political party. Of the eight presidentially appointed members, a minimum of two must and maximum of four may reside along or near the Northeast Corridor (defined as Connecticut, Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, and Rhode Island), while the other four to six must reside in a state served by an Amtrak-operated long-distance or state-supported route outside of the Northeast Corridor. At least one of these eight must be an individual with a disability.\nThe Secretary may be represented at Board meetings by their designee.\nCurrent board members.\nThe current board members as of \u00a018, 2025[ [update]]:\nIncidents.\nThe following are major accidents and incidents that involved Amtrak trains:\nAfter settling for $17\u00a0million in the 2017 Washington state train crash, to prevent further lawsuits, the board adopted a new policy requiring arbitration.\nReferences.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51929", "revid": "26347579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51929", "title": "Pope Fabian", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 236 to 250\nPope Fabian () was the bishop of Rome from 10 January 236 until his death on 20 January 250, succeeding Anterus. A dove is said to have descended on his head to mark him as the Holy Spirit's unexpected choice to become the next pope. He was succeeded by Cornelius.\nMost of his papacy was characterized by amicable relations with the imperial government, and the schism between the Roman congregations of Pontian and Hippolytus was ended. He divided Rome into diaconates and appointed secretaries to collect the records of the martyrs. He sent out seven \"apostles to the Gauls\" as missionaries, but probably did not baptize Emperor Philip the Arab as is alleged. He died a martyr at the beginning of the Decian persecution and is venerated as a saint by the Catholic Church and the Orthodox Church.\nEarly life and accession.\nAccording to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Fabian was a noble Roman by birth, and his father's name was Fabius. Nothing more is known about his background. The legend concerning the circumstances of his election is preserved by the fourth-century writer Eusebius of Caesarea (\"Church History\", VI. 29). One authority refers to him as \"Flavian\".\nAfter the short reign of Pope Anterus, Fabian had come to Rome from the countryside when the new papal election began. \"Although present\", says Eusebius, Fabian \"was in the mind of none\". While the names of several illustrious and noble churchmen were being considered over the course of thirteen days, a dove suddenly descended upon the head of Fabian. To the assembled electors, this strange sight recalled the gospel scene of the descent of the Holy Spirit on Jesus at the time of his baptism by John the Baptist. The congregation took this as a sign that he was marked out for this dignity, and Fabian was at once proclaimed bishop by acclamation.\nPapacy.\nDuring Fabian's reign of 14 years, there was a lull in the persecution which had resulted in the exile of both Anterus' predecessor Pontian and the antipope (and later saint) Hippolytus. Fabian had enough influence at court to effect the return of the bodies of both of these martyrs from Sardinia, where they had died at hard labor in the mines. The report that he baptized the emperor Philip the Arab and his son, however, is probably a legend, although he did seem to enjoy some connections at court, since the bodies of Pontian and Hippolytus could not have been exhumed without the emperor's approval.\nAccording to the sixth-century historian and hagiographer Gregory of Tours Fabian sent out the \"apostles to the Gauls\" to Christianise Gaul in A.D. 245. Fabian sent seven bishops from Rome to Gaul to preach the Gospel: Gatianus of Tours to Tours, Trophimus of Arles to Arles, Paul of Narbonne to Narbonne, Saturnin to Toulouse, Denis to Paris, Austromoine to Clermont, and Martial to Limoges. He also condemned Privatus, the originator of a new heresy in Africa.\nThe \"Liber Pontificalis\" says that Fabian divided the Christian communities of Rome into seven districts, each supervised by a deacon. Eusebius (VI \u00a743) adds that he appointed seven subdeacons to help collect the \"acta\" of the martyrs\u2014the reports of the court proceedings on the occasion of their trials. There is also a tradition that he instituted the four minor clerical orders: porter, lector, exorcist, and acolyte. However most scholars believe these offices evolved gradually and were formally instituted at a later date.\nHis deeds are thus described in the \"Liber Pontificalis\": \nHe divided the \"regiones\" into deaconships and made seven sub-deaconships which seven secretaries oversaw, so that they brought together the deeds of the martyrs faithfully made whole, and he brought forth many works in the cemeteries.\nThe \"Liberian Catalogue\" of the popes also reports that Fabian initiated considerable work on the catacombs, where honored Christians were interred, and where he also caused the body of Pontian to be entombed at the catacomb of Callixtus.\nMartyrdom and legacy.\nWith the ascension of Emperor Decius, the Roman government's tolerant policy toward Christianity temporarily ended. Decius ordered everyone in the Empire, with the exception of Jews, to demonstrate loyalty to Rome by offering incense to the cult images of deities that represented the Roman state. This was unacceptable to many Christians who took the commandment against idolatry seriously. Fabian was one of the earliest victims of Decius, dying as a martyr on 20 January 250, at the beginning of the Decian persecution, though probably in prison, rather than by execution.\nFabian was interred in the catacomb of Callixtus in Rome. The Greek inscription on his tomb has survived, and bears the words: \"Fabian, Bishop, Martyr\". Fabian's remains were later reinterred at San Sebastiano fuori le mura by Pope Clement XI where the Albani Chapel is dedicated in his honour.\nFabian's feast day is commemorated on 20 January in the Catholic Church, the same as Saint Sebastian. Fabian's feast day in the Eastern Orthodox Church is 5 August, and in Coptic Christianity it is 7 and 11 Meshir. The church of Santi Fabiano e Venanzio a Villa Fiorelli (1936) in Rome is named in his honour, and also in that of Saint Venantius of Camerino who died in the same persecutions.\nFabian was highly esteemed by Cyprian. Cyprian's letter to Fabian's successor, Cornelius, calls him \"incomparable\" and says that the glory of his martyrdom answered the purity and holiness of his life (Cyprian, \"Epistle\" 30). Novatian refers to his \"nobilissima memoriae\", and he corresponded with Origen.\nFabian is honored on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America on 20 January.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51932", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51932", "title": "Kinetic energy penetrator", "text": "High density non-explosive projectile\nA kinetic energy penetrator (KEP), also known as long-rod penetrator (LRP), is a type of ammunition designed to penetrate vehicle armour using a flechette-like, high-sectional density projectile. Like a bullet or kinetic energy weapon, this type of ammunition does not contain explosive payloads and uses purely kinetic energy to penetrate the target. Modern KEP munitions are typically of the armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) type.\nHistory.\nEarly cannons fired kinetic energy ammunition, initially consisting of heavy balls of worked stone and later of dense metals. From the beginning, combining high muzzle energy with projectile weight and hardness have been the foremost factors in the design of such weapons. Similarly, the foremost purpose of such weapons has generally been to defeat protective shells of armored vehicles or other defensive structures, whether it is stone walls, sailship timbers, or modern tank armour. Kinetic energy ammunition, in its various forms, has consistently been the choice for those weapons due to the highly focused terminal ballistics.\nThe development of the modern KE penetrator combines two aspects of artillery design, high muzzle velocity and concentrated force. High muzzle velocity is achieved by using a projectile with a low mass and large base area in the gun barrel. Firing a small-diameter projectile wrapped in a lightweight outer shell, called a sabot, raises the muzzle velocity. Once the shell clears the barrel, the sabot is no longer needed and falls off in pieces. This leaves the projectile traveling at high velocity with a smaller cross-sectional area and reduced aerodynamic drag during the flight to the target (see external ballistics and terminal ballistics). Germany developed modern sabots under the name \"treibspiegel\" (\"thrust mirror\") to give extra altitude to its anti-aircraft guns during the Second World War. Before this, primitive wooden sabots had been used for centuries in the form of a wooden plug attached to or breech loaded before cannonballs in the barrel, placed between the propellant charge and the projectile. The name \"sabot\" (pronounced in English usage) is the French word for clog (a wooden shoe traditionally worn in some European countries).\nConcentration of force into a smaller area was initially attained by replacing the single metal (usually steel) shot with a composite shot using two metals, a heavy core (based on tungsten) inside a lighter metal outer shell. These designs were known as armour-piercing composite rigid (APCR) by the British, high-velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) by the US, and \"hartkern\" (hard core) by the Germans. On impact, the core had a much more concentrated effect than plain metal shot of the same weight and size. The air resistance and other effects were the same as for the shell of identical size. High-velocity armor-piercing (HVAP) rounds were primarily used by tank destroyers in the US Army and were relatively uncommon as the tungsten core was expensive and prioritized for other applications.\nBetween 1941 and 1943, the British combined the two techniques in the armour-piercing discarding sabot (APDS) round. The sabot replaced the outer metal shell of the APCR. While in the gun, the shot had a large base area to get maximum acceleration from the propelling charge but once outside, the sabot fell away to reveal a heavy shot with a small cross-sectional area. APDS rounds served as the primary kinetic energy weapon of most tanks during the early-Cold War period, though they suffered the primary drawback of inaccuracy. This was resolved with the introduction of the armour-piercing fin-stabilized discarding sabot (APFSDS) round during the 1970s, which added stabilising fins to the penetrator, greatly increasing accuracy.\nDesign.\nThe principle of the kinetic energy penetrator is that it uses its kinetic energy, which is a function of its mass and velocity, to force its way through armor. If the armor is defeated, the heat and spalling (particle spray) generated by the penetrator going through the armor, and the pressure wave that develops, ideally destroys the target.\nThe modern kinetic energy weapon maximizes the stress (kinetic energy divided by impact area) delivered to the target by:\nThe penetrator length plays a large role in determining the ultimate depth of penetration. Generally, a penetrator is incapable of penetrating deeper than its own length, as the sheer stress of impact and perforation ablates it. This has led to the current designs which resemble a long metal arrow.\nFor monobloc penetrators made of a single material, a perforation formula devised by Wili Odermatt and W. Lanz can calculate the penetration depth of an APFSDS round.\nIn 1982, an analytical investigation drawing from concepts of gas dynamics and experiments on target penetration led to the conclusion on the efficiency of impactors that penetration is deeper using unconventional three-dimensional shapes.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51934", "revid": "31226026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51934", "title": "Martin Dunwoody", "text": "British mathematician\nMartin John Dunwoody (born 3 November 1938) is an emeritus professor of Mathematics at the University of Southampton, England.\nHe earned his PhD in 1964 from the Australian National University. He held positions at the University of Sussex before becoming a professor at the University of Southampton in 1992. He has been emeritus professor since 2003.\nDunwoody works on geometric group theory and low-dimensional topology. He is a leading expert in splittings and accessibility of discrete groups, groups acting on graphs and trees, JSJ-decompositions, the topology of 3-manifolds and the structure of their fundamental groups.\nSince 1971 several mathematicians have been working on Wall's conjecture, posed by Wall in a 1971 paper, which said that all finitely generated groups are accessible. Roughly, this means that every finitely generated group can be constructed from finite and one-ended groups via a finite number of amalgamated free products and HNN extensions over finite subgroups. In view of the Stallings theorem about ends of groups, one-ended groups are precisely those finitely generated infinite groups that cannot be decomposed nontrivially as amalgamated products or HNN-extensions over finite subgroups.\nDunwoody proved the Wall conjecture for finitely presented groups in 1985. In 1991 he finally disproved Wall's conjecture by finding a finitely generated group that is not accessible.\nDunwoody found a graph-theoretic proof of Stallings' theorem about ends of groups in 1982, by constructing certain tree-like automorphism invariant graph decompositions. This work has been developed to an important theory in the book \"Groups acting on graphs\", Cambridge University Press, 1989, with Warren Dicks. In 2002 Dunwoody put forward a proposed proof of the Poincar\u00e9 conjecture. The proof generated considerable interest among mathematicians, but a mistake was quickly discovered and the proof was withdrawn. The conjecture was later proven by Grigori Perelman, following the program of Richard S. Hamilton.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51935", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51935", "title": "Kruyshev", "text": ""}
{"id": "51937", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51937", "title": "Hymenophore", "text": "Fungal structure bearing hymenium\nA hymenophore refers to the hymenium-bearing structure of a fungal fruiting body. Hymenophores can be smooth surfaces, lamellae, folds, tubes, or teeth. The term was coined by Robert Hooke in 1665.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51938", "revid": "16759563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51938", "title": "Hymenomycete", "text": "Former group of fungi\nHymenomycetes was formerly the largest taxonomic group of fungi within the division Basidiomycota, but the term is no longer taxonomically relevant. Many familiar fungi belong to this class, including bracket fungi and toadstools. This class contained the orders Agaricales, Boletales, and Russulales.\nThe erstwhile class, now understood to be a polyphyletic assemblage of basidiomycetes, refers to fungi with fruit bodies whose hymenophore develops in an exposed manner, or only with a veil (velum). These forms are termed gymnocarpic or hemiangiocarpic ontogeny, respectively. A contrasting example of hymenophore development is the puffballs, which undergo gasterocarpic development (hymenophore enclosed).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51939", "revid": "6454287", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51939", "title": "Homosexual marriage", "text": ""}
{"id": "51940", "revid": "50034649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51940", "title": "Waveplate", "text": "Optical polarization device\nA waveplate or retarder is an optical device that alters the polarization state of a light wave travelling through it. Two common types of waveplates are the \"half-wave plate\", which rotates the polarization direction of linearly polarized light, and the \"quarter-wave plate\", which converts between different elliptical polarizations (such as the special case of converting from linearly polarized light to circularly polarized light and vice versa.)\nWaveplates are constructed out of a birefringent material (such as quartz or mica, or even plastic), for which the index of refraction is different for light that is linearly polarized along one or the other of two certain perpendicular crystal axes. The behavior of a waveplate (that is, whether it is a half-wave plate, a quarter-wave plate, etc.) depends on the thickness of the crystal, the wavelength of light, and the variation of the index of refraction. By appropriate choice of the relationship between these parameters, it is possible to introduce a controlled phase shift between the two polarization components of a light wave, thereby altering its polarization. With an engineered combination of two birefringent materials, an achromatic waveplate can be manufactured such that the spectral response of its phase retardance can be nearly flat.\nA common use of waveplates\u2014particularly the sensitive-tint (full-wave) and quarter-wave plates\u2014is in optical mineralogy. Addition of plates between the polarizers of a petrographic microscope makes the optical identification of minerals in thin sections of rocks easier, in particular by allowing deduction of the shape and orientation of the optical indicatrices within the visible crystal sections. This alignment can allow discrimination between minerals which otherwise appear very similar in plane polarized and cross polarized light.\nPrinciples of operation.\nA waveplate works by shifting the phase between two perpendicular polarization components of the light wave. A typical waveplate is simply a birefringent crystal with a carefully chosen orientation and thickness. The crystal is cut into a plate, with the orientation of the cut chosen so that the optic axis of the crystal is parallel to the surfaces of the plate. This results in two axes in the plane of the cut: the \"ordinary axis\", with index of refraction \"n\"o, and the \"extraordinary axis\", with index of refraction \"n\"e. The ordinary axis is perpendicular to the optic axis. The extraordinary axis is parallel to the optic axis. For a light wave normally incident upon the plate, the polarization component along the ordinary axis travels through the crystal with a speed \"v\"o = \"c\"/\"n\"o, while the polarization component along the extraordinary axis travels with a speed \"v\"e = \"c\"/\"n\"e. This leads to a phase difference between the two components as they exit the crystal. When \"n\"e\u00a0&lt; \"n\"o, as in calcite, the extraordinary axis is called the \"fast axis\" and the ordinary axis is called the \"slow axis\". For \"n\"e\u00a0&gt; \"n\"o the situation is reversed.\nDepending on the thickness of the crystal, light with polarization components along both axes will emerge in a different polarization state. The waveplate is characterized by the amount of relative phase, \u0393, that it imparts on the two components, which is related to the birefringence \u0394\"n\" and the thickness \"L\" of the crystal by the formula\nformula_1\nwhere \u03bb0 is the vacuum wavelength of the light.\nWaveplates in general, as well as polarizers, can be described using the Jones matrix formalism, which uses a vector to represent the polarization state of light and a matrix to represent the linear transformation of a waveplate or polarizer.\nAlthough the birefringence \u0394\"n\" may vary slightly due to dispersion, this is negligible compared to the variation in phase difference according to the wavelength of the light due to the fixed path difference (\u03bb0 in the denominator in the above equation). Waveplates are thus manufactured to work for a particular range of wavelengths. The phase variation can be minimized by stacking two waveplates that differ by a tiny amount in thickness back-to-back, with the slow axis of one along the fast axis of the other. With this configuration, the relative phase imparted can be, for the case of a quarter-wave plate, one-fourth a wavelength rather than three-fourths or one-fourth plus an integer. This is called a \"zero-order waveplate\".\nFor a single waveplate changing the wavelength of the light introduces a linear error in the phase. Tilt of the waveplate enters via a factor of 1/cos \u03b8 (where \u03b8 is the angle of tilt) into the path length and thus only quadratically into the phase. For the extraordinary polarization the tilt also changes the refractive index to the ordinary via a factor of cos \u03b8, so combined with the path length, the phase shift for the extraordinary light due to tilt is zero.\nA polarization-independent phase shift of zero order needs a plate with thickness of one wavelength.\nFor calcite the refractive index changes in the first decimal place, so that a true zero order plate is ten times as thick as one wavelength.\nFor quartz and magnesium fluoride the refractive index changes in the second decimal place and true zero order plates are common for wavelengths above 1\u00a0\u03bcm.\nPlate types.\nHalf-wave plate.\nFor a half-wave plate, the relationship between \"L\", \u0394\"n\", and \u03bb0 is chosen so that the phase shift between polarization components is \u0393\u00a0= \u03c0. Now suppose a linearly polarized wave with polarization vector formula_2 is incident on the crystal. Let \u03b8 denote the angle between formula_2 and formula_4, where formula_4 is the vector along the waveplate's fast axis. Let \"z\" denote the propagation axis of the wave. The electric field of the incident wave is\nformula_6\nwhere formula_7 lies along the waveplate's slow axis. The effect of the half-wave plate is to introduce a phase shift term e\"i\"\u0393\u00a0= e\"i\"\u03c0\u00a0= \u22121 between the \"f\" and \"s\" components of the wave, so that upon exiting the crystal the wave is now given by\nformula_8\nIf formula_9 denotes the polarization vector of the wave exiting the waveplate, then this expression shows that the angle between formula_9 and formula_4 is \u2212\u03b8. Evidently, the effect of the half-wave plate is to mirror the wave's polarization vector through the plane formed by the vectors formula_4 and formula_13. For linearly polarized light, this is equivalent to saying that the effect of the half-wave plate is to rotate the polarization vector through an angle 2\u03b8; however, for elliptically polarized light the half-wave plate also has the effect of inverting the light's handedness.\nQuarter-wave plate.\nFor a quarter-wave plate, the relationship between \"L\", \u0394\"n\", and \u03bb0 is chosen so that the phase shift between polarization components is \u0393\u00a0= \u03c0/2. Now suppose a linearly polarized wave is incident on the crystal. This wave can be written as\nformula_14\nwhere the \"f\" and \"s\" axes are the quarter-wave plate's fast and slow axes, respectively, the wave propagates along the \"z\" axis, and \"Ef\" and \"Es\" are real. The effect of the quarter-wave plate is to introduce a phase shift term e\"i\"\u0393\u00a0=e\"i\"\u03c0/2\u00a0= \"i\" between the \"f\" and \"s\" components of the wave, so that upon exiting the crystal the wave is now given by\nformula_15\nThe wave is now elliptically polarized.\nIf the axis of polarization of the incident wave is chosen so that it makes a 45\u00b0 with the fast and slow axes of the waveplate, then \"Ef\"\u00a0= \"Es\"\u00a0\u2261 \"E\", and the resulting wave upon exiting the waveplate is\nformula_16\nand the wave is circularly polarized.\nIf the axis of polarization of the incident wave is chosen so that it makes a 0\u00b0 with the fast or slow axes of the waveplate, then the polarization will not change, so remains linear. If the angle is in between 0\u00b0 and 45\u00b0 the resulting wave has an elliptical polarization.\nA circulating polarization can be visualized as the sum of two linear polarizations with a phase difference of 90\u00b0. The output depends on the polarization of the input. Suppose polarization axes x and y parallel with the slow and fast axis of the waveplate:\nThe polarization of the incoming photon (or beam) can be resolved as two polarizations on the x and y axis. If the input polarization is parallel to the fast or slow axis, then there is no polarization of the other axis, so the output polarization is the same as the input (only the phase more or less delayed). If the input polarization is 45\u00b0 to the fast and slow axis, the polarization on those axes are equal. But the phase of the output of the slow axis will be delayed 90\u00b0 with the output of the fast axis. If not the amplitude but both sine values are displayed, then x and y combined will describe a circle. With other angles than 0\u00b0 or 45\u00b0 the values in fast and slow axis will differ and their resultant output will describe an ellipse.\nFull-wave, or sensitive-tint plate.\nA full-wave plate introduces a phase difference of exactly one wavelength between the two polarization directions, for one wavelength of light. In optical mineralogy, it is common to use a full-wave plate designed for green light (a wavelength near 540\u00a0nm). Linearly polarized white light which passes through the plate becomes elliptically polarized, except for that green light wavelength, which will remain linear. If a linear polarizer oriented perpendicular to the original polarization is added, this green wavelength is fully extinguished but elements of the other colors remain. This means that under these conditions the plate will appear an intense shade of red-violet, sometimes known as \"sensitive tint\". This gives rise to this plate's alternative names, the \"sensitive-tint plate\" or (less commonly) \"red-tint plate\". These plates are widely used in mineralogy to aid in identification of minerals in thin sections of rocks.\nMultiple-order vs. zero-order waveplates.\nA multiple-order waveplate is made from a single birefringent crystal that produces an integer multiple of the rated retardance (for example, a multiple-order half-wave plate may have an absolute retardance of 37\u03bb/2). By contrast, a zero-order waveplate produces exactly the specified retardance. This can be accomplished by combining two multiple-order wave plates such that the difference in their retardances yields the net (true) retardance of the waveplate. Zero-order waveplates are less sensitive to temperature and wavelength shifts, but are more expensive than multiple-order ones.\nStacking a series of different-order waveplates with polarization filters between them yields a Lyot filter. Either the filters can be rotated, or the waveplates can be replaced with liquid crystal layers, to obtain a widely tunable pass band in optical transmission spectrum.\nUse in mineralogy and optical petrology.\nThe sensitive-tint (full-wave) and quarter-wave plates are widely used in the field of optical mineralogy. Addition of plates between the polarizers of a petrographic microscope makes easier the optical identification of minerals in thin sections of rocks, in particular by allowing deduction of the shape and orientation of the optical indicatrices within the visible crystal sections.\nIn practical terms, the plate is inserted between the perpendicular polarizers at an angle of 45 degrees. This allows two different procedures to be carried out to investigate the mineral under the crosshairs of the microscope. Firstly, in ordinary cross polarized light, the plate can be used to distinguish the orientation of the optical indicatrix relative to crystal elongation \u2013 that is, whether the mineral is \"length slow\" or \"length fast\" \u2013 based on whether the visible interference colors increase or decrease by one order when the plate is added. Secondly, a slightly more complex procedure allows for a tint plate to be used in conjunction with interference figure techniques to allow measurement of the \"optic angle\" of the mineral. The optic angle (often notated as \"2V\") can both be diagnostic of mineral type, as well as in some cases revealing information about the variation of chemical composition within a single mineral type.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51942", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51942", "title": "I'm Sorry, I'll Read that Again", "text": ""}
{"id": "51943", "revid": "4871659", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51943", "title": "Carlsbad", "text": "Carlsbad may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles about distinct geographical locations with the same name. "}
{"id": "51944", "revid": "1305323699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51944", "title": "Dichroism", "text": "Phenomenon where the material is splitting two or more beams of different colours\nIn optics, a dichroic material is either one which causes visible light to be split up into distinct beams of different wavelengths (colours) (not to be confused with dispersion), or one in which light rays having different polarizations are absorbed by different amounts.\nIn beam splitters.\nThe original meaning of \"dichroic\", from the Greek \"dikhroos\", two-coloured, refers to any optical device which can split a beam of light into two beams with differing wavelengths. Such devices include mirrors and filters, usually treated with optical coatings, which are designed to reflect light over a certain range of wavelengths and transmit light which is outside that range. An example is the dichroic prism, used in some camcorders, which uses several coatings to split light into red, green and blue components for recording on separate CCD arrays, however it is now more common to have a Bayer filter to filter individual pixels on a single CCD array. This kind of dichroic device does not usually depend on the polarization of the light. The term \"dichromatic\" is also used in this sense.\nWith polarized light.\nThe second meaning of \"dichroic\" refers to the property of a material, in which light in different polarization states traveling through it experiences a different absorption coefficient; this is also known as diattenuation. When the polarization states in question are right and left-handed circular polarization, it is then known as circular dichroism (CD). Most materials exhibiting CD are chiral, although non-chiral materials showing CD have been recently observed. Since the left- and right-handed circular polarizations represent two spin angular momentum (SAM) states, in this case for a photon, this dichroism can also be thought of as spin angular momentum dichroism and could be modelled using quantum mechanics.\nIn some crystals, such as tourmaline, the strength of the dichroic effect varies strongly with the wavelength of the light, making them appear to have different colours when viewed with light having differing polarizations. This is more generally referred to as pleochroism, and the technique can be used in mineralogy to identify minerals. In some materials, such as herapathite (iodoquinine sulfate) or Polaroid sheets, the effect is not strongly dependent on wavelength.\nIn liquid crystals.\nDichroism, in the second meaning above, occurs in liquid crystals due to either the optical anisotropy of the molecular structure or the presence of impurities or the presence of dichroic dyes. The latter is also called a \"guest\u2013host effect\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51945", "revid": "16228717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51945", "title": "Alexander Trocchi", "text": "Scottish novelist (1925\u20131984)\nAlexander Whitelaw Robertson Trocchi ( ; 30 July 1925 \u2013 15 April 1984) was a Scottish novelist.\nEarly life and career.\nTrocchi was born in Glasgow to Alfred (formerly Alfredo) Trocchi, a music-hall performer of Italian parentage, and Annie (n\u00e9e Robertson), who ran a boarding house and died of food poisoning when Trocchi was a teenager. He attended Hillhead High School in the city and Cally House School in Gatehouse of Fleet, having been evacuated there during World War II. After working as a seaman on the Murmansk convoys, he studied English Literature and Moral Philosophy at the University of Glasgow, and was awarded second-class honours in 1950. \nWithout graduating, Trocchi obtained a travelling grant that enabled him to relocate to continental Europe. In the early 1950s he lived in Paris and edited the literary magazine \"Merlin\", which published Henry Miller, Samuel Beckett, Christopher Logue, and Pablo Neruda, amongst others. Although not published in \"Merlin\", American writer Terry Southern, who lived in Paris from 1948 to 1952, became a close friend of both Trocchi and his colleague Richard Seaver, and the three later co-edited the anthology \"Writers In Revolt\" (1962). Though \"Merlin\" had been established somewhat in rivalry with the \"Paris Review\", George Plimpton also had served on the magazine's editorial board. Trocchi claimed that this journal came to an end when the US State Department cancelled its many subscriptions in protest over an article by Jean-Paul Sartre praising the homoeroticism of Jean Genet.\nMaurice Girodias published most of Trocchi's novels through Olympia Press, often written under pen names, such as Frances Lengel and Carmencita de las Lunas. Girodias also published \"My Life and Loves: Fifth Volume\", which purported to be the final volume of the autobiography of Irish-American writer Frank Harris. However, though based on autobiographical material by Harris, the book was heavily edited and rewritten by Trocchi. Girodias subsequently commissioned Trocchi to write erotica along with his friends and Merlin associates Logue, Plimpton and John Stevenson. Under the name Frances Lengel, he churned out numerous pornographic books including the now classic \"Helen and Desire\" (1954) and a dirty version of his own book \"Young Adam\" (1954). Trocchi and his friends also published Samuel Beckett's \"War and Memory\" and Jean Genet's \"Thief's journal\" in English for the first time.\nDrug addiction.\nTrocchi acquired his lifelong heroin addiction in Paris. He left Paris for the United States and spent time in Taos, New Mexico, before settling in New York City, where he worked on a stone scow on the Hudson River. This time is chronicled in the novel \"Cain's Book\", which at the time became something of a sensation, being an honest study of heroin addiction with descriptions of sex and drug use that got it banned in Britain, where the book was the subject of an obscenity trial. In the United States, however, it received favorable reviews.\nTrocchi was then deep in the throes of heroin addiction; he even failed to attend his own launch party for \"Cain's Book\". His wife Lyn prostituted herself on the streets of the Lower East Side. He injected himself on camera during a live television debate on drug abuse, despite being on bail at the time. He had been charged with supplying heroin to a minor, an offence then punishable by death. A jail term seemed certain, but with the help of friends (including Norman Mailer), Trocchi was smuggled over the Canada\u2013US border where he was given refuge in Montreal by poet Irving Layton and met up with Leonard Cohen. His wife Lyn was arrested and son Marc detained, but later joined Trocchi in London.\nLater life.\nIn the late 1950s he lived in Venice, California, then the centre of the Southern California Beat scene. In October 1955, he became involved with the Lettrist International and then the Situationist International. His text \"Invisible Insurrection of a Million Minds\" was published in the Scottish journal \"New Saltire\" in 1962 and subsequently as \"Technique du Coup du Monde\" in \"Internationale Situationniste\", number 8. It proposed an international \"spontaneous university\" as a cultural force and marked the beginning of his movement towards his \"sigma\" project, which played a formative part in the UK Underground.\nTrocchi appeared at the 1962 Edinburgh Writers Festival where he claimed \"sodomy\" as a basis for his writing. During the festival, Hugh MacDiarmid denounced him as \"cosmopolitan scum\". However, while this incident is well known, it is little remarked upon that the two men subsequently engaged in correspondence, and actually became friends. Trocchi then moved to London, where he remained for the rest of his life.\nHe began a new novel, \"The Long Book\", which he did not finish. Much of his sporadic work of the 1960s was collected as \"The Sigma Portfolio\". In March 1966 the \"Internationale Situationniste,\" issue number 10, announced \"Upon the appearance in London of the first publications of the 'Project Sigma' initiated by Alexander Trocchi, it was mutually agreed that the SI could not involve itself in such a loose cultural venture... It is therefore no longer as a member of the SI that our friend Alexander Trocchi has since developed an activity of which we fully approve of several aspects.\" He continued writing but published little. He opened a small book store near his Kensington home. He was known in Notting Hill as \"Scots Alec\".\nIn the 1960s and 70s, Trocchi lived at 4 Observatory Gardens, Kensington, London on the two top floors of a 19th-century terrace block comprising six storeys. He had two sons: Marc Alexander and Nicholas. The elder son, Marc died of cancer at age 19 in 1976, shortly after Alexander's American wife Lyn died of complications from hepatitis.\nAfter undergoing surgery for lung cancer, he died of pneumonia in London on 15 April 1984. He was cremated at Mortlake Crematorium.\nThe younger son, Nicholas, returned to the family's home in London less than a year after his father's death and leapt to his death from the top floor of the five-storey building. When the terrace block was extensively refurbished into luxury apartments in the 1980s, the number on Alexander Trocchi's house was removed.\nResurgence.\nInterest in Trocchi and his role in the avant-garde movements of the mid-20th century began to rise soon after his death. \"Edinburgh Review\" published a \"Trocchi Number\" in 1985 and their parent house, Polygon, published the biography, \"The Making of the Monster\" in 1991 by Andrew Murray Scott simultaneously with an anthology, \"Invisible Insurrection\", also compiled by Scott who had known Trocchi for four years in London. These works were influential in bringing Trocchi back to public attention and were widely reviewed. Scott assisted the Estate in attempting to regain control of Trocchi's material and to license new editions in the UK and US and Far East, also collating and annotating all remaining manuscripts and documents in the Estate's possession.\nDuring the 1990s, various American and Scottish publishers (most notably Rebel Inc.) reissued his originally pseudonymous Olympia Press novels and a retrospective of his articles for \"Merlin\" and others, \"A Life in Pieces\" (1997), was issued in response to revived interest in his life and work by a younger generation. His early novel \"Young Adam\" was adapted into a film starring Ewan McGregor and Tilda Swinton in 2003 after several years of wrangling over finance.\n\"Tainted Love\" (2005) by Stewart Home contains a lengthy 'factional' meditation on Trocchi's post-literary career period in Notting Hill. In 2009 Oneworld Publications reissued \"Man at Leisure\" (1972), complete with the original introduction by William Burroughs, and in 2011 Oneworld Publications also re-released \"Cain's Book\", with a foreword by Tom McCarthy."}
{"id": "51946", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51946", "title": "Roosevelt Island", "text": "Island and neighborhood in New York City\nRoosevelt Island is an island in New York City's East River, within the borough of Manhattan. It lies between Manhattan Island to the west, and the borough of Queens, on Long Island, to the east. It is about long, with an area of , and had a population of 11,722 as of the 2020 United States census. It consists of two largely residential communities: Northtown and Southtown. Roosevelt Island is owned by the city but was leased to the New York State Urban Development Corporation (UDC) for 99 years in 1969.\nThe island was called ' by the Lenape and ' (Hog Island) by the Dutch during the colonial era and later Blackwell's Island. During much of the 19th and 20th centuries, the island was used by hospitals and prisons, with very limited access. It was renamed Welfare Island in 1921. Following several proposals to redevelop Welfare Island in the 1960s, the UDC leased the island, renamed it after former U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1973, and redeveloped it as a series of residential neighborhoods. The first phase of Northtown, the island's first community, was completed in 1974, followed by the second phase (Northtown II) in 1989. Southtown was developed in the early 21st century, along with the Cornell Tech higher-education campus.\nIn addition to residential towers, the island has several buildings that predate the residential development, including six New York City designated landmarks. The island is accessible by numerous modes of transport, including a bridge, an aerial tram, and the city's subway and ferry systems. Many government services, such as emergency services, are provided from Queens, but the island also has a post office and a pneumatic garbage-disposal system. There are several parks on Roosevelt Island as well, including a promenade around the island's perimeter and Four Freedoms Park at its southern end. In addition to Cornell Tech, the island contains an elementary school. Several houses of worship are located on Roosevelt Island, and numerous community organizations have been founded there.\nGeography.\nRoosevelt Island is located in the middle of the East River, between Manhattan Island to the west and Queens to the east. The island's southern tip faces 47th Street on Manhattan Island, while its northern tip faces 86th Street on Manhattan Island. It is about long, with a maximum width of . The island was prior to the 18th century but has been expanded to . Administratively, it is part of the New York City borough of Manhattan. Together with Mill Rock, Roosevelt Island constitutes Manhattan's Census Tract 238, which has a land area of .\nThe island is one of the southernmost locations in New York City where Fordham gneiss, a type of bedrock commonly found beneath the South Bronx, can be seen above ground. The gneiss outcropping was surrounded by dolomite, which was worn down by East River currents, creating the current island. The layer of bedrock is shallow and is covered by glacial till, and a 2012 study found no evidence of ponds or streams on the island. Since the 19th century, the island's natural topography has been modified drastically, and fill has been added to Roosevelt Island to increase its area. An ancient fault line, known as Cameron's Line, runs within the East River between Roosevelt Island and Queens.\nRoosevelt Island's street layout is based on a master plan designed in 1969 by the architects Philip Johnson and John Burgee. Main Street runs the length of the island, splitting into a loop around Southtown; it was the island's only road until 1989. The street is paved in red brick. Main Street, along with the island's parks, was intended to be a communal area for the island's various ethnic groups and socioeconomic classes. The island's residences and businesses are largely clustered around Main Street. Roosevelt Island is surrounded by a seawall of Fordham gneiss, quarried from the island itself.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nLenape use.\nAccording to archaeological digs, the area around Roosevelt Island was settled by Paleo-Indians up to 12,000 years ago. In particular, the area was the homeland of the Mareckawick, a group of Lenape Native Americans, who called it . The name is variously translated as \"long island\" or \"It's nice to be on the island\". The historian Isaac Newton Phelps Stokes claimed that the name referred to Randalls Island, but this claim has not been corroborated.\nThe Lenape may have visited the island. Archeological studies have found shell middens just opposite the island, along both the Queens and Manhattan shores, and the Lenape are known to have had settlements around waterways. However, the island likely did not have any Lenape settlements because of the lack of freshwater. There is little evidence of Native American activities on the island from before the Archaic period (which ended around 1000 BCE).\nDutch colonization.\nThere are disputes over who owned the island after the European colonization of New Netherland in the 17th century. According to several sources, Dutch Governor Wouter van Twiller was said to have purchased the island from the Lenape in 1637. A study from 1988 found that Van Twiller's deed referred to what is now Randalls and Wards Islands further north, but a subsequent study said that Van Twiller acquired Randalls, Wards, Roosevelt, and Governors islands simultaneously. In any case, Roosevelt Island was known in early modern Dutch as \"Varcken[s]\", \"Varken\", or \"Verckens Eylandt\", all of which are translated in modern English as Hog Island ().\nBy 1639, Jan Claessen Alteras was known to have farmed Hog Island. Reports indicate that Alteras had made improvements to the island by 1642, though the nature of the work is not known. New Netherland director-general Peter Stuyvesant took over the island in 1642. The following year, it was leased to Francois Fyn. Fyn, in turn, leased the island to Laurens Duyts, who developed further structures on the island. Duyts defaulted on his lease in 1658 and was deported for \"gross immoralities\", and Fyn's lawyer took back the island.\nManning and Blackwell ownership.\nAfter the Dutch surrendered to the British in 1664, a British military captain named John Manning acquired the island in 1668. In 1673, Manning surrendered to Dutch forces who had wanted to retake New Netherland; as punishment, he had to live on the island in exile. After Manning's banishment, the isle became known as Manning's Island. Manning had a mansion near the island's southern tip, where he served rum punch to visitors. The island was then conveyed to Manning's stepdaughter Mary in 1676 or 1685. Mary was married to Robert Blackwell, who became the island's new owner and namesake. The \"Brooklyn Times-Union\" wrote that the island had gained the Blackwell name \"by a mere chance, or the result of a marriage\".\nThe Blackwell family settled the island over four generations. At the beginning of the 18th century, Blackwell built his farmhouse, the Blackwell House, on the island. Blackwell's Island was not a major battleground in the American Revolutionary War, though British troops tried to take the island after the 1776 Battle of Long Island. The British briefly seized control on September 2\u20134, 1776, after which the American troops took over. A British prison inspector proposed using the island as a prison in the early 1780s, but it is not known whether this happened. Blackwell's sons took over the island in 1780 and tried to sell it, at which point Blackwell's Island had several buildings and was several miles removed from New York City. By the mid-1780s, the island included two houses, orchards, a cider mill, and other farm structures. Contemporary sources do not mention any structures on the northern half of the island. A public auction was held in 1785, but no one bought the island. In 1796, Blackwell's great-grandson Jacob Blackwell constructed the Blackwell House, one of Manhattan's oldest houses. James L. Bell paid the Blackwells $30,000 for the island in 1823, but Blackwell took back control two years later, upon Bell's death. One source indicated that Bell never fulfilled the terms of the sale.\nHospital and prison island.\nBy 1826, the city almshouse at Bellevue Hospital was overcrowded, prompting city officials to consider moving that facility to Blackwell's Island. The city government purchased the island for $32,000 () on July 19, 1828. Ownership of the island remained unresolved for another 16 years while Bell's widow sued the city. Through the 19th century, the island housed several hospitals and a prison. At one point there were 26 institutions on the island.\n1830s to 1860s.\nThe city government erected a penitentiary on the island, which opened August 3, 1830. There were proposals to construct a canal to split male and female prisoners; though the canal was not built, an unknown architect did build a separate building for female prisoners. The island's prison population already numbered in the hundreds by 1838, whereas there were only 24 staff members (including those not assigned to guard duties). By 1839, the New York City Lunatic Asylum opened, including the Octagon Tower. The asylum, with two wings made of locally quarried Fordham gneiss, at one point held 1,700 inmates, twice its designed capacity. Prisoners frequently tried to swim away from the island. Almshouses, or housing for the poor, were constructed in 1847. Other hospitals were soon developed on the island, including a 600-bed prison hospital that was finished in 1849. Thomas Story Kirkbride, who oversaw some of the island's hospitals, described the island as having fallen into \"degradation and neglect\" by 1848.\nA workhouse was built on the island in 1852, followed by the Smallpox Hospital in 1856. The Asylum burned down in 1858 and was rebuilt on the same site, and the prison hospital was destroyed in the same fire. Two pipes provided fresh water from the Croton Aqueduct to the island by 1860, and maps indicate that Blackwell's Island had two reservoirs as well. The prison hospital was replaced with City Hospital (later known as Charity Hospital), which was completed in 1861 and served both prisoners and New York City's poorer population. A \"hospital for incurables\" followed in 1866.\n1870s to 1890s.\nPrisoners built the Blackwell Island Light on the island's northern tip in 1872. In 1877, the hospital opened a School of Nursing, the fourth such training institution in the nation.\nLate-19th-century editions of the \"Appleton's Dictionary of New York\" described Blackwell's Island's penitentiary as having a \"feudal character\". Conditions in some of the hospitals declined significantly enough that the island as a whole gained a poor reputation. The women's hospital on the island was completed in 1881. Inmates from the Smallpox Hospital were moved to North Brother Island in 1885, and the Smallpox Hospital building became a nurses' training school and dormitory. In addition, a male nurse's training school opened in 1887 and operated for 16 years. The Chapel of the Good Shepherd opened on the island in 1889.\nThe Strecker Memorial Laboratory was constructed in 1892 for the City Hospital. The next year, the city began sending typhus patients to the island. During the decade, city officials found the almshouse and City Hospital dilapidated and overcrowded, and a grand jury declared the women's asylum a \"disgrace\" to New York City. The asylum's inmates were transferred to Wards Island in the mid-1890s, and Wards Island's Homeopathic Hospital relocated to Blackwell's Island, becoming the Metropolitan Hospital. A proposal to build a power plant on the island in 1895 was unsuccessful, and the city began planning to expand the island's prisons the next year. Work began on new structures for the City Hospital and the almshouse in early 1897, and eleven new almshouse buildings opened that October. There were also plans to add eight pavilions to the island's infants' hospital. The prison's hospital burned down in 1899. At the end of the century, the island housed 7,000 people across seven institutions.\n1900s and 1910s.\nBy the 20th century, Blackwell's Island had received the nickname of \"Farewell Island\" because of its connotations with fear and despair, and it was also known as simply \"The Island\". At the time, the island contained a poorhouse, the city jail, and several hospitals. The United States Department of the Navy proposed a drill ground and training facility at Blackwell's Island's northern end in 1901, although city officials opposed it. The following year, there was a proposal to turn the island over to the federal government and raze many of the existing structures; the city's controller was also against this plan. Other proposals for the island in the first decade of the 20th century included new tuberculosis (consumptive) hospitals, additional almshouses, an electric power plant, and general hospitals. A tuberculosis ward at Metropolitan Hospital opened on the island in 1902, followed by an expanded nurses' school the next year. By the mid-1900s, the \"Louisville Courier-Journal\" called the island \"the world's best guarded prison\", and the \"New-York Tribune\" described the island as unsanitary. The city's controller recommended the construction of a new hospital to alleviate the poor conditions.\nA proposal to convert the island into a park resurfaced in 1907. By the end of the decade, thousands of elderly residents voluntarily traveled to the island for \"vacations\" every year. The island's prisoners manufactured goods for the city, such as beds, brushes, and clothes, and the Russell Sage Foundation set up a short-lived pathology institute on the island in 1907. The Queensboro Bridge, crossing Blackwell's Island, opened in 1909, but it did not provide direct access to the island until the late 1910s. In addition, in the early 1910s, several buildings were added at the island's City and Metropolitan hospitals, and a Catholic chapel was developed on the island. City corrections commissioner Katharine Davis announced plans to construct a prison hospital on the island in 1915; there was very little vacant land on the island by then.\nBy the 1910s, twenty-five thousand prisoners passed through the island's jail annually, and Mayor William Jay Gaynor proposed shutting the jail. There were also proposals to move the penitentiary to Hart Island, freeing up Blackwell's Island for hospitals and charitable institutions. The city's deputy correction correctioner called the island's penitentiary \"unfit for pigs\" in a 1914 report criticizing the unsanitary and overcrowded conditions, and a grand jury investigation the same year found that the jail was severely mismanaged. Blackwell's Island Penitentiary was negatively affecting the reputation of the island's other facilities, to the point where a renaming of the island was under discussion. The women's penitentiary underwent reforms during the mid-1910s, and some prisoners were sent off the island to other jails. Bird S. Coler ordered that the island's buildings be refurbished after he became the city's public welfare commissioner in 1918.\n1920s and 1930s.\nIn 1921, the city began using Blackwell's Penitentiary to detain women who were awaiting trial. The island's prison hospital was severely understaffed, and the prison was described as \"a disgrace to the City of New York\". That April, the New York City Board of Aldermen renamed Blackwell's Island to Welfare Island. The aldermen hoped the new name would improve the island's reputation, though the United States Board on Geographic Names did not recognize the name change for four decades. The state's prison commission recommended converting the island to a park in 1924, and the city began planning to move Welfare Island's inmates to a new jail complex on Rikers Island further north. By then, the Welfare Island penitentiary lacked plumbing, had rat infestations, and was susceptible to fire. The prison's hospital was so overcrowded that ill inmates had to be treated in their cells. Prison staff were poorly compensated, and the prison received little to no maintenance.\nA chapel was dedicated on the island in 1925, followed by a synagogue in 1926. The city government also expanded the island's Cancer Institute in the 1920s. The State Department of Correction described the island in the early 1930s as \"absolutely unsuitable for the purpose for which it is now used\". The Board of Estimate rezoned the island in 1933 to allow redevelopment. At the time, officials were planning a children's hospital and nurses' dormitory on the island. Municipal prison commissioner Austin MacCormick reformed the island's prison in 1934 following a series of uprisings. By then, the old almshouse (the City Home) was so overcrowded that patients were being housed in abandoned portions of the Lunatic Asylum. Welfare Island's jail was scheduled to be relocated, and city parks commissioner Robert Moses proposed converting the jail site to a public park. A city committee instead recommended a plan by city hospital commissioner S. S. Goldwater, who proposed expanding the island's hospital facilities.\nAfter the Rikers Island jail complex opened, workers demolished the Welfare Island jail, and all inmates had been relocated by February 1936. The city announced plans for a chronic care hospital complex in 1936. When the Welfare Island Hospital for Chronic Diseases, later Goldwater Memorial Hospital, opened in July 1939, the Central and Neurological Hospital closed. An eight-building camp also opened in 1939.\n1940s to 1960s.\nDuring the mid-1940s, plans were filed for a combined laundry, garage, and firehouse building; a hospital at Welfare Island's northern tip; a nurses' training school; and a chronic-disease ward at the Metropolitan Hospital. A girls' shelter on the island opened in late 1945. By the late 1940s, mayor William O'Dwyer described conditions at some of the island's hospitals as \"frightful\", mainly because of their age. A chronic-care hospital and a laundry building were developed on Welfare Island during that era. The laundry building began construction in 1948 and was completed the next year. Work on a 2,000-bed facility, later known as the Bird S. Coler Hospital, also began in 1948. Further projects were proposed in the late 1940s, including the Welfare Island Bridge to Queens, a laboratory for Goldwater Hospital, and two hospitals with a combined 1,500 beds. The bridge was intended to relieve traffic caused by the island's new hospitals, while the additional hospitals would serve the city's growing elderly population.\nDuring the early 1950s, the city planned a 1,500-bed hospital on the island and wished to convert the island's Cancer Institute into a tuberculosis hospital. After Coler Hospital opened in 1952, patients were relocated there from the City Home for Dependents. City Home was emptied out by 1953. The Welfare Island Bridge opened in May 1955, and a bus began serving the island. The Metropolitan Hospital moved to mainland Manhattan later that year, while the City Hospital was replaced in 1957 by Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens. Several medical facilities on the island opened during the mid-1950s, including an elderly rehabilitation center at Goldwater Hospital, a polio treatment center at Goldwater, and a children's rehabilitation center at Coler Hospital. There were also proposals to establish a \"fire college\" and a women's jail on the island. Another medical facility for chronically ill and elderly patients opened on Welfare Island in 1958.\nBy 1960, half of Welfare Island was abandoned, and the Goldwater and Bird S. Coler hospitals were the only remaining institutions there. The city government had been trying since 1957, without success, to obtain $1 million to demolish the abandoned buildings. The New York City Fire Department (FDNY) opened a training school in 1962, using 90 abandoned buildings for training purposes. One reporter in 1967 called Welfare Island a \"ghost town, vacant lot, woodland and mausoleum for unhappy memories\".\nRedevelopment plans.\nEarly- and mid-1960s proposals.\nThe businessman and politician Frederick W. Richmond announced a proposal in 1961 to redevelop the island with residences for 70,000 people. The plan would have cost $450 million and would have included a two-level platform supporting buildings as tall as 50 stories. The American Institute of Architects' New York chapter proposed that the island instead become a park, while yet another plan called for the island to become housing for United Nations staff. Other plans included those for a college campus or a smaller-scale residential area. A New York City Subway station on Welfare Island was announced in February 1965 as part of the new 63rd Street lines under the East River; the subway announcement spurred additional plans for the island's redevelopment. There were plans to rename Welfare Island because the public generally associated the name negatively with the island's hospitals, and even the hospital's patients wanted the island to be renamed.\nThe city government ordered the demolition of six dilapidated buildings on the island in 1965. The city took over another 45 abandoned hospital buildings via condemnation in June 1966, and the New York City Board of Estimate applied for $250,000 in federal funds for a feasibility study on the island's redevelopment later that year. The New York state government proposed in December 1967 to convert most of the island into a public park, except for senior citizens' housing at the north end. The United Nations International School considered developing a campus at the island's southern end, and the New York Board of Trade pushed to redevelop the island as a city park. Other plans included a mix of recreational facilities and low-density housing; an amusement park similar to Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen; an underground nuclear power plant; a cemetery; and a \"city of the future\".\nJohnson and Burgee plan.\nIn February 1968, mayor John V. Lindsay named a committee to make recommendations for the island's development, at which point one newspaper called it \"the most expensive wasteland in the world\". The state government established the Welfare Island Development Corporation (WIDC; later the Roosevelt Island Development Corporation or RIDC) that April. Early the next year, the state government canceled plans for a state park encompassing Welfare Island, and Lindsay's committee recommended renaming the island and developing housing units and recreational facilities there. Land clearing began that April, and Lindsay asked the New York State Urban Development Corporation (UDC) to help redevelop the island in May. The city and state governments formally presented their proposal for Welfare Island in October 1969. After the Board of Estimate approved the plan later that month, the UDC signed a 99-year lease with the city that December. The city could pay either two percent of the development cost or 40 percent of any profits. The UDC issued $250 million in bonds to help finance the project. The state hoped to finish the project within eight years.\nThe architects Philip Johnson and John Burgee designed the master plan for Welfare Island, which called for two neighborhoods named Northtown and Southtown, separated by a common area. The island was to become a car-free area with apartments, stores, community centers, and a waterfront promenade. The apartments ranged in size from studios to four-bedroom units and were a mixture of rental and cooperative units. There would be a hotel, public schools, stores, and office space, and several existing buildings would be retained. Services such as parks and schools were near every residence, and there was a pneumatic trash collection system. The first apartment buildings banned dogs, but this prohibition was not applied to buildings developed later. Additionally, the hospitals on the island still needed vehicular access, so the car ban was ultimately repealed.\nBy the early 1970s, the families of Welfare Island's three chaplains were the only people living on the island, excluding hospital patients. Models of Johnson and Burgee's proposal were exhibited at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in late 1970. The UDC modified some of Johnson and Burgee's designs after they were publicized; for example, it added more buildings on the waterfront. The redevelopment attracted residents who wanted a better quality of life. Critics expressed concerns about the fact that lower- and upper-income residents were placed on opposite sides of Main Street, and they also questioned whether the project's $400 million construction budget could have been spent on other projects.\nRedevelopment.\nRenaming and development of Northtown.\nThe first phase of the development, Northtown, was to accommodate about 2,100 families. The law professor Adam Yarmolinsky was hired to lead the WIDC in late 1970, but he resigned after just over a year. Work formally began in mid-1971, and the state approved the construction of the first buildings the same year. The UDC hired at least 17 architectural and engineering companies to design the structures, though many of the architects resigned during construction. The WIDC approved a proposal for 1,100 middle-income and luxury apartments in April 1972; the UDC decided to build the residences as housing cooperatives after unsuccessfully looking for a private developer. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development formally designated Welfare Island as a \"new town\" in December 1972, making it eligible for additional funds.\nUDC considered renaming the island to attract new residents; the Four Freedoms Foundation proposed renaming it for U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt. The City Council approved the name change in July 1973, and Welfare Island was renamed Roosevelt Island on August 20, 1973. Officials began planning the Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park as well; although the island had been renamed in anticipation of the park's construction, the project was delayed for the next several decades. By the middle of 1973, one building had topped out, and the island had been expanded by using dirt from the 63rd Street Tunnel's construction. UDC head Edward J. Logue and project manager Robert Litke convinced multiple developers to sign 40-year leases for buildings on the island. Parts of the project were delayed by disputes over the relocation of a laundry building. By the end of the year, an advisory group recommended that the state legislature halt all UDC financing for the unbuilt phases of the Roosevelt Island development, citing the state's financial shortfalls. At least one of the residential structures' builders had also gone bankrupt. Construction proceeded steadily through 1974, and renting began that October. In addition, the existing Blackwell House and Chapel of the Good Shepherd were renovated.\nAfter Logue was fired in early 1975, there was uncertainty over whether additional buildings would ever be built, especially given the UDC's financial troubles. The UDC decided to complete the first phase of the island's development, on which it had already spent $180 million, and the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal took over the UDC's residential developments, including Roosevelt Island. Following an architectural design competition, the UDC hired four architecture firms to design the second phase of Northtown that year. Residents began moving into Roosevelt Island's first building in April 1975. Initially, there were no stores on the island, and residents had to pass through Queens to go anywhere else. Although people were not incentivized to move to Roosevelt Island because of the lack of public transportation, the island was home to 170 families by the end of 1975. The first four buildings in Northtown were all completed by mid-1976, while the storefronts were slowly being rented.\nDevelopment of Northtown II.\nNo new buildings were completed between 1976 and 1989, due to delays in the subway line's opening and the city's financial troubles. The Roosevelt Island Tramway to Manhattan opened in May 1976, and the U.S. government provided a grant the same year to fund the construction of parks on the island. Rivercross, the only cooperative apartment building in Northtown, generally attracted upper-class families because of its high monthly fees, while the other buildings attracted middle-class residents. The FDNY training school moved to Randalls Island in 1977, and the old Roosevelt Island campus was razed. There were over 3,000 residents by early 1977 and 5,500 residents by 1978. Two-thirds of the island's storefronts were still empty by the end of 1977, even as almost all of the rental apartments and most of the cooperative apartments were occupied. The UDC leased some land in late 1977 to the Starrett Corporation, which planned to erect three additional buildings with a combined 1,000 apartments. Starrett and the UDC signed an agreement in June 1979, in which Starrett agreed to build the three buildings, collectively known as Northtown II, for $82 million.\nNew York state comptroller Edward V. Regan published a report in 1980, saying that the Roosevelt Island redevelopment suffered from severe cost overruns and was losing money. Starrett continued to modify its plans for Northtown II, and, by 1982, the New York state government planned to begin developing Northtown II. The opening of the subway, which would support the island's increasing population, had been repeatedly delayed, even as residents expressed concerns that the subway would cause the island's low crime rate to increase. By then, the island had 5,000 residents and 1,800 hospital patients, but relatively few businesses. The state legislature created the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation (RIOC) to operate the island in 1984.\nThe UDC re-approved the Northtown II plan in July 1984, and RIOC approved it in 1986. The revised plans called for five buildings, containing a total of 1,100 apartments. Opponents of the Northtown II project wanted to maintain the island's character and expressed concerns about the lack of mass transit options; following a lawsuit to block Northtown II, a judge approved it in late 1986. Work on Northtown II commenced at the end of 1987, financed by a $176 million mortgage loan from the city. The Northtown II towers, known as Manhattan Park, opened in 1989. While the new apartments initially sold at a slower-than-expected pace, Northtown II was 70 percent occupied by early 1990.\n1990s developments.\nThe opening of the Roosevelt Island subway station, in late 1989, allowed further development to proceed. Officials announced the Southtown development in October 1989. Designed by Raquel Ramati Associates, it was to consist of 1,956 apartments, split evenly between market-rate and affordable apartments. The development would span and house up to 5,000 people. The New York City Board of Estimate approved plans for Southtown in August 1990, but the project had been placed on hold by 1991 because RIOC had not been able to secure a developer. For much of the 1990s, no large buildings were completed on Roosevelt Island.\nIn part because of the lack of development, the island's population remained lower than expected, requiring it to be subsidized. By the mid-1990s, the island had 8,200 residents, less than half the 20,000 that the state government had originally envisioned, and there were around 20 small stores. To attract visitors, RIOC developed several recreational facilities and parks and sought to restore the island's oldest buildings. RIOC also planned to remove about of land to make way for a seawall. The architect Santiago Calatrava was hired to design a visitor center in the 1990s, but this was never built.\nRIOC proposed selling off the Southtown site in 1997, and the Related Companies and Hudson Companies signed an agreement to develop Southtown. The plans for Southtown were subsequently redrawn; the revised plan called for three buildings to the east of Main Street, six buildings to the west, and new recreational fields. Southtown's development also entailed reducing the size of the existing Blackwell Park, which prompted opposition from Northtown residents who used the park. A 26-story hotel with a convention center was proposed on the island in 1998, though this plan was controversial. There was also growing discontent with RIOC. As a result, mayor Rudy Giuliani proposed having the city take over the island in 1999, and state legislator Pete Grannis also proposed legislation to allow the island to govern itself. A contractor was hired to build the first section of Southtown in May 1999, and Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center indicated that it would build a tower in Southtown to house its staff.\n2000s to present.\nBy the 2000 United States census, Roosevelt Island had a population of 9,520. Some of the island's original buildings, which were part of the Mitchell\u2013Lama affordable housing program, were planned to be converted to market-rate housing during the time. Southtown's first buildings, including two structures for medical workers were announced in early 2001. The first two Southtown buildings were completed in 2002, and a proposal to redevelop the Octagon tower as an apartment building was announced that year. The largely inaccessible Southpoint Park was opened year-round in 2003, a year after Governor George Pataki signed legislation designating several parks on the island. The island's first two condominium buildings, both in Southtown, and the Octagon were developed next. All three structures had been completed by 2007, increasing the island's population to around 12,000. Southtown's fifth and sixth buildings were completed by 2008. By the late 2000s, there were long waiting lists for residences on the island, and people quickly moved into the new residential buildings. Although the Roosevelt Island Residents Association expressed concerns that the new developments would cause gentrification, the island largely retained its middle-class housing stock.\nWork commenced on Four Freedoms Park in 2009, along with a redesign of Southpoint Park. Southpoint Park reopened in 2011, and Four Freedoms Park was finished the next year. A RIOC survey from 2010 found that only 12 percent of residents shopped on the island, and RIOC leased the island's largely vacant retail space to the Related Companies and Hudson Companies the next year. Related and Hudson renovated 33 storefronts, while RIOC waived food-truck permit fees to entice food vendors. The city government selected Technion\u00a0\u2013 Israel Institute of Technology and Cornell University in late 2011 to develop the Cornell Tech research center on the island; the proposal included three towers, a hotel, and a conference center. The campus replaced the outmoded Goldwater Memorial Hospital, which closed in 2013. Work on Cornell Tech itself began in 2015, and the campus opened two years later. Graduate students moved to the island after Cornell Tech opened.\nMeanwhile, the island's population had grown to 11,661 by the 2010 United States census. Some of the Mitchell\u2013Lama apartments were converted to market-rate housing in the 2010s, while development of additional residential structures continued. The seventh Riverwalk building was finished in 2015, followed by the eighth in 2019. Firefighters Field was renovated with the development of the eighth Riverwalk building. To attract visitors, RIOC announced in 2018 that it would create an \"art trail\" around the island. RIOC began soliciting plans for a memorial to the journalist Nellie Bly in 2019; it ultimately commissioned \"The Girl Puzzle\" monument by Amanda Matthews, which was dedicated in December 2021. There was an additional influx of residents during the COVID-19 pandemic in New York City, particularly among those looking for open space. The final building in Southtown, Riverwalk 9, began construction in November 2022 and topped out the next year. In March 2024, plans were announced for a \"healing forest\" at the southern end of the island. The last building in the Riverwalk development, Riverwalk Heights, was completed in 2024, adding 357 units to Roosevelt Island. In 2025, the RIOC extended its lease of Roosevelt Island to 2078.\nDemographics.\nWhen the first residential buildings opened, Roosevelt Island's amenities and wheelchair accessibility made it attractive to disabled residents and families with children. Many of the first residents were white, middle-income families, and disabled patients from the island's hospitals moved into the apartments as well. The island also attracted residents who wanted to live in a racially integrated neighborhood, as well as those who wanted to avoid housing discrimination in other areas.\nDue to its proximity to the headquarters of the United Nations, Roosevelt Island attracted UN employees almost as soon as the first building opened. A \"New York Times\" article from 1999 described Roosevelt Island's diverse demographics as being another factor in its popularity among diplomatic staff. The island has been home to many diplomatic staff over the years, including Kofi Annan when he was United Nations Secretary General. One of every three Roosevelt Island residents was foreign-born by 2000.\nThe 2020 United States census showed that Roosevelt Island had a population of 11,722, across three census tracts. The racial makeup of Roosevelt Island's three census tracts was 36.3% (4,251) White, 10.6% (1,237) African American, 33.2% (3,897) Asian, 2.8% (333) from other races, and 4.8% (564) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 12.3% (1,440) of the population. In the 2020 census data from the New York City Department of City Planning, Roosevelt Island is grouped as part of the Upper East Side-Lenox Hill-Roosevelt Island neighborhood tabulation area. The neighborhood tabulation area had 59,200 residents.\nCommunity.\nRoosevelt Island's redevelopment in the 1970s spurred the creation of a community distinct from the rest of Manhattan. Following Northtown's completion, an architectural critic wrote for \"Architectural Design\" that Roosevelt Island \"seems to be more of a hermetically sealed suburb than an integral part of New York City\". One newspaper from 1989 described the island as a \"small, self-contained, family-oriented community\", with its own Little League Baseball team, newspaper, and library. A \"Washington Post\" article from the same year described the island as having the feel of a small town but with a closer connection to Manhattan. A \"New York Times\" article from 1999 said the island had the feel of \"a postwar suburb of some European city\", distinct from the rest of New York City. In 2008, the \"New York Daily News\" described the island as a \"fantastic and peaceful place to live\", albeit with many disputes among residents.\nOver the years, several dozen volunteer groups have been developed on the island. These include the Roosevelt Island Garden Club, which consists of 120 plots tended by members. There is also a farmer's market. in addition to organizations such as the Roosevelt Island Visual Art Association and the Main Street Theatre &amp; Dance Alliance. A historical society, the Roosevelt Island Historical Society, has archival material about the island's history. The island has a biweekly newspaper, \"The Main Street Wire\", which was founded in 1981; it originally had a column with pieces about the history of Roosevelt Island.\nThere have been community traditions on Roosevelt Island, such as Halloween parades, Black History Month events, and Lunar New Year celebrations. Various activities take place on the island throughout the year, such as picnics and concerts, in addition to annual Roosevelt Island Day celebrations since 1995. The island has also hosted events like the Roosevelt Island Table Tennis Tournament and the Figment NYC festival. Every summer since 2015, the Manhattan Park Pool Club has commissioned a mural for the Manhattan Park development's pool deck. Roosevelt Island has sometimes been used as a filming location, such as for the films \"Spider-Man\" (2002) and \"Dark Water\" (2005).\nBuildings.\nThe 1969 master plan divided the island into two residential communities: Northtown and Southtown. The plan received mixed reviews. A writer for \"New York\" magazine wrote that the Johnson\u2013Burgee design was \"a nice plan for a very nice community\", while an \"Architectural Forum\" reviewer called it \"purposefully schematic and architecturally nonspecific\". \"The Wall Street Journal\" wrote of the buildings on the island: \"Their physical surfaces are harsh but the streetscapes aren't.\" In 1977, the City Club of New York gave Roosevelt Island's buildings a special honor award for the quality of their designs. Although most of the residential structures contain rental apartments, there are also condominiums and cooperative housing. Roosevelt Island generally has more wheelchair-accessible housing than other neighborhoods, in part because of its past use as a hospital island.\nNorthtown.\nThe first phase of Roosevelt Island's development was called Northtown, with about 2,140 apartments. Northtown consists of four housing complexes: Westview, Island House, Rivercross, and Eastwood. The architectural firm of Sert, Jackson &amp; Associates designed the Island House and Rivercross buildings east of Main Street, while John Johansen and Ashok Bhavnani designed the Eastwood and Westfield buildings on the west side. All four structures are U-shaped buildings, which measure up to 20 stories high and are faced in concrete or corrugated brick. Three of the buildings were rental apartment complexes: Island House, Westview, and Eastwood (the latter of which had affordable housing). Rivercross was structured as a housing cooperative. All of these buildings, except Rivercross, were originally subsidized under the state's Mitchell\u2013Lama Housing Program. The first apartments included built-in heating and air-conditioning units, while the buildings themselves included health clubs. Westview and Eastwood also had skip-stop elevators that stopped at three-floor intervals; this allowed for more flexible apartment layouts on floors that were not served by elevators.\nNorthtown II (also known as Manhattan Park), located north of Northtown and on the west side of Main Street, was developed by the Starrett Corporation and designed by the firm Gruzen Samton. Completed in 1989, it occupies and consists of five buildings. The complex comprises around 1,100 rental apartments, split into about 220 affordable apartments and about 880 market-rate apartments. The affordable apartments are clustered within one building. In all five structures, the apartments range from one to three bedrooms. There are also a garden, picnic space, community center, playgrounds, and daycare center. Near the north end of the island is a 500-unit apartment building known as the Octagon, which is centered around a remaining portion of the Lunatic Asylum.\nIn addition to the apartment buildings, the northern part of Roosevelt Island contains the Metropolitan Hospital's former church, which was built in the 1920s and became a wedding venue in 2021. A stone structure, Chapel of St. Dennis, was built near the Octagon around 1935\u20131940; little else is known about this chapel.\nSouthtown and southern end.\nSouthtown (also referred to as Riverwalk) was developed starting in 2001. When complete, Southtown will have 2,000 units in nine buildings. As of 2022[ [update]], eight of Southtown's nine planned buildings had been completed, while the last structure was under construction. Some of the buildings house medical staff who work in Manhattan. The structures contain a total of over 2,000 apartments, of which 40 percent are affordable housing. Some of the buildings in Southtown are condominiums, including Riverwalk Place and Riverwalk Court. In contrast to the older Northtown buildings, which were developed in groups, the Riverwalk structures were constructed as standalone buildings; the \"Wall Street Journal\" regarded Southtown as lacking the \"coherent streetscapes\" of Northtown.\nThe southern end of the island also contains four buildings, which are part of the Cornell Tech graduate-school campus and research center. The $2 billion facility includes 2 million square feet of space on an site. The first phase of the campus includes a main academic building, a graduate housing tower, and an innovation hub/tech incubator. The 26-story Cornell Tech residential tower has 350 apartments and was intended as the world's largest passive house residential tower when it was built. Cornell Tech's first phase also includes a conference center and a hotel. The hotel is 18 stories high, with 224 rooms, and is known as the Graduate Roosevelt Island; it opened in 2021 as the island's first hotel.\nDesignated landmarks.\nRoosevelt Island has six buildings and structures that are New York City designated landmarks, all of which are also on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The Blackwell House at Main Street, one of the city's few remaining farmhouses, was built between 1796 and 1804 for James Blackwell. Also along Main Street is the Chapel of the Good Shepherd, an Episcopal church from 1889. Blackwell Island Light, an octagonal Gothic-style lighthouse at the northern end of the island, was built in 1872; it measures tall and was designed by Renwick.\nThe remaining three official city landmarks are former hospitals. At the island's southern tip are the Smallpox Hospital, a Gothic-style ruin built in 1857 as the first smallpox hospital in the U.S., and the Strecker Laboratory, a Romanesque Revival-style electrical substation built in 1892 as a laboratory. At the northern end is the Octagon, the sole remaining structure from the 1839 Lunatic Asylum. The ruins of the City Hospital, a mid-19th-century building on the southern tip of the island, had been listed on the NRHP, but were razed in 1994 due to extreme neglect.\nGovernance and infrastructure.\nThe neighborhood is part of Manhattan Community District 8. In the 1970s, when the city's community districts were being redrawn, there were disputes over whether the island should be served by a district in Manhattan or Queens. While the island was ultimately placed within a Manhattan community district, it received emergency services from Queens. The island's other services come from Manhattan; for example, it was still assigned a ZIP Code and an area code from Manhattan. The island has a ZIP Code of 10044, and residents are assigned area codes 212, 332, 646, and 917. The United States Postal Service operates the Roosevelt Island Station at 694 Main Street; the island's post office opened in October 1976. The firm of Kallman and McKinnell designed the post office, along with a small fire station and a set of stores.\nThe Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation, a state public-benefit corporation, operates the island's infrastructure and oversees its development. RIOC manages transportation and private security on the island, and it is also responsible for leasing out stores, developing apartments, and preserving the island's landmarked buildings. Although RIOC is a state agency, its members are appointed rather than elected, though straw polls for positions on RIOC's board were hosted starting in 2008. By law, five of RIOC's nine members must be island residents, but not RIOC's CEO. Much of RIOC's income comes from fees collected from private developers.\nUtilities.\nParts of New York City Water Tunnel No. 3, which provides fresh water to much of New York City, pass underneath the island; the section under Roosevelt Island opened in 1998 and travels as much as under the island. Roosevelt Island also had its own steam plant behind the Roosevelt Island Tramway's terminal until 2013. In addition, Verdant Power installed tidal turbines under the East River's eastern channel in the 2000s as part of the Roosevelt Island Tidal Energy project; The turbines powered small parts of the island. Three new turbines were installed in the 2020s.\nWaste disposal.\nBefore the 1970s, raw waste from Roosevelt Island was dumped directly into the East River. Garbage on Roosevelt Island is collected by an automated vacuum collection (AVAC) system, which consists of pneumatic tubes measuring either , , or wide. Manufactured by Swedish firm Envac and installed in 1975, it was the second AVAC system in the U.S. at the time of its installation, after the Disney utilidor system. It is one of the world's largest AVAC systems, collecting trash from 16 residential towers. Trash from each tower is transported to the Central Collections and Compaction Plant at up to . The collection facility contains three turbines that spin the garbage; the trash is then compacted and sent to a landfill. The pneumatic tube system collects or of trash each day. On several occasions, tenants have damaged the system by throwing large objects, such as strollers and Christmas trees, into the tubes.\nEmergency services.\nNYC Health + Hospitals/Coler is located in the northern portion of the island and has been Roosevelt Island's only public hospital since 2013, when Goldwater Memorial Hospital closed. Although the 1969 plan for Roosevelt Island called for dedicated fire and police stations, as of 2024[ [update]] the island receives all of its emergency services from Queens. Roosevelt Island is patrolled by the 114th Precinct of the New York City Police Department, located at 34-16 Astoria Boulevard in Astoria, Queens. The Roosevelt Island Public Safety Department also patrols the island; its officers can make arrests but do not carry weapons.\nRoosevelt Island has no firehouse. Fire protection services are provided by Engine Company 260 of the New York City Fire Department (FDNY), located at 11-15 37th Avenue in Astoria. The FDNY maintains its Special Operations Command facility at 750 Main Street on the island. Engine Company 261, in Long Island City, served the island until it closed in 2003. There was controversy over the firehouse's closure, and a New York Supreme Court judge subsequently ruled that the closure was illegal. In 2019, mayor Bill de Blasio's office told reporters that the firehouse would not reopen because the island already had additional emergency services.\nRecreation and green spaces.\nParks.\nWhen Roosevelt Island was redeveloped in the 1970s, about a quarter of the land area was set aside for parks. The island has four primary parks: Lighthouse, Octagon, Southpoint, and Four Freedoms parks. At the northern tip of Roosevelt Island is Lighthouse Park, named after the Blackwell Island Light. Octagon Park, a green space, contains a prow-shaped performance stage facing the East River's west channel; it was originally planned as an ecological park with bedrock outcrops. Near the south end of the island is Southpoint Park, a green space containing the Strecker Lab and Smallpox Hospital buildings. The Franklin D. Roosevelt Four Freedoms Park, a New York State Park, opened in 2012 at the southern end of the island. Four Freedoms Park was designed by Louis Kahn in 1974 and consists of two rows of trees converging toward a granite \"room\" at the island's southern tip.\nAdditionally, the southern part of Cornell Tech contains a , publicly accessible berm around in area. The berm is undeveloped, but the buildings it is intended to protect from flooding are planned to be built by 2027.\nThere is a smaller park located around the Blackwell House. The southern tip of Roosevelt Island was formerly occupied by the Delacorte Fountain, which was donated by publisher George T. Delacorte Jr. in mid-1967 and dedicated in 1969. The fountain sprayed water from the East River into the air. A local group planted trees at the southern tip of the island in 1985, which quickly died due to blasts from the Delacorte Fountain; the fountain was turned off in the 1980s and subsequently taken apart. The entire island is circled by a publicly accessible waterfront promenade. Because of its greenery, Roosevelt Island received a Tree City USA designation for several years in the 1990s and 2000s.\nRecreational facilities.\nThere are four outdoor recreational fields on Roosevelt Island:\nThe Roosevelt Island Racquet Club is located near the Roosevelt Island Tramway stop and was developed in the early 1990s, with 11 courts underneath a pair of domes. Also next to the tram stop is the Sportspark indoor recreation center, with a studio, swimming pool, gym, and recreation room. There are additional tennis courts in Octagon Park, next to the Octagon.\nEducation.\nSchools and higher education.\nRoosevelt Island is served by the New York City Department of Education. When it was redeveloped as a residential community in the 1970s, the island was planned with up to 16 schools serving grades K-12, each accommodating 180 to 300 students. Roosevelt Island's schools were spread across several apartment buildings. The school system taught fine arts as part of a partnership with Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, and each school taught a foreign language as well.\nThe first school on Roosevelt Island opened in 1975 with a single student and two teachers. By the 1980s, the island had five school buildings, each serving two grades. All of the island's schools were combined in 1992 into PS/IS 217 Roosevelt Island School, which is located on Main Street. By the 21st century, PS/IS 217 was the only public school on the island, serving students from pre-kindergarten to grade 8. High-school students on the island generally went to schools in Manhattan. The Child School and Legacy High School serves special needs children with learning and emotional disabilities.\nIn 2011, Mayor Michael Bloomberg announced that Cornell Tech, a Cornell University-Technion-Israel Institute of Technology graduate school of applied sciences, would be built on the island. The first phase of Cornell Tech opened in 2017.\nLibrary.\nThe New York Public Library (NYPL) operates the Roosevelt Island branch at 504 Main Street. The library was founded in the 1970s as a volunteer initiative. Two residents, Dorothy and Herman Reade, founded the island's first library within a rented space in 1976; the collection had moved to 625 Main Street by 1977. The Reades' library was unusual in that it used a custom classification system, rather than the Dewey Decimal Classification system, which the Reades did not know much about. The library moved to its own building at 524 Main Street in 1979 or the 1980s. The library on Main Street was named the Dorothy and Herman Reade Library of Roosevelt Island in the early 1980s. Residents originally paid dues to access the library.\nThe library became a branch of the NYPL system in 1998, allowing the branch to access the NYPL's much larger collection. The Empire State Center for the Book dedicated a plaque on the island in 2016, marking the island's literary connections. The current NYPL branch at 504 Main Street opened in January 2021 and covers .\nReligion.\nThere have been churches and chapels for several Christian denominations on the island. The Chapel of the Good Shepherd, a Late Victorian Gothic style structure, was Roosevelt Island's first church and operated until 1958 as an Episcopal church. The chapel reopened in 1975 as a community center. The Chapel of Our Lady, Consoler of the Afflicted dated to 1909 and was a Gothic-style stone building serving the island's Catholic community. The Church of the Good Samaritan was developed for the Lutheran community in 1917. Both the Chapel of Our Lady and the Church of the Good Samaritan have since been demolished. At the Metropolitan Hospital was an Episcopal chapel, the Chapel of the Holy Spirit (consecrated 1925), and a Catholic chapel, the Chapel of the Sacred Heart.\nWelfare Island originally contained the Council Synagogue, which opened in 1926 and was described as having a \"pleasing exterior\" and a \"simple, dignified interior\". Following the residential redevelopment, the Roosevelt Island Jewish Congregation was founded c.\u20091987; the Chabad Lubavitch Center of Roosevelt Island moved into the RIJC's space in 2006. Chabad of Roosevelt Island also operates a Chabad Jewish student organization in association with Cornell Tech, which accommodates many international students from Israel. There is also a mosque operated by the Islamic Society of Roosevelt Island.\nTransportation.\nUntil its development in the late 20th century, Roosevelt Island was largely inaccessible from the outside world, and a guard banned most visitors, including all children under age 12. The island was accessed solely by rowboat until the early 20th century. Even through the 1950s, the only modes of transit to and from the island were a ferry from 78th Street in Manhattan and an elevator from the Queensboro Bridge.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], the island is accessible via bridge, aerial tramway, ferry, and subway. Although the tramway and subway stations are both wheelchair-accessible, both modes of transit can experience outages that occasionally make it impossible for disabled residents to travel to and from the island. Furthermore, despite the existence of several modes of transit, the island still had a reputation for being hard to access during the 21st century.\nPedestrian and vehicular access.\nAlthough Roosevelt Island is located directly under the Queensboro Bridge, it is no longer directly accessible from the bridge itself. A trolley previously connected passengers from Queens and Manhattan to a stop in the middle of the bridge, where passengers took an elevator down to the island. The trolley operated from the bridge's opening in 1909 until April 7, 1957. An elevator building, on the bridge's north side, was finished in 1918 or 1919. The elevator was closed to the public in 1957, after the Roosevelt Island Bridge opened, but was not demolished until 1970. As late as August 1973, another passenger elevator ran from the Queens end of the bridge to the island,\nThe Roosevelt Island Bridge, a vertical-lift bridge over the East River's eastern channel to Astoria, Queens, opened in 1955. It is the only vehicular route to the island and also contains a sidewalk. News media said in 2001 that the bridge was almost never lifted, though it was lifted more frequently starting in the 2000s. There is a bike lane on the bridge.\nRoosevelt Island's main parking facility is the Motorgate Garage, which was designed by the firm of Kallman &amp; McKinnell and originally had 1,000 parking spaces. It is designed in a brutalist style, with a concrete facade, and also included the island's first post office and fire station. There are also parking meters along Main Street, but parking is limited to 20 minutes. Since 2020, the island has also had Citi Bike bikeshare stations.\nMass transit.\nThe New York City Subway's 63rd Street Line was proposed in 1965 with a station directly serving the island. Service on the 63rd Street Line began in October 1989, but the line had no direct subway access to much of Queens until 2001. The line's eponymous station (served by the trains) is one of the deepest stations below sea level in the system, at more than below ground level. The BMT 60th Street Tunnel ( N , \u200b R , and \u200b W trains) and the IND 53rd Street Line (trains) both pass under Roosevelt Island, without stopping, on their way between Manhattan and Queens. There are emergency exit shafts to the island from both the 53rd Street and 60th Street tunnels.\nThe Roosevelt Island Tramway was proposed in the 1970s after delays in the subway's construction. It was completed in May 1976, providing access to Midtown Manhattan, and had been intended as a temporary mode of transport until the subway station opened. The tram was completely reconstructed in 2010.\nWhen the island was being redeveloped in the 1970s, the UDC had planned to operate 20-seat electric minibuses there. As of 2023[ [update]], MTA Bus's route operates between the island and Queens, making a loop around Roosevelt Island. RIOC also operates the Red Bus, a shuttle bus service that circulates around the island. The latter service is fare-free, connecting apartment buildings to the subway and tramway.\nA ferry service ran from Welfare Island to Manhattan from 1935 to June 1956, although the island's old ferry terminal remained standing for several years. A ferry route ran directly to Lower Manhattan briefly during 1986. Roosevelt Island has been served by NYC Ferry's Astoria route since August 2017. The ferry landing is on the east side of the island near the tramway station.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51947", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51947", "title": "Hearing Impairment", "text": ""}
{"id": "51951", "revid": "82835", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51951", "title": "Trolleys", "text": ""}
{"id": "51952", "revid": "11860501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51952", "title": "Streetcars", "text": ""}
{"id": "51953", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51953", "title": "I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue", "text": "BBC radio comedy panel game (since 1972)\nI'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue is a BBC radio comedy panel game. Billed as \"the antidote to panel games\", it consists of two teams of two comedians being given \"silly things to do\" by the host. The show was launched in April 1972 as a parody of radio and TV panel games, and has been broadcast since on BBC Radio 4 and the BBC World Service, with repeats aired on BBC Radio 4 Extra and, in the 1980s and 1990s, on BBC Radio 2. The 50th series was broadcast in November and December 2007.\nAfter a period of split chairmanship in the first series, Humphrey Lyttelton (\"Humph\") served in this role from the programme's inception until his hospitalisation and subsequent death in 2008, which led to the cancellation of the 2008 series. The show recommenced on 15 June 2009 with Lyttelton replaced by three hosts: Stephen Fry, Jack Dee and Rob Brydon. Dee went on to host all episodes of the 52nd series later that year, and continues in that role. The chairman's script was for a long time written by Iain Pattinson, who worked on the show from 1992 until his death in 2021.\nHistory.\n\"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\" developed from the long-running radio sketch show \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", the writers of which were John Cleese, Jo Kendall, David Hatch, The Goodies trio Bill Oddie, Tim Brooke-Taylor and especially Graeme Garden who suggested the idea of an unscripted show which, it was decided, would take the form of a parody panel game. A panel game with no competition was not itself a new idea: the BBC had a history of successful quiz shows designed to allow witty celebrities to entertain where winning was not important. Examples include \"Ignorance Is Bliss\", \"Just a Minute\", \"My Word!\" and \"My Music\" on the radio and \"Call My Bluff\" on television.\nThe pilot episode (at that time titled \"I'm Sorry, They're At It Again\") opened with Graeme Garden and Jo Kendall singing the words of \"Three Blind Mice\" to the tune of \"Ol' Man River\" followed by Bill Oddie and Tim Brooke-Taylor performing the lyrics of \"Sing a Song of Sixpence\" to the melody of \"These Foolish Things\". Dave Lee, who was bandleader on \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\", was at the piano and a number of rounds were introduced by a short phrase of music. Other rounds included \"Dialogue Read in a Specific Accent\" and \"Songs Sung as Animals\". In 1974 Bill Oddie was replaced by Willie Rushton, with Barry Cryer replacing Jo Kendall as Graeme Garden's teammate, and Humphrey Lyttelton as chairman, and the personnel remained constant from this point until Rushton's death in 1996, although occasional guest panellists appeared in the 1980s and early 1990s (see below). Since then the panel has featured a variety of guest comedians.\nAs of 2003, the show had over two million listeners on Radio 4 and its recording sessions typically filling 1,500-seat theatres within a week of being advertised. At least one recording for the spring 2006 series filled all its seats within three hours of the free tickets being made available, and the London recording of the autumn series in that year sold out in ten minutes. Although there are twelve \"Clue\" shows broadcast per year these are the result of just six recording sessions, with two programmes being recorded back-to-back. The show was recently voted the second funniest radio programme ever, after \"The Goon Show\". It has a large following among professional comedians such as Armando Iannucci, who turned down opportunities to work on it as he preferred to remain a listener.\nThe official, authorised history of the show and ISIRTA, \"The Clue Bible\" by Jem Roberts, was published by Preface Publishing in October 2009.\nParticipants.\nChairman.\nHumphrey Lyttelton, primarily known as a jazz trumpeter and bandleader, and known as Humph to his friends, was invited to be chairman because of the role played by improvisation in both comedy and jazz music. In the first series Lyttelton shared the role of chairman with Barry Cryer but he made it his own (especially once Cryer replaced Cleese as a regular panellist) and continued as chairman until his death on 25 April 2008. He read the script introducing the programme and segments in an utterly deadpan manner. He claimed the secret was just to read what was in front of him without understanding why it was funny. He adopted the grumpy persona of someone who would really rather be somewhere else, which he attributed to worrying that, surrounded by four professional comedians, he would have nothing worthwhile to chip in. He did occasionally depart from the script, however, often bringing the house down with an ad-lib. He was credited by the regular panellists as being the chief reason for the show's longevity.\nOn 18 April 2008, the producer of \"I'm Sorry I Haven't A Clue\", Jon Naismith, announced that, owing to hospitalisation to repair an aortic aneurysm, Humphrey Lyttelton would be unable to record the scheduled shows and that they would have to be postponed. The final show of the 2008 \"Best of\" tour on 22 April would be presented by Rob Brydon. Following Lyttelton's death there was speculation that the series might be cancelled because replacing him would be extremely difficult if not impossible. In a eulogy in \"The Guardian\", Barry Cryer did not allude to the future of the programme but said that there's \"got to be an agonising reappraisal\" and that Lyttelton was the \"very hub of the show\". Cryer, Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden all ruled themselves out as hosts: Cryer did not think the programme would work if a panellist became chairman and it \"would need somebody of stature to be parachuted in\". Jeremy Hardy also ruled himself out, saying \"Humph had big shoes to fill and I wouldn't do it.\"\nIn the \"Clue\" mailout for September 2008, Naismith stated: \"Despite the rumours, we've made no decisions about possible replacements for Humph, and are unlikely to make any decisions this year at least. Certainly I don't envisage us selecting anyone on a permanent basis for several series.\" It was announced that the show would continue recording beginning in 2009. The first new shows would be hosted by rotating guest presenters (similarly to the format of \"Have I Got News for You\") before a permanent replacement host was decided. In the \"Clue\" mailout for February 2009, Naismith announced that Stephen Fry, Jack Dee and Rob Brydon would host two shows each, to be recorded in April, May and June 2009 respectively. The programme returned on 15 June 2009, chaired by Fry with the usual panellists and special guest Victoria Wood. Every series since then has been chaired by Dee.\nPanellists.\nThe regular panellists for much of the show's early history were:\nMore recently, the show has used a wider variety of panellists with fewer regulars. Guests have included:\nProducers.\nThe show has had a number of producers over the years:\nMusical accompaniment.\nEarly episodes featured Dave Lee, who provided piano accompaniment on \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\". However, Colin Sell now usually fills this role. He is often the butt of jokes about his musical ability, to which he is unable to respond as he has no microphone. For example: \"When music experts hear Colin's compositions, they say he could have been another Berlin, Porter or anybody else employed by the German State Railway.\" Guest pianists, including Neil Innes, Denis King and Matthew Scott, have been called in when Sell has been unable to attend (or the \"ISIHAC\" team have \"won the coin toss\" as Lyttelton once said on the show). Lyttelton's band also appeared on a couple of Christmas specials. \nOn one occasion when Innes was guesting, Lyttelton outlined the musician's career, concluding that this \"has brought him to where he is today: standing in for Colin Sell.\" In another appearance, Innes sang along to his own composition \"I'm the Urban Spaceman\" during a round of \"Pick Up Song\".\nThe theme music is called \"The Schickel Shamble\", by Ron Goodwin, and is from the film \"Monte Carlo or Bust!\" It was chosen by David Hatch.\nScorers.\nSince 18 May 1985 (in the episode in which Kenny Everett made his debut), the show has included a fictional and completely silent scorer \"whose job is eased by the fact no points are actually awarded\". Usually this is \"the lovely Samantha\", who sits on the Chairman's left hand. There is a seat with a microphone next to the Chairman which is \"used\" by Samantha. During the introductory music, Humphrey Lyttelton would stand up and \"help\" Samantha into her seat. In practice, the seat and microphone were only used by the producer to welcome the audience, to introduce the participants and to give any other information to the audience such as the expected date of broadcasting, and to supervise re-recordings of fluffs made in the programme.\nLyttelton would describe Samantha's social activities, usually in an apology received from the unseen character who had been detained, often with a \"gentleman friend\". His comments included sexual innuendo and double entendres, such as \"Samantha likes nothing better than a little potter in the woodshed in the morning\", though many were far more daring and explicit. This has continued under Jack Dee's chairmanship.\nDuring early episodes of Samantha's appearance on the show, it was not completely clear that she was a fictional character, garnering complaints about the sexist and humiliating treatment she received. Producer Jon Naismith recalled \"when we [Naismith and Iain Pattinson] took over the show we used to get quite a few letters accusing us of sexist references to Samantha\" (the character was named after the page 3 topless model Samantha Fox). Samantha's inabilities as score-keeper often form the basis for humour; in a programme from 1997, Humph said: \"It's just occurred to me that Samantha hasn't given us the score... since 1981.\"\nSamantha has sometimes been replaced by a Swedish stand-in, Sven, or occasionally another substitute, Monica. When Margaret Thatcher left office in 1990 Lyttelton introduced a scorer named Margaret. In an episode in November 1991 both Samantha and Sven were present but occupied with each other and unable to award points.\nThe programme's scoring is completely non-existent. Most of the show is scripted, but in rounds such as \"Sound charades\", where one team of panellists have to guess the charade of the other team, the answer may be obvious (usually a pun) but the opposing team are not told the answer. In recording, it has taken them many minutes to come up with the correct answer, most of which has to be edited out before broadcast.\nIn rounds in which the panel must not see what the audience sees, there is the \"advanced laser display-board\" (in reality, a sign with the answer written on, held by Jon Naismith). These boards are sometimes described in more elaborate terms and as \"so generously funded by our hosts\". The names and phrases on them are conveyed to \"listeners at home\" by the \"mystery voice\", alluding to the 1960s radio programme \"Twenty Questions\".\nCorrespondence.\nA regular feature on the programme, preceding the game Mornington Crescent, is a fictional letters section which begins with the chairman's comments (\"I notice from the sheer weight of this week's postbag, we've received a little over no letters\" and \"I see from the number of letters raining down on us this week that the Scrabble factory has exploded again\"). The invariably single letter each week is from \"A Mrs Trellis of North Wales\" (one of the many prompts for a cheer from the audience), whose incoherent letters usually mistake the chairman for another Radio 4 presenter or media personality. \"Dear Libby\" (she writes), \"why oh why ... very nearly spells YOYO\", or \"Dear Mr Titchmarsh, never let them tell you that size isn't important. My aunt told me that, but then all my new wallpaper fell off.\"\nFormat.\nIntroduction.\nThe chairman introduces the show by introducing the place where they are recording from and giving factoids about the location which lead to a punchline, usually at the location's expense. The teams are then introduced, invariably in a self-deprecating manner that portrays them as has-beens, followed by the scorer for the evening, alternating between Samantha and Sven.\nGames.\nMany games are played on \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", some frequently and dozens less often. A few have been played only once, either because the joke works only once or because they were not particularly successful. Popular games include \"One Song to the Tune of Another\", \"Mornington Crescent\", \"Sound Charades\", \"Late Arrivals\", \"Double Feature\", \"Cheddar Gorge\" and \"Uxbridge English Dictionary\". \"One Song to the Tune of Another\" is always introduced using a complex analogy, despite its self-explanatory title, often ending with a joke at the expense of Colin Sell. \nMost episodes follow a format, and the same games are played in sequence in most series. The first, third and fifth episodes of a series (recorded first of two shows in each location) usually includes \"One Song to the Tune of Another\" as the second round, and the alternate episodes feature \"Pick-up Song\" in the same slot. \"Uxbridge English Dictionary\" usually begins the second recording session, and the same session will usually include \"Mornington Crescent\". \"Sound Charades\" is typically featured in the odd-numbered episodes. This pattern is more consistent in later episodes. \nThe panellists play as individuals or as two teams. \"Celebrity What's My Line?\" completely destroyed the intent of the original\u00a0\u2014 for players to guess the occupation of a third party by asking yes/no questions. The \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\" version once employed the famous actress (and fan of the show) Dame Judi Dench in this role and the renowned television gardener Alan Titchmarsh. Each began by performing a mime illustrating their occupation, giving a cryptic clue to the panel (appearing to a radio listener as a short silence punctuated by exclamations from the panel and laughter from the studio audience), before fielding apparently serious questions from the teams (e.g. \"Is that your own hair?\" or \"Do you kill people for money?\"), who pretended not to know who they were.\nMusical games often involve incongruities such as singing \"One Song to the Tune of Another\" or playing a song using only a swanee whistle and a kazoo. In \"Just a Minim\" \u2013 a parody of Radio 4's \"Just a Minute\" \u2013 panellists must sing a specified song avoiding repetition, deviation, or hesitation: the chosen songs often have extremely repetitive lyrics.\nHumour is derived from wordplay such as puns or mockery of styles of speech. For example, in a round based on suggesting television programmes from biblical times, suggestions included 'They think it's all Jehovah', \"I Love Lucifer and\" \"The Exodus Files.\"\nIn \"Uxbridge English Dictionary\", panellists contribute humorous redefinitions of words; such as \"Puny: the Roman Catholic equivalent of tennis elbow\". More puns are found in the \"Arrivals at the Ball\" section, of the form \"Mr and Mrs X and their son (or daughter)...\" the child's name forming a pun, preferably laboured and feeble. This grew out of the \"drama\" section of later shows in the \"I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again\" series; for example, at the Criminals' Ball, \"Mr and Mrs Knee, and their Swedish son, Lars Knee\".\nAccording to Tim Brooke-Taylor, twenty per cent of the show is ad-libbed. According to Willie Rushton, it is more like fifty per cent, but he didn't think that a bad thing.\nTime, destiny, fate and eternity.\nThe show draws to a close with the chairman imparting some final words of wisdom intended to evoke time, destiny, fate and eternity, undercut with silliness. For example: \"...And so, as the hunter of time blasts the moose of eternity, and the dairy counter worker of fate sighs and grabs her mop...\" Lyttelton's final sign-off on the show, shortly before his death in April 2008, was: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And so as the loose-bowelled pigeon of time swoops low over the unsuspecting tourist of destiny, and the flatulent skunk of fate wanders into the air-conditioning system of eternity, I notice it's the end of the show.\u2014\u200a\nHumour.\nMost of the humour is detached from the real world. Steve Punt cites it as one of his favourite radio shows because \"there's no points being made or targets being attacked.\" Contemporary references occasionally made by participants are usually asides. The show does occasionally comment on the outside world, though from an innocent perspective. The game \"Complete George Bush Quotes\" was once played, in which the teams had to supply endings for phrases that George Bush had begun (see Bushism), the teams complaining that they couldn't be any funnier than the original; similar rounds with guessing or completing quotes of other well-known public figures and personalities have also been played.\nThe regular panellists are represented by the chairman to be unfunny, struggling comedians who have been doing the same act for many years. The supposed personalities of the panellists as demonstrated by the chairman, fictitious but drawn from their public personas, is also a recurring theme. Barry Cryer was often represented as a tight-fisted alcoholic who could not wait to get to the pub (but who never bought a round of drinks), while Tim Brooke-Taylor was often represented as willing to take any small performance job in his quiet career and always campaigning for repeats of \"The Goodies\" (something which Brooke-Taylor himself played upon in many rounds). Humphrey Lyttelton often delivered mock comments of how boring and low quality the show was and, particularly in his later years on the show, preferring to doze off rather than listen to the rounds. Pianist Colin Sell, meanwhile, is often the butt of jokes regarding his supposedly terrible musical skills (despite in reality being an accomplished musician). \nAccording to Willie Rushton, \"The show gets quite filthy at times, but the audience love it.\"\nAfter fifty years on the air, one of the most important aspects of the show is its huge stock of running gags which, if not always funny in themselves, can elicit huge anticipatory laughter from the studio audience. The mere mention of Lionel Blair often brought roars of laughter in anticipation of an outrageous double-entendre based on his supposed homosexuality (he was not gay). Similarly, particular mention of points scorer Samantha or her male replacement Sven (neither of whom actually exists) will typically bring laughter in anticipation of a sexual double-entendre.\nIn the \"Film Club\" round, any reference by Graeme Garden to \"Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia\" is sure to cause a similar response. The game \"Wobbling Bunnies\" was introduced several times by Humph, often with eager anticipation by the panel and audience, but time pressures always meant the game was never actually played. Graeme Garden and Barry Cryer frequently played the characters of two Scots, Hamish and Dougal, whose skits usually began with the phrase \"You'll have had your tea?\", as a stereotypical Scots miser when receiving a guest never offers any food or drink. The characters were developed into their own Radio 4 show, \"Hamish and Dougal\", which also featured Jeremy Hardy. Another long-running gag involves one of the panellists putting forward a challenge of \"hesitation\" when another panellist leaves a long pause in the middle of speaking, a reference to another long-running Radio 4 panel show, \"Just a Minute\". (Likewise, occasionally on \"Just a Minute\", a panellist will make a challenge of \"Mornington Crescent\".) Chairman Humphrey Lyttelton frequently poked fun at \"Just a Minute\" and its chairman Nicholas Parsons. Lyttelton's successor, Jack Dee, continued with and expanded upon this, mimicking Parsons while he was still alive by constantly emphasising the long experience of some panellists, and the fact that the programme can be heard all over the world.\nAwards.\nThe programme has won the Gold Sony Radio Comedy Award three times:\nOther awards:\nIn 2020 the programme was voted the greatest radio comedy of all time by a panel convened by \"Radio Times\".\nWTBS recordings.\nEpisodes of \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\" were included in the package of programmes held in 20 underground radio stations of the BBC's Wartime Broadcasting Service (WTBS), designed to provide public information and morale-boosting broadcasts for 100 days after a nuclear attack.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51954", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51954", "title": "Performance problem", "text": ""}
{"id": "51955", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51955", "title": "Distribution (mathematical analysis)", "text": "Generalization of the concept of a function\nDistributions, also known as Schwartz distributions are a kind of generalized function in mathematical analysis. Distributions make it possible to differentiate functions whose derivatives do not exist in the classical sense. In particular, any locally integrable function has a distributional derivative.\nDistributions are widely used in the theory of partial differential equations, where it may be easier to establish the existence of distributional solutions (weak solutions) than classical solutions, or where appropriate classical solutions may not exist. Distributions are also important in physics and engineering where many problems naturally lead to differential equations whose solutions or initial conditions are singular, such as the Dirac delta function.\nA function formula_1 is normally thought of as acting on the points in the function domain by \"sending\" a point formula_2 in the domain to the point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Instead of acting on points, distribution theory reinterprets functions such as formula_1 as acting on test functions in a certain way. In applications to physics and engineering, test functions are usually infinitely differentiable complex-valued (or real-valued) functions with compact support that are defined on some given non-empty open subset &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. (Bump functions are examples of test functions.) The set of all such test functions forms a vector space that is denoted by formula_4 or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nMost commonly encountered functions, including all continuous maps formula_5 if using formula_6 can be canonically reinterpreted as acting via \"integration against a test function\". Explicitly, this means that such a function formula_1 \"acts on\" a test function formula_8 by \"sending\" it to the number formula_9 which is often denoted by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This new action formula_10 of formula_1 defines a scalar-valued map formula_12 whose domain is the space of test functions &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This functional formula_13 turns out to have the two defining properties of what is known as a : it is linear, and it is also continuous when formula_14 is given a certain topology called the canonical LF topology. The action (the integration formula_15) of this distribution formula_13 on a test function formula_17 can be interpreted as a weighted average of the distribution on the support of the test function, even if the values of the distribution at a single point are not well-defined. Distributions like formula_13 that arise from functions in this way are prototypical examples of distributions, but there exist many distributions that cannot be defined by integration against any function. Examples of the latter include the Dirac delta function and distributions defined to act by integration of test functions formula_19 against certain measures formula_20 on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Nonetheless, it is still always possible to reduce any arbitrary distribution down to a simpler family of related distributions that do arise via such actions of integration.\nMore generally, a distribution on formula_21 is by definition a linear functional on formula_22 that is continuous when formula_23 is endowed with the canonical LF topology. The space of all distributions on formula_21 is usually denoted by &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nDefinitions of the appropriate topologies on spaces of test functions and distributions are given in the article on spaces of test functions and distributions. This article is primarily concerned with the definition of distributions, together with their properties and some important examples.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nThe practical use of distributions can be traced back to the use of Green's functions in the 1830s to solve ordinary differential equations, but was not formalized until much later. According to , generalized functions originated in the work of Sergei Sobolev\u00a0(1936) on second-order hyperbolic partial differential equations, and the ideas were developed in somewhat extended form by Laurent Schwartz in the late 1940s. According to his autobiography, Schwartz introduced the term \"distribution\" by analogy with a distribution of electrical charge, possibly including not only point charges but also dipoles and so on. comments that although the ideas in the transformative book by were not entirely new, it was Schwartz's broad attack and conviction that distributions would be useful almost everywhere in analysis that made the difference. A detailed history of the theory of distributions was given by .\nNotation.\nThe following notation will be used throughout this article:\nformula_50\nWe call the continuous linear operator formula_51 the differential operator on distributions extending formula_52. Its action on an arbitrary distribution formula_53 is defined via:\nformula_54\nIf formula_55 converges to formula_56 then for every multi-index formula_57 converges to formula_58\nMultiplication of distributions by smooth functions.\nA differential operator of order 0 is just multiplication by a smooth function. And conversely, if formula_1 is a smooth function then formula_60 is a differential operator of order 0, whose formal transpose is itself (that is, formula_61). The induced differential operator formula_62 maps a distribution formula_63 to a distribution denoted by formula_64 We have thus defined the multiplication of a distribution by a smooth function.\nWe now give an alternative presentation of the multiplication of a distribution formula_63 on formula_21 by a smooth function formula_67 The product formula_68 is defined by\nformula_69\nThis definition coincides with the transpose definition since if formula_70 is the operator of multiplication by the function formula_71 (that is, formula_72), then\nformula_73\nso that formula_74\nUnder multiplication by smooth functions, formula_75 is a module over the ring formula_76 With this definition of multiplication by a smooth function, the ordinary product rule of calculus remains valid. However, some unusual identities also arise. For example, if formula_77 is the Dirac delta distribution on formula_78 then formula_79 and if formula_80 is the derivative of the delta distribution, then\nformula_81\nThe bilinear multiplication map formula_82 given by formula_83 is not continuous; it is however, hypocontinuous.\nExample: The product of any distribution formula_63 with the function that is identically 1 on formula_21 is equal to formula_86\nExample: Suppose formula_87 is a sequence of test functions on formula_21 that converges to the constant function formula_89 For any distribution formula_63 on formula_91 the sequence formula_92 converges to formula_93\nIf formula_55 converges to formula_56 and formula_87 converges to formula_49 then formula_98 converges to formula_99\nProblem of multiplying distributions.\nIt is easy to define the product of a distribution with a smooth function, or more generally the product of two distributions whose singular supports are disjoint. With more effort, it is possible to define a well-behaved product of several distributions provided their wave front sets at each point are compatible. A limitation of the theory of distributions (and hyperfunctions) is that there is no associative product of two distributions extending the product of a distribution by a smooth function, as has been proved by Laurent Schwartz in the 1950s. For example, if formula_100 is the distribution obtained by the Cauchy principal value\nformula_101\nIf formula_77 is the Dirac delta distribution then\nformula_103\nbut,\nformula_104\nso the product of a distribution by a smooth function (which is always well-defined) cannot be extended to an associative product on the space of distributions.\nThus, nonlinear problems cannot be posed in general and thus are not solved within distribution theory alone. In the context of quantum field theory, however, solutions can be found. In more than two spacetime dimensions the problem is related to the regularization of divergences. Here Henri Epstein and Vladimir Glaser developed the mathematically rigorous (but extremely technical) causal perturbation theory. This does not solve the problem in other situations. Many other interesting theories are non-linear, like for example the Navier\u2013Stokes equations of fluid dynamics.\nSeveral not entirely satisfactory theories of algebras of generalized functions have been developed, among which Colombeau's (simplified) algebra is maybe the most popular in use today.\nInspired by Lyons' rough path theory, Martin Hairer proposed a consistent way of multiplying distributions with certain structures (regularity structures), available in many examples from stochastic analysis, notably stochastic partial differential equations. See also Gubinelli\u2013Imkeller\u2013Perkowski (2015) for a related development based on Bony's paraproduct from Fourier analysis.\nComposition with a smooth function.\nLet formula_63 be a distribution on formula_106 Let formula_107 be an open set in formula_108 and formula_109 If formula_110 is a submersion then it is possible to define\nformula_111\nThis is the composition of the distribution formula_63 with formula_110, and is also called the pullback of formula_63 along formula_110, sometimes written\nformula_116\nThe pullback is often denoted formula_117 although this notation should not be confused with the use of '*' to denote the adjoint of a linear mapping.\nThe condition that formula_110 be a submersion is equivalent to the requirement that the Jacobian derivative formula_119 of formula_110 is a surjective linear map for every formula_121 A necessary (but not sufficient) condition for extending formula_122 to distributions is that formula_110 be an open mapping. The Inverse function theorem ensures that a submersion satisfies this condition.\nIf formula_110 is a submersion, then formula_122 is defined on distributions by finding the transpose map. The uniqueness of this extension is guaranteed since formula_122 is a continuous linear operator on formula_127 Existence, however, requires using the change of variables formula, the inverse function theorem (locally), and a partition of unity argument.\nIn the special case when formula_110 is a diffeomorphism from an open subset formula_107 of formula_108 onto an open subset formula_21 of formula_108 change of variables under the integral gives:\nformula_133\nIn this particular case, then, formula_122 is defined by the transpose formula:\nformula_135\nConvolution.\nUnder some circumstances, it is possible to define the convolution of a function with a distribution, or even the convolution of two distributions.\nRecall that if formula_1 and formula_137 are functions on formula_108 then we denote by formula_139 the convolution of formula_1 and formula_141 defined at formula_142 to be the integral\nformula_143\nprovided that the integral exists. If formula_144 are such that formula_145 then for any functions formula_146 and formula_147 we have formula_148 and formula_149 If formula_1 and formula_137 are continuous functions on formula_152 at least one of which has compact support, then formula_153 and if formula_154 then the values of formula_139 on formula_156 do not depend on the values of formula_1 outside of the Minkowski sum formula_158\nImportantly, if formula_159 has compact support then for any formula_160 the convolution map formula_161 is continuous when considered as the map formula_162 or as the map formula_163\nTranslation and symmetry.\nGiven formula_164 the translation operator formula_165 sends formula_166 to formula_167 defined by formula_168 This can be extended by the transpose to distributions in the following way: given a distribution formula_169 the translation of formula_63 by formula_171 is the distribution formula_172 defined by formula_173\nGiven formula_174 define the function formula_175 by formula_176 Given a distribution formula_169 let formula_178 be the distribution defined by formula_179 The operator formula_180 is called the symmetry with respect to the origin.\nConvolution of a test function with a distribution.\nConvolution with formula_181 defines a linear map:\nformula_182\nwhich is continuous with respect to the canonical LF space topology on formula_183\nConvolution of formula_1 with a distribution formula_185 can be defined by taking the transpose of formula_186 relative to the duality pairing of formula_187 with the space formula_188 of distributions. If formula_189 then by Fubini's theorem\nformula_190\nExtending by continuity, the convolution of formula_1 with a distribution formula_63 is defined by\nformula_193\nAn alternative way to define the convolution of a test function formula_1 and a distribution formula_63 is to use the translation operator formula_196 The convolution of the compactly supported function formula_1 and the distribution formula_63 is then the function defined for each formula_142 by\nformula_200\nIt can be shown that the convolution of a smooth, compactly supported function and a distribution is a smooth function. If the distribution formula_63 has compact support, and if formula_1 is a polynomial (resp. an exponential function, an analytic function, the restriction of an entire analytic function on formula_203 to formula_152 the restriction of an entire function of exponential type in formula_203 to formula_108), then the same is true of formula_207 If the distribution formula_63 has compact support as well, then formula_209 is a compactly supported function, and the Titchmarsh convolution theorem implies that:\nformula_210\nwhere formula_211 denotes the convex hull and formula_212 denotes the support.\nConvolution of a smooth function with a distribution.\nLet formula_213 and formula_185 and assume that at least one of formula_1 and formula_63 has compact support. The convolution of formula_1 and formula_169 denoted by formula_219 or by formula_220 is the smooth function:\nformula_221\nsatisfying for all formula_222:\nformula_223\nLet formula_224 be the map formula_225. If formula_63 is a distribution, then formula_224 is continuous as a map formula_228. If formula_63 also has compact support, then formula_224 is also continuous as the map formula_231 and continuous as the map formula_232\nIf formula_233 is a continuous linear map such that formula_234 for all formula_235 and all formula_236 then there exists a distribution formula_185 such that formula_238 for all formula_239\nExample: Let formula_240 be the Heaviside function on formula_241 For any formula_242\nformula_243\nLet formula_77 be the Dirac measure at 0 and let formula_245 be its derivative as a distribution. Then formula_246 and formula_247 Importantly, the associative law fails to hold:\nformula_248\nConvolution of distributions.\nIt is also possible to define the convolution of two distributions formula_53 and formula_63 on formula_152 provided one of them has compact support. Informally, to define formula_252 where formula_63 has compact support, the idea is to extend the definition of the convolution formula_254 to a linear operation on distributions so that the associativity formula\nformula_255\ncontinues to hold for all test functions formula_256\nIt is also possible to provide a more explicit characterization of the convolution of distributions. Suppose that formula_53 and formula_63 are distributions and that formula_53 has compact support. Then the linear maps\nformula_260\nare continuous. The transposes of these maps:\nformula_261\nare consequently continuous and it can also be shown that\nformula_262\nThis common value is called the convolution of formula_53 and formula_63 and it is a distribution that is denoted by formula_252 or formula_266 It satisfies formula_267 If formula_53 and formula_63 are two distributions, at least one of which has compact support, then for any formula_164 formula_271 If formula_63 is a distribution in formula_108 and if formula_77 is a Dirac measure then formula_275; thus formula_77 is the identity element of the convolution operation. Moreover, if formula_1 is a function then formula_278 where now the associativity of convolution implies that formula_279 for all functions formula_1 and formula_281\nSuppose that it is formula_63 that has compact support. For formula_236 consider the function\nformula_284\nIt can be readily shown that this defines a smooth function of formula_285 which moreover has compact support. The convolution of formula_53 and formula_63 is defined by\nformula_288\nThis generalizes the classical notion of convolution of functions and is compatible with differentiation in the following sense: for every multi-index formula_289\nformula_290\nThe convolution of a finite number of distributions, all of which (except possibly one) have compact support, is associative.\nThis definition of convolution remains valid under less restrictive assumptions about formula_53 and formula_86\nThe convolution of distributions with compact support induces a continuous bilinear map formula_293 defined by formula_294 where formula_295 denotes the space of distributions with compact support. However, the convolution map as a function formula_296 is not continuous although it is separately continuous. The convolution maps formula_297 and formula_298 given by formula_299 both fail to be continuous. Each of these non-continuous maps is, however, separately continuous and hypocontinuous.\nConvolution versus multiplication.\nIn general, regularity is required for multiplication products, and locality is required for convolution products. It is expressed in the following extension of the Convolution Theorem which guarantees the existence of both convolution and multiplication products. Let formula_300 be a rapidly decreasing tempered distribution or, equivalently, formula_301 be an ordinary (slowly growing, smooth) function within the space of tempered distributions and let formula_110 be the normalized (unitary, ordinary frequency) Fourier transform. Then, according to ,\nformula_303\nhold within the space of tempered distributions. In particular, these equations become the Poisson Summation Formula if formula_304 is the Dirac Comb. The space of all rapidly decreasing tempered distributions is also called the space of convolution operators formula_305 and the space of all ordinary functions within the space of tempered distributions is also called the space of multiplication operators formula_306 More generally, formula_307 and formula_308 A particular case is the Paley-Wiener-Schwartz Theorem which states that formula_309 and formula_310 This is because formula_311 and formula_312 In other words, compactly supported tempered distributions formula_295 belong to the space of convolution operators formula_305 and\nPaley-Wiener functions formula_315 better known as bandlimited functions, belong to the space of multiplication operators formula_306\nFor example, let formula_317 be the Dirac comb and formula_318 be the Dirac delta;then formula_319 is the function that is constantly one and both equations yield the Dirac-comb identity. Another example is to let formula_137 be the Dirac comb and formula_321 be the rectangular function; then formula_322 is the sinc function and both equations yield the Classical Sampling Theorem for suitable formula_323 functions. More generally, if formula_137 is the Dirac comb and formula_325 is a smooth window function (Schwartz function), for example, the Gaussian, then formula_326 is another smooth window function (Schwartz function). They are known as mollifiers, especially in partial differential equations theory, or as regularizers in physics because they allow turning generalized functions into regular functions.\nTensor products of distributions.\nLet formula_327 and formula_328 be open sets. Assume all vector spaces to be over the field formula_329 where formula_330 or formula_331 For formula_332 define for every formula_333 and every formula_334 the following functions:\nformula_335\nGiven formula_336 and formula_337 define the following functions:\nformula_338\nwhere formula_339 and formula_340 \nThese definitions associate every formula_341 and formula_342 with the (respective) continuous linear map:\nformula_343\nMoreover, if either formula_53 (resp. formula_63) has compact support then it also induces a continuous linear map of formula_346 (resp. formula_347).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Fubini's theorem for distributions\u2014Let formula_341 and formula_349 If formula_332 then \nformula_351\nThe &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;tensor product of formula_341 and formula_353 denoted by formula_354 or formula_355 is the distribution in formula_356 defined by:\nformula_357\nSpaces of distributions.\nFor all formula_358 and all formula_359 every one of the following canonical injections is continuous and has an image (also called the range) that is a dense subset of its codomain:\nformula_360\nwhere the topologies on formula_361 (formula_362) are defined as direct limits of the spaces formula_363 in a manner analogous to how the topologies on formula_364 were defined (so in particular, they are not the usual norm topologies). The range of each of the maps above (and of any composition of the maps above) is dense in its codomain.\nSuppose that formula_365 is one of the spaces formula_364 (for formula_367) or formula_368 (for formula_369) or formula_370 (for formula_371). Because the canonical injection formula_372 is a continuous injection whose image is dense in the codomain, this map's transpose formula_373 is a continuous injection. This injective transpose map thus allows the continuous dual space formula_374 of formula_365 to be identified with a certain vector subspace of the space formula_75 of all distributions (specifically, it is identified with the image of this transpose map). This transpose map is continuous but it is not necessarily a topological embedding.\nA linear subspace of formula_75 carrying a locally convex topology that is finer than the subspace topology induced on it by formula_378 is called a space of distributions.\nAlmost all of the spaces of distributions mentioned in this article arise in this way (for example, tempered distribution, restrictions, distributions of order formula_379 some integer, distributions induced by a positive Radon measure, distributions induced by an formula_380-function, etc.) and any representation theorem about the continuous dual space of formula_365 may, through the transpose formula_382 be transferred directly to elements of the space formula_383\nRadon measures.\nThe inclusion map formula_384 is a continuous injection whose image is dense in its codomain, so the transpose formula_385 is also a continuous injection.\nNote that the continuous dual space formula_386 can be identified as the space of Radon measures, where there is a one-to-one correspondence between the continuous linear functionals formula_387 and integral with respect to a Radon measure; that is,\nThrough the injection formula_395 every Radon measure becomes a distribution on U. If formula_1 is a locally integrable function on U then the distribution formula_397 is a Radon measure; so Radon measures form a large and important space of distributions.\nThe following is the theorem of the structure of distributions of Radon measures, which shows that every Radon measure can be written as a sum of derivatives of locally formula_398 functions on U:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Suppose formula_56 is a Radon measure, where formula_400 let formula_401 be a neighborhood of the support of formula_169 and let &lt;math&gt;I = \\{p \\in \\N^n :\nPositive Radon measures.\nA linear function formula_63 on a space of functions is called positive if whenever a function formula_1 that belongs to the domain of formula_63 is non-negative (that is, formula_1 is real-valued and formula_407) then formula_408 One may show that every positive linear functional on formula_392 is necessarily continuous (that is, necessarily a Radon measure). \nLebesgue measure is an example of a positive Radon measure.\nLocally integrable functions as distributions.\nOne particularly important class of Radon measures are those that are induced locally integrable functions. The function formula_410 is called locally integrable if it is Lebesgue integrable over every compact subset K of U. This is a large class of functions that includes all continuous functions and all formula_380 functions. The topology on formula_23 is defined in such a fashion that any locally integrable function formula_1 yields a continuous linear functional on formula_23 \u2013 that is, an element of formula_75 \u2013 denoted here by formula_416 whose value on the test function formula_417 is given by the Lebesgue integral:\nformula_418\nConventionally, one abuses notation by identifying formula_419 with formula_31 provided no confusion can arise, and thus the pairing between formula_419 and formula_417 is often written\nformula_423\nIf formula_1 and formula_137 are two locally integrable functions, then the associated distributions formula_419 and formula_427 are equal to the same element of formula_75 if and only if formula_1 and formula_137 are equal almost everywhere (see, for instance, ). Similarly, every Radon measure formula_20 on formula_21 defines an element of formula_75 whose value on the test function formula_417 is formula_435 As above, it is conventional to abuse notation and write the pairing between a Radon measure formula_20 and a test function formula_417 as formula_438 Conversely, as shown in a theorem by Schwartz (similar to the Riesz representation theorem), every distribution which is non-negative on non-negative functions is of this form for some (positive) Radon measure.\nTest functions as distributions.\nThe test functions are themselves locally integrable, and so define distributions. The space of test functions formula_4 is sequentially dense in formula_75 with respect to the strong topology on formula_441 This means that for any formula_442 there is a sequence of test functions, formula_443 that converges to formula_56 (in its strong dual topology) when considered as a sequence of distributions. Or equivalently,\nformula_445\nDistributions with compact support.\nThe inclusion map formula_446 is a continuous injection whose image is dense in its codomain, so the transpose map formula_447 is also a continuous injection. Thus the image of the transpose, denoted by formula_448 forms a space of distributions.\nThe elements of formula_449 can be identified as the space of distributions with compact support. Explicitly, if formula_63 is a distribution on U then the following are equivalent,\nCompactly supported distributions define continuous linear functionals on the space formula_455; recall that the topology on formula_455 is defined such that a sequence of test functions formula_460 converges to 0 if and only if all derivatives of formula_460 converge uniformly to 0 on every compact subset of U. Conversely, it can be shown that every continuous linear functional on this space defines a distribution of compact support. Thus compactly supported distributions can be identified with those distributions that can be extended from formula_4 to formula_76\nRestriction of distributions to compact sets.\nIf formula_464 then for any compact set formula_465 there exists a continuous function formula_110compactly supported in formula_108 (possibly on a larger set than K itself) and a multi-index formula_235 such that formula_469 on formula_470\nDistributions of finite order.\nLet formula_471 The inclusion map formula_472 is a continuous injection whose image is dense in its codomain, so the transpose formula_473 is also a continuous injection. Consequently, the image of formula_474 denoted by formula_475 forms a space of distributions. The elements of formula_476 are the distributions of order formula_477 The distributions of order formula_478 which are also called are exactly the distributions that are Radon measures (described above).\nFor formula_479 a is a distribution of order formula_480 that is not a distribution of order formula_481.\nA distribution is said to be of finite order if there is some integer formula_28 such that it is a distribution of order formula_483 and the set of distributions of finite order is denoted by formula_484 Note that if formula_485 then formula_486 so that formula_487 is a vector subspace of formula_75, and furthermore, if and only if formula_489\nStructure of distributions of finite order.\nEvery distribution with compact support in U is a distribution of finite order. Indeed, every distribution in U is locally a distribution of finite order, in the following sense: If V is an open and relatively compact subset of U and if formula_490 is the restriction mapping from U to V, then the image of formula_75 under formula_490 is contained in formula_493\nThe following is the theorem of the structure of distributions of finite order, which shows that every distribution of finite order can be written as a sum of derivatives of Radon measures:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTheorem\u2014Suppose formula_56 has finite order and formula_495 and for every test function formula_31 let formula_497\nThen formula_53 is a distribution of infinite order on U. Moreover, formula_53 can not be extended to a distribution on formula_500; that is, there exists no distribution formula_63 on formula_500 such that the restriction of formula_63 to U is equal to formula_504\nTempered distributions and Fourier transform.\nDefined below are the Schwartz space formula_505 and its dual; the space of tempered distributions formula_506, which forms a proper subspace of formula_507 the space of distributions on formula_508 Tempered distributions are useful if one studies the Fourier transform since all tempered distributions have a Fourier transform, which is not true for an arbitrary distribution in formula_509\nSchwartz space.\nThe Schwartz space formula_505 is the space of all smooth functions that are rapidly decreasing at infinity along with all partial derivatives. Thus formula_511 is in the Schwartz space provided that any derivative of formula_512 multiplied with any power of formula_513 converges to 0 as formula_514 These functions form a complete TVS with a suitably defined family of seminorms. More precisely, for any multi-indices formula_235 and formula_516 define\nformula_517\nThen formula_417 is in the Schwartz space if all the values satisfy\nformula_519\nThe family of seminorms formula_520 defines a locally convex topology on the Schwartz space. For formula_521 the seminorms are, in fact, norms on the Schwartz space. One can also use the following family of seminorms to define the topology:\nformula_522\nOtherwise, one can define a norm on formula_505 via\nformula_524\nThe Schwartz space is a Fr\u00e9chet space (that is, a complete metrizable locally convex space). Because the Fourier transform changes formula_525 into multiplication by formula_526 and vice versa, this symmetry implies that the Fourier transform of a Schwartz function is also a Schwartz function.\nA sequence formula_527 in formula_505 converges to 0 in formula_505 if and only if the functions formula_530 converge to 0 uniformly in the whole of formula_152 which implies that such a sequence must converge to zero in formula_532\nformula_187 is dense in formula_534 The subset of all analytic Schwartz functions is dense in formula_505 as well.\nThe Schwartz space is nuclear, and the tensor product of two maps induces a canonical surjective TVS-isomorphisms\nformula_536\nwhere formula_537 represents the completion of the injective tensor product (which in this case is identical to the completion of the projective tensor product).\nTempered distributions.\nThe inclusion map formula_538 is a continuous injection whose image is dense in its codomain, so the transpose formula_539 is also a continuous injection. Thus, the image of the transpose map, denoted by formula_540 forms a space of distributions.\nThe space formula_506 is called the space of tempered distributions. It is the continuous dual space of the Schwartz space. Equivalently, a distribution formula_63 is a tempered distribution if and only if\nformula_543\nThe derivative of a tempered distribution is again a tempered distribution. Tempered distributions generalize the bounded (or slow-growing) locally integrable functions; all distributions with compact support and all square-integrable functions are tempered distributions. More generally, all functions that are products of polynomials with elements of the \"Lp\" space formula_544 for formula_545 are tempered distributions.\nThe tempered distributions can also be characterized as slowly growing, meaning that each derivative of formula_63 grows at most as fast as some polynomial. This characterization is dual to the rapidly falling behaviour of the derivatives of a function in the Schwartz space, where each derivative of formula_417 decays faster than every inverse power of formula_548 An example of a rapidly falling function is formula_549 for any positive formula_550\nFourier transform.\nTo study the Fourier transform, it is best to consider complex-valued test functions and complex-linear distributions. The ordinary continuous Fourier transform formula_551 is a TVS-automorphism of the Schwartz space, and the Fourier transform is defined to be its transpose formula_552 which (abusing notation) will again be denoted by formula_553 So the Fourier transform of the tempered distribution formula_63 is defined by formula_555 for every Schwartz function formula_556 formula_557 is thus again a tempered distribution. The Fourier transform is a TVS isomorphism from the space of tempered distributions onto itself. This operation is compatible with differentiation in the sense that\nformula_558\nand also with convolution: if formula_63 is a tempered distribution and formula_17 is a slowly increasing smooth function on formula_152 formula_562 is again a tempered distribution and\nformula_563\nis the convolution of formula_557 and formula_565 In particular, the Fourier transform of the constant function equal to 1 is the formula_77 distribution.\nExpressing tempered distributions as sums of derivatives.\nIf formula_567 is a tempered distribution, then there exists a constant formula_568 and positive integers formula_224 and formula_570 such that for all Schwartz functions formula_571\nformula_572\nThis estimate, along with some techniques from functional analysis, can be used to show that there is a continuous slowly increasing function formula_110 and a multi-index formula_235 such that\nformula_575\nUsing holomorphic functions as test functions.\nThe success of the theory led to an investigation of the idea of hyperfunction, in which spaces of holomorphic functions are used as test functions. A refined theory has been developed, in particular Mikio Sato's algebraic analysis, using sheaf theory and several complex variables. This extends the range of symbolic methods that can be made into rigorous mathematics, for example, Feynman integrals.\nSee also.\nDifferential equations related\nGeneralizations of distributions\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51957", "revid": "41849648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51957", "title": "Conclave (disambiguation)", "text": "A conclave is a meeting of the College of Cardinals to elect the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church.\nConclave may also refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "51959", "revid": "14148970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51959", "title": "Mornington Crescent (game)", "text": "Improvisational comedy game\nMornington Crescent is an improvisational comedy game featured in the BBC Radio 4 comedy panel show \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\" (ISIHAC), a series that satirises panel games.\nThe game consists of each panellist in turn announcing a landmark or street, most often a tube station on the London Underground system. The ostensible aim is to be the first to announce \"Mornington Crescent\", a station on the Northern line. Interspersed with the turns is humorous discussion amongst the panellists and host regarding the rules and legality of each move, as well as the strategy the panellists are using. The actual aim of the game is to entertain the other participants and listeners with amusing discussion of the fictional rules and strategies.\nOrigins.\nMornington Crescent first appeared in the opening episode of the sixth series of BBC Radio 4's comedy panel show \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\", broadcast on 22 August 1978. Although five episodes transmitted in 1974\u20131975 are lost, Mornington Crescent seems to have made no appearance before 1978. It was played in every surviving episode of the sixth series. It has been played ever since.\nThe origins of the game are not clear. One claim is that it was invented by Geoffrey Perkins, who stated in an interview that Mornington Crescent was created as a non-game. Barry Cryer, a panellist on the programme from 1972 until shortly before his death in 2022, said that Geoffrey Perkins did not invent the game, and that it had been around since the 1960s. According to Chairman Humphrey Lyttelton, the game was invented to vex a series producer who was unpopular with the panellists. One day, the team members were drinking, when they heard him coming. \"Quick,\" said one, \"let's invent a game with rules he'll never understand.\"\nA similar game called \"Finchley Central\" was described in the Spring 1969 issue of the mathematical magazine \"Manifold\", edited by Ian Stewart and John Jaworski at the University of Warwick. Douglas Hofstadter referred to the article in his 1985 book \"Metamagical Themas\". The game is referred to as an \"English game\" in an article on \"non-games\" as follows:\nTwo players alternate naming the stations of the London Underground. The first to say \"Finchley Central\" wins. It is clear that the \"best\" time to say \"Finchley Central\" is exactly before your opponent does. Failing that, it is good that he should be considering it. You could, of course, say \"Finchley Central\" on your second turn. In that case, your opponent puffs on his cigarette and says, \"Well... Shame on you.\"\nGameplay on \"I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue\".\nThe objective of Mornington Crescent is to give the appearance of a game of skill and strategy, with complex and long-winded rules and strategies, to parody games in which similarly circuitous systems have evolved. The apparent rules are fictional, and its appeal to audiences lies in the ability of players to create an entertaining illusion of competitive gameplay.\nHumorous variations to the rules have been introduced to games. Humphrey Lyttelton would describe special rules to apply to that session, such as \"Trumpington's Variations\" or \"Tudor Court Rules\", so that almost every episode featuring Mornington Crescent introduced a variant. In one of them, first introduced in North Yorkshire, a player whose movement is blocked is considered to be \"in Nidd\" and is forced to remain in place for the next three moves. This tends to block the other players, putting them into Nidd as well and causing a roadblock. In one episode, every player ended up in Nidd and the rule had to be suspended so that the round could continue.\nOver time, the destinations named by the panellists expanded beyond the Underground, in accordance with various regional expansions of the game. \"ISIHAC\" is recorded around the United Kingdom, and the game is occasionally modified accordingly. There have been versions in Slough and Leeds, as well as one in Scotland, played during the Edinburgh Fringe arts festival and a 2016 recording in Glasgow (where the name was changed to \"Morningside Crescent\"). Another variation, called \"Morganstown Crescent is played at recordings in Wales. In one episode, recorded in Luton, panellists named locations as far afield as the Place de l'\u00c9toile in Paris, Nevsky Prospekt in St. Petersburg, and Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, DC, but a move to Luton High Street was ruled invalid for being too remote. In other episodes, an attempt was supposedly made to expand the territory to Manhattan (via Heathrow and JFK) but there was some disagreement as to whether or not the New York City Subway system was suited to the game. References have been made in various episodes of \"ISIHAC\" to international versions of the game, including \"Mornington Croissant\", supposedly based on the Paris M\u00e9tro, and \"Mornington Peninsula\", the Australian variant. At least one full game of Mornington Croissant was played on air.\nA regular feature that introduces Mornington Crescent is a letters section which begins with the chairman's comments (\"I notice from the sheer weight of this week's postbag, we've received a little over no letters\" and \"I see from the number of letters raining down on us this week that the Scrabble factory has exploded again\"). The selected letter each week is invariably from \"A Mrs. Trellis of North Wales\", whose incoherent letters usually mistake the chairman for another Radio 4 presenter or media personality. \"Dear Libby,\" (she writes), \"why oh why ... very nearly spells YOYO\", or \"Dear Mr. Titchmarsh, never let them tell you that size isn't important. My aunt told me that, but then all my new wallpaper fell off.\"\nFurther popularity.\nFinchley Central and Mornington Crescent have been played as a play-by-mail pastime, and in the 1980s were played by post in a number of play-by-mail magazines. One format involved a series of elimination rounds, with everyone except the winner of the current round going forward onto the next. A \"type-in\" computer version of the game for the BBC Micro was included in the April 1985 edition of \"The Micro User\". Mornington Crescent can now be played online, in the spirit of the radio series. Games are played by fans on Usenet, in diverse web forums, and on the London Underground itself. A Facebook application has also been produced.\nWhen Mornington Crescent Underground station was reopened in 1998 after six years of closure for lift repairs, London Transport invited the \"Clue\" team to perform an opening ceremony. A memorial plaque to the late Willie Rushton, one of the show's longest-serving panelists, was installed at the station in 2002.\nSpin-offs and publications.\nAt Christmas 1984, Radio 4 broadcast a special programme, \"Everyman's Guide to Mornington Crescent\", a \"two-part documentary\" on the history of the game and its rules, presented by Raymond Baxter. At the end of part one (concentrating on the history), it was announced that part two (about the rules) had been postponed due to \"scheduling difficulties\".\nAnother documentary was broadcast on Christmas Eve 2005. It was named \"In Search of Mornington Crescent\", and narrated by Andrew Marr. This has since also been released on a BBC Audiobook CD.\nTwo books of rules and history have been published, \"The Little Book of Mornington Crescent\" (2001; ), by Graeme Garden, Tim Brooke-Taylor, Barry Cryer and Humphrey Lyttelton, and \"Stovold's Mornington Crescent Almanac\" (2001; ), by Graeme Garden.\nCultural references.\nThe code for the first ever Mornington Crescent computer game, on a BBC Micro, was presented on p154 of the April 1985 edition of \"The Micro User\", an early computer magazine. Due to space restrictions, the rules for the game were not published but were promised for the next month's edition, along with an explanation by a member of the Society for the Support of Mornington Crescent, Dr. Richard Taylor-Fischel. Unfortunately, in that edition on the Letters page, p121, he took umbrage at the modifications to the game that had been necessary to produce a computer program and consequently withdrew his collaboration, using the name Dr. R. T. Fischel PhD and bar. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51960", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51960", "title": "CGS units", "text": ""}
{"id": "51961", "revid": "37878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51961", "title": "SI units", "text": ""}
{"id": "51962", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51962", "title": "Vulgar Latin", "text": "Non-standard Latin variety spoken by the people of ancient Rome\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nVulgar Latin, also known as Colloquial, Popular, Spoken or Vernacular Latin, is the range of non-formal registers of Latin spoken from the Late Roman Republic onward. \"Vulgar Latin\" as a term is both controversial and imprecise. Spoken Latin existed for a long time and in many places. Scholars have differed in opinion as to the extent of the differences, and whether Vulgar Latin was in some sense a different language. This was developed as a theory in the nineteenth century by Raynouard. At its extreme, the theory suggested that the written register formed an elite language distinct from common speech, but this is now rejected.\nThe current consensus is that the written and spoken languages formed a continuity much as they do in modern languages, with speech tending to evolve faster than the written language, and the written, formalised language exerting pressure back on speech. \"Vulgar Latin\" is used in different ways by different scholars, applying it to indicate spoken Latin of differing types, or from different social classes and time periods. Nevertheless, interest in the shifts in the spoken forms remains very important to understand the transition from Latin or Late Latin through to Proto-Romance and Romance languages. To make matters more complicated, evidence for spoken forms can be found only through examination of written Classical Latin, Late Latin, or early Romance, depending on the time period.\nHistory of controversy.\nDuring the Classical period, Roman authors referred to the informal, everyday variety of their own language as \"sermo plebeius\" or \"sermo vulgaris\", meaning \"common speech\". This could simply refer to unadorned speech without the use of rhetoric, or even plain speech. The modern usage of the term Vulgar Latin dates to the Renaissance, when Italian thinkers began to theorize that their own language originated in a sort of \"corrupted\" Latin that they assumed formed an entity distinct from the literary Classical variety, though opinions differed greatly on the nature of this \"vulgar\" dialect.\nThe early 19th-century French linguist Fran\u00e7ois-Just-Marie Raynouard is often regarded as the father of modern Romance philology. Observing that the Romance languages have many features in common that are not found in Latin, at least not in \"proper\" or Classical Latin, he concluded that the former must have all had some common ancestor (which he believed most closely resembled Old Occitan) that replaced Latin some time before the year 1000. This he dubbed \"la langue romane\" or \"the Romance language\".\nThe first truly modern treatise on Romance linguistics and the first to apply the comparative method was Friedrich Christian Diez's seminal \"Grammar of the Romance Languages\". Researchers such as Wilhelm Meyer-L\u00fcbke characterised Vulgar Latin as, to a great extent, a separate language that was more or less distinct from the written form. To Meyer-L\u00fcbke, the spoken Vulgar form was the genuine and continuous form, while Classical Latin was a kind of artificial idealised language imposed upon it; thus Romance languages were derived from the \"real\" Vulgar form, which had to be reconstructed from remaining evidence. Others that followed this approach divided Vulgar from Classical Latin by education or class. Other views of \"Vulgar Latin\" include defining it as uneducated speech, slang, or in effect, Proto-Romance.\nThe result is that the term \"Vulgar Latin\" is regarded by some modern philologists as essentially meaningless, but unfortunately very persistent:\nthe continued use of \"Vulgar Latin\" is not only no aid to thought, but is, on the contrary, a positive barrier to a clear understanding of Latin and Romance...&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;I wish it were possible to hope the term might fall out of use. Many scholars have stated that \"Vulgar Latin\" is a useless and dangerously misleading term ... To abandon it once and for all can only benefit scholarship.\nLloyd called to replace the use of \"Vulgar Latin\" with a series of more precise definitions, such as the spoken Latin of a particular time and place.\nResearch in the twentieth century has in any case shifted the view to consider the differences between written and spoken Latin in more moderate terms. Just as in modern languages, speech patterns are different from written forms, and vary with education, the same can be said of Latin. For instance, philologist J\u00f3zsef Herman agrees that the term is problematic, and therefore limits it in his work to mean the innovations and changes that turn up in spoken or written Latin that were relatively uninfluenced by educated forms of Latin. Herman states: it is completely clear from the texts during the time that Latin was a living language, there was never an unbridgeable gap between the written and spoken, nor between the language of the social elites and that of the middle, lower, or disadvantaged groups of the same society.\nHerman also makes it clear that Vulgar Latin, in this view, is a varied and unstable phenomenon, crossing many centuries of usage where any generalisations are bound to cover up variations and differences.\nSources.\nEvidence for the features of non-literary Latin comes from the following sources:\nFragmentation.\nAn oft-posed question is why (or when, or how) Latin \u201cfragmented\u201d into several different languages. Current hypotheses contrast the centralizing and homogenizing socio-economic, cultural, and political forces that characterized the Roman Empire with the centrifugal forces that prevailed afterwards.\nBy the end of the first century CE the Romans had seized the entire Mediterranean Basin and established hundreds of colonies in the conquered provinces. Over time this\u2014along with other factors that encouraged linguistic and cultural assimilation, such as political unity, frequent travel and commerce, military service, etc.\u2014led to Latin becoming the predominant language throughout the western Mediterranean. Latin itself was subject to the same assimilatory tendencies, such that its varieties had probably become more uniform by the time the Empire fell than they had been before it. That is not to say that the language had been static for all those years, but rather that ongoing changes tended to spread to all regions.\nThe rise of the first Arab caliphate in the seventh century marked the definitive end of Roman dominance over the Mediterranean. It is from approximately that century onward that regional differences proliferate in Latin documents, revealing the fragmentation of Latin into the incipient Romance languages. Until then Latin appears to have been remarkably homogeneous, as far as can be judged from its written records, although careful statistical analysis reveals regional differences in the treatment of the vowel /\u012d/, and in the frequency of the merger of (original) intervocalic /b/ and /w/, by about the fifth century CE.\nPhonological development.\nConsonantism.\nPalatalization.\nFront vowels in hiatus (after a consonant and before another vowel) became [j], which palatalized preceding consonants.\nFricativization.\n/w/ (except after /k/) and intervocalic /b/ merge as the bilabial fricative /\u03b2/.\nVocalism.\nLoss of vowel quantity.\nThe system of phonemic vowel length collapsed by the fifth century AD (see also ), leaving quality differences as the distinguishing factor between vowels; the paradigm thus changed from /\u012b \u012d \u0113 \u0115 \u0101 \u0103 \u014f \u014d \u016d \u016b/ to /i \u026a e \u025b a \u0254 o \u028a u/ with no distinction between original /a/ and /a\u02d0/. Concurrently, stressed vowels in open syllables lengthened.\nLoss of near-close front vowel.\nTowards the end of the Roman Empire /\u026a/ merged with /e/ in most regions, although not in Africa or a few peripheral areas in Italy.\nGrammar.\nRomance articles.\nIt is difficult to place the point in which the definite article, absent in Latin but present in all Romance languages, arose, largely because the highly colloquial speech in which it arose was seldom written down until the daughter languages had strongly diverged; most surviving texts in early Romance show the articles fully developed.\nDefinite articles evolved from demonstrative pronouns or adjectives (an analogous development is found in many Indo-European languages, including Greek, Celtic and Germanic); compare the fate of the Latin demonstrative adjective , , \"that\", in the Romance languages, becoming French and (Old French \"li\", \"lo\", \"la\"), Catalan and Spanish , and , Occitan and , Portuguese and Galician and (elision of -l- is a common feature of Galician-Portuguese) and Italian , and . Sardinian went its own way here also, forming its article from , an intensive adjective (\"su, sa\"); some Catalan and Occitan dialects have articles from the same source. While most of the Romance languages put the article before the noun, Romanian has its own way, by putting the article after the noun, e.g. \"lupul\" (\"the wolf\" \u2013 from *\"lupum illum\") and \"omul\" (\"the man\" \u2013 \"*homo illum\"), possibly a result of being within the Balkan sprachbund.\nThe term may have evolved from its initial demonstrative function, broadening to convey semantic prominence by directing the attention of the audience towards particular referents which the speaker intended to highlight. This usage of the term is found in the , which recounts the travels of the Christian pilgrim\u2014and the author\u2014Egeria: the author utilizes the demonstrative to mark words that are crucial to the meaning of the text. For instance, when noting the location of a cave by a church, Egeria clarifies that she is referring to \"\" (\"that church\"). The usage of typically occurs alongside nouns that have previously been identified with the text: Egeria, when describing a church near Mount Olivet, initially describes it merely as an \",\" but later refers to it as \".\" The usage of the demonstratives to denote prominent parts of discourse may have predicated the eventual transformation of the term into a definite article. Once speakers began prefacing sentences with the term, they began utilizing it in a manner similar to an article; therefore, the article-like features of the word eventually become normalized and then incorporated into the standard grammar of the language.\nIn Late Latin writings, was often used by writers in relative clauses to establish the identity of subjects not previously mentioned in the text. The 7th-century \"Chronicle of Fredegar\" clarifies that it is discussing \"\" (\"those men\") before introducing a relative clause in which they are the subject. During this time period, the term also developed anaphoric functions as an extension of the original demonstrative usage: Late Latin authors would substitute more basic mentions of a referent with and added more descriptive information. For instance, the \"Chronicle of Fredegar\" refers to a \"\" (\"queen\") as \",\" meaning \"that relative of the Franks. From this usage of the , in which it functioned help identify a specific referent, the term may have generalized to adopt more features associated with definite articles. One example of such a development appears in the writings of the 6th-century Gallo-Roman historian Gregory of Tours, who wrote \",\" meaning \"The holy Eugenius was led to the king, and debated with that Arrian bishop in defense of the Catholic faith.\" Within this passage, the ablative form of the pronoun, , is utilized to denote the Arrian bishop, however it appears to function for more like the English article \"the\" rather than the original Classical Latin : the sentence could be understood equally as well if rendered as \"The holy Eugenius was led to the king, and debated with the Arrian bishop in defense of the Catholic faith.\" Another indication of the weakening of the demonstratives can be inferred from the fact that at this time, legal and similar texts begin to swarm with , , and so forth (all meaning, essentially, \"aforesaid\"), which seem to mean little more than \"this\" or \"that\". Gregory of Tours writes, \"Erat autem... beatissimus Anianus in supradicta civitate episcopus\" (\"Blessed Anianus was bishop in that city.\") The original Latin demonstrative adjectives were no longer felt to be strong or specific enough.\nThe Latin pronoun , which was initially used to emphasize specific referents, also developed functions similar to a definite article. However, it retained some of its original emphatic properties: it was also used anaphorically to highlight prominent referents. In one 9th-10th century text from the Diocese of Urgell they utilize the phrase to identify the church the entire paragraph referred to while identifying a unique river, not mentioned previously in the text, as \"\" (\"that river\"). Alongside its emphatic usage, the original Classical Latin was also used to clarify referents if the text risked introducing ambiguity regarding the subjects and objects involved. However, in Late Latin literature appears in scenarios in which its presence was not necessary: In the \"Chronicle of Fredegar\", a character is introduced as \"\" (\"Waiofar) before\u2014in the next sentence\u2014being described as \"\" (\"the very same Waiofar\"). Other documents suggest that and may have eventually assumed practically identical meanings: the 11th-12th century text, the utilizes both terms like definite articles, mentioning \"\" and \",\" both meaning \"the authority.\"\nIn the less formal speech, reconstructed forms suggest that the inherited Latin demonstratives were made more forceful by being compounded with (originally an interjection: \"behold!\"), which also spawned Italian through , a contracted form of \"ecce eum\". This is the origin of Old French (*\"ecce ille\"), (*\"ecce iste\") and (*\"ecce hic\"); Italian (*\"eccum istum\"), (*\"eccum illum\") and (now mainly Tuscan) (*\"eccum tibi istum\"), as well as (*\"eccu hic\"), (*\"eccum hac\"); Spanish and Occitan and Portuguese (*\"eccum ille\"); Spanish and Portuguese (*\"eccum hac\"); Spanish and Portuguese (*\"eccum hic\"); Portuguese (*\"eccum illac\") and (*\"eccum inde\"); Romanian (*\"ecce iste\") and (*\"ecce ille\"), and many other forms.\nOn the other hand, even in the Oaths of Strasbourg, dictated in Old French in AD 842, no demonstrative appears even in places where one would clearly be called for in all the later languages (\"pro christian poblo\" \u2013 \"for the Christian people\"). Using the demonstratives as articles may have still been considered overly informal for a royal oath in the 9th century. Considerable variation exists in all of the Romance vernaculars as to their actual use: in Romanian, the articles are suffixed to the noun (or an adjective preceding it), as in other languages of the Balkan sprachbund and the North Germanic languages.\nThe numeral , (one) supplies the indefinite article in all cases (again, this is a common semantic development across Europe). This is anticipated in Classical Latin; Cicero writes \"cum uno gladiatore nequissimo\" (\"with a most immoral gladiator\"). This suggests that \"\" was beginning to supplant in the meaning of \"a certain\" or \"some\" by the 1st century BC.\nLoss of neuter gender.\nThe three grammatical genders of Classical Latin were replaced by a two-gender system in most Romance languages.\nThe neuter gender of classical Latin was in most cases identical with the masculine both syntactically and morphologically. The confusion had already started in Pompeian graffiti, e.g. \"cadaver mortuus\" for \"cadaver mortuum\" (\"dead body\"), and \"hoc locum\" for \"hunc locum\" (\"this place\"). The morphological confusion shows primarily in the adoption of the nominative ending \"-us\" (\"-\u00d8\" after \"-r\") in the \"o\"-declension.\nIn Petronius's work, one can find \"balneus\" for (\"bath\"), \"fatus\" for (\"fate\"), \"caelus\" for (\"heaven\"), \"amphitheater\" for (\"amphitheatre\"), \"vinus\" for (\"wine\"), and conversely, \"thesaurum\" for (\"treasure\"). Most of these forms occur in the speech of one man: Trimalchion, an uneducated Greek (i.e. foreign) freedman.\nIn modern Romance languages, the nominative \"s\"-ending has been largely abandoned, and all substantives of the \"o\"-declension have an ending derived from \"-um\": \"-u\", \"-o\", or \"-\u00d8\". E.g., masculine (\"wall\"), and neuter (\"sky\") have evolved to: Italian , ; Portuguese , ; Spanish , , Catalan , ; Romanian , \"cieru&gt;\"; French , . However, Old French still had \"-s\" in the nominative and \"-\u00d8\" in the accusative in both words: \"murs\", \"ciels\" [nominative] \u2013 \"mur\", \"ciel\" [oblique].\nFor some neuter nouns of the third declension, the oblique stem was productive; for others, the nominative/accusative form, (the two were identical in Classical Latin). Evidence suggests that the neuter gender was under pressure well back into the imperial period. French \"(le)\" , Catalan \"(la)\" , Occitan \"(lo)\" , Spanish \"(la)\" , Portuguese \"(o)\" , Italian language \"(il)\" , Leonese \"(el) lleche\" and Romanian \"(le)\" (\"milk\"), all derive from the non-standard but attested Latin nominative/accusative neuter or accusative masculine . In Spanish the word became feminine, while in French, Portuguese and Italian it became masculine (in Romanian it remained neuter, /). Other neuter forms, however, were preserved in Romance; Catalan and French , Leonese, Portuguese and Italian , Romanian (\"name\") all preserve the Latin nominative/accusative \"nomen\", rather than the oblique stem form *\"nomin-\" (which nevertheless produced Spanish ).\nMost neuter nouns had plural forms ending in or ; some of these were reanalysed as feminine singulars, such as (\"joy\"), plural \"gaudia\"; the plural form lies at the root of the French feminine singular \"(la)\" , as well as of Catalan and Occitan \"(la)\" (Italian \"la\" is a borrowing from French); the same for (\"wood stick\"), plural \"ligna\", that originated the Catalan feminine singular noun \"(la)\" , Portuguese \"(a)\" , Spanish \"(la)\" and Italian \"(la)\" . Some Romance languages still have a special form derived from the ancient neuter plural which is treated grammatically as feminine: e.g., \"arm(s)\" \u2192 Italian \"(il)\" : \"(le) braccia\", Romanian : \"bra\u021be(le)\". Cf. also Merovingian Latin \"ipsa animalia aliquas mortas fuerant\".\nAlternations in Italian heteroclitic nouns such as \"l'uovo fresco\" (\"the fresh egg\") / \"le uova fresche\" (\"the fresh eggs\") are usually analysed as masculine in the singular and feminine in the plural, with an irregular plural in \"-a\". However, it is also consistent with their historical development to say that is simply a regular neuter noun (, plural \"ova\") and that the characteristic ending for words agreeing with these nouns is \"-o\" in the singular and \"-e\" in the plural. The same alternation in gender exists in certain Romanian nouns, but is considered regular as it is more common than in Italian. Thus, a relict neuter gender can arguably be said to persist in Italian and Romanian.\nIn Portuguese, traces of the neuter plural can be found in collective formations and words meant to inform a bigger size or sturdiness. Thus, one can use \"(s)\" (\"egg(s)\") and \"(s)\" (\"roe\", \"collection(s) of eggs\"), \"(s)\" (\"section(s) of an edge\") and \"(s\") (\"edge(s)\"), \"(s)\" (\"bag(s)\") and \"(s\") (\"sack(s)\"), \"(s)\" (\"cloak(s)\") and \"(s)\" (\"blanket(s)\"). Other times, it resulted in words whose gender may be changed more or less arbitrarily, like / (\"fruit\"), / (\"broth\"), etc.\nThese formations were especially common when they could be used to avoid irregular forms. In Latin, the names of trees were usually feminine, but many were declined in the second declension paradigm, which was dominated by masculine or neuter nouns. Latin (\"pear tree\"), a feminine noun with a masculine-looking ending, became masculine in Italian \"(il)\" and Romanian ; in French and Spanish it was replaced by the masculine derivations \"(le)\" , \"(el)\" ; and in Portuguese and Catalan by the feminine derivations \"(a)\" , \"(la)\" .\nAs usual, irregularities persisted longest in frequently used forms. From the fourth declension noun \"manus\" (\"hand\"), another feminine noun with the ending \"-us\", Italian and Spanish derived \"(la)\" , Romanian \"m\u00e2nu&gt;\", pl. / (reg.) \"m\u00e2ni\", Catalan \"(la)\" , and Portuguese \"(a)\" , which preserve the feminine gender along with the masculine appearance.\nExcept for the Italian and Romanian heteroclitic nouns, other major Romance languages have no trace of neuter nouns, but still have neuter pronouns. French / / (\"this\"), Spanish / / (\"this\"), Italian: / / (\"to him\" /\"to her\" / \"to it\"), Catalan: , , , (\"it\" / \"this\" / \"this-that\" / \"that over there\"); Portuguese: / / (\"all of him\" / \"all of her\" / \"all of it\").\nIn Spanish, a three-way contrast is also made with the definite articles , , and . The last is used with nouns denoting abstract categories: \"lo bueno\", literally \"that which is good\", from : good.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLoss of oblique cases.\nThe Vulgar Latin vowel shifts caused the merger of several case endings in the nominal and adjectival declensions. Some of the causes include: the loss of final \"m\", the merger of \"\u0103\" with \"\u0101\", and the merger of \"\u016d\" with \"\u014d\" (see tables). Thus, by the 5th century, the number of case contrasts had been drastically reduced.\nThere also seems to be a marked tendency to confuse different forms even when they had not become homophonous (like the generally more distinct plurals), which indicates that nominal declension was shaped not only by phonetic mergers, but also by structural factors. As a result of the untenability of the noun case system after these phonetic changes, Vulgar Latin shifted from a markedly synthetic language to a more analytic one.\nThe genitive case died out around the 3rd century AD, according to Meyer-L\u00fcbke, and began to be replaced by \"de\" + noun (which originally meant \"about/concerning\", weakened to \"of\") as early as the 2nd century BC. Exceptions of remaining genitive forms are some pronouns, certain fossilized expressions and some proper names. For example, French (\"Thursday\") &lt; Old French \"juesdi\" &lt; Vulgar Latin \"\"; Spanish \"es\" (\"it is necessary\") &lt; \"est \"; and Italian (\"earthquake\") &lt; \"\" as well as names like \"Paoli\", \"Pieri\".\nThe dative case lasted longer than the genitive, even though Plautus, in the 2nd century BC, already shows some instances of substitution by the construction \"ad\" + accusative. For example, \"ad carnuficem dabo\".\nThe accusative case developed as a prepositional case, displacing many instances of the ablative. Towards the end of the imperial period, the accusative came to be used more and more as a general oblique case.\nDespite increasing case mergers, nominative and accusative forms seem to have remained distinct for much longer, since they are rarely confused in inscriptions. Even though Gaulish texts from the 7th century rarely confuse both forms, it is believed that both cases began to merge in Africa by the end of the empire, and a bit later in parts of Italy and Iberia. Nowadays, Romanian maintains a two-case system, while Old French and Old Occitan had a two-case subject-oblique system.\nThis Old French system was based largely on whether or not the Latin case ending contained an \"s\" or not, with the \"s\" being retained but all vowels in the ending being lost (as with \"veisin\" below). But since this meant that it was easy to confuse the singular nominative with the plural oblique, and the plural nominative with the singular oblique, this case system ultimately collapsed as well, and Middle French adopted one case (usually the oblique) for all purposes.\nToday, Romanian is generally considered the only Romance language with a surviving case system. However, some dialects of Romansh retain a special predicative form of the masculine singular identical to the plural: \"il bien vin\" (\"the good wine\") vs. \"il vin ei buns\" (\"the wine is good\"). This \"predicative case\" (as it is sometimes called) is a remnant of the Latin nominative in \"-us\".\nWider use of prepositions.\nThe loss of a productive noun case system meant that the syntactic purposes it formerly served now had to be performed by prepositions and other paraphrases. These particles increased in number, and many new ones were formed by compounding old ones. The descendant Romance languages are full of grammatical particles such as Spanish , \"where\", from Latin + (which in Romanian literally means \"from where\"/\"where from\"), or French , \"since\", from + , while the equivalent Spanish and Portuguese is \"de\" + \"ex\" + \"de\". Spanish and Portuguese , \"after\", represent \"de\" + \"ex\" + .\nSome of these new compounds appear in literary texts during the late empire; French , Spanish \"de\" and Portuguese \"de\" (\"outside\") all represent \"de\" + (Romanian \u2013 \"ad\" + \"foris\"), and we find Jerome writing \"stulti, nonne qui fecit, quod de foris est, etiam id, quod de intus est fecit?\" (Luke 11.40: \"ye fools, did not he, that made which is without, make that which is within also?\"). In some cases, compounds were created by combining a large number of particles, such as the Romanian (\"just recently\") from \"ad\" + \"de\" + \"in\" + \"illa\" + \"hora\".\nClassical Latin:\n\"Marcus patr\u012b librum dat.\" \"Marcus is giving [his] father [a/the] book.\"\nVulgar Latin:\n\"*Marcos da libru a patre.\" \"Marcus is giving [a/the] book to [his] father.\"\nJust as in the disappearing dative case, colloquial Latin sometimes replaced the disappearing genitive case with the preposition \"de\" followed by the ablative, then eventually the accusative (oblique).\nClassical Latin:\n\"Marcus mihi librum patris dat.\" \"Marcus is giving me [his] father's book.\nVulgar Latin:\n\"*Marcos mi da libru de patre.\" \"Marcus is giving me [the] book of [his] father.\"\nPronouns.\nUnlike in the nominal and adjectival inflections, pronouns kept a great part of the case distinctions. However, many changes happened. For example, the of \"ego\" was lost by the end of the empire, and \"eo\" appears in manuscripts from the 6th century.\nAdverbs.\nClassical Latin had a number of different suffixes that made adverbs from adjectives: , \"dear\", formed , \"dearly\"; , \"fiercely\", from ; , \"often\", from . All of these derivational suffixes were lost in Vulgar Latin.\nAn alternative formation with a feminine ablative form modifying (originally the ablative of \"m\u0113ns\", and so meaning \"with a ... mind\") gave rise to a widespread rule for forming adverbs in many Romance languages: adding the suffix -\"ment(e)\" to the feminine form of the adjective. So (\"quick\") instead of (\"quickly\") gave \"veloci mente\" (originally \"with a quick mind\", \"quick-mindedly\"), and \"-mente\" became a productive suffix for forming adverbs in Romance such as Italian , Spanish 'clearly'. The development of an originally autonomous form (the noun \"mente\", meaning 'mind') into a suffix (although remaining in free lexical use in other contexts e.g. Italian \"venire in mente\" 'come to mind') is a textbook case of grammaticalization.\nVerbs.\nIn general, the verbal system in the Romance languages changed less from Classical Latin than did the nominal system.\nThe four conjugational classes generally survived. The second and third conjugations already had identical imperfect tense forms in Latin, and also shared a common present participle. Because of the merging of short \"i\" with long \"\u0113\" in most of Vulgar Latin, these two conjugations grew even closer together. Several of the most frequently-used forms became indistinguishable, while others became distinguished only by stress placement:\nThese two conjugations came to be conflated in many of the Romance languages, often by merging them into a single class while taking endings from each of the original two conjugations. Which endings survived was different for each language, although most tended to favour second conjugation endings over the third conjugation. Spanish, for example, mostly eliminated the third conjugation forms in favour of the second conjugation forms.\nFrench and Catalan did the same, but tended to generalise the third conjugation infinitive instead. Catalan in particular almost eliminated the second conjugation ending over time, reducing it to a small relic class. In Italian, the two infinitive endings remained separate (but spelled identically), while the conjugations merged in most other respects much as in the other languages. However, the third-conjugation third-person plural present ending survived in favour of the second conjugation version, and was even extended to the fourth conjugation. Romanian also maintained the distinction between the second and third conjugation endings.\nIn the perfect, many languages generalized the \"-aui\" ending most frequently found in the first conjugation. This led to an unusual development; phonetically, the ending was treated as the diphthong rather than containing a semivowel , and in other cases the sound was simply dropped. We know this because it did not participate in the sound shift from to . Thus Latin \"amaui\", \"amauit\" (\"I loved; he/she loved\") in many areas became proto-Romance *\"amai\" and *\"amaut\", yielding for example Portuguese \"amei\", \"amou\". This suggests that in the spoken language, these changes in conjugation preceded the loss of .\nAnother major systemic change was to the future tense, remodelled in Vulgar Latin with auxiliary verbs. A new future was originally formed with the auxiliary verb , *\"amare habeo\", literally \"to love I have\" (cf. English \"I have to love\", which has shades of a future meaning). This was contracted into a new future suffix in Western Romance forms, which can be seen in the following modern examples of \"I will love\":\nThe first historical attestation of this new future can be found in a 7th-century Latin text, the \"Chronicle of Fredegar\"\nA periphrastic construction of the form 'to have to' (late Latin \"habere ad\") used as future is characteristic of Sardinian: \nAn innovative conditional (distinct from the subjunctive) also developed in the same way (infinitive + conjugated form of \"habere\"). The fact that the future and conditional endings were originally independent words is still evident in literary Portuguese, which in these tenses allows clitic object pronouns to be incorporated between the root of the verb and its ending: \"I will love\" (\"eu\") \"amarei\", but \"I will love you\" \"amar-te-ei\", from \"amar\" + \"te\" [\"you\"] + (\"eu\") \"hei\" = \"amar\" + \"te\" + [\"h\"]\"ei\" = \"amar-te-ei\".\nIn Spanish, Italian, Romanian and Portuguese, personal pronouns can still be omitted from verb phrases as in Latin, as the endings are still distinct enough to convey that information: \"venio\" &gt; Sp \"vengo\" (\"I come\"). In French, however, all the endings are typically homophonous except the first and second person (and occasionally also third person) plural, so the pronouns are always used (\"je viens\") except in the imperative.\nContrary to the millennia-long continuity of much of the active verb system, which has now survived 6000 years of known evolution, the synthetic passive voice was utterly lost in Romance, being replaced with periphrastic verb forms\u2014composed of the verb \"to be\" plus a passive participle\u2014or impersonal reflexive forms\u2014composed of a verb and a passivizing pronoun.\nApart from the grammatical and phonetic developments there were many cases of verbs merging as complex subtleties in Latin were reduced to simplified verbs in Romance. A classic example of this are the verbs expressing the concept \"to go\". Consider three particular verbs in Classical Latin expressing concepts of \"going\": , , and *\"ambitare\". In Spanish and Portuguese \"ire\" and \"vadere\" merged into the verb \"ir\", which derives some conjugated forms from \"ire\" and some from \"vadere\". \"andar\" was maintained as a separate verb derived from \"ambitare\".\nItalian instead merged \"vadere\" and \"ambitare\" into the verb . At the extreme French merged three Latin verbs with, for example, the present tense deriving from \"vadere\" and another verb \"ambulare\" (or something like it) and the future tense deriving from \"ire\". \nSimilarly the Romance distinction between the Romance verbs for \"to be\", and , was lost in French as these merged into the verb . In Italian, the verb inherited both Romance meanings of \"being essentially\" and \"being temporarily of the quality of\", while specialized into a verb denoting location or dwelling, or state of health.\nCopula.\nThe copula (that is, the verb signifying \"to be\") of Classical Latin was . This evolved to *\"essere\" in Vulgar Latin by attaching the common infinitive suffix \"-re\" to the classical infinitive; this produced Italian and French through Proto-Gallo-Romance *\"essre\" and Old French as well as Spanish and Portuguese (Romanian \"a\" derives from \"fieri\", which means \"to become\").\nIn Vulgar Latin a second copula developed utilizing the verb , which originally meant (and is cognate with) \"to stand\", to denote a more temporary meaning. That is, *\"essere\" signified the \"esse\"nce, while \"stare\" signified the \"state.\" \"Stare\" evolved to Spanish and Portuguese and Old French (both through *\"estare\"), Romanian \"a sta\" (\"to stand\"), using the original form for the noun (\"stare\"=\"state\"/\"starea\"=\"the state\"), while Italian retained the original form.\nThe semantic shift that underlies this evolution is more or less as follows: A speaker of Classical Latin might have said: \"vir est in foro\", meaning \"the man is in/at the marketplace\". The same sentence in Vulgar Latin could have been *\"(h)omo stat in foro\", \"the man stands in/at the marketplace\", replacing the \"est\" (from \"esse\") with \"stat\" (from \"stare\"), because \"standing\" was what was perceived as what the man was actually doing.\nThe use of \"stare\" in this case was still semantically transparent assuming that it meant \"to stand\", but soon the shift from \"esse\" to \"stare\" became more widespread. In the Iberian peninsula \"esse\" ended up only denoting natural qualities that would not change, while \"stare\" was applied to transient qualities and location. In Italian, \"stare\" is used mainly for location, transitory state of health (\"sta male\" 's/he is ill' but \"\u00e8 gracile\" 's/he is puny') and, as in Spanish, for the eminently transient quality implied in a verb's progressive form, such as \"sto scrivendo\" to express 'I am writing'.\nThe historical development of the \"stare\" + ablative gerund progressive tense in those Romance languages that have it seems to have been a passage from a usage such as \"sto pensando\" 'I stand/stay (here) in thinking', in which the \"stare\" form carries the full semantic load of 'stand, stay' to grammaticalization of the construction as expression of progressive aspect (Similar in concept to the Early Modern English construction of \"I am a-thinking\"). The process of reanalysis that took place over time bleached the semantics of \"stare\" so that when used in combination with the gerund the form became solely a grammatical marker of subject and tense (e.g. \"sto\" = subject first person singular, present; \"stavo\" = subject first person singular, past), no longer a lexical verb with the semantics of 'stand' (not unlike the auxiliary in compound tenses that once meant 'have, possess', but is now semantically empty: \"j'ai \u00e9crit\", ho scritto\", he escrito\", etc.). Whereas \"sto scappando\" would once have been semantically strange at best (?'I stay escaping'), once grammaticalization was achieved, collocation with a verb of inherent mobility was no longer contradictory, and \"sto scappando\" could and did become the normal way to express 'I am escaping'. (Although it might be objected that in sentences like Spanish \"la catedral est\u00e1 en la ciudad\", \"the cathedral is in the city\" this is also unlikely to change, but all locations are expressed through \"estar\" in Spanish, as this usage originally conveyed the sense of \"the cathedral \"stands\" in the city\").\nWord order typology.\nClassical Latin in most cases adopted an SOV word order in ordinary prose, although other word orders were employed, such as in poetry, euphony, focus, or emphasis, enabled by inflectional marking of the grammatical function of words. However, word order in most of the modern Romance languages generally adopted a standard SVO word order. Relics of SOV word order still survive in the placement of clitic object pronouns (e.g. Spanish 'I love you').\nVocabulary.\nLexical turnover.\nOver the centuries, spoken Latin lost certain words in favour of coinages; in favour of borrowings from neighbouring languages such as Gaulish, Germanic, or Greek; or in favour of other Latin words that had undergone semantic shift. The \u201clost\u201d words often continued to enjoy some currency in literary Latin, however.\nA commonly-cited example is the replacement of the highly irregular (suppletive) verb \"ferre\", meaning 'to carry', with the entirely regular \"portare\". Similarly, the verb \"loqui\", meaning 'to speak', was replaced by a variety of alternatives such as the native \"fabulari\" and \"narrare\" or the Greek borrowing \"parabolare\".\nClassical Latin particles fared poorly, with all of the following vanishing in the course of its development to Romance: an, at, autem, donec, enim, etiam, haud, igitur, ita, nam, postquam, quidem, quin, quoad, quoque, sed, sive, utrum, vel.\nSemantic drift.\nMany words experienced a shift in meaning. Some notable cases are \"civitas\" ('citizenry' \"\u2192\" 'city', replacing \"urbs\"); \"focus\" ('hearth' \"\u2192\" 'fire', replacing \"ignis\"); \"manducare\" ('chew' \"\u2192\" 'eat', replacing \"edere\"); \"causa\" ('subject matter' \"\u2192\" 'thing', competing with \"res\"); \"mittere\" ('send' \u2192 'put', competing with \"ponere\"); \"necare\" ('murder' \"\u2192\" 'drown', competing with \"submergere\"); \"pacare\" ('placate' \"\u2192\" 'pay', competing with \"solvere\"), and \"totus\" ('whole' \"\u2192\" 'all, every', competing with \"omnis\").\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks consulted.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTransitions to Romance languages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51963", "revid": "4967956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51963", "title": "Steinway &amp; Sons", "text": "German-American piano company\nSteinway &amp; Sons, also known as Steinway (), is a German-American piano company, founded in 1853 in New York City by German piano builder Heinrich Engelhard Steinweg (later known as Henry E. Steinway). The company's growth led to a move to a larger factory in New York, and later opening an additional factory in Hamburg, Germany. The New York factory, in the borough of Queens, supplies the Americas, and the factory in Hamburg supplies the rest of the world.\nSteinway is a prominent piano company, known for its high quality and for inventions within the area of piano development. Steinway has been granted 139 patents in piano making, with the first in 1857. The company's share of the high-end grand piano market consistently exceeds 80\u00a0percent. The dominant position has been criticized, with some musicians and writers arguing that it has blocked innovation and led to a homogenization of the sound favored by pianists.\nSteinway pianos have received numerous awards. One of the first is a gold medal in 1855 at the American Institute Fair at the New York Crystal Palace. From 1855 to 1862, Steinway pianos received 35 gold medals. More awards and recognitions followed, including three medals at the International Exposition of 1867 in Paris. The European part of the company held a royal warrant of appointment to Queen Elizabeth II. Steinway &amp; Sons was named \"Company of the Year\" in 1996 by \"The Music Trades\" magazine. The award was given in recognition of Steinway's \"overall performance, quality, value-added products, a well-executed promotional program and disciplined distribution which generated the most impressive results in the entire music industry.\"\nIn addition to the Steinway piano line, Steinway markets two other, lower-priced brands of piano sold under the brand names \"Boston\" and \"Essex\".&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nFoundation and growth.\nHeinrich Engelhard Steinweg first made pianos in the 1820s from his house in Seesen, Germany. He made pianos under the \"Steinweg\" brand until he emigrated from Germany to America in 1850 with his wife and seven of his nine children. The eldest son, C. F. Theodor Steinweg, remained in Germany, and continued making the Steinweg brand of pianos, partnering with Friedrich Grotrian, a piano dealer, from 1856 to 1865.\nIn 1853, Heinrich Engelhard Steinweg founded Steinway &amp; Sons. His first workshop in America was in a small loft at the back of 85 Varick Street in the borough of Manhattan in New York City. The first piano made by Steinway &amp; Sons was given the number 483 because Heinrich Engelhard Steinweg had built 482 pianos in Germany. Number 483 was sold to a New York family for $500, and is now on display at the St\u00e4dtisches Museum Seesen, the town in which Heinrich Engelhard Steinweg began his career as a piano maker. A year later, demand was such that the company moved to larger premises at 82\u201388 Walker Street. It was not until 1864 that the family anglicized their name from \"Steinweg\" to \"Steinway\".\nBy the 1860s, Steinway had built and moved into a factory at Park Avenue between 52nd and 53rd Street (the present site of the Seagram Building) where it covered a whole block. With a workforce of 350 men, production increased from 500 to nearly 1,800 pianos per year. The employees were mostly German immigrants and the official language of the company was German. The pianos themselves underwent numerous substantial improvements through innovations made both at the Steinway factory and elsewhere in the industry based on emerging engineering and scientific research, including developments in the understanding of acoustics. Almost half of the company's 139 patented inventions were developed by the first and second generations of the Steinway family. Steinway's pianos won prizes at exhibitions in New York City, London, and Paris. By 1862, Steinway pianos had received more than 35 medals. Part of Steinway's early reputation arose from its successes in trade fairs.\nIn 1865, the Steinway family sent a letter to C. F. Theodor Steinweg asking that he leave the German Steinweg factory (by then located in Braunschweig (Brunswick)) and travel to New York City to take over the leadership of the family firm due to the deaths of his brothers Henry and Charles from disease. C. F. Theodor Steinweg obeyed, selling his share of the German piano company to his partner Wilhelm Grotrian (son of Friedrich Grotrian) and two other workmen, Adolph Helfferich and H. G. W. Schulz. The German factory changed its name from \"C. F. Theodor Steinweg\" to \"Grotrian, Helfferich, Schulz, Th. Steinweg Nachf.\" (), later shortened to \"Grotrian-Steinweg\". In New York City, C. F. Theodor Steinweg anglicized his name to C. F. Theodore Steinway. During the next 15 years of his leadership, he kept a home in Braunschweig and traveled often between Germany and the United States.\nThrough 1870\u201380, William Steinway (born Wilhelm Steinweg, a son of Heinrich Engelhard Steinweg) established a company town after purchasing a home and its surrounding property from the widow of Benjamin Pike Jr., that would later bear his name as the Steinway Mansion. This company town would go on to become \"Steinway Village\" in what is now the Astoria neighborhood of Queens in New York City. Steinway Village was built as its own town, and included a new factory (still used today) with its own foundry and sawmill, houses for employees, kindergarten, lending library, post office, volunteer fire department, and parks. Steinway Village later became part of Long Island City. Steinway Street, one of the major streets in the Astoria and Long Island City neighborhoods of Queens, is named after the company.\nIn 1876, Steinway participated in the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia. The competition among piano makers principally involved Steinway, Chickering, and Weber. According to journalist James Barron's account of Steinway's participation in the competition, the company was able to secure success by bribing one of the judges. William Steinway denied to the exposition's organizers that a judge had been paid directly, although Barron states that the judge was bribed through an intermediary, the pianist Frederic Boscovitz. According to freelancer Isabel Wolff, William Steinway admitted in his diary that under his leadership the New York City arm of the company bribed judges at trade fairs to favor Steinway pianos. According to musicologist Donald W. Fostle, it is untrue that Steinway repeatedly bribed judges at trade fairs, and in the one documented case it is unclear if Steinway were enmeshed, along with others, in bribery or were the target of attempted extortion.\nTo reach European customers who wanted Steinway pianos, and to avoid high European import taxes, William Steinway and C. F. Theodore Steinway established a new piano factory in the free German city of Hamburg in 1880. The first address of Steinway's factory in Hamburg was at Schanzenstra\u00dfe in the western part of Hamburg, St. Pauli. C. F. Theodore Steinway became the head of the German factory, and William Steinway went back to the factory in New York. The two factories regularly exchanged experience about their patents and techniques despite the large distance between them, and they continue to do so today. C. F. Theodore Steinway was a talented inventor who made many improvements in the construction of the piano. About a third of Steinway's patented inventions are under the name of C. F. Theodore Steinway. The Steinway factory in Hamburg was part laboratory, part factory. Much of the precision cutting and drilling machinery installed in the New York factory was tried in the Hamburg factory first. C. F. Theodore Steinway died in Braunschweig in 1889, having successfully competed against the Grotrian-Steinweg brand \u2013 both the Hamburg-based Steinway factory and the Braunschweig-based Grotrian-Steinweg factory became known for making premium German pianos.\nMeanwhile, the 1880s saw the company embroiled in a series of labor disputes between the New York City factory's management and workers. Back then, industrialists faced labor strikes frequently. One dispute, in 1880, saw the company lead an industry-wide lockout of piano workers in New York City. In later disputes in the decade, the company hired detectives to spy on its workers, paid police to take management's side in the dispute and to protect company property, and evicted strike leaders from company housing.\nIn 1883, the Hungarian composer and pianist Franz Liszt wrote in a letter to Steinway: \"...The new Steinway grand is a glorious masterpiece in power, sonority, singing quality, and perfect harmonic effects, affording delight even to my old piano-weary fingers. Ever continuing success remains a beautiful attribute of the world-renowned firm of Steinway &amp; Sons. ...Owing to my ignorance of the mechanism of piano construction I can but praise the magnificent result in the volume and quality of sound.\"\nIn 1890, Steinway received its first royal warrant, granted by Queen Victoria. The following year the patrons of Steinway included the Prince of Wales and other members of royalty and nobility. In subsequent years Steinway was granted royal and imperial warrants from the rulers of Italy, Norway, Persia, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, Sweden, and Turkey.\nSteinway Halls.\nFrom 1864 to 1866, William Steinway, who is credited with establishing Steinway's success in marketing, oversaw the construction of Steinway Hall on East 14th Street in Manhattan, New York City. Steinway Hall had cost $200,000 to build. It included the second largest concert hall in New York City as well as showrooms for Steinway pianos. To enter the concert hall concertgoers had to pass through the showrooms, a way to advertise Steinway pianos. Sales increased by more than 400 pianos in 1867. Steinway Hall quickly became one of New York City's most prominent cultural centers, housing the New York Philharmonic for the next 25 years until Carnegie Hall opened in 1891.\nIn 1925, the Steinway Hall on East 14th Street was closed and a new Steinway Hall on West 57th Street was opened. In 2013, Steinway sold the Steinway Hall on West 57th Street for $46 million and moved out of the building at the end of 2014. In 2016, a new Steinway Hall opened on Sixth Avenue.\nA second Steinway Hall was opened in London in 1875. It was located first on Wigmore Street, in 1924 it moved to St. George Street, and later it moved to its current address on Marylebone Lane.\nExpansion.\nIn 1857, Steinway began to make a line of art case pianos, designed by artists. In 1903, the 100,000th Steinway grand piano was given as a gift to the White House; it was decorated by the artist Thomas Wilmer Dewing. The 100,000th Steinway grand piano was replaced in 1938 by the 300,000th, which remains in use in the White House. The piano is normally placed in the largest room of the White House, the East Room.\nLater, Steinway diversified into the manufacture of player pianos. Several systems such as the Welte-Mignon, Duo-Art, and Ampico were incorporated. During the 1920s, Steinway had been selling up to 6,000 pianos a year. In 1929, Steinway constructed one double-keyboard grand piano. It has 164 keys and 4 pedals. (In 2005, Steinway refurbished this instrument).\nDuring World War II, the Steinway factory in New York received orders from the Allied Armies to build wooden gliders to convey troops behind enemy lines. Steinway could make few normal pianos, but built 2,436 special models called the \"Victory Vertical\" or \"G.I. Piano\". It was a small piano that four men could lift, painted olive drab, gray, or blue, designed to be carried aboard ships or dropped by parachute from an airplane to bring music to the soldiers.\nThe factory in Hamburg, Germany, could sell very few pianos during World War II. No more than a hundred pianos per year left the factory. In the later years of the war, the company was ordered to give up all the prepared and dried wood their lumber yard held for war production. In an air raid over Hamburg, several Allied bombs hit the factory and nearly destroyed it. After the war, Steinway restored the Hamburg factory with help from the Marshall Plan.\nIn the late 1960s, Steinway brought countersuit against \"Grotrian-Steinweg\" to stop them from using the name \"Steinweg\" on their pianos. Steinway won the case on appeal in 1975, forcing their competitor to use only the name \"Grotrian\" in the United States. The case set a precedent and established the concept of Initial Interest Confusion, in which consumers might be initially attracted to a similarly named but lesser-known brand because of the stronger brand's good reputation.\nThe 500,000th Steinway.\nIn 1988, Steinway made its 500,000th piano. Designed by artist Wendell Castle, it carries inscriptions of the names of the 832 pianists and 90 ensembles on the Steinway Artist roster of 1987, including Van Cliburn, Vladimir Horowitz and Billy Joel.\nSix years later the company launched \"C. F. Theodore Steinway Academy for Concert Technicians\", known simply as \"Steinway Academy\", at Steinway's factory in Hamburg, Germany. There, experienced piano tuners and piano technicians from all over the world receive further training in piano tuning and maintenance. By 2000, Steinway had made its 550,000th piano.\nIn 2003, Steinway celebrated its 150th anniversary at Carnegie Hall with a three-day concert series with performances by Peter Cincotti, Art Garfunkel, Herbie Hancock, Ben Heppner, Ahmad Jamal, Ramsey Lewis, Randy Newman, Roger Williams, Nancy Wilson, Yundi Li and Eroica Trio, among others. The first concert featured classical music, the second jazz, and the third pop. As part of the 150th anniversary, fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld created a commemorative Steinway limited edition grand piano.\nIn 2005, Steinway celebrated the 125th anniversary of the establishment of its factory in Hamburg, Germany. The celebration featured a concert at the Laeiszhalle concert hall in Hamburg with performances by Vladimir and Vovka Ashkenazy, Lang Lang, and Detlef Kraus. 1,800 people from 33 countries attended the concert. As part of the celebration, a 125th anniversary Steinway limited edition grand piano was designed by Count Albrecht von Goertz.\nUntil his death on September 18, 2008, at the age of 93, Henry Z. Steinway, the great-grandson of the Steinway founder, still worked for Steinway and put his signature on custom-made limited-edition pianos. At several public occasions, Henry Z. Steinway represented the Steinway family. He started at the company in 1937 after graduating from Harvard University. He was president of the company from 1956 to 1977 and was the last Steinway family member to be president of Steinway.\nChanges in ownership.\nIn 1972, after a lengthy strike, a long-running financial struggle, high legal expenses, and a lack of business interest among some of the Steinway family members, the firm was sold to CBS. At that time, CBS owned many enterprises in the entertainment industry, including electric guitar and amplifier maker Fender, drum maker Rogers, electro-mechanical piano maker Rhodes, and the baseball team New York Yankees. CBS had plans to form a musical conglomerate that made and sold music in all forms and through all outlets, including records, radio, television, and musical instruments. This new conglomerate was evidently not as successful as CBS had expected, and Steinway was sold in 1985, along with classical and church organ maker Rodgers and flute and piccolo maker Gemeinhardt, to a group of Boston-area investors led by Robert and John P. Birmingham. In order to acquire Steinway, the investors founded the musical conglomerate Steinway Musical Properties. In 1995, Steinway Musical Properties was acquired by Selmer Industries to form the musical conglomerate Steinway Musical Instruments.\nIn June 2013, private equity firm Kohlberg &amp; Company offered to buy Steinway parent company Steinway Musical Instruments for $438 million. Two months later hedge fund Paulson &amp; Co. Inc. made a higher offer, $512 million, to take the company private. The Steinway Musical Instruments board recommended that shareholders accept this, and in September 2013 Paulson announced completion of the acquisition.\nRecent history.\nAfter the 2008 economic downturn, Steinway grand piano sales fell by half, and 30\u00a0percent of the union employees were laid off at the New York factory between August 2008 and November 2009. Sales were down 21\u00a0percent in 2009 in the United States. But sales began increasing a little in 2010, and they continued to improve the following year.\nIn 2015, Steinway went back to the player piano industry from around the 1920s by introducing a digital player piano series called Spirio. The technology in the Spirio pianos was created in 2007 by Wayne Stahnke, an Austrian engineer who has previously made digital player piano systems for other piano companies, like Yamaha and B\u00f6sendorfer. Wayne Stahnke's technology, originally called \"Live Performance Model LX\", was sold to Steinway in 2014 and re-branded as \"Spirio\". In contrast to player pianos by other brands available at the time, a recording option was not originally available in the Steinway Spirio. In 2018, a recording option was made available in Steinway Spirio pianos, known as the Spirio \"r\". The Spirio technology is referred to as \"non-parasitic\", meaning that the recording and playback equipment do not interfere with the sound or feel of the piano. The pianist is recorded by over 20 grey-scale optical sensors mounted behind the piano\u2019s keyboard. With over 1000 levels of sensitivity and the ability to record 800 measurements/second, they sense the speed at which the hammers strike the strings. In 2024, the Spirio library contained more than 4,000 recordings.\nIn 2015, Steinway made its 600,000th piano. The piano features the Fibonacci spiral and Macassar ebony veneer. It took 6,000 hours of work over 4 years to make, and was priced at $2.4 million.\nAs of early 2021, Paulson &amp; Co. remains the ultimate parent of Steinway &amp; Sons, with head office at 1251 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.\nModels.\nSteinway pianos are sold by a worldwide network of around 200 authorized Steinway dealers who operate around 300 showrooms. The primary differentiation between Steinway models is simply their size (which is indicated by their model letter), which is also one of the most important indicators of their relative prices.\nSteinway pianos are also sold in the secondary market. The price of a used Steinway can vary tremendously, depending on the model (size), age, condition, and the quality of any restoration work that has been done. Additionally, Steinway offers certified pre-owned pianos, using Steinway-approved parts.\nGrands and uprights.\nSteinway makes the following models of pianos:\nThe Hamburg factory makes seven models of grand pianos and one model of upright piano. (The numerical portion of each model designation represents the length of the grand pianos and the height of the upright piano, in centimetres).\nThe New York factory makes six models of grand pianos and one model of upright piano.\nGrand pianos.\nA model L (5\u2019 10 1\u20442\") was produced and sold as a replacement for the model O from 1922 to 2006.\nUpright pianos.\nSteinway has previously made upright pianos in different dimensions, such as the Model I/Model R.\nDesigner cases.\nDesigners and artists such as Karl Lagerfeld, Dakota Jackson, Walter Dorwin Teague, Arthur Blackmore, Joseph Burr Tiffany, Louis Comfort Tiffany, Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, George Schastey, and the Herter Brothers have created original designs for Steinway pianos. These specially designed pianos fall under the art case piano line or the limited edition piano line.\nSteinway began creating art case pianos in 1857 and the making of art case pianos reached its peak in the late 19th century. Today, Steinway only builds art case pianos on rare occasions. The art case pianos are unique. Some of Steinway's most notable art case pianos are the \"Alma-Tadema grand piano\" from 1887, the 100,000th Steinway piano from 1903, the 300,000th Steinway piano from 1938, and the \"Sound of Harmony\" from 2008. The \"Alma-Tadema grand piano\" was designed by Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema and received great public acclaim when it was exhibited in London. The piano is made of ebony, inlaid with ivory and mother of pearl, with carved case, lid, and legs, and painted in the inside lid by artist Edward Poynter. It was bought by financier Henry Gurdon Marquand for his New York City mansion. In 1997, it was sold at Christie's auction house in London for $1.2 million, setting a price record for a piano sold at auction. It is now on display at the art museum Clark Art Institute. The 100,000th Steinway piano was given as a gift to the White House in 1903 and is made of cherry tree with gold leaf. It is decorated with coats of arms of the thirteen original states of America and painted by Thomas Dewing with dancing figures representing the nine Muses. The 100,000th Steinway piano was replaced in 1938 by the 300,000th Steinway piano. The gold gilded mahogany legs of the 300,000th piano are carved as eagles and are molded by sculptor Albert Stewart. The piano remains in use in the White House. The \"Sound of Harmony\" is decorated with inlays of 40 different woods, including the lid, which replicates artwork by Chinese painter Shi Qi. It took about four years to build the grand piano and it was priced at \u20ac1.2 million. The piano was chosen for use at the Expo 2010 Shanghai China.\nExamples of limited edition pianos include \"The Steinway Limited Edition\" by Karl Lagerfeld created to celebrate the 150th anniversary of the Steinway company in 2003, and the 125th-anniversary grand piano by Count Albrecht von Goertz designed to celebrate the 125th anniversary in 2005 of the founding of the Steinway factory in Hamburg, Germany.\nIn 1993, Steinway introduced a new line of specially designed cases, the \"Steinway Crown Jewel Collection\". The collection consists of grand and upright pianos in Steinway's regular models, but instead of the traditional black finish the pianos of the \"Steinway Crown Jewel Collection\" have veneers of rare woods from around the world. The collection includes Macassar ebony, East Indian rosewood, and kewazinga bubinga.\nBrands.\nIn addition to the \"Steinway &amp; Sons\" brand, Steinway markets two other brands: \"Boston\" for the mid-level market and \"Essex\" for the entry-level market. Boston and Essex pianos are made using lower-cost components and labor. Pianos of these two brands, made with Steinway owned designs, are manufactured in Asia by suppliers. Steinway allows only its authorized Steinway dealers to carry new Boston and Essex pianos.\nPiano bank.\nSteinway maintains a worldwide \"piano bank\" from which performing pianists, especially Steinway Artists, can select a Steinway piano with the touch and tonal characteristics they prefer for use in a certain concert, recording, or tour. Steinway prepares, tunes, and delivers the piano of the performer's choice to the designated concert hall or recording studio at the performer's expense.\nThe \"piano bank\" consists of approximately 250 Steinway pianos valued collectively at $12.5 million in 2019.\nManufacture.\nGerman and American factories.\nSome pianists and technicians have expressed a preference for pianos from Steinway's Hamburg factory over those made in New York, or vice versa. Emanuel Ax, concert pianist and piano teacher at the Juilliard School, has said that \"...\u00a0the differences have more to do with individual instruments than with where they were made.\" Larry Fine, American piano technician and author of \"The Piano Book\", considers Hamburg Steinways to be of higher quality than those from New York. In 2010, the New York factory made some changes in its manufacturing processes and materials to improve quality, and Fine was invited to tour the factory to see some of the changes. Fine wrote in his \"Acoustic &amp; Digital Piano Buyer\" of Spring 2011 that the changes have improved the quality of the New York pianos, but that the Hamburg pianos are still of higher quality.\nSteinway has two sales areas: the factory in New York supplies North and South America, and the one in Hamburg supplies the rest of the world. At all main Steinway showrooms across the world, customers can order pianos from either factory. The Hamburg and New York factories exchange parts and craftsmanship, and the parts for both factories come from the same places: Canadian maple is used for the rim, and the soundboards are made from Sitka spruce from Alaska. Both factories use similar crown parameters for their diaphragmatic soundboards. To maintain quality, Steinway has acquired some of its suppliers. Steinway bought the German manufacturer Kluge in Wuppertal, which supplies keyboards, in December 1998, and in November 1999 purchased the company that supplies its cast iron plates, O. S. Kelly Co. in Springfield, Ohio.\nA majority of the world's concert halls own at least one Steinway piano, and some (for example Carnegie Hall) have model D-274s from both the Hamburg factory and the New York factory to satisfy a greater range of preferences.\nComponents.\nEach Steinway grand piano has more than 12,000 individual parts. A Steinway piano is handcrafted and takes nearly a year to build.\nSteinway maintains its own lumber yards at both the Hamburg and New York factories, aging and drying lumber from nine months to five years. Less than 50 percent is finally used in the making of Steinway pianos. More than 70 percent of the walnut stock is discarded. The woods are purchased when they are available rather than when they are needed.\nRim.\nThe rims of Hamburg-made Steinways are made of layers of hard rock maple and mahogany; the New York-made rims use layers of hard rock maple only. The layers are glued and pressed together into one piece in one operation using rim-bending presses that C. F. Theodore Steinway invented in 1880. After the rim-bending process, the rim has to rest from the stress of being bent. It is placed in a conditioning room for a month or more to reduce the moisture content of the wood to approximately six percent.\nPlate.\nInside the piano, a cast iron plate provides the strength to support the string tension, which ranges from 16\u00a0tons to 23\u00a0tons depending on the model. The iron plate is installed above the soundboard and is bronzed, lacquered, polished, and decorated with the Steinway logo. Steinway fabricates plates in its own foundry.\nSoundboard and bridges.\nSteinway makes its soundboard from solid spruce, which allows the soundboard to transmit and amplify sound. The soundboard in Steinway pianos are double-crowned with Steinway's diaphragmatic design. The diaphragmatic soundboard, which was granted a patent in 1936, tapers in thickness from the center to the edges, which permits more freedom of movement resulting in a richer and more lasting tonal response.\nSteinway bridges are made of vertically laminated hard rock maple with a hard rock maple cap. The bridges are measured for specific height requirements for each piano and are hand notched.\nKeys and action.\nSteinway keys are made of Bavarian spruce. The surface of the white keys is made of polymer; earlier, they had been made of elephant ivory. Around the 1950s, Steinway switched from using ivory, and some years later use of ivory for piano keys was outlawed. The action parts are mounted on Steinway's tubular metallic frame. The Steinway hammers are cut from virgin wool felt, containing no admixture of other materials.\nIn 1962, the New York factory introduced the Permafree action for its grand pianos, using Teflon parts in place of cloth bushings. Using Teflon was less expensive for the company, was intended to withstand wear and humidity changes better than cloth, and eliminated the factory's reliance on a kind of cloth that might not be exactly the same from batch to batch. However, the Teflon bushings (which are relatively rigid and unaffected by humidity) were tightly installed inside parts made of wood, which does expand and contract according to humidity. This made the action become too tight or too loose, especially after changes in the weather, and caused annoying clicking noises while playing. The Teflon bushings were discontinued in 1983, and existing pianos that had them were retrofitted with cloth. The Hamburg factory never implemented the Teflon bushings in its pianos.\nStrings and pinblock.\nThe pianos have steel strings in the midsection and treble, with bass strings made of copper-wound steel. The strings are uniformly spaced with one end coiled around the tuning pins, which in turn are inserted in a laminated wooden block called the pinblock or wrestplank. The tuning pins keep the strings tight and are held in place by friction. Steinway also employs front and rear duplex scales, in which the main vibrating section of the string is augmented by a much smaller vibration in the two ends of the string which are fastened in place. Steinway was a friend of the German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz, and this friendship led to the development and Steinway patent in 1872 of front and back aliquots, allowing the traditionally dead sections of strings to vibrate in sympathy with the main string. The result is a fuller, more complex sound.\nThe pinblock, also known as wrestplank, in Steinways is made of seven layers of hard-textured wood that are glued together, set at a 45\u00b0 angle to the run of the grain. It is designed to keep the piano in tune longer.\nAffiliates.\nSteinway Artists.\nIn contrast to other piano makers, who presented their pianos to pianists, William Steinway engaged the Russian pianist Anton Rubinstein to play Steinway pianos during Rubinstein's first and only American concert tour from 1872 to 1873, with 215 concerts in 239 days. It was a success for both Rubinstein and Steinway. Thus, the Steinway Artist program was born. Later the Polish pianist Ignacy Jan Paderewski toured America playing 107 concerts on Steinway pianos in 117 days.\nAs of \u00a02018[ [update]], around 2,000 pianists worldwide are official \"Steinway Artists\", which means that they have chosen to perform on Steinway pianos exclusively, and each owns a Steinway. None is paid to do so. Steinway Artists come from different genres: classical, jazz, pop, and rock. A few examples of Steinway Artists are Daniel Barenboim, Harry Connick Jr., Billy Joel, Evgeny Kissin, Diana Krall, Yundi Li and Lang Lang. Some examples of \"Immortal Steinway Artists\" are Irving Berlin, Benjamin Britten, George Gershwin, Vladimir Horowitz, Cole Porter, and Sergei Rachmaninoff.\nSteinway expects Steinway Artists to perform on Steinway pianos where they are available and in appropriate condition. Artur Schnabel complained once that \"Steinway refused to let me use their pianos [i.e., Steinway pianos owned by Steinway] unless I would give up playing the Bechstein piano \u2013 which I had used for so many years \u2013 in Europe. They insisted that I play on Steinway exclusively, everywhere in the world, otherwise they would not give me their pianos in the United States. That is the reason why from 1923 until 1930 I did not return to America.\u00a0... [in] 1933, Steinway changed their attitude and agreed to let me use their pianos in the United States, even if I continued elsewhere to play the Bechstein piano\u00a0... Thus, from 1933 on, I went every year to America.\" In 1972, Steinway responded to Garrick Ohlsson's statement that B\u00f6sendorfer was \"the Rolls-Royce of pianos\" by trucking away the Steinway-owned grand piano that Ohlsson was about to give a recital on at Alice Tully Hall in New York City. Ohlsson ended up performing on a B\u00f6sendorfer piano borrowed at the eleventh hour, and Steinway would not let him borrow Steinway-owned pianos for some time. Ohlsson has since made peace with Steinway. Angela Hewitt was removed from the Steinway Artist roster around 2002 after she purchased and performed on a Fazioli piano. After the Canadian pianist Louis Lortie was removed from the Steinway Artist roster in 2003, he complained in a newspaper article that Steinway is trying to establish a monopoly on the concert world by becoming \"the Microsoft of pianos\". A Steinway spokesman said, in response to Lortie's decision to perform a concert on a Fazioli piano, that Steinway does not want anyone on the Steinway Artist roster who does not want to play the Steinway exclusively.\nAccording to musicologist Stuart de Ocampo, \"That Steinway aggressively sought out and paid (in various forms) for artist endorsements must be stressed in order to combat an idealistic notion that the greatest flocked to Steinway simply because it was the best.\" More generally, Stuart de Ocampo endorses the view of Donald W. Fostle, who wrote in a company history of Steinway that \"the genius of Steinways\u00a0... ultimately lay in their ability to persuade millions of persons across decades and continents that in this realm of supreme subjectivity, individual variation, incertitude, and ever-changing conditions, there was an absolute best. The assertion, repeated often enough, took on the coloration of fact\", but Stuart de Ocampo concludes that \"Innovations in piano construction carved out a unique sound for the Steinway pianos in the mid-nineteenth century. Medals at fairs and international exhibitions were the basis of Steinway &amp; Sons' early reputation.\" Paying for pianists' endorsements back then was not specific to Steinway. As there were financial incentives for testimonials, several famous pianists had no qualms about endorsing more than one piano brand. Franz Liszt endorsed Steinway, B\u00f6sendorfer, Chickering, Erard, Ibach, Mason &amp; Risch, and Steck at the same time. Today, no pianist is paid by Steinway, and when Steinway Artists loan pianos from Steinway for a concert or recording session the artists do have to pay Steinway for preparing, tuning, and delivering of the piano. According to management academic David Liebeskind, the Steinway Artist program \"...\u00a0is one of the only pure product endorsements programs, as no artist is paid to play on or endorse a Steinway piano.\"\nThe Steinway Artist program has been copied by other piano companies, but Steinway's program is unique in that a pianist must promise to play pianos of the Steinway brand \"only\". The Steinway Artist designation restricts a pianist's use of pianos by other makers and implies an obligation to perform on Steinway pianos.\nAll-Steinway Schools.\nThe All-Steinway School designation is given by Steinway to educational institutions of music in which not less than 90\u00a0percent of the pianos are designed by Steinway. Steinway does not offer the pianos free of charge but requires that the institutions buy them. Performance venues, teaching studios, and practice rooms for piano students must be equipped with Steinway pianos. Teaching studios and practice rooms for other students may be equipped with Boston or Essex pianos; some All-Steinway Schools have chosen to have Steinway pianos in these rooms also. It is required that the pianos are kept in performance-quality condition and All-Steinway Schools must have piano technicians who participate in Steinway's technical training programs. If the pianos are not maintained in performance-quality condition, Steinway can withdraw the All-Steinway School designation.\nThe Oberlin Conservatory of Music in Ohio holds the longest partnership with Steinway. They have used Steinway pianos exclusively since 1877, 24 years after Steinway was founded. In 2007, they obtained their 200th Steinway piano, a model D-274 manufactured at Steinway's factory in Hamburg, Germany. Other examples of All-Steinway Schools are the Yale School of Music at Yale University in Connecticut, the Curtis Institute of Music in Pennsylvania, Royal Holloway, University of London, the University of Melbourne Faculty of VCA and MCM in Australia, and the Central Conservatory of Music in Beijing.\nIn 2007, the Crane School of Music in Potsdam, New York, was added to the All-Steinway School roster, receiving 141 pianos in one $3.8 million order. In 2009, the University of Cincinnati \u2013 College-Conservatory of Music in Ohio became designated an All-Steinway School, based on a $4.1 million order of 165 new pianos, one of the largest orders Steinway has ever processed.\nAs of 2024[ [update]], there are approximately 200 All-Steinway Schools around the world.\nPiano competitions.\nSeveral international piano competitions use Steinway pianos. Since the Cleveland International Piano Competition chose to use only Steinway pianos in 1999, Steinway has been selected exclusively by such competitions as the Van Cliburn International Piano Competition in Fort Worth, Texas, the Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition in Salt Lake City, Utah, the International Johann Sebastian Bach Competition in Leipzig, Germany, the Queen Elisabeth Competition in Brussels, Belgium, the Ferruccio Busoni International Piano Competition in Bolzano, Italy, and the Long-Thibaud-Crespin Competition in Paris.\nAwards.\nThe Steinway company and its leaders have won numerous awards, including:\nPatented inventions.\nSteinway has been granted 139 patents in piano making; the first in 1857. Some examples of these are:\nMusic.\nSteinway pianos have appeared in numerous records and concerts. A few examples include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nCompany websites\nArticles\nOnline archives and museums"}
{"id": "51964", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51964", "title": "Vincent R. Impellitteri", "text": "American politician and jurist (1900\u20131987)\nVincent Richard Impellitteri (born Vincenzo Impellitteri; February 4, 1900 \u2013 January 29, 1987) was an Italian-American politician and judge who served as the 101st Mayor of New York City from 1950 to 1953. He was elected as a Democrat and president of the City Council in 1945 and reelected in 1949. When Mayor William O'Dwyer resigned in 1950, he became acting mayor. In the special election that year, party bosses denied him the Democratic nomination for the rest of the term but was subsequently elected mayor on a new ticket, the \"Experience Party\". He lost the Democratic primary when he ran for a full term in 1953 and became a judge in 1954.\nEarly life.\nBorn Vincenzo Impellitteri in Isnello, Sicily, he moved with his family to the United States as an infant in 1901. They settled in Ansonia, Connecticut, where Impellitteri spent most of his youth. He was a Catholic. He enlisted in the United States Navy for World War I. He served as a radioman with the rank of petty officer third class on board the destroyer USS \"Stockton\", which was based in Queenstown, Ireland, and performed convoy escort and antisubmarine duty. He left the Navy after the war and became a U.S. citizen in 1922. After that, Impellitteri attended the Fordham University School of Law (where he received his LL.B. in 1924) while working successively as a night bellboy and manager at a Broadway hotel. He married Elizabeth (Betty) Agnes McLaughlin in 1926.\nStart of career.\nFollowing his admission to the bar, he worked in private practice alongside influential Democratic attorney Martin Thomas Conboy Jr. He served as a state Assistant District Attorney from 1929 to 1938. After returning to private practice for three years as a specialist in criminal law, he served as legal secretary to New York Supreme Court Justice Peter Schmuck, later moving to the chambers of Joseph A. Gavagan in an analogous role. He was reportedly a close associate of gangster Tommy Lucchese, who helped Impellitteri's rise in politics. On the other hand, a report in the \"New York World-Telegram\" indicated that Impelliteri opposed organized crime and corruption and had failed to rise through the city Democratic Party's ranks because he had \"the injudicious good taste to snub Frank Costello\", the gambler and racketeer who was said to control the Tammany Hall organization behind the scenes.\nIn 1945, Mayor William O'Dwyer picked Impellitteri to run for President of the City Council on the Tammany Hall slate. He ran on the Democratic and American Labor Party lines in 1945, but when he was up for reelection in 1949, he ran on the Democratic Party line alone.\nAccording to historian Robert Caro, Impelliteri was drafted into his first elected role by Democratic Party leadership, who selected his name from a municipal employee directory. The party was seeking an Italian American Manhattan resident to bring balance to the citywide ticket and thought an employee in his position would be easy to persuade on political matters.\nMayor of New York City.\nOn August 31, 1950, O'Dwyer, pursued by both federal and state investigators, was suddenly appointed by President Harry S. Truman as United States ambassador to Mexico, where he would be beyond the reach of officials who wanted his public testimony in several matters on which he preferred not to speak. Under the City Charter of the era, City Council President Impellitteri became acting mayor upon O'Dwyer's resignation. The Tammany Hall bosses determined that Impellitteri was unsuitable for the role and refused to nominate him as the Democratic candidate for the special election in November 1950; instead, highly regarded New York State Supreme Court Judge Ferdinand Pecora, who was also given the Liberal Party line, ran as the nominee. Impellitteri ignored the machine and ran independently under the new \"Experience Party\" banner. He also popularized the slogan \"unbought and unbossed\" during his 1950 campaign.\nImpellitteri was the first mayor since the consolidation of greater New York in 1898 who was elected without a major party's ballot line, and his election was a populist uprising against the political system. The results were:\nImpellitteri's inauguration, held on November 14, 1950, absent either a band or a platform, was swift and straightforward. Outside City Hall, he pledged to \"do my level best to justify the confidence you have reposed in me.\"\nShortly after Impellitteri's succession, the Kings County District Attorney arrested bookmaker Harry Gross in September 1950 as part of a corruption investigation that caused nearly 500 police officers of all ranks to resign, retire, or be fired. Impellitteri opposed the corruption, vigorously supporting the Brooklyn District Attorney, Miles McDonald, and firing anyone in his administration associated with former Mayor William O'Dwyer.\nImpellitteri is credited with trying to rein in the budget, raising the bus and subway fare to fifteen cents, establishing parking meters on city streets for enhanced revenue, and increasing the sales tax. He aspired to be a new light in city politics, but his administration met with some resistance from the established order. At the time, Robert Moses wielded significant influence; according to Robert Caro (in his Moses biography \"The Power Broker\"), Impellitteri deferred to Moses on all matters of appointments and policy and is described as a puppet on Robert Moses' strings. The Italian author Carlo Levi documented the mayor's 1950 visit to his birthplace in Sicily. \nImpellitteri ran for a full term in 1953. He was defeated in the Democratic primary by then Manhattan Borough President Robert F. Wagner, Jr. Although New York City Comptroller Lazarus Joseph usually sided in the New York City Board of Estimate with Impellitteri during the latter's term in office, Joseph supported Wagner for the Democratic nomination.\nLater career and retirement.\nAfter becoming mayor, Wagner appointed Impellitteri a New York City Criminal Court judge. He retired from the bench in 1965. Following the death of his wife in 1967, he lived at the New York Athletic Club's City House on Central Park South. After he was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 1983, he maintained his Athletic Club residence but primarily resided in convalescent homes, most notably the Carolton Convalescent Hospital in Fairfield, Connecticut.\nPhilanthropy.\nImpellitteri became a patron of The Lambs Club in 1949.\nDeath and burial.\nHe died of heart failure on January 29, 1987, at Bridgeport Hospital in Bridgeport, Connecticut. Impellitteri was buried at Mount Saint Peter Catholic Cemetery in Derby, Connecticut.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "51965", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=51965", "title": "Jimmy Walker", "text": "Mayor of New York City from 1926 to 1932\nJames John Walker (June 19, 1881\u00a0\u2013 November 18, 1946), known colloquially as Jimmy Walker and Beau James, was an American attorney, lyricist, and Democratic Party politician who served as the 97th mayor of New York City from 1926 until his resignation in 1932. A flamboyant politician, he was a liberal Democrat and part of the powerful Tammany Hall machine. He was forced to resign during a corruption scandal in which he accepted large sums of money in exchange for municipal contracts.\nEarly life and political career.\nWalker was the son of Irish-born William H. Walker (1842\u20131916), a carpenter and lumberyard owner who was very active in local politics as a Democratic assemblyman and alderman from Greenwich Village, belying certain accounts of Walker's childhood that stated he grew up in poverty. Walker was not the best student and dropped out of college, eventually graduating from New York Law School in 1904. Walker's father wanted him to become a lawyer and politician, but he decided that he would rather write songs and be involved in the music industry. He wrote the lyrics for a 1906 hit, \"Will You Love Me in December as You Do in May?\" with songwriter Ernest Ball. Walker entered politics in 1909 and subsequently passed the bar exam in 1912.\nWalker was a member of the New York State Assembly (New York Co., 5th D.) in 1910, 1911, 1912, 1913 and 1914. He was a member of the New York State Senate from 1915 to 1925, sitting in the 138th, 139th, 140th, 141st (all four 13th D.), 142nd, 143rd, 144th, 145th, 146th, 147th and 148th New York State Legislatures (all seven 12th D.); and was Minority Leader from 1920 to 1922; Temporary President of the State Senate from 1923 to 1924; and Minority Leader again in 1925. In the Senate he strongly opposed Prohibition.\nDuring his tenure as Temporary President of the State Senate, Walker was often seen on the floor accompanied by reformist activist, future urban planner, and key Al Smith ally Robert Moses. Moses, without an official position and therefore forced to kneel beside Walker's desk rather than sit in a chair, acted sort of as an advisor for Walker. He provided Walker with arguments and facts to be used against Republican adversaries on issues that, according to author Robert Caro, \"Walker had no patience to master.\" Moses also delivered messages to Walker on Governor Smith's behalf.\nWalker was elegant and witty, but he was also willing to take down his opponents with no mercy. Ellwood Rabenold was a reformist elected to the State Senate as a Democrat. He was independent-minded and put the party's one-vote majority in 1923 in jeopardy. When Rabenold refused to support a bill that Democrats considered vital and then attacked Walker's character, Walker pledged he would \"ruin\" Rabenold and dedicated the rest of the term to forcing Rabenold out of politics. Walker would eventually succeed, showing no remorse for destroying his career.\nRunning for mayor, 1925.\nAfter his years in the Senate, Walker set his sights on the 1925 election for Mayor of New York. Beginning with the 1925 Democratic primary for mayor, Walker knew that to ultimately win the mayoral election he had to defeat the mayor, John Francis Hylan. Walker's reputation as a flamboyant man-about-town made him a hero to many working-class voters; he was often seen at legitimate theaters and illegitimate speakeasies. Walker was a clothes horse: his valet packed 43 suits for his trip to Europe in August 1927. On the other hand, his reputation for tolerating corruption made him suspect to middle-class and moralistic voters. Governor Alfred E. Smith was his mentor. Smith was a staunch supporter since Walker backed many social and cultural issues that were considered politically important, such as social welfare legislation, legalization of boxing, repeal of blue laws against Sunday baseball games, and condemning the Ku Klux Klan. Their mutual opposition to Prohibition was especially important in their political relationship.\nSmith knew the secret to how Walker could win the mayoral race and overcome his tarnished reputation was for Smith to guide Walker's every move. Smith used his base in the strong political machine of Tammany Hall to secure victory. Finally, Walker himself had to be willing to change some of his more unscrupulous ways or at least provide a cover for his indiscretions. As with many things in Walker's life, he chose the latter. Instead of ending his visits to speakeasies and his friendships with chorus girls, he took those activities behind the closed doors of a penthouse funded by Tammany Hall.\nWalker defeated Hylan in the Democratic primary, and after defeating Republican mayoral candidate Frank D. Waterman in the general election he became mayor of New York.\nMayor, 1926\u20131932.\nIn his initial years as mayor, Walker saw the city prosper and many public works projects gain traction. In his first year, Walker created the Department of Sanitation, unified New York's public hospitals, improved many parks and playgrounds, and guided the Board of Transportation to enter into contract for the construction of an expanded subway system (the Independent Subway System or IND). Under Walker's administration, new highways and a dock for superliners were also built. He even managed to maintain the five-cent subway fare despite a threatened strike by the workers.\nWalker's term was also known for the proliferation of speakeasies during Prohibition. It is a noted aspect of his career as mayor and as a member of the State Senate that Walker was strongly opposed to Prohibition. As mayor, Walker led his administration in challenging the Eighteenth Amendment by replacing the police commissioner with an inexperienced former state banking commissioner. The new police commissioner immediately dissolved the Special Service Squad. Since Walker did not feel that drinking was a crime, he discouraged the police from enforcing Prohibition law or taking an active role unless it was to curb excessive violations or would prove to be newsworthy. His affairs with \"chorus girls\" were widely known, and he left his wife, Janet, for showgirl Betty Compton. The first U.S. arrival in New York City of the best known Anastasia Romanov impostor, Anna Anderson, in 1928 and the eventual public denial of her by the exiled Romanovs and return to Germany in 1931 also occurred during Walker's mayoralty.\nWalker was re-elected by an overwhelming margin in 1929, defeating Republican Fiorello H. La Guardia and Socialist Norman Thomas. Walker's fortunes turned downward with the economy after the stock-market crash of 1929. Patrick Joseph Hayes, the Cardinal Archbishop of New York, denounced him, implying that the immorality of the mayor, both personal and political in tolerating \"girlie magazines\" and casinos, was a cause of the economic downturn. It was one of the causes that led to Tammany Hall's pulling its support for Walker. Walker's image was further solidified by quotes like \"A reformer is a guy who rides through a sewer in a glass-bottomed boat.\"\nWalker endorsed Al Smith for the Democratic nomination during the 1932 presidential election.\nScandal and resignation.\nIncreasing social unrest led to investigations into corruption within Walker's administration, and he was eventually forced to testify before the investigative committee of Judge Samuel Seabury, the Seabury Commission (also known as the Hofstadter Committee). Walker caused his own downfall by accepting large sums of money from businessmen looking for municipal contracts.\nOne surprise witness in the Seabury investigation was Vivian Gordon. She informed the investigators that women were falsely arrested and accused of prostitution by the New York City Police Department. Police officers were given more money in their paychecks. After her testimony, Gordon was suspiciously found strangled in a park in the Bronx. The incident demonstrated to New Yorkers that corruption could lead to terrible consequences, and led to suspicion that Walker might ultimately, in some way, have been responsible for her death.\nWith New York City appearing as a symbol of corruption under Mayor Walker, Governor Franklin D. Roosevelt knew he had to do something about Walker and his administration. Knowing that the state constitution could allow an elected mayor to be removed from office, Roosevelt felt compelled to do so but risked losing Tammany Hall's support for the Democratic nomination for president. On the other hand, if Roosevelt did nothing or let Walker off, the national newspapers would consider him weak.\nFacing pressure from Roosevelt, Walker eluded questions about his personal bank accounts, stating instead that the amounts he received were \"beneficences\" and not bribes. He delayed any personal appearances until after Roosevelt's nomination was secured. It was then that the embattled mayor could fight no longer. Months from his national election, Roosevelt decided that he must remove Walker from office. Walker agreed and resigned on September 1, 1932. \nLater life and legacy.\nWalker went on a grand tour of Europe with Compton, his Ziegfeld girl. He announced on November 12, 1932, while aboard the SS \"Conte Grande\", that he had \"no desire or intention of ever holding public office again.\" Walker stayed in Europe until the danger of criminal prosecution appeared remote. There, he married Compton while in Cannes, France.\nAfter his return to the United States, Walker acted as head of Majestic Records, which included such popular performing artists as Louis Prima and Bud Freeman. He and Compton would adopt two children, Mary Ann Walker and James J. Walker. In 1940 he had his own radio series on WHN, \"Jimmy Walker's Opportunity Hour\", with Henry Gladstone serving as announcer. The same year, Compton began divorce action against Walker, with the divorce becoming official on March 15, 1941. He died on November 18, 1946 at the age of 65 of a brain hemorrhage. He was interred in the Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Hawthorne, New York.\nWhen Walker was a member of the New York State Senate, he sponsored the \"Walker Law\" to legalize boxing in New York. He was honored a number of times over the years by the boxing community. Walker is a member of the International Boxing Hall of Fame and was given the Edward J. Neil Trophy in 1945 for his service to the sport.\nHe also spent many summers in Atlantic Beach, New York, sometimes during his term as mayor, and afterward, for he was friends with its founder, William Austin.\nA 1985 survey of historians, political scientists and urban experts conducted by Melvin G. Holli of the University of Illinois at Chicago ranked Walker as the fourth-worst American big-city mayor to have been in office since 1820. A 1993 edition of the same survey saw Walker similarly ranked as the third-worst.\nIn popular culture.\nA romanticized version of Walker's tenure as mayor was presented in the 1957 film \"Beau James\", starring Bob Hope. This was a somewhat accurate depiction of Walker, who during his time as mayor had become a symbol of the jazz age romanticism. The film was based on a biography of Walker, also titled \"Beau James\", written by Gene Fowler. A song by Dean Martin, similarly titled \"Beau James\", presented a highly idealized and romantic interpretation of his tenure as mayor. A book was also the basis of \"Jimmy\", a stage musical about Walker that had a brief Broadway run from October 1969 to January 1970. The show starred Frank Gorshin as Walker and Anita Gillette as Betty Compton. There is also a song about Walker in the stage musical \"Fiorello!\", \"Gentleman Jimmy\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
