{"id": "46674", "revid": "50585666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46674", "title": "Battle of Tours", "text": "732 battle of the Umayyad invasion of Gaul\nThe Battle of Tours, also called the Battle of Poitiers and the Battle of the Highway of the Martyrs (), was fought on 10 October 732, and was an important battle during the Umayyad invasion of Gaul. It resulted in victory for the Frankish and Aquitanian forces, led by Charles Martel, over the invading Umayyad forces, led by Abd al-Rahman al-Ghafiqi, governor of al-Andalus. Several historians, such as Edward Gibbon, have credited the Christian victory in the battle as an important factor in curtailing the spread of Islam in Western Europe.\nDetails of the battle, including the number of combatants and its exact location, are unclear from the surviving sources. Most sources agree that the Umayyads had a larger force and suffered heavier casualties. Notably, the Frankish troops apparently fought without heavy cavalry. The battlefield was located somewhere between the cities of Poitiers and Tours, in northern Aquitaine in western France, near the border of the Frankish realm and the then-independent Duchy of Aquitaine under Odo the Great.\nAl-Ghafiqi was killed in combat, and the Umayyad army withdrew after the battle. Charles emerged strengthened and Odo weakened. The battle helped lay the foundations of the Carolingian Empire and Frankish domination of western Europe for the next century. Most historians agree that \"the establishment of Frankish power in western Europe shaped the continent's destiny and the Battle of Tours confirmed that power.\"\nAfter the fall of the Umayyad Caliphate and the rise of the Abbasid Caliphate in 750, internal conflicts within al-Andalus, including revolts and the establishment of the Emirate of C\u00f3rdoba under Abd al-Rahman I, shifted the focus of Andalusi Muslim leaders towards internal consolidation. In the following centuries, chroniclers of the ninth century, gave Charles the nickname of Martel (the hammer), but without attributing it to a single battle, as he had many victories under his belt.\nBackground.\nSources available on ancient battles or those of the High Middle Ages say little on this event. Few Arab authors refer to this episode. Allusions to the battle of Poitiers simply specify that Abd al-Rahman and his companions experienced martyrdom.\nThe Latin sources of the eight and ninth centuries are more numerous but remain imprecise. Most chronicles report the event in 732 in brief and similar terms just recalling that Charles fought the Saracens on a Saturday in October. The Annals of Lorsch are more precise. According to Sigebert de Gembloux, \"duke Odo, inferior to Charles in all respects, brought against him the Saracens of Spain\" (Chronica), where the Chronicles of Fredegar (which he copies) states that \"Odo, seeing himself defeated and humiliated by Charles, appealed to the treacherous nation of Saracens.\"\nThe Battle of Tours followed two decades of Umayyad conquests in Europe which had begun with the invasion of the Christian Visigothic Kingdom of the Iberian Peninsula in 711. These were followed by military expeditions into the Frankish territories of Gaul, former provinces of the Roman Empire. Umayyad military campaigns reached northward into Aquitaine and Burgundy, including a major engagement at Bordeaux and several raids. Charles's victory is widely believed to have stopped the northward advance of Umayyad forces from the Iberian Peninsula and to have prevented the Islamization of Western Europe.\nMost historians assume that the two armies met where the rivers Clain and Vienne join between Tours and Poitiers. The number of troops in each army is not known. The \"Mozarabic Chronicle of 754\", a Latin contemporary source which describes the battle in greater detail than any other Latin or Arabic source, states that \"the people of Austrasia [the Frankish forces], greater in number of soldiers and formidably armed, killed the king, Abd ar-Rahman\", which agrees with many Arab and Muslim historians. However, virtually all Western sources disagree, estimating the Franks as numbering 30,000, less than half the Muslim force.\nSome modern historians, using estimates of what the land was able to support and what Martel could have raised from his realm and supported during the campaign, believe the total Muslim force outnumbered the Franks if one counts the outlying raiding parties which rejoined the main body before Tours. Drawing on non-contemporary Muslim sources, Creasy describes the Umayyad forces as 80,000 strong or more. Writing in 1999, Paul K. Davis estimates the Umayyad forces at 80,000 and the Franks at about 30,000, while noting that modern historians have estimated the strength of the Umayyad army at Tours at between 20,000\u201380,000. However, Edward J. Schoenfeld, rejecting the older figures of 60,000\u2013400,000 Umayyads and 75,000 Franks, contends that \"estimates that the Umayyads had over fifty thousand troops (and the Franks even more) are logistically impossible.\" Similarly, historian Victor Davis Hanson believes both armies were roughly the same size, between 20,000 and 30,000 men.\nModern historical analysis may be more accurate than the medieval sources, as the modern figures are based on estimates of the logistical ability of the countryside to support these numbers of men and animals. Davis and Hanson point out that both armies had to live off the countryside, neither having a logistical system sufficient to provide supplies for a campaign. Other sources give the following estimates: \"Gore places the Frankish army at 15,000\u201320,000, although other estimates range from 30,000 to 80,000. In spite of wildly varying estimates of the Muslim force, he places that army as around 20,000\u201325,000. Other estimates also range up to 80,000, with 50,000 not an uncommon estimate.\"\nLosses during the battle are unknown, but chroniclers later claimed that Charles Martel's force lost about 1,500 while the Umayyad force was said to have suffered massive casualties of up to 375,000 men. However, these same casualty figures were recorded in the \"Liber Pontificalis\" for Duke Odo the Great's victory at the Battle of Toulouse (721). Paul the Deacon reported correctly in his \"History of the Lombards\" (written around 785) that the \"Liber Pontificalis\" mentioned these casualty figures in relation to Odo's victory at Toulouse (though he claimed that Charles Martel fought in the battle alongside Odo), but later writers, probably \"influenced by the \"Continuations of Fredegar\", attributed the Muslims casualties solely to Charles Martel, and the battle in which they fell became unequivocally that of Tours-Poitiers.\" The \"Vita Pardulfi\", written in the middle of the eighth century, reports that after the battle 'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n's forces burned and looted their way through the Limousin region on their way back to Al-Andalus, which implies that they were not destroyed to the extent imagined in the \"Continuations of Fredegar\".\nUmayyads.\nThe invasion of Hispania, and then Gaul, was conducted by the Umayyad dynasty ( also \"Umawi\"), the first dynasty of Sunni caliphs of the Sunni Islamic empire after the reign of the Rashidun Caliphs (Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, and Ali) ended. The Umayyad Caliphate, at the time of the Battle of Tours, was perhaps the world's foremost military power. The great expansion of the Caliphate occurred under the reign of the Umayyads. Muslim armies pushed east across Persia and west across North Africa through the late 7th century.\nThe Umayyad empire was now a vast domain that ruled a diverse array of peoples. It had defeated and completely absorbed the Sasanian Empire, while also conquering much of the Byzantine Empire, including Syria, Armenia, and North Africa, although Leo the Isaurian stemmed the tide when his army defeated the Umayyads at the Battle of Akroinon (740), their final campaign in Anatolia.\nFranks.\nThe Frankish realm under Charles Martel was the foremost military power of western Europe. During most of his tenure in office as commander-in-chief of the Franks, the Frankish kingdom consisted of north and eastern France (Austrasia, Neustria and Burgundy), most of western Germany, and the Low Countries (Luxembourg, Belgium and the Netherlands). This domain had begun to progress towards becoming the first real imperial power in western Europe since the fall of Rome. However, it continued to struggle against external forces such as the Saxons, Frisians, and other opponents such as the Basque-Aquitanians led by Odo the Great (Old French: Eudes, or Eudo), Duke of Aquitaine and Vasconia.\nUmayyad conquests from Hispania.\nThe Umayyad troops, under Al-Samh ibn Malik al-Khawlani, the governor-general of al-Andalus, overran Septimania by 719, following their sweep up the Iberian Peninsula. Al-Samh set up his capital from 720 at Narbonne, which the Moors called Arb\u016bna. With the port of Narbonne secure, the Umayyads swiftly subdued without much resistance the cities of Alet, B\u00e9ziers, Agde, Lod\u00e8ve, Maguelonne, and N\u00eemes, still controlled by their Visigothic counts.\nThe Umayyad campaign into Aquitaine suffered a temporary setback at the Battle of Toulouse. Duke Odo the Great broke the siege of Toulouse, taking Al-Samh ibn Malik's forces by surprise. Al-Samh ibn Malik was mortally wounded. This defeat did not stop incursions into old Roman Gaul, as Moorish forces, soundly based in Narbonne and easily resupplied by sea, struck eastwards in the 720s, penetrating and raiding into Burgundy in 725.\nThreatened by both the Umayyads in the south and by the Franks in the north, in 730 Odo allied himself with the Berber commander Uthman ibn Naissa, called \"Munuza\" by the Franks, the deputy governor of what would later become Catalonia. To seal the alliance, Uthman was given Odo's daughter Lampagie in marriage, and the Moors ceased their raids across the Pyrenees, Odo's southern border. However, the next year, the Berber leader killed the bishop of Urgell Nambaudus and detached himself from his Arab masters in Cordova. Abd Al Ra\u1e25man in turn sent an expedition to crush his revolt, and next directed his attention against Uthman's ally Odo.\nOdo collected his army at Bordeaux, but was defeated, and Bordeaux was plundered. During the following Battle of the River Garonne, the \"Chronicle of 754\" commented that \"God alone knows the number of the slain\". The chronicle added that they \"pierced through the mountains, trampled over rough and level ground, plundered far into the country of the Franks, and smote all with the sword, insomuch that when Eudo came to battle with them at the River Garonne, he fled.\"\nOdo's appeal to the Franks.\nOdo set about reorganizing his troops despite his heavy losses, and gave the Frankish leader notice of the impending danger to the heartland of his realm while appealing to the Franks for assistance, which Charles Martel only granted after Odo agreed to submit to Frankish authority.\nIt appears that the Umayyads were not aware of the true strength of the Franks. The Umayyad forces were not particularly concerned about any of the Germanic tribes, including the Franks, and the Arab chronicles of that age show that awareness of the Franks as a growing military power only came after the Battle of Tours.\nFurther, the Umayyads appear not to have scouted northward for potential foes, for if they had, they surely would have noted Charles Martel as a force to be reckoned with on his own, because of his growing domination of much of Europe since 717.\nUmayyad advance towards the Loire.\nIn 732, the Umayyad advance force was proceeding north towards the Loire River, having outpaced their supply wagons and a large part of their army. Having easily destroyed all resistance in that part of Gaul, the invading army had split off into several raiding parties, while the main body advanced more slowly.\nThe Umayyads delayed their campaign late in the year probably because the army needed to live off the land as they advanced. They had to wait until the area's wheat harvest was ready and then until a reasonable amount of the harvest had been stored.\nOdo was defeated so easily at Bordeaux and Garonne, despite winning eleven years earlier at the Battle of Toulouse, because at Toulouse he had managed a surprise attack against an overconfident and unprepared foe: the Umayyad forces were mostly infantry, and what cavalry they did have were never mobilized. As Herman of Carinthia wrote in one of his translations of a history of al-Andalus, Odo managed a highly successful encircling envelopment which took the attackers completely by surprise, resulting in the slaughter of the Muslim forces.\nAt Bordeaux and again at Garonne, the Umayyad forces were mostly cavalry and had the chance to mobilize, which led to the devastation of Odo's army. Odo's forces, like other European troops of that era, had no stirrups at that time and therefore no heavy cavalry. Most of their troops were infantry. The Umayyad heavy cavalry broke Odo's infantry in their first charge and then slaughtered them as they fled.\nThe invading force went on to devastate southern Gaul. A possible motive, according to the second continuator of the \"Chronicle of Fredegar\", were the riches of the Abbey of Saint Martin of Tours, the most prestigious and holiest shrine in western Europe at the time. Upon hearing this, Austrasia's Mayor of the Palace, Charles Martel, prepared his army and marched south, avoiding the old Roman roads, hoping to take the Muslims by surprise.\nBattle (October 732).\nPreparations and man\u0153uvre.\nBy all accounts, the invading forces were caught off guard to discover a large force sitting directly in their path to Tours. Charles achieved the total surprise he had hoped for. He then chose not to attack but rather set up a defensive, phalanx-like formation. According to Arab sources, the Franks drew up in a large square, with hills and trees in their front to impede or break up Muslim cavalry charges.\nFor one week, the two armies engaged in minor skirmishes while the Umayyads waited for their full strength to arrive. 'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n, despite being a proven commander, had been outman\u0153uvred by allowing Charles to concentrate his forces and pick the field of battle. Furthermore, the Umayyads could not judge the size of Charles' army since he had used the forest to conceal his true numbers.\nCharles' infantry was his best hope for victory. Seasoned and battle-hardened, most of them had fought under him for years, some as far back as 717. In addition to his army, he also had levies of militia which had not seen significant military use except for gathering food and harassing the Muslim army.\nWhile many historians through the centuries have believed that the Franks were outnumbered at the onset of battle by at least two to one, some sources, such as the Mozarabic Chronicle of 754, contradict that assertion.\nCharles correctly assumed that 'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n would feel compelled to give battle, and move on and try to loot Tours. Neither side wanted to attack. Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n felt he had to sack Tours, which meant he had to go through the Frankish army on the hill in front of him. Charles' decision to stay in the hills proved crucial, as it forced the Umayyad cavalry to charge uphill and through trees, diminishing their effectiveness.\nCharles had been preparing for this confrontation since the Battle of Toulouse a decade earlier. Gibbon believes, as do most historians, that Charles had made the best of a bad situation. Though allegedly outnumbered and without any heavy cavalry, he had tough, battle-hardened infantrymen who believed in him implicitly. At a time in the Middle Ages when permanent armies had been non-existent in Europe, Charles even took out a large loan from the Pope after convincing him of the impending emergency, to properly train and maintain a full-size army largely composed of professional infantry. Moreover, as Davis points out, these infantrymen were heavily armed.\nFormed into a phalanx formation, they were able to withstand a cavalry charge better than might be expected, especially as Charles had secured the high ground \u2013 with trees before him to further impede any cavalry charges. Arab intelligence failed to discern the reliability and strength of Charles's men (whom he had trained for a decade), but Charles was well aware of the Caliphate's strengths and weaknesses.\nFurthermore, the Franks were dressed for the cold, whereas the Arabs wore very light clothing more suitable for North African winters than European winters.\nThe battle eventually became a waiting game in which the Muslims did not want to attack an army that could be numerically superior and wanted the Franks to come out into the open. The Franks formed up in a thick defensive formation and waited for them to charge uphill. The battle finally began on the seventh day, as 'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n did not want to wait any longer, with winter approaching.\nEngagement.\n'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n trusted in the tactical superiority of his cavalry and had them charge repeatedly throughout the day. The disciplined Frankish soldiers withstood the assaults, though according to Arab sources, the Arab cavalry broke into the Frankish square several times. Despite this, the Franks did not break. The well-trained Frankish soldiers accomplished what has been considered being impossible at that time: infantry withstanding a heavy cavalry charge. Paul Davis says the core of Charles' army was a professional infantry that was both highly disciplined and well-motivated, \"having campaigned with him all over Europe\".\nContemporary accounts.\nThe Mozarabic Chronicle of 754 \"describes the battle in greater detail than any other Latin or Arabic source\". It says of the encounter that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While Abd ar-Rahman was pursuing Odo, he decided to despoil Tours by destroying its palaces and burning its churches. There he confronted the consul of Austrasia by the name of Charles, a man who, having proved himself to be a warrior from his youth and an expert in things military, had been summoned by Odo. After each side had tormented the other with raids for almost seven days, they finally prepared their battle lines and fought fiercely. The northern peoples remained as immobile as a wall, holding together like a glacier in the cold regions. In the blink of an eye, they annihilated the Arabs with the sword. The people of Austrasia, greater in a number of soldiers and formidably armed, killed the king, Abd ar-Rahman, when they found him, striking him on the chest. But suddenly, within sight of the countless tents of the Arabs, the Franks despicably sheathed their swords postponing the fight until the next day since night had fallen during the battle. Rising from their own camp at dawn, the Europeans saw the tents and canopies of the Arabs all arranged just as they had appeared the day before. Not knowing that they were empty and thinking that inside them there were Saracen forces ready for battle, they sent officers to reconnoiter and discovered that all the Ishmaelite troops had left. They had indeed fled silently by night in tight formation, returning to their own country.\u2014\u200a\nCharles Martel's family composed, for the fourth book of the \"Continuations of Fredegar's Chronicle\", a stylized summary of the battle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Prince Charles boldly drew up his battle lines against them [the Arabs] and the warrior rushed in against them. With Christ's help, he overturned their tents and hastened to battle to grind them small in slaughter. The king Abdirama having been killed, he destroyed [them], driving forth the army, he fought and won. Thus did the victor triumph over his enemies.\u2014\u200a\nThis source details further that \"he (Charles Martel) came down upon them like a great man of battle\". It goes on to say Charles \"scattered them like the stubble\".\nThe Latin word used for \"warrior\", \"\", \"is from the Book of Maccabees, chapters 15 and 16\", which describe huge battles.\nIt is thought that Bede's \"Ecclesiastical History of the English People\" (Book V, Chapter XXIV) includes a reference to the Battle of Tours: \"...a dreadful plague of Saracens ravaged France with miserable slaughter, but they not long after in that country received the punishment due to their wickedness\".\nStrategic analysis.\nGibbon makes the point that 'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n did not move at once against Charles Martel, and was surprised by him at Tours as Charles had marched over the mountains while avoiding the roads to surprise the Muslim invaders. Thus, Charles selected the time and place they would fight.\n'Abd-al-Ra\u1e25m\u00e2n was a good general, but failed to do two things he should have done before the battle:\nThese failures disadvantaged the Muslim army in the following ways:\nWhile some military historians point out that leaving enemies in your rear is not generally wise, the Mongols proved that indirect attack, and bypassing weaker foes to eliminate the strongest first, can be a devastatingly effective mode of invasion. In this case, those enemies were virtually no danger, given the ease with which the Muslims destroyed them. The real danger was Charles, and the failure to scout Gaul adequately was disastrous.\nAccording to Creasy, both western and Muslim histories agree the battle was hard fought, and that the Umayyad heavy cavalry had broken into the square, but agreed that the Franks were in formation still strongly resisting.\nCharles could not afford to stand idly by while Frankish territories were threatened. He would have to face the Umayyad armies sooner or later, and his men were enraged by the utter devastation of the Aquitanians and wanted to fight. But Sir Edward Creasy noted that,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When we remember that Charles had no standing army, and the independent spirit of the Frank warriors who followed his standard, it seems most probable that it was not in his power to adopt the cautious policy of watching the invaders, and wearing out their strength by delay. So dreadful and so widespread were the ravages of the Saracenic light cavalry throughout Gaul, that it must have been impossible to restrain for any length of time the indignant ardor of the Franks. And, even if Charles could have persuaded his men to look tamely on while the Arabs stormed more towns and desolated more districts, he could not have kept an army together when the usual period of a military expedition had expired.\nBoth Hallam and Watson argue that had Charles failed, there was no remaining force to protect Western Europe. Hallam perhaps said it best: \"It may justly be reckoned among those few battles of which a contrary event would have essentially varied the drama of the world in all its subsequent scenes: with Marathon, Arbela, the Metaurus, Ch\u00e2lons and Leipzig.\"\nStrategically, and tactically, Charles probably made the best decision he could in waiting until his enemies least expected him to intervene, and then marching by stealth to catch them by surprise at a battlefield of his choosing. Probably he and his own men did not realize the seriousness of the battle they had fought, as one historian put it: \"few battles are remembered over 1,000 years after they are fought, but the Battle of [Tours-Poitiers] is an exception ... Charles Martel turned back a Muslim raid that had it been allowed to continue, might have conquered Gaul.\"\nVictory for Charles Martel.\nUmayyad retreat and second invasion.\nThe Umayyad army retreated south over the Pyrenees. Charles continued to expand south in subsequent years. After the death of Odo (c. 735), who had reluctantly acknowledged Charles' suzerainty in 719, Charles wished to unite Odo's duchy to himself and went there to elicit the proper homage of the Aquitanians. But the nobility proclaimed Hunald, Odo's son, as the duke, and Charles recognized his legitimacy when the Umayyads entered Provence as part of an alliance with Duke Maurontus the next year.\nHunald, who originally resisted acknowledging Charles as an overlord, soon had little choice. He acknowledged Charles as his overlord, albeit not for long, and Charles confirmed his duchy.\nUmayyad invasion (735\u201339).\nIn 735, Uqba ibn al-Hajjaj, the new governor of al-Andalus, invaded Gaul. Antonio Santosuosso and other historians detail how he advanced into France to avenge the defeat at Tours and to spread Islam. According to Santosuosso, Uqba ibn al-Hajjaj converted about 2,000 Christians he had captured over his career. In the last major attempt at an invasion of Gaul through Iberia, a sizable expedition was assembled at Saragossa and entered what is now French territory in 735, crossed the River Rhone, and captured and looted Arles. From there, he struck into the heart of Provence, ending with the capture of Avignon, despite strong resistance.\nUqba ibn al-Hajjaj's forces remained in Septimania and part of Provence for four years, carrying raids to Lyons, Burgundy, and Piedmont. Charles Martel invaded Septimania in two campaigns in 736 and 739, but was forced back again to Frankish territory under his control. Alessandro Santosuosso strongly argues that the second (Umayyad) expedition was probably more dangerous than the first. The second expedition's failure put an end to any serious Muslim expedition across the Pyrenees, although raids continued. Plans for further large-scale attempts were hindered by internal turmoil in the Umayyad lands which often made enemies out of their own kind.\nAdvance to Narbonne.\nDespite the defeat at Tours, the Umayyads remained in control of parts of Septimania for another 27 years, though they could not expand further. The treaties reached earlier with the local population stood firm and were further consolidated in 734 when the governor of Narbonne, Yusuf ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Fihri, concluded agreements with several towns on common defense arrangements against the encroachments of Charles Martel, who had systematically brought the south to heel as he extended his domains. He conquered Umayyad fortresses and destroyed their garrisons at the Siege of Avignon and the Siege of N\u00eemes.\nThe army attempting to relieve Narbonne met Charles in open battle at the Battle of the River Berre and was destroyed. However, Charles failed in his attempt to take Narbonne at the Siege of Narbonne in 737, when the city was jointly defended by its Muslim Arab and Berber, and its Christian Visigothic citizens.\nCarolingian dynasty.\nReluctant to tie down his army for a siege that could last years, and believing he could not afford the losses of an all-out frontal assault such as he had used at Arles, Charles was content to isolate the few remaining invaders in Narbonne and Septimania. The threat of invasion was diminished after the Umayyad defeat at Narbonne, and the unified Caliphate would collapse into civil war in 750 at the Battle of the Zab.\nIt was left to Charles' son, Pepin the Short, to force Narbonne's surrender in 759, thus bringing it into the Frankish domains. The Umayyad dynasty was expelled, driven back to Al-Andalus where Abd al-Rahman I established an emirate in C\u00f3rdoba in opposition to the Abbasid caliph in Baghdad.\nIn the northeast of Spain, the Frankish emperors established the Marca Hispanica across the Pyrenees in part of what today is Catalonia, reconquering Girona in 785 and Barcelona in 801. This formed a buffer zone against Muslim lands across the Pyrenees. Historian J.M. Roberts said in 1993 of the Carolingian dynasty:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It produced Charles Martel, the soldier who turned the Arabs back at Tours, and the supporter of Saint Boniface the Evangelizer of Germany. This is a considerable double mark to have left on the history of Europe.\nBefore the Battle of Tours, stirrups may have been unknown in the west. Lynn Townsend White Jr. argues that the adoption of the stirrup for cavalry was the direct cause of the development of feudalism in the Frankish realm by Charles Martel and his heirs.\nHistorical and macrohistorical views.\nThe historical views of this battle fall into three great phases, both in the East and especially in the West. Western historians, beginning with the \"Mozarabic Chronicle of 754\", stressed the macrohistorical impact of the battle, as did the \"Continuations of Fredegar\". This became a claim that Charles had saved Christianity, as Gibbon and his generation of historians agreed that the Battle of Tours was unquestionably decisive in world history.\nModern historians have essentially fallen into two camps on the issue. The first camp essentially agrees with Gibbon, and the other argues that the battle has been massively overstated \u2013 turned from a raid in force to an invasion, and from a mere annoyance to the Caliph to a shattering defeat that helped end the Islamic Expansion Era. It is essential, however, to note that within the first group, those who agree the battle was of macrohistorical importance, there are a number of historians who take a more moderate and nuanced view of the significance of the battle, in contrast to the more dramatic and rhetorical approach of Gibbon. The best example of this school is William E. Watson, who does believe the battle has such importance, as will be discussed below, but analyzes it militarily, culturally, and politically, rather than seeing it as a classic \"Muslim versus Christian\" confrontation.\nIn the East, Arab histories followed a similar path. First, the battle was regarded as a disastrous defeat; then, it largely faded from Arab histories, leading to a modern dispute which regards it as either a second loss to the great defeat of the Second Siege of Constantinople, where the Bulgarian Emperor Tervel played a crucial role, or a part of a series of great macrohistorical defeats which together brought about the fall of the first Caliphate. With the Byzantines and Bulgarians together with the Franks both successfully blocking further expansion, internal social troubles came to a head, starting with the Great Berber Revolt of 740, and ending with the Battle of the Zab, and the destruction of the Umayyad Caliphate.\nIn Western history.\nThe first wave of modern historians, especially scholars on Rome and the medieval period, such as Edward Gibbon, contended that had Charles fallen, the Umayyad Caliphate would have easily conquered a divided Europe. Gibbon famously observed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A victorious line of march had been prolonged above a thousand miles from the rock of Gibraltar to the banks of the Loire; the repetition of an equal space would have carried the Saracens to the confines of Poland and the Highlands of Scotland; the Rhine is not more impassable than the Nile or Euphrates, and the Arabian fleet might have sailed without a naval combat into the mouth of the Thames. Perhaps the interpretation of the Koran would now be taught in the schools of Oxford, and her pulpits might demonstrate to a circumcised people the sanctity and truth of the revelation of Mahomet.\nNor was Gibbon alone in lavishing praise on Charles as the savior of Christendom and western civilization. H. G. Wells wrote: \"The Moslim [\"sic\"] when they crossed the Pyrenees in 720 found this Frankish kingdom under the practical rule of Charles Martel, the Mayor of the Palace of a degenerate descendant of Clovis, and experienced the decisive defeat of [Tours-Poitiers] (732) at his hands. This Charles Martel was practically overlord of Europe north of the Alps from the Pyrenees to Hungary. He ruled over a multitude of subordinate lords speaking French-Latin and High and Low German languages.\"\nGibbon was echoed a century later by the Belgian historian Godefroid Kurth, who wrote that the Battle of Tours \"must ever remain one of the great events in the history of the world, as upon its issue depended whether Christian Civilization should continue or Islam prevail throughout Europe.\"\nGerman historians were especially ardent in their praise of Charles Martel; Schlegel speaks of this \"mighty victory\", and tells how \"the arm of Charles Martel saved and delivered the Christian nations of the West from the deadly grasp of all-destroying Islam.\" Creasy quotes Leopold von Ranke's opinion that this period was\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;one of the most important epochs in the history of the world, the commencement of the eighth century, when on the one side Mohammedanism threatened to overspread Italy and Gaul, and on the other the ancient idolatry of Saxony and Friesland once more forced its way across the Rhine. In this peril of Christian institutions, a youthful prince of Germanic race, Karl Martell, arose as their champion, maintained them with all the energy which the necessity for self-defense calls forth, and finally extended them into new regions.\nThe German military historian Hans Delbr\u00fcck said of this battle \"there was no more important battle in the history of the world.\" (\"The Barbarian Invasions\", p.\u00a0441.) Had Charles Martel failed, Henry Hallam argued, there would have been no Charlemagne, no Holy Roman Empire or Papal States; all these depended upon Charles's containment of Islam from expanding into Europe while the Caliphate was unified and able to mount such a conquest. Another great mid era historian, Thomas Arnold, ranked the victory of Charles Martel even higher than the victory of Arminius in its impact on all of modern history: \"Charles Martel's victory at Tours was among those signal deliverances which have affected for centuries the happiness of mankind.\" Louis Gustave and Charles Strauss said \"The victory gained was decisive and final, The torrent of Arab conquest was rolled back and Europe was rescued from the threatened yoke of the Saracens.\"\nCharles Oman concluded that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At [Tours-Poitiers] the Franks fought as they had done two hundred years before at Casilinum, in one solid mass, without breaking rank or attempting to maneuver. Their victory was won by the purely defensive tactics of the infantry square; the fanatical Arabs, dashing against them time after time, were shattered to pieces, and at last, fled under the shelter of night. But there was no pursuit, for Charles had determined not to allow his men to stir a step from the line to chase the broken foe.\nJohn Bagnell Bury, writing at the beginning of the 20th century, said \"The Battle of Tours ... has often been represented as an event of the first magnitude for the world's history, because after this, the penetration of Islam into Europe was finally brought to a standstill.\"\nModern Western historians are clearly divided on the importance of the battle, and where it should rank in military history; see below.\nAdolf Hitler on the Battle of Tours.\nAlbert Speer, Hitler's Armaments Minister, specifically referencing Hitler\u2019s Table Talks, described how Hitler expressed approval of Islam, saying that Hitler had been particularly impressed by what he had heard from a delegation of Arabs. When the Arabs had tried to penetrate Central Europe in the 8th century, they had been driven back at the Battle of Tours; if they had won that battle, the world would have become Muslim (maybe). According to Speer\u2019s comments, Hitler considered that Islam was more suited to the \"Germanic\" temperament and would have been more compatible to the Germans than Christianity. Historian Mikael Nilsson has noted that the Table Talks where Hitler\u2019s comment came from were heavily distorted and revised, especially by Francois Genoud, who also forged \"The Testament of Adolf Hitler\" and likely inserted pro-Arab phrases to reconcile his own support for Arab Nationalism and Terrorism. Speer himself noted that when others were taking down the notes of Hitler speaking in private for the table talks, Hitler expressing even after 1942 his desire to unite the Christian churches into a single established church \u201cas in England\u201d was left out.\nHitler\u2019s above purported statement contradicts several of Hitler\u2019s known statements, many kept by the stenographers of the German Foreign Ministry. In March 1944 Hitler stated that Germany was defending Europe as it had done in the past when it \u201cbroke the Arab wave at Poitiers\u201d, and prevented south-eastern Europe from being \u201clost forever\u201d in the Great Turkish War. Hitler compared Islam to Communism \u2014 and Christian Europe\u2019s wars against Islamic empires to his war against the Soviet Union \u2014 on numerous occasions, such as in December 1942, January 1943, February 1943 (in a letter to Benito Mussolini), and a second time during March 1944, where he compared the alliance between the Soviet Union and the United Kingdom with the Franco-Ottoman Alliance against the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation \u2014 saying that like France the British were allying themselves with an \u201canti-European power\u201d, and he referred to Islam as the empowering ideology of the anti-European world similar to Communism in his own day, and like Islam (that he said was built around a \u201cMuslim race\u201d), he claimed Communism flew under a second banner of \u201cPan-Slavism\u201d.\nHitler also referred to Germany\u2019s Invasion of the Soviet Union as a \"Crusade\" (\"Kreuzzug\u201d, literally translated as \u201cCross-march\u201d) naming it \u201cOperation Barbarossa\u201d after the crusading Holy Roman Emperor Frederick Barbarossa who set out on a campaign against the Muslim Sultan Saladin.\nIn Muslim history.\nEastern historians, like their Western counterparts, have not always agreed on the importance of the battle. According to Bernard Lewis, \"The Arab historians, if they mention this engagement [the Battle of Tours] at all, present it as a minor skirmish,\" and Gustave von Grunebaum writes: \"This setback may have been important from the European point of view, but for Muslims at the time, who saw no master plan imperiled thereby, it had no further significance.\" Contemporary Arab and Muslim historians and chroniclers were much more interested in the second Umayyad siege of Constantinople in 718, which ended in a disastrous defeat.\nHowever, Creasy has claimed: \"The enduring importance of the battle of Tours in the eyes of the Muslims is attested not only by the expressions of 'the deadly battle' and 'the disgraceful overthrow' which their writers constantly employ when referring to it but also by the fact that no more serious attempts at conquest beyond the Pyrenees were made by the Saracens.\"\nThirteenth-century Moroccan author Ibn Idhari al-Marrakushi, mentioned the battle in his history of the Maghrib, \"\"al-Bayan al-Mughrib fi Akhbar al-Maghrib\".\" According to Ibn Idhari, \"Abd ar-Rahman and many of his men found martyrdom on the balat ash-Shuhada'i (the path of the martyrs).\" Antonio Santosuosso points that \"they (the Muslims) called the battle's location, the road between Poitiers and Tours, 'the pavement of Martyrs'.\" However, as Henry Copp\u00e9e pointed out, \"The same name was given to the battle of Toulouse and is applied to many other fields on which the Moslemah were defeated: they were always martyrs for the faith.\"\nKhalid Yahya Blankinship argued that the military defeat at Tours was one of the failures that contributed to the decline of the Umayyad caliphate:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stretching from Morocco to China, the Umayyad caliphate based its expansion and success on the doctrine of jihad \u2013 armed struggle to claim the whole earth for God's rule, a struggle that had brought much material success for a century but suddenly ground to a halt followed by the collapse of the ruling Umayyad dynasty in 750 AD. The End of the Jihad State demonstrates for the first time that the cause of this collapse came not just from internal conflict, as has been claimed, but from a number of external and concurrent factors that exceeded the caliphate's capacity to respond. These external factors began with crushing military defeats at Byzantium, Toulouse, and Tours, which led to the Berber Revolt of 740 in Iberia and Northern Africa.\nSupporting the significance of Tours as a world-altering event.\nNinth-century chroniclers recorded the outcome of the battle as a divine judgment in favor of Charles and gave him the nickname \"Martellus\" (\"The Hammer\"). Later Christian chroniclers and pre-20th century historians praised Charles Martel as the champion of Christianity, characterizing the battle as the decisive turning point in the struggle against Islam, a struggle which preserved Christianity as the religion of Europe. According to modern military historian, Victor Davis Hanson \"most of the 18th and 19th century historians like Gibbon saw Tours as a landmark battle that marked the high tide of the Muslim advance into Europe.\" Leopold von Ranke felt that Tours-Poitiers \"was the turning point of one of the most important epochs in the history of the world.\"\nHistorian William E. Watson writes that \"the subsequent history of the West would have proceeded along vastly different currents had 'Abd ar-Rahman been victorious at Tours-Poitiers in 732\" and that \"[a]fter examining the motives for the Muslim drive north of the Pyrenees, one can attach a macrohistorical significance to the encounter ... especially when one considers the attention paid to the Franks in Arabic literature and the successful expansion of Muslims elsewhere in the medieval period.\"\nVictorian writer John Henry Haaren says in \"Famous Men of the Middle Ages\" \"The battle of Tours or Poitiers as it should be called is regarded as one of the decisive battles of the world. It decided that Christians and not Muslims should be the ruling power in Europe.\" Bernard Grun delivers this assessment in his \"Timetables of History\", reissued in 2004: \"In 732 Charles Martel's victory over the Arabs at the Battle of Tours stems the tide of their westward advance.\"\nHistorian and humanist Michael Grant lists the battle of Tours in the macrohistorical dates of the Roman era. Historian Norman Cantor who specialized in the medieval period, teaching and writing at Columbia and New York University said in 1993: \"It may be true that the Arabs had now fully extended their resources and they would not have conquered France, but their defeat (at Tours) in 732 put a stop to their advance to the North.\"\nMilitary historian Robert W. Martin considers Tours \"one of the most decisive battles in all of history.\" Additionally, historian Hugh Kennedy says \"it was clearly significant in establishing the power of Charles Martel and the Carolingians in France, but it also had profound consequences in Muslim Spain. It signaled the end of the \"ghanima\" (booty) economy.\"\nMilitary Historian Paul Davis argued in 1999 \"had the Muslims been victorious at Tours, it is difficult to suppose what population in Europe could have organized to resist them.\" Likewise, George Bruce in his update of Harbottle's classic military history \"Dictionary of Battles\" maintains that \"Charles Martel defeated the Moslem army effectively ending Moslem attempts to conquer western Europe.\"\nHistory professor Antonio Santosuosso comments on Charles, Tours, and the subsequent campaigns against Rahman's son in 736\u2013737, that these later defeats of invading Muslim armies were at least as important as Tours in their defense of Western Christendom and its monasteries, the centers of learning that ultimately led Europe out of her Middle Ages. He also makes an argument, after studying the Arab histories of the period, that these were armies of invasion sent by the Caliph not just to avenge Tours, but to begin the end of Christian Europe and bring it into the Caliphate.\nProfessor of religion Huston Smith says in \"The World's Religions: Our Great Wisdom Traditions\" \"But for their defeat by Charles Martel in the Battle of Tours in 732, the entire Western world might today be Muslim.\" Historian Robert Payne on page 142 in \"The History of Islam\" said \"The more powerful Muslims and the spread of Islam were knocking on Europe's door. And the spread of Islam was stopped along the road between the towns of Tours and Poitiers, France, with just its head in Europe.\"\nVictor Davis Hanson has commented that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Recent scholars have suggested [Tours-Poitiers], so poorly recorded in contemporary sources, was a mere raid and thus a construct of western mythmaking or that a Muslim victory might have been preferable to continued Frankish dominance. What is clear is that [Tours-Poitiers] marked a general continuance of the successful defense of Europe, (from the Muslims). Flush from the victory at Tours, Charles Martel went on to clear southern France from Islamic attackers for decades, unify the warring kingdoms into the foundations of the Carolingian Empire, and ensure ready and reliable troops from local estates.\nPaul Davis, another modern historian, says \"whether Charles Martel saved Europe for Christianity is a matter of some debate. What is sure, however, is that his victory ensured that the Franks would dominate Gaul for more than a century.\" Davis writes, \"Moslem defeat ended the Moslems' threat to western Europe, and Frankish victory established the Franks as the dominant population in western Europe, establishing the dynasty that led to Charlemagne.\"\nObjecting to the significance of Tours as a world-altering event.\nOther historians disagree with this assessment. Alessandro Barbero writes, \"Today, historians tend to play down the significance of the battle of [Tours-Poitiers], pointing out that the purpose of the Muslim force defeated by Charles Martel was not to conquer the Frankish kingdom, but simply to pillage the wealthy monastery of St-Martin of Tours\". Similarly, Toma\u017e Mastnak writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Modern historians have constructed a myth presenting this victory as having saved Christian Europe from the Muslims. Edward Gibbon, for example, called Charles Martel the savior of Christendom and the battle near Poitiers an encounter that changed the history of the world. ... This myth has survived well into our own times. ... Contemporaries of the battle, however, did not overstate its significance. The continuators of Fredegar's chronicle, who probably wrote in the mid-eighth century, pictured the battle as just one of many military encounters between Christians and Saracens \u2013 moreover, as only one in a series of wars fought by Frankish princes for booty and territory. ... One of Fredegar's continuators presented the battle of [Tours-Poitiers] as what it really was: an episode in the struggle between Christian princes as the Carolingians strove to bring Aquitaine under their rule.\nThe historian Philip Khuri Hitti believes that \"In reality, nothing was decided on the battlefield of Tours. The Moslem wave, already a thousand miles from its starting point in Gibraltar \u2013 to say nothing about its base in al-Qayrawan \u2013 had already spent itself and reached a natural limit.\"\nThe view that the battle has no great significance is perhaps best summarized by Franco Cardini in \"Europe and Islam\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Although prudence needs to be exercised in minimizing or 'demythologizing' the significance of the event, it is no longer thought by anyone to have been crucial. The 'myth' of that particular military engagement survives today as a media clich\u00e9, than which nothing is harder to eradicate. It is well known how the propaganda put about by the Franks and the papacy glorified the victory that took place on the road between Tours and Poitiers...\nIn their introduction to \"The Reader's Companion to Military History\" Robert Cowley and Geoffrey Parker summarise this side of the modern view of the Battle of Tours by saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The study of military history has undergone drastic changes in recent years. The old drums-and-bugles approach will no longer do. Factors such as economics, logistics, intelligence, and technology receive the attention once accorded solely to battles and campaigns and casualty counts. Words like \"strategy\" and \"operations\" have acquired meanings that might not have been recognizable a generation ago. Changing attitudes and new research have altered our views of what once seemed to matter most. For example, several of the battles that Edward Shepherd Creasy listed in his famous 1851 book \"The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World\" rate hardly a mention here, and the confrontation between Muslims and Christians at Poitiers-Tours in 732, once considered a watershed event, has been downgraded to a raid in force.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46675", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46675", "title": "Xylem", "text": "Water transport tissue in vascular plants\nXylem is one of the two types of transport tissue in vascular plants, the other being phloem; both of these are part of the vascular bundle. The basic function of the xylem is to transport water upward from the roots to parts of the plants such as stems and leaves, but it also transports nutrients. The word \"xylem\" is derived from the Ancient Greek word (), meaning \"wood\"; the best-known xylem tissue is wood, though it is found throughout a plant. The term was introduced by Carl N\u00e4geli in 1858.\nStructure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Plain image with caption/styles.css\"/&gt; \nDiagrammatic structure of xylem cells \nThe most distinctive xylem cells are the long tracheary elements that transport water. Tracheids and vessel elements are distinguished by their shape; vessel elements are shorter, and are connected together into long tubes that are called \"vessels\".\nWood also contains two other type of cells: parenchyma and fibers.\nXylem can be found:\nIn transitional stages of plants with secondary growth, the first two categories are not mutually exclusive, although usually a vascular bundle will contain \"primary xylem\" only.\nThe branching pattern exhibited by xylem follows Murray's law.\nPrimary and secondary xylem.\nPrimary xylem is formed during primary growth from procambium. It includes protoxylem and metaxylem. Metaxylem develops after the protoxylem but before secondary xylem. Metaxylem has wider vessels and tracheids than protoxylem.\nSecondary xylem is formed during secondary growth from vascular cambium. Although secondary xylem is also found in members of the gymnosperm groups Gnetophyta and Ginkgophyta and to a lesser extent in members of the Cycadophyta, the two main groups in which secondary xylem can be found are:\nMain function \u2013 upwards water transport.\nThe xylem, vessels and tracheids of the roots, stems and leaves are interconnected to form a continuous system of water-conducting channels reaching all parts of the plants. The system transports water and soluble mineral nutrients from the roots throughout the plant. It is also used to replace water lost during transpiration and photosynthesis. Xylem sap consists mainly of water and inorganic ions, although it can also contain a number of organic chemicals as well. The transport is passive, not powered by energy spent by the tracheary elements themselves, which are dead by maturity and no longer have living contents. Transporting sap upwards becomes more difficult as the height of a plant increases and upwards transport of water by xylem is considered to limit the maximum height of trees. Three phenomena cause xylem sap to flow:\nThe primary force that creates the capillary action movement of water upwards in plants is the adhesion between the water and the surface of the xylem conduits. Capillary action provides the force that establishes an equilibrium configuration, balancing gravity. When transpiration removes water at the top, the flow is needed to return to the equilibrium.\nTranspirational pull results from the evaporation of water from the surfaces of cells in the leaves. This evaporation causes the surface of the water to recess into the pores of the cell wall. By capillary action, the water forms concave menisci inside the pores. The high surface tension of water pulls the concavity outwards, generating enough force to lift water as high as a hundred meters from ground level to a tree's highest branches.\nTranspirational pull requires that the vessels transporting the water be very small in diameter; otherwise, cavitation would break the water column. And as water evaporates from leaves, more is drawn up through the plant to replace it. When the water pressure within the xylem reaches extreme levels due to low water input from the roots (if, for example, the soil is dry), then the gases come out of solution and form a bubble\u00a0\u2013 an embolism forms, which will spread quickly to other adjacent cells, unless bordered pits are present (these have a plug-like structure called a torus, that seals off the opening between adjacent cells and stops the embolism from spreading). Even after an embolism has occurred, plants are able to refill the xylem and restore the functionality.\nCohesion-tension theory.\nThe \"cohesion-tension theory\" is a theory of intermolecular attraction that explains the process of water flow upwards (against the force of gravity) through the xylem of plants. It was proposed in 1894 by John Joly and Henry Horatio Dixon. Despite numerous objections, this is the most widely accepted theory for the transport of water through a plant's vascular system based on the classical research of Dixon-Joly (1894), Eugen Askenasy (1845\u20131903) (1895), and Dixon (1914,1924).\nWater is a polar molecule. When two water molecules approach one another, the slightly negatively charged oxygen atom of one forms a hydrogen bond with a slightly positively charged hydrogen atom in the other. This attractive force, along with other intermolecular forces, is one of the principal factors responsible for the occurrence of surface tension in liquid water. It also allows plants to draw water from the root through the xylem to the leaf.\nWater is constantly lost through transpiration from the leaf. When one water molecule is lost another is pulled along by the processes of cohesion and tension. Transpiration pull, utilizing capillary action and the inherent surface tension of water, is the primary mechanism of water movement in plants. However, it is not the only mechanism involved. Any use of water in leaves forces water to move into them.\nTranspiration in leaves creates tension (differential pressure) in the cell walls of mesophyll cells. Because of this tension, water is being pulled up from the roots into the leaves, helped by cohesion (the pull between individual water molecules, due to hydrogen bonds) and adhesion (the stickiness between water molecules and the hydrophilic cell walls of plants). This mechanism of water flow works because of water potential (water flows from high to low potential), and the rules of simple diffusion.\nOver the past century, there has been a great deal of research regarding the mechanism of xylem sap transport; today, most plant scientists continue to agree that the \"cohesion-tension theory\" best explains this process, but multiforce theories that hypothesize several alternative mechanisms have been suggested, including longitudinal cellular and xylem osmotic pressure gradients, axial potential gradients in the vessels, and gel- and gas-bubble-supported interfacial gradients.\nMeasurement of pressure.\nUntil recently, the differential pressure (suction) of transpirational pull could only be measured indirectly, by applying external pressure with a pressure bomb to counteract it. When the technology to perform direct measurements with a pressure probe was developed, there was initially some doubt about whether the classic theory was correct, because some workers were unable to demonstrate negative pressures. More recent measurements do tend to validate the classic theory, for the most part. Xylem transport is driven by a combination of transpirational pull from above and root pressure from below, which makes the interpretation of measurements more complicated.\nEvolution.\nXylem appeared early in the history of terrestrial plant life. Fossil plants with anatomically preserved xylem are known from the Silurian (more than 400 million years ago), and trace fossils resembling individual xylem cells may be found in earlier Ordovician rocks. The earliest true and recognizable xylem consists of tracheids with a helical-annular reinforcing layer added to the cell wall. This is the only type of xylem found in the earliest vascular plants, and this type of cell continues to be found in the \"protoxylem\" (first-formed xylem) of all living groups of vascular plants. Several groups of plants later developed pitted tracheid cells independently through convergent evolution. In living plants, pitted tracheids do not appear in development until the maturation of the \"metaxylem\" (following the protoxylem).\nIn most plants, pitted tracheids function as the primary transport cells. The other type of vascular element, found in angiosperms, is the vessel element. Vessel elements are joined end to end to form vessels in which water flows unimpeded, as in a pipe. The presence of xylem vessels (also called trachea) is considered to be one of the key innovations that led to the success of the angiosperms. However, the occurrence of vessel elements is not restricted to angiosperms, and they are absent in some archaic or \"basal\" lineages of the angiosperms: (e.g., Amborellaceae, Tetracentraceae, Trochodendraceae, and Winteraceae), and their secondary xylem is described by Arthur Cronquist as \"primitively vesselless\". Cronquist considered the vessels of \"Gnetum\" to be convergent with those of angiosperms. Whether the absence of vessels in basal angiosperms is a primitive condition is contested, the alternative hypothesis states that vessel elements originated in a precursor to the angiosperms and were subsequently lost.\nTo photosynthesize, plants must absorb CO2 from the atmosphere. However, this comes at a price: while stomata are open to allow CO2 to enter, water can evaporate. Water is lost much faster than CO2 is absorbed, so plants need to replace it, and have developed systems to transport water from the moist soil to the site of photosynthesis. Early plants sucked water between the walls of their cells, then evolved the ability to control water loss (and CO2 acquisition) through the use of stomata. Specialized water transport tissues soon evolved in the form of hydroids, tracheids, then secondary xylem, followed by an endodermis and ultimately vessels.\nThe high CO2 levels of Silurian-Devonian times, when plants were first colonizing land, meant that the need for water was relatively low. As CO2 was withdrawn from the atmosphere by plants, more water was lost in its capture, and more elegant transport mechanisms evolved. As water transport mechanisms, and waterproof cuticles, evolved, plants could survive without being continually covered by a film of water. This transition from poikilohydry to homoiohydry opened up new potential for colonization. Plants then needed a robust internal structure that held long narrow channels for transporting water from the soil to all the different parts of the above-soil plant, especially to the parts where photosynthesis occurred.\nDuring the Silurian, CO2 was readily available, so little water needed expending to acquire it. By the end of the Carboniferous, when CO2 levels had lowered to something approaching today's, around 17 times more water was lost per unit of CO2 uptake. However, even in these \"easy\" early days, water was at a premium, and had to be transported to parts of the plant from the wet soil to avoid desiccation. This early water transport took advantage of the \"cohesion-tension\" mechanism inherent in water. Water has a tendency to diffuse to areas that are drier, and this process is accelerated when water can be wicked along a fabric with small spaces. In small passages, such as that between the plant cell walls (or in tracheids), a column of water behaves like rubber\u00a0\u2013 when molecules evaporate from one end, they pull the molecules behind them along the channels. Therefore, transpiration alone provided the driving force for water transport in early plants. However, without dedicated transport vessels, the cohesion-tension mechanism cannot transport water more than about 2\u00a0cm, severely limiting the size of the earliest plants. This process demands a steady supply of water from one end, to maintain the chains; to avoid exhausting it, plants developed a waterproof cuticle. Early cuticle may not have had pores but did not cover the entire plant surface, so that gas exchange could continue. However, dehydration at times was inevitable; early plants cope with this by having a lot of water stored between their cell walls, and when it comes to it sticking out the tough times by putting life \"on hold\" until more water is supplied.\nTo be free from the constraints of small size and constant moisture that the parenchymatic transport system inflicted, plants needed a more efficient water transport system. During the early Silurian, they developed specialized cells, which were lignified (or bore similar chemical compounds) to avoid implosion; this process coincided with cell death, allowing their innards to be emptied and water to be passed through them. These wider, dead, empty cells were a million times more conductive than the inter-cell method, giving the potential for transport over longer distances, and higher CO2 diffusion rates.\nThe earliest macrofossils to bear water-transport tubes are Silurian plants placed in the genus \"Cooksonia\". The early Devonian pretracheophytes \"Aglaophyton\" and \"Horneophyton\" have structures very similar to the hydroids of modern mosses.\nPlants continued to innovate new ways of reducing the resistance to flow within their cells, thereby increasing the efficiency of their water transport. Bands on the walls of tubes, in fact apparent from the early Silurian onwards, are an early improvisation to aid the easy flow of water. Banded tubes, as well as tubes with pits in their walls, were lignified and, when they form single celled conduits, are considered to be \"tracheids\". These, the \"next generation\" of transport cell design, have a more rigid structure than hydroids, allowing them to cope with higher levels of water pressure. Tracheids may have a single evolutionary origin, possibly within the hornworts, uniting all tracheophytes (but they may have evolved more than once).\nWater transport requires regulation, and dynamic control is provided by stomata.\nBy adjusting the amount of gas exchange, they can restrict the amount of water lost through transpiration. This is an important role where water supply is not constant, and indeed stomata appear to have evolved before tracheids, being present in the non-vascular hornworts.\nAn endodermis probably evolved during the Silu-Devonian, but the first fossil evidence for such a structure is Carboniferous. This structure in the roots covers the water transport tissue and regulates ion exchange (and prevents unwanted pathogens etc. from entering the water transport system). The endodermis can also provide an upwards pressure, forcing water out of the roots when transpiration is not enough of a driver.\nOnce plants had evolved this level of controlled water transport, they were truly homoiohydric, able to extract water from their environment through root-like organs rather than relying on a film of surface moisture, enabling them to grow to much greater size. As a result of their independence from their surroundings, they lost their ability to survive desiccation\u00a0\u2013 a costly trait to retain.\nDuring the Devonian, maximum xylem diameter increased with time, with the minimum diameter remaining pretty constant. By the middle Devonian, the tracheid diameter of some plant lineages (Zosterophyllophytes) had plateaued. Wider tracheids allow water to be transported faster, but the overall transport rate depends also on the overall cross-sectional area of the xylem bundle itself. The increase in vascular bundle thickness further seems to correlate with the width of plant axes, and plant height; it is also closely related to the appearance of leaves and increased stomatal density, both of which would increase the demand for water.\nWhile wider tracheids with robust walls make it possible to achieve higher water transport tensions, this increases the likelihood of cavitation. Cavitation occurs when a bubble of air forms within a vessel, breaking the bonds between chains of water molecules and preventing them from pulling more water up with their cohesive tension. A tracheid, once cavitated, cannot have its embolism removed and return to service (except in a few advanced angiosperms which have developed a mechanism of doing so). Therefore, it is well worth plants' while to avoid cavitation occurring. For this reason, pits in tracheid walls have very small diameters, to prevent air entering and allowing bubbles to nucleate. Freeze-thaw cycles are a major cause of cavitation. Damage to a tracheid's wall almost inevitably leads to air leaking in and cavitation, hence the importance of many tracheids working in parallel.\nOnce cavitation has occurred, plants have a range of mechanisms to contain the damage. Small pits link adjacent conduits to allow fluid to flow between them, but not air\u00a0\u2013 although these pits, which prevent the spread of embolism, are also a major cause of them. These pitted surfaces further reduce the flow of water through the xylem by as much as 30%. The diversification of xylem strand shapes with tracheid network topologies increasingly resistant to the spread of embolism likely facilitated increases in plant size and the colonization of drier habitats during the Devonian radiation. Conifers, by the Jurassic, developed bordered pits had valve-like structures to isolate cavitated elements. These torus-margo structures have an impermeable disc (torus) suspended by a permeable membrane (margo) between two adjacent pores. When a tracheid on one side depressurizes, the disc is sucked into the pore on that side, and blocks further flow. Other plants simply tolerate cavitation. For instance, oaks grow a ring of wide vessels at the start of each spring, none of which survive the winter frosts. Maples use root pressure each spring to force sap upwards from the roots, squeezing out any air bubbles.\nGrowing to height also employed another trait of tracheids\u00a0\u2013 the support offered by their lignified walls. Defunct tracheids were retained to form a strong, woody stem, produced in most instances by a secondary xylem. However, in early plants, tracheids were too mechanically vulnerable, and retained a central position, with a layer of tough sclerenchyma on the outer rim of the stems. Even when tracheids do take a structural role, they are supported by sclerenchymatic tissue.\nTracheids end with walls, which impose a great deal of resistance on flow; vessel members have perforated end walls, and are arranged in series to operate as if they were one continuous vessel. The function of end walls, which were the default state in the Devonian, was probably to avoid embolisms. An embolism is where an air bubble is created in a tracheid. This may happen as a result of freezing, or by gases dissolving out of solution. Once an embolism is formed, it usually cannot be removed (but see later); the affected cell cannot pull water up, and is rendered useless.\nEnd walls excluded, the tracheids of prevascular plants were able to operate under the same hydraulic conductivity as those of the first vascular plant, \"Cooksonia\".\nThe size of tracheids is limited as they comprise a single cell; this limits their length, which in turn limits their maximum useful diameter to 80\u00a0\u03bcm. Conductivity grows with the fourth power of diameter, so increased diameter has huge rewards; \"vessel elements\", consisting of a number of cells, joined at their ends, overcame this limit and allowed larger tubes to form, reaching diameters of up to 500\u00a0\u03bcm, and lengths of up to 10\u00a0m.\nVessels first evolved during the dry, low CO2 periods of the late Permian, in the horsetails, ferns and Selaginellales independently, and later appeared in the mid Cretaceous in angiosperms and gnetophytes.\nVessels allow the same cross-sectional area of wood to transport around a hundred times more water than tracheids! This allowed plants to fill more of their stems with structural fibers, and also opened a new niche to vines, which could transport water without being as thick as the tree they grew on. Despite these advantages, tracheid-based wood is a lot lighter, thus cheaper to make, as vessels need to be much more reinforced to avoid cavitation.\nDevelopment.\nXylem development can be described by four terms: \"centrarch, exarch, endarch\" and \"mesarch\". As it develops in young plants, its nature changes from \"protoxylem\" to \"metaxylem\" (i.e. from \"first xylem\" to \"after xylem\"). The patterns in which protoxylem and metaxylem are arranged are essential in studying plant morphology.\nProtoxylem and metaxylem.\nAs a young vascular plant grows, one or more strands of primary xylem form in its stems and roots. The first xylem to develop is called 'protoxylem'. In appearance, protoxylem is usually distinguished by narrower vessels formed of smaller cells. Some of these cells have walls that contain thickenings in the form of rings or helices. Functionally, protoxylem can extend: the cells can grow in size and develop while a stem or root is elongating. Later, 'metaxylem' develops in the strands of xylem. Metaxylem vessels and cells are usually larger; the cells have thickenings typically either in the form of ladderlike transverse bars (scalariform) or continuous sheets except for holes or pits (pitted). Functionally, metaxylem completes its development after elongation ceases when the cells no longer need to grow in size.\nPatterns of protoxylem and metaxylem.\nThere are four primary patterns to the arrangement of protoxylem and metaxylem in stems and roots.\nThe other three terms are used where there is more than one strand of primary xylem.\nHistory.\nIn his book \"De plantis libri XVI\" (On Plants, in 16 books) (1583), the Italian physician and botanist Andrea Cesalpino proposed that plants draw water from soil not by magnetism (\"ut magnes ferrum trahit\", as magnetic iron attracts) nor by suction (\"vacuum\"), but by absorption, as occurs in the case of linen, sponges, or powders. The Italian biologist Marcello Malpighi was the first person to describe and illustrate xylem vessels, which he did in his book \"Anatome plantarum\" ... (1675). Although Malpighi believed that xylem contained only air, the British physician and botanist Nehemiah Grew, who was Malpighi's contemporary, believed that sap ascended both through the bark and through the xylem. However, according to Grew, capillary action in the xylem would raise the sap by only a few inches; to raise the sap to the top of a tree, Grew proposed that the parenchymal cells become turgid and thereby not only squeeze the sap in the tracheids but force some sap from the parenchyma into the tracheids. In 1727, English clergyman and botanist Stephen Hales showed that transpiration by a plant's leaves causes water to move through its xylem. By 1891, the Polish-German botanist Eduard Strasburger had shown that the transport of water in plants did not require the xylem cells to be alive.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46676", "revid": "28916033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46676", "title": "Banach fixed-point theorem", "text": "Theorem about metric spaces\nIn mathematics, the Banach fixed-point theorem (also known as the contraction mapping theorem or contractive mapping theorem or Banach\u2013Caccioppoli theorem) is an important tool in the theory of metric spaces; it guarantees the existence and uniqueness of fixed points of certain self-maps of metric spaces and provides a constructive method to find those fixed points. It can be understood as an abstract formulation of Picard's method of successive approximations. The theorem is named after Stefan Banach (1892\u20131945) who first stated it in 1922.\nStatement.\n\"Definition.\" Let formula_1 be a metric space. Then a map formula_2 is called a contraction mapping on formula_3 if there exists formula_4 such that\nformula_5\nfor all formula_6\nBanach fixed-point theorem. Let formula_1 be a non-empty complete metric space with a contraction mapping formula_8 Then formula_9 admits a unique fixed-point formula_10 in formula_3 (i.e. formula_12). Furthermore, formula_10 can be found as follows: start with an arbitrary element formula_14 and define a sequence formula_15 by formula_16 for formula_17 Then formula_18.\n\"Remark 1.\" The following inequalities are equivalent and describe the speed of convergence:\nformula_19\nAny such value of formula_20 is called a \"Lipschitz constant\" for formula_9, and the smallest one is sometimes called \"the best Lipschitz constant\" of formula_9.\n\"Remark 2.\" formula_23 for all formula_24 is in general not enough to ensure the existence of a fixed point, as is shown by the map\nformula_25\nwhich lacks a fixed point. However, if formula_3 is compact, then this weaker assumption does imply the existence and uniqueness of a fixed point, that can be easily found as a minimizer of formula_27, indeed, a minimizer exists by compactness, and has to be a fixed point of formula_28 It then easily follows that the fixed point is the limit of any sequence of iterations of formula_9.\n\"Remark 3.\" When using the theorem in practice, the most difficult part is typically to define formula_3 properly so that formula_31.\nProof.\nLet formula_14 be arbitrary and define a sequence formula_15 by setting formula_16. We first note that for all formula_35 we have the inequality\nformula_36\nThis follows by induction on formula_37, using the fact that formula_9 is a contraction mapping. Then we can show that formula_15 is a Cauchy sequence. In particular, let formula_40 such that formula_41:\n formula_42\nLet formula_43 be arbitrary. Since formula_44, we can find a large formula_45 so that\nformula_46\nTherefore, by choosing formula_47 and formula_37 greater than formula_49 we may write:\nformula_50\nThis proves that the sequence formula_15 is Cauchy. By completeness of formula_1, the sequence has a limit formula_53 Furthermore, formula_10 must be a fixed point of formula_9:\nformula_56\nAs a contraction mapping, formula_9 is continuous, so bringing the limit inside formula_9 was justified. Lastly, formula_9 cannot have more than one fixed point in formula_1, since any pair of distinct fixed points formula_61 and formula_62 would contradict the contraction of formula_9:\nformula_64\nwhere the equality is due to formula_65 being fixed points of formula_9, the first inequality is due to formula_9 being a contraction mapping, and the last inequality is due to formula_68 and formula_69 as formula_70.\n precisely, formula_83 is still of the form formula_84 with formula_85 a Lipschitz map of constant formula_86. A direct consequence of this result yields the proof of the inverse function theorem.\nConverses.\nSeveral converses of the Banach contraction principle exist. The following is due to Czes\u0142aw Bessaga, from 1959:\nLet formula_87 be a map of an abstract set such that each iterate formula_88 has a unique fixed point. Let formula_89, then there exists a complete metric on formula_3 such that formula_91 is contractive, and formula_20 is the contraction constant.\nIndeed, very weak assumptions suffice to obtain such a kind of converse. For example if formula_93 is a map on a \"T\"1 topological space with a unique fixed point formula_94, such that for each formula_95 we have formula_96, then there already exists a metric on formula_3 with respect to which formula_91 satisfies the conditions of the Banach contraction principle with contraction constant formula_99. In this case the metric is in fact an ultrametric.\nGeneralizations.\nThere are a number of generalizations (some of which are immediate corollaries).\nLet formula_100 be a map on a complete non-empty metric space. Then, for example, some generalizations of the Banach fixed-point theorem are:\nformula_109\nThen formula_9 has a unique fixed point.\nIn applications, the existence and uniqueness of a fixed point often can be shown directly with the standard Banach fixed point theorem, by a suitable choice of the metric that makes the map formula_9 a contraction. Indeed, the above result by Bessaga strongly suggests to look for such a metric. See also the article on fixed point theorems in infinite-dimensional spaces for generalizations.\nIn a non-empty compact metric space, any function formula_9 satisfying formula_23 for all distinct formula_114, has a unique fixed point. The proof is simpler than the Banach theorem, because the function formula_115 is continuous, and therefore assumes a minimum, which is easily shown to be zero.\nA different class of generalizations arise from suitable generalizations of the notion of metric space, e.g. by weakening the defining axioms for the notion of metric. Some of these have applications, e.g., in the theory of programming semantics in theoretical computer science.\nExample.\nAn application of the Banach fixed-point theorem and fixed-point iteration can be used to quickly obtain an approximation of formula_116 with high accuracy. Consider the function formula_117. It can be verified that formula_116 is a fixed point of formula_91, and that formula_91 maps the interval formula_121 to itself. Moreover, formula_122, and it can be verified that\nformula_123\non this interval. Therefore, by an application of the mean value theorem, formula_91 has a Lipschitz constant less than 1 (namely formula_125). Applying the Banach fixed-point theorem shows that the fixed point formula_116 is the unique fixed point on the interval, allowing for fixed-point iteration to be used.\nFor example, the value 3 may be chosen to start the fixed-point iteration, as formula_127. The Banach fixed-point theorem may be used to conclude that\n formula_128\nApplying \"f\" to 3 only three times already yields an expansion of formula_116 accurate to 33 digits:\n formula_130\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n\"This article incorporates material from http:// on PlanetMath, which is licensed under the .\""}
{"id": "46677", "revid": "19469213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46677", "title": "Die Fledermaus", "text": "Comic operetta in three acts by Johann Strauss II\n (, \"The Bat\", sometimes called \"The Revenge of the Bat\") is an operetta composed by Johann Strauss II to a German libretto by Karl Haffner and Richard Gen\u00e9e, which premiered in 1874.\nBackground.\nThe original literary source for ' was ' (\"The Prison\"), a farce by German playwright Julius Roderich Benedix that premiered in Berlin in 1851. On 10 September 1872, a three-act French vaudeville play by Henri Meilhac and Ludovic Hal\u00e9vy, \"\", loosely based on the Benedix farce, opened at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre du Palais-Royal. Meilhac and Hal\u00e9vy had provided several successful libretti for Offenbach. \"Le R\u00e9veillon\" later was adapted as the 1926 silent film \"So This Is Paris\", directed by Ernst Lubitsch.\nMeilhac and Hal\u00e9vy's play was soon translated into German by Karl Haffner (1804\u20131876), at the instigation of Max Steiner, as a non-musical play for production in Vienna. The French custom of a New Year's Eve \"r\u00e9veillon\", or supper party, was not considered to provide a suitable setting for the Viennese theatre, so it was decided to substitute a ball for the \"r\u00e9veillon\". Haffner's translation was passed to the playwright and composer Richard Gen\u00e9e, who had provided some of the lyrics for Strauss's \"Der Karneval in Rom\" the year before, and he completed the libretto.\nPerformance history.\nThe operetta premiered on 5 April 1874 at the Theater an der Wien in Vienna and has been part of the regular repertoire ever since.\nIt was performed in New York under Rudolf Bial at the Stadt Theatre on 21 November 1874. The German premi\u00e8re took place at Munich's G\u00e4rtnerplatztheater in 1875. \"Die Fledermaus\" was sung in English at London's Alhambra Theatre on 18 December 1876, with its score modified by Hamilton Clarke.\nWhen the operetta came to Paris in 1877 at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de la Renaissance, as \"La Tzigane\", an amalgamated adaptation of \"Die Fledermaus\" and \"Cagliostro in Wien\" with Isma\u00ebl and Zulma Bouffar in the cast, it was not a success. It was not until 1904, in a version based on Meilhac and Halevy's play, with words adapted by Paul Ferrier to the music (with Max Dearly and \u00c8ve Lavalli\u00e8re in the cast) did \"Die Fledermaus\" find success in Paris and enter the repertoire.\nThe first London performance in German did not take place until 1895. According to the archivist of the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden, \"Twenty years after its production as a lyric opera in Vienna, [composer and conductor Gustav] Mahler raised the artistic status of Strauss's work by producing it at the Hamburg Opera House [...] all the leading opera houses in Europe, notably Vienna and Munich, have brightened their regular repertoire by including it for occasional performance.\"\nThe role of Eisenstein was originally written for a tenor but is now frequently sung by a baritone. The role of Orlofsky is a trouser role, usually performed by a mezzo-soprano, sometimes by a countertenor and occasionally \u2013 an octave lower \u2013 by a tenor.\nThe party of act 2 allows productions to insert a variety of additional entertainment acts, such as music, comedy, or dance. The lengthy drunken soliloquy by Frosch (a comedy speaking role) in act 3 also permits variety in performance.\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\n\"Eisenstein's apartment\"\nGabriel von Eisenstein, a Viennese man-about-town, has been sentenced to eight days in prison for insulting an official, partially due to the incompetence of his attorney, Dr. Blind. Adele, Eisenstein's maid, receives a forged letter, allegedly from her sister who is in the company of the ballet, but actually written by Eisenstein's friend Falke, inviting her to Prince Orlofsky's ball. She pretends the letter says that her aunt is very sick, and asks her mistress Rosalinde (Eisenstein's wife) for an evening off (\"Da schreibt meine Schwester Ida\"/\"My sister Ida writes to me\"). Falke arrives to invite him to the ball (Duet: \"Komm mit mir zum Souper\"/\"Come with me to the supper\"). Together, they recall a practical joke which Eisenstein played on Falke a few years ago, for which Falke is secretly planning a light-hearted revenge in kind. Eisenstein bids farewell to Adele and his wife Rosalinde, pretending he is going to prison (Trio: \"O Gott, wie r\u00fchrt mich dies!\"/\"Oh dear, oh dear, how sorry I am\") but really intending to postpone jail for one day and have fun at the ball.\nAfter Eisenstein leaves, Rosalinde is visited by her former lover, the singing teacher Alfred, who serenades her (\"T\u00e4ubchen, das entflattert ist\"/\"Dove that has escaped\"). Frank, the governor of the prison, arrives to take Eisenstein to jail, and finds Alfred instead. In order not to compromise Rosalinde, Alfred agrees to pretend to be Eisenstein and to accompany Frank. (Finale, drinking song: \"Gl\u00fccklich ist, wer vergisst\"/\"Happy is he who forgets\" followed by Rosalinde's defence when Frank arrives: \"Mit mir so sp\u00e4t im t\u00eate-\u00e0-t\u00eate\"/\"In t\u00eate-\u00e0-t\u00eate with me so late\", and Frank's invitation: \"Mein sch\u00f6nes, gro\u00dfes Vogelhaus\"/\"My beautiful, large bird-cage\".)\nAct 2.\n\"A summer house in the Villa Orlofsky\"\nIt transpires that Falke, with Prince Orlofsky's permission, is using the ball as a way of getting revenge on Eisenstein. Some time before, after a costume-party, Eisenstein had abandoned Falke, very drunk and dressed in a bat-costume, in the center of town, exposing him to ridicule the next day. As part of his scheme, Falke has invited Frank, Adele, and Rosalinde to come the ball, all concealing their identities as well. Rosalinde pretends to be a masked Hungarian countess, Eisenstein goes by the name \"Marquis Renard\", Frank is \"Chevalier Chagrin\", and Adele, who has borrowed one of Rosalinde's dresses without permission, pretends she is an actress.\nThe ball is in progress (Chorus: \"Ein Souper heut' uns winkt\"/\"A supper is before us\") and the Prince welcomes his guests (\"Ich lade gern mir G\u00e4ste ein\"/\"I love to invite my friends\"). Eisenstein is introduced to Adele, but is confused as to who she really is because of her striking resemblance to his maid. (\"Mein Herr Marquis\"/\"My lord marquis\", sometimes referred to as \"Adele's Laughing Song\"). Frank arrives. He and Eisenstein, who are both posing as Frenchmen, attempt to conceal their identities by repeating common French phrases to each other, to Orlofsky's great amusement. Since neither actually knows French, both are fooled. As the party progresses, they both experience alcohol-induced good-feeling and manly camaraderie for each other.\nThen Falke introduces the masked Rosalinde to the company. She convinces everyone that she is Hungarian by singing the \"Czardas\", a sentimental dancing-song (\"Kl\u00e4nge der Heimat\"/\"Sounds from home\"). During an amorous t\u00eate-\u00e0-t\u00eate, Eisenstein tries unsuccessfully to persuade the mystery-woman to unmask. She succeeds in extracting a valuable watch from her husband's pocket, something which she can use in the future as evidence of his impropriety. (Watch duet: \"Dieser Anstand, so manierlich\"/\"Her bearing, so well-mannered\"). In a rousing finale, Orlofsky makes a toast to champagne, and the company celebrates (The Champagne song: \"Im Feuerstrom der Reben\"/\"In the fire stream of the grape\"; followed by the canon: \"Br\u00fcderlein, Br\u00fcderlein und Schwesterlein\"/\"Brothers, brothers and sisters\" and the waltz finale, \"Ha, welch ein Fest, welche Nacht voll Freud'!\"/\"Ha, what joy, what a night of delight\".) Eisenstein and Frank dash off as the clock strikes six in the morning.\nAct 3.\n\"In the prison offices of Warden Frank\"\nThe next morning they all find themselves at the prison where the confusion increases and is compounded by the jailer, Frosch, who has profited by Warden Frank's absence to become gloriously drunk. Alfred, still in jail in Eisenstein's place, irritates the other prisoners by singing operatic arias.\nAdele arrives to ask the Chevalier Chagrin (actually Frank) to sponsor her career as an actress, but Frank is not wealthy enough to do this (Melodrama; Couplet of Adele: \"Spiel' ich die Unschuld vom Lande\"/\"If I play the innocent peasant maid\"). Meanwhile, Alfred asks Frosch to summon Dr. Blind to help get him released; Frank agrees to allow this and Dr. Blind arrives. Eisenstein enters and says he has come to serve his sentence. He is surprised when Frank tells him that his cell is already occupied by a man who claims to be Eisenstein and whom Frank had arrested in Eisenstein's apartment. Frank further tells Eisenstein that the man he arrested was singing amorous songs to Rosalinde at the time of his arrest, and warmly kissed her goodbye. Enraged, Eisenstein takes Dr. Blind's wig and glasses in order to disguise himself and confront the impersonator Alfred, who Eisenstein now believes has cuckolded him. Rosalinde enters. Eisenstein takes off his disguise and accuses her of being unfaithful to him with Alfred. Eisenstein, Rosalinde, and Alfred sing a trio in which Eisenstein angrily claims the right of vengeance (Trio: \"Ja, ich bin's, den ihr betrogen...Ra-ra-ra-ra-Rache will ich!\"/\"I'm the one who was mistreated...Ve-ve-ve-ve-vengeance is mine!\"). However, Rosalinde produces his watch, and he realizes that the Hungarian mystery-woman he tried to seduce at Orlofsky's party was actually Rosalinde in disguise and that he, not she, is at fault.\nFalke enters with all the guests from the party and explains that the whole thing was payback for Eisenstein's practical joke on him three years before. Eisenstein is delighted by the prank, and he begs Rosalinde to forgive him for his attempted infidelity. Rosalinde refuses at first and threatens to divorce him, but Eisenstein tells her that his misbehavior was caused by the champagne. She accepts this explanation and immediately forgives him unconditionally. Orlofsky promises to finance Adele's acting career, and the company joyfully reprises the \"Champagne song\" from act 2.\nStage adaptations.\nStrauss's music has been adopted for at least two musical comedies:\nFilm adaptations.\n\"\" has been adapted numerous times for the cinema and for TV:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "46679", "revid": "1", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46679", "title": "Arithmetic encoding", "text": ""}
{"id": "46680", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46680", "title": "Entropy coding", "text": "Lossless data compression scheme\nIn information theory, an entropy coding (or entropy encoding) is any lossless data compression method that attempts to approach the lower bound declared by Shannon's source coding theorem, which states that any lossless data compression method must have an expected code length greater than or equal to the entropy of the source.\nMore precisely, the source coding theorem states that for any source distribution, the expected code length satisfies formula_1, where formula_2 is the function specifying the number of symbols in a code word, formula_3 is the coding function, formula_4 is the number of symbols used to make output codes and formula_5 is the probability of the source symbol. An entropy coding attempts to approach this lower bound.\nTwo of the most common entropy coding techniques are Huffman coding and arithmetic coding.\nIf the approximate entropy characteristics of a data stream are known in advance (especially for signal compression), a simpler static code may be useful.\nThese static codes include universal codes (such as Elias gamma coding or Fibonacci coding) and Golomb codes (such as unary coding or Rice coding).\nSince 2014, data compressors have started using the asymmetric numeral systems family of entropy coding techniques, which allows combination of the compression ratio of arithmetic coding with a processing cost similar to Huffman coding.\nEntropy as a measure of similarity.\nBesides using entropy coding as a way to compress digital data, an entropy encoder can also be used to measure the amount of similarity between streams of data and already existing classes of data. This is done by generating an entropy coder/compressor for each class of data; unknown data is then classified by feeding the uncompressed data to each compressor and seeing which compressor yields the highest compression. The coder with the best compression is probably the coder trained on the data that was most similar to the unknown data.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46681", "revid": "421292", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46681", "title": "Church numeral", "text": ""}
{"id": "46682", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46682", "title": "Von Neumann ordinal", "text": ""}
{"id": "46683", "revid": "1314865589", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46683", "title": "Amalfi", "text": "Town in Campania, Italy\nAmalfi (, , ) is a town and \"comune\" in the province of Salerno, in the region of Campania, Italy, on the Gulf of Salerno. It lies at the mouth of a deep ravine, at the foot of Monte Cerreto (1,315 metres, 4,314 feet), surrounded by dramatic cliffs and coastal scenery. The town of Amalfi was the capital of the maritime republic known as the Duchy of Amalfi, an important trading power in the Mediterranean between 839 and around 1200. It has 4,611 inhabitants.\nThe town became a popular seaside resort beginning in the Edwardian era, with members of the British upper class spending their winters in Amalfi. Amalfi is included in the UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nHistory.\nAmalfi began as a maritime power, trading grain from its neighbours, salt from Sardinia and slaves from the interior, and even timber, in exchange for the gold dinars minted in Egypt and Syria, in order to buy the Byzantine silks that it resold in the West. Grain-bearing Amalfi traders enjoyed privileged positions in the Islamic ports, Fernand Braudel notes. The Amalfi tables (\"Tavole amalfitane\") provided a maritime code that was widely used by the Christian port cities. Merchants of Amalfi were using gold coins to purchase land in the 9th century, while most of Italy worked in a barter economy. During the late 9th century, long-distance trade revived between Amalfi and Gaeta with Byzantine, the latter which benefited from a flourishing trade network with the Arabs. Karl Marx in \"The German Ideology\" acknowledged the role of Amalfi in the very beginning of European mercantile Capitalism. \nAn independent republic from the 7th century until 1073, Amalfi extracted itself from Byzantine vassalage in 839 and first elected a duke in 958; it rivalled Pisa and Genoa in its domestic prosperity and maritime importance before the rise of the Republic of Venice. In spite of some devastating setbacks it had a population of some 70,000 to 80,000 reaching a peak about the turn of the millennium, during the reign of Duke Manso (966\u20131004). Under his line of dukes, Amalfi remained independent, except for a brief period of Salernitan dependency under Guaimar IV.\nIn 1073, the republic fell to the Norman countship of Apulia, but was granted many rights. A prey to the Normans who encamped in the south of Italy, it became one of their principal posts. However, in 1131, it was reduced by Roger II of Sicily, who had been refused the keys to its citadel. The Holy Roman Emperor Lothair, fighting in favour of Pope Innocent II against Roger, who sided with the Antipope Anacletus, took him prisoner in 1133, assisted by forty-six Pisan ships. The Pisans, commercial rivals of the Amalfitani, sacked the city; Lothair claimed as part of the booty a copy of the Pandects of Justinian which was found there.\nIn 1135 and 1137, it was taken by the Pisans and rapidly declined in importance, though the Amalfian Laws were recognized in the Mediterranean until 1570. A tsunami in 1343 destroyed the port and lower town, and Amalfi never recovered to anything more than local importance.\nIn medieval culture Amalfi was famous for its flourishing schools of law and mathematics. Flavio Gioia, traditionally considered the first to introduce the mariner's compass to Europe, is said to have been a native of Amalfi.\nAmalfi has a long history of catering to visitors, with two former monasteries being converted to hotels at a relatively early date, the Luna Convento in the second decade of the 19th century and the Cappuccini Convento in the 1880s. Celebrated visitors to Amalfi included the composer Richard Wagner and the playwright Henrik Ibsen, both of whom completed works while staying in Amalfi.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMain sights.\nAmalfi occupied a high position in medieval architecture; its cathedral of Sant'Andrea (Saint Andrew, 11th century), the campanile, the convent of the Cappuccini, founded by the Amalfitan Cardinal Pietro Capuano, richly represent the artistic movement prevailing in Southern Italy at the time of the Normans, with its tendency to blend the Byzantine style with the forms and sharp lines of the northern architecture.\nCathedral.\nAt the top of a flight of steps, Saint Andrew's Cathedral (Duomo) overlooks the Piazza Duomo, the heart of Amalfi. The cathedral dates back to the 11th century; its interior is adorned in the late Baroque style with a nave and two aisles divided by 20 columns. The fa\u00e7ade of the cathedral is Byzantine in style and is adorned with various paintings of saints, including a large fresco of Saint Andrew.\nThe gold caisson ceiling has four large paintings by Andrea dell'Asta. They depict the flagellation of Saint Andrew, the miracle of Manna, the crucifixion of Saint Andrew and the Saint on the cross. From the left hand nave there is a flight of stairs which leads to the crypt. These stairs were built in 1203 for Cardinal Pietro Capuano, who, on 18 May 1208, brought Saint Andrew's remains to the cathedral from Constantinople.\nThe bronze statue of Saint Andrew in the cathedral was sculpted by Michelangelo Naccherino, a pupil of Michelangelo; also present are Pietro Bernini marble sculptures of St. Stephen and St. Lawrence.\nIn 1206, Saint Andrew's relics were brought to Amalfi from Constantinople by the Pietro Capuano following the Sack of Constantinople (an event of the 4th Crusade) after the completion of the town's cathedral. The cathedral contains a tomb in its crypt that it maintains still holds a portion of the relics of the apostle. A golden reliquary which originally housed his skull and another one used for processions through Amalfi on holy days can also be seen.\nArsenal of the Maritime Republic (\"Gli Arsenali della Repubblica\").\nThe structure of the arsenal consists of two large stone-built halls with vaulting supported by repeated pointed arches. The vaulting rests on ten piers, originally there were twenty two, the missing twelve and the structure they supported having been lost to centuries of coastal erosion. The main function of the arsenal was the building, repair and storage of warships. Amalfitan war-galleys were among the largest to be found in the Mediterranean during the Early Middle Ages. The building now contains architectural and sculptural remains, a row-barge used in the Historical Regatta, a number of models of ships and it also acts as a venue for visual art exhibitions. Starting from December 2010, the Ancient Arsenals of Amalfi host the Compass Museum on the premises of the two aisles of the building, which were spared by the Amalfi seaquake of 1343.\nMuseum of Handmade Paper (\"Museo della Carta\").\nThe Museum of Handmade Paper, located in Mill Valley in the northern part of the modern town, celebrates the long-established paper making tradition in Amalfi. The town was one of the first centres of paper making in Europe, the skill having been acquired by the Amalfitans from the Arabs. The museum is housed in an ancient paper mill which was once owned by the Milano family, a family famous in Amalfi for its involvement in the production and manufacture of paper. In 1969 the building was converted into a museum as a result of the will of Nicholas Milano, the mill's then owner. The museum contains the machinery and equipment (restored and fully functional) that was once used to manufacture paper by hand.\nCulture.\nThe Amalfi coast is famed for its production of Limoncello liqueur and the area is a known cultivator of lemons. The correct name is \"sfusato amalfitano\", and they are typically long and at least double the size of other lemons, with a thick and wrinkled skin and a sweet and juicy flesh without many pips. It is common to see lemons growing in the terraced gardens along the entire Amalfi coast between February and October. Amalfi is also a known maker of a hand-made thick paper which is called \"bambagina\". It is exported to many European countries and to America and has been used throughout Italy for wedding invitations, visiting cards and elegant writing paper. The paper has a high quality and has been used by artists such as Giuseppe Leone, who described it: \"There is a whole world that the Amalfi paper evokes and an artist who is sensitive to the suggestion of these places is aware that it is unique and exciting\".\nThree traditional events draw numerous visitors to Amalfi. First are the feast days of Saint Andrew (25\u201327 June, and 30 November), celebrating the city's patron saint. Then there is \"Byzantine New Year's Eve\" (31 August) celebrating the beginning of the New Year according to the old civil calendar of the Byzantine Empire. The third event is the Historical Regatta (first Sunday in June), a traditional rowing competition among the four best known Italian historical maritime republics: Amalfi, Genoa, Pisa, and Venice. This event is hosted by a different city every year, so it comes to Amalfi once every four years.\nTransportation.\nAmalfi can be reached using the SS163 Amalfitana state road, the SR366 regional road and the SP252 provincial road.\nThe port of Amalfi has passenger connections to Capri, Positano, Maiori, Minori, Cetara, and Salerno.\nThe nearest airports are:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46684", "revid": "48885933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46684", "title": "Anne, Queen of Great Britain", "text": "Queen of Great Britain and Ireland from 1702 to 1714\nAnne (6 February 1665 \u2013 1 August 1714) was Queen of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 8 March 1702, and Queen of Great Britain and Ireland following the ratification of the Acts of Union 1707 merging the kingdoms of England and Scotland, until her death in 1714.\nAnne was born during the reign of her uncle King Charles II. Her father was Charles's younger brother and heir presumptive, James, whose suspected Roman Catholicism was unpopular in England. On Charles's instructions, Anne and her elder sister Mary were raised as Anglicans. Mary married her Dutch Protestant cousin, William III of Orange, in 1677, and Anne married Prince George of Denmark, a Lutheran, in 1683. On Charles's death in 1685, James succeeded to the throne, but three years later he was deposed in the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Mary and William became joint monarchs. Although the sisters had been close, disagreements over Anne's finances, status, and choice of acquaintances arose shortly after Mary's accession and they became estranged. William and Mary had no children. After Mary's death in 1694, William reigned alone until his own death in 1702, when Anne succeeded him.\nDuring her reign, Anne favoured moderate Tory politicians, who were more likely to share her Anglican religious views than their opponents, the Whigs. The Whigs grew more powerful during the course of the War of the Spanish Succession, until 1710 when Anne dismissed many of them from office. Her close friendship with Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough, turned sour as the result of political differences. The Duchess took revenge with an unflattering description of the Queen in her memoirs, which was widely accepted by historians until Anne was reassessed in the late 20th century.\nAnne was plagued by poor health throughout her life, and from her thirties she grew increasingly ill and obese. Despite 17 pregnancies, she died without surviving issue and was the last monarch of the House of Stuart. The loss of her young son, Prince William, precipitated a potential succession crisis. Under the Act of Settlement 1701, which excluded all Catholics, Anne was succeeded by her second cousin George I of the House of Hanover.\nEarly life.\nAnne was born at 11:39\u00a0p.m. on 6 February 1665 at St James's Palace, London, the fourth child and second daughter of the Duke of York (later King James II and VII), and his first wife, Anne Hyde. Her father was the younger brother of King Charles II, who ruled the three kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and her mother was the daughter of Lord Chancellor Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon. At her Anglican baptism in the Chapel Royal at St James's, her older sister, Mary, was one of her godparents, along with the Duchess of Monmouth and the Archbishop of Canterbury, Gilbert Sheldon. Anne's parents had eight children, but Anne and Mary were the only ones to survive to adulthood.\nAs a child, Anne had an eye condition, which manifested as excessive watering known as \"defluxion\". For medical treatment, she was sent to France, where she lived with her paternal grandmother, Henrietta Maria of France, at the Ch\u00e2teau de Colombes near Paris. Following her grandmother's death in 1669, Anne lived with an aunt, Henrietta Anne, Duchess of Orl\u00e9ans. On the sudden death of her aunt in 1670, Anne returned to England. Her mother died the following year.\nAs was traditional in the royal family, Anne and her sister were brought up separated from their father in their own establishment at Richmond in Surrey. On the instructions of Charles II, they were raised as Protestants, despite their father being a Catholic. Placed in the care of Colonel Edward and Lady Frances Villiers, their education was focused on the teachings of the Anglican church. Henry Compton, Bishop of London, was appointed as Anne's preceptor.\nAround 1671, Anne first made the acquaintance of Sarah Jennings, who later became her close friend and one of her most influential advisors. In about 1678, Jennings married John Churchill (the future Duke of Marlborough), who was the brother of Arabella Churchill, the Duke of York's mistress. He was to become Anne's most important general.\nIn 1673, James's conversion to Catholicism became public, and he married a Catholic princess, Mary of Modena, who was only six and a half years older than Anne. Charles II had no legitimate children, and so James was next in the line of succession, followed by his two surviving daughters from his first marriage, Mary and Anne\u2014as long as he had no son. Over the next ten years, Mary of Modena had ten children, but all were either stillborn or died in infancy, leaving Mary and Anne second and third in the line of succession after their father. There is every indication that, throughout Anne's early life, she and her stepmother got on well together, and James was a conscientious and loving father.\nMarriage.\nIn November 1677, Anne's sister, Mary, married their Dutch first cousin William III of Orange at St James's Palace, but Anne could not attend the wedding because she was confined to her room with smallpox. By the time she recovered, Mary had already left for her new life in the Netherlands. Lady Frances Villiers contracted the disease and died. Anne's aunt Lady Henrietta Hyde (the wife of Laurence Hyde) was appointed as her new governess. A year later, Anne and her stepmother visited Mary in Holland for two weeks.\nThe Duke and Duchess of York retired to Brussels in March 1679 in the wake of anti-Catholic hysteria fed by the Popish Plot, and Anne visited them from the end of August. In October, all three returned to Britain: Anne to England, and her father and stepmother to Scotland. She joined them at Holyrood Palace in Edinburgh from July 1681 until May 1682. It was her last journey outside England.\nAnne's second cousin George of Hanover visited London for three months from December 1680, sparking rumours of a potential marriage between them. Historian Edward Gregg dismissed the rumours as ungrounded, as her father was essentially exiled from court, and the Hanoverians planned to marry George to his first cousin Sophia Dorothea of Celle as part of a scheme to unite the Hanoverian inheritance. Other rumours claimed she was courted by Lord Mulgrave, although he denied it. Nevertheless, as a result of the gossip, he was temporarily dismissed from court.\nWith George of Hanover out of contention as a suitor for Anne, King Charles looked elsewhere for an eligible prince who would be welcomed as a groom by his Protestant subjects but also acceptable to his Catholic ally Louis XIV of France. The Danes were Protestant allies of the French, and Louis XIV was keen on an Anglo-Danish alliance to contain the power of the Dutch. A marriage treaty between Anne and Prince George of Denmark, younger brother of King Christian V, was negotiated by Anne's uncle Laurence Hyde, who had been made Earl of Rochester, and the English Secretary of State for the Northern Department, Robert Spencer, 2nd Earl of Sunderland. Anne and George were second cousins once removed. Anne's father consented to the marriage eagerly because it diminished the influence of his other son-in-law, William of Orange, who was naturally unhappy at the match.\nBishop Compton officiated at Anne and George's wedding on 28 July 1683 in the Chapel Royal at St James's Palace. Although it was an arranged marriage, they were faithful and devoted partners. They were given a set of buildings, known as the Cockpit, in the Palace of Whitehall as their London residence, and Sarah Churchill was appointed one of Anne's ladies of the bedchamber. Within months of the marriage, Anne was pregnant, but the baby was stillborn in May. Anne recovered at the spa town of Tunbridge Wells, and over the next two years, gave birth to two daughters in quick succession: Mary and Anne Sophia.\nAccession of James II.\nWhen Charles II died in 1685, Anne's father became King James II of England and VII of Scotland. To the consternation of the English people, James began to give Catholics military and administrative offices, in contravention of the Test Acts that were designed to prevent such appointments. Anne shared the general concern, and continued to attend Anglican services. As her sister Mary lived in the Netherlands, Anne and her family were the only members of the royal family attending Protestant religious services in England. When her father tried to get Anne to baptise her youngest daughter into the Catholic faith, Anne burst into tears. \"[T]he doctrine of the Church of Rome is wicked and dangerous\", she wrote to her sister, \"their ceremonies\u2014most of them\u2014plain downright idolatry.\" Anne became estranged from her father and stepmother, as James moved to weaken the Church of England's power.\nIn early 1687, within a matter of days, Anne miscarried, her husband caught smallpox, and their two young daughters died of the same infection. Lady Rachel Russell wrote that George and Anne had \"taken [the deaths] very heavily\u00a0... Sometimes they wept, sometimes they mourned in words; then sat silent, hand in hand; he sick in bed, and she the carefullest nurse to him that can be imagined.\" Later that year, she suffered another stillbirth.\nPublic alarm at James's Catholicism increased when his wife, Mary of Modena, became pregnant for the first time since James's accession. In letters to her sister Mary, Anne raised suspicions that the Queen was faking her pregnancy in an attempt to introduce a false heir. She wrote, \"they will stick at nothing, be it never so wicked, if it will promote their interest\u00a0... there may be foul play intended.\" Anne had another miscarriage in April 1688, and left London to recuperate in the spa town of Bath.\nAnne's stepmother gave birth to a son, James Francis Edward Stuart, on 10 June 1688, and a Catholic succession became more likely. Anne was still at Bath, so she did not witness the birth, which fed the belief that the child was spurious. Anne may have left the capital deliberately to avoid being present, or because she was genuinely ill, but it is also possible that James desired the exclusion of all Protestants, including his daughter, from affairs of state. \"I shall never now be satisfied\", Anne wrote to her sister Mary, \"whether the child be true or false. It may be it is our brother, but God only knows\u00a0... one cannot help having a thousand fears and melancholy thoughts, but whatever changes may happen you shall ever find me firm to my religion and faithfully yours.\"\nTo dispel rumours of a supposititious child, James had 40 witnesses to the birth attend a Privy Council meeting, but Anne claimed she could not attend because she was pregnant (which she was not) and then declined to read the depositions because it was \"not necessary\".\nGlorious Revolution.\nWilliam of Orange invaded England on 5 November 1688 in the Glorious Revolution, which ultimately deposed King James. Forbidden by James to pay Mary a projected visit in the spring of 1687, Anne corresponded with her and was aware of the plans to invade. On the advice of the Churchills, she refused to side with James after William landed and instead wrote to William on 18 November declaring her approval of his action. Churchill abandoned the unpopular King James on the 24th. George followed suit that night, and in the evening of the following day James issued orders to place Sarah Churchill under house arrest at St James's Palace. Anne and Sarah fled from Whitehall by a back staircase, putting themselves under the care of Bishop Compton. They spent one night in his house, and subsequently arrived at Nottingham on 1 December. Two weeks later and escorted by a large company, Anne arrived at Oxford, where she met George in triumph. \"God help me!\", lamented James on discovering Anne's desertion on 26 November, \"Even my children have forsaken me.\" On 19 December, Anne returned to London, where she was at once visited by William. James fled to France on the 23rd. Anne showed no concern at the news of her father's flight, and instead merely asked for her usual game of cards. She justified herself by saying that she \"was used to play and never loved to do anything that looked like an affected constraint\".\nIn January 1689, a Convention Parliament assembled in England and declared that James had effectively abdicated when he fled, and that the thrones of England and Ireland were therefore vacant. The Parliament or Estates of Scotland took similar action, and William and Mary were declared monarchs of all three realms. The Bill of Rights 1689 and Claim of Right Act 1689 settled the succession. Anne and her descendants were to be in the line of succession after William and Mary, and they were to be followed by any descendants of William by a future marriage. On 24 July 1689, Anne gave birth to a son, Prince William, Duke of Gloucester, who, though ill, survived infancy. As William and Mary had no children, it looked as though Anne's son would inherit the Crown.\nWilliam and Mary.\nSoon after their accession, William and Mary rewarded John Churchill by granting him the Earldom of Marlborough and George was made Duke of Cumberland. Anne requested the use of Richmond Palace and a parliamentary allowance. William and Mary refused the first, and unsuccessfully opposed the latter, both of which caused tension between the two sisters. Anne's resentment grew worse when William refused to allow George to serve in the military in an active capacity. The new king and queen feared that Anne's financial independence would weaken their influence over her and allow her to organise a rival political faction. From around this time, at Anne's request she and Sarah Churchill, Lady Marlborough, began to call each other the pet names Mrs. Morley and Mrs. Freeman, respectively, to facilitate a relationship of greater equality between the two when they were alone. In January 1692, suspecting that Marlborough was secretly conspiring with James's followers, the Jacobites, William and Mary dismissed him from all his offices. In a public show of support for the Marlboroughs, Anne took Sarah to a social event at the palace, and refused her sister's request to dismiss Sarah from her household. Lady Marlborough was subsequently removed from the royal household by the Lord Chamberlain, and Anne angrily left her royal lodgings and took up residence at Syon House, the home of the Duke of Somerset. Anne was stripped of her guard of honour; courtiers were forbidden to visit her, and civic authorities were instructed to ignore her. In April, Anne gave birth to a son who died within minutes. Mary visited her, but instead of offering comfort took the opportunity to berate Anne once again for her friendship with Sarah. The sisters never saw each other again. Later that year, Anne moved to Berkeley House in Piccadilly, London, where she had a stillborn daughter in March 1693.\nWhen Mary died of smallpox in 1694, William continued to reign alone. Anne became his heir apparent, since any children he might have by another wife were assigned to a lower place in the line of succession, and the two reconciled publicly. He restored her previous honours, allowed her to reside in St James's Palace, and gave her Mary's jewels, but excluded her from government and refrained from appointing her regent during his absences abroad. Three months later, William restored Marlborough to his offices. With Anne's restoration at court, Berkeley House became a social centre for courtiers who had previously avoided contact with Anne and her husband.\nAccording to James, Anne wrote to him in 1696 requesting his permission to succeed William, and thereafter promising to restore the Crown to James's line at a convenient opportunity; he declined to give his consent. She was probably trying to ensure her own succession by attempting to prevent a direct claim by James.\nAct of Settlement.\nAnne's final pregnancy ended on 25 January 1700 with a stillbirth. She had been pregnant at least 17 times over as many years, and had miscarriages or stillbirths at least 12 times. Of her five liveborn children, four died before the age of two. Anne experienced bouts of \"gout\" (pains in her limbs and eventually stomach and head) from at least 1698. Based on her foetal losses and physical symptoms, she may have had systemic lupus erythematosus, or antiphospholipid syndrome. Alternatively, pelvic inflammatory disease could explain why the onset of her symptoms roughly coincided with her penultimate pregnancy. Other suggested causes of her failed pregnancies are listeriosis, diabetes, intrauterine growth retardation, and rhesus incompatibility. Rhesus incompatibility, however, generally worsens with successive pregnancies, and so does not fit the pattern of Anne's pregnancies, as her only son to survive infancy, Prince William, Duke of Gloucester, was born after a series of stillbirths. Experts also believe syphilis, porphyria and pelvic deformation to be unlikely as the symptoms are incompatible with her medical history.\nAnne's gout rendered her lame for much of her later life. Around the court, she was carried in a sedan chair, or used a wheelchair. Around her estates, she used a one-horse chaise, which she drove herself \"furiously like Jehu and a mighty hunter like Nimrod\". She gained weight as a result of her sedentary lifestyle; in Sarah's words, \"she grew exceeding gross and corpulent. There was something of majesty in her look, but mixed with a gloominess of soul\". Sir John Clerk, 1st Baronet, described her in 1706:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;under a fit of the gout and in extreme pain and agony, and on this occasion everything about her was much in the same disorder as about the meanest of her subjects. Her face, which was red and spotted, was rendered something frightful by her negligent dress, and the foot affected was tied up with a poultice and some nasty bandages. I was much affected by this sight\u00a0...\nAnne's sole surviving child, the Duke of Gloucester, died at age 11 on 30 July 1700. She and her husband were \"overwhelmed with grief\". Anne ordered her household to observe a day of mourning every year on the anniversary of his death. With William childless and Gloucester dead, Anne was the only person remaining in the line of succession established by the Bill of Rights 1689. To address the succession crisis and preclude a Catholic restoration, the Parliament of England enacted the Act of Settlement 1701, which provided that, failing the issue of Anne and of William III by any future marriage, the Crown of England and Ireland would go to Sophia, Electress of Hanover, and her Protestant descendants. Sophia was the granddaughter of James VI and I through his daughter Elizabeth, who was the sister of Anne's grandfather Charles I. Over 50 Catholics with stronger claims were excluded from the line of succession. Anne's father died in September 1701. His widow, the former queen, wrote to Anne to inform her that her father forgave her and to remind her of her promise to seek the restoration of his line, but Anne had already acquiesced to the line of succession created by the Act of Settlement.\nReign.\nAnne became queen upon the death of King William III on 8 March 1702, and was immediately popular. In her first speech to the English Parliament, on 11 March, she distanced herself from her late Dutch brother-in-law and said, \"As I know my heart to be entirely English, I can very sincerely assure you there is not anything you can expect or desire from me which I shall not be ready to do for the happiness and prosperity of England.\"\nSoon after her accession, Anne appointed her husband Lord High Admiral, giving him nominal control of the Royal Navy. Anne gave control of the army to Lord Marlborough, whom she appointed Captain-General. Marlborough also received numerous honours from the Queen; he was created a Knight of the Garter and was elevated to the rank of duke. The Duchess of Marlborough was appointed Groom of the Stool, Mistress of the Robes, and Keeper of the Privy Purse.\nAnne was crowned on St George's Day, 23 April 1702. Affected by gout, she was carried to Westminster Abbey in an open sedan chair, with a low back to permit her train to flow out behind her. On 4 May, England became embroiled in the War of the Spanish Succession, in which England, Austria, and the Dutch Republic fought against France and Bourbon Spain. Charles II of Spain had died childless in 1700, and the succession was disputed by two claimants: the Habsburg Archduke Charles of Austria and the Bourbon Philip, Duke of Anjou.\nShe took a lively interest in affairs of state, and was a patron of theatre, poetry and music. She subsidised George Frideric Handel with \u00a3200 a year. She sponsored high-quality medals as rewards for political or military achievements. They were produced at the Mint by Isaac Newton and John Croker. She knighted Newton when she visited Cambridge in 1705.\nActs of Union.\nWhile Ireland was subordinate to the English Crown and Wales formed part of the kingdom of England, Scotland remained an independent sovereign state with its own parliament and laws. The Act of Settlement 1701, passed by the English Parliament, applied in the kingdoms of England and Ireland but not Scotland, where a strong minority wished to preserve the Stuart dynasty and its right of inheritance to the throne. Anne had declared it \"very necessary\" to conclude a union of England and Scotland in her first speech to the English Parliament, and a joint Anglo-Scots commission met at her former residence, the Cockpit, to discuss terms in October 1702. The negotiations broke up in early February 1703 having failed to reach an agreement. The Estates of Scotland responded to the Act of Settlement by passing the Act of Security, which gave the Estates the power, if the Queen had no further children, to choose the next Scottish monarch from among the Protestant descendants of the royal line of Scotland. The individual chosen by the Estates could not be the same person who came to the English throne, unless England granted full freedom of trade to Scottish merchants. At first, Anne withheld royal assent to the act, but she granted it the following year when the Estates threatened to withhold supply, endangering Scottish support for England's wars.\nIn its turn, the English Parliament responded with the Alien Act 1705, which threatened to impose economic sanctions and declare Scottish subjects aliens in England, unless Scotland either repealed the Act of Security or moved to unite with England. The Estates chose the latter option; the English Parliament agreed to repeal the Alien Act, and new commissioners were appointed by Queen Anne in early 1706 to negotiate the terms of a union. The articles of union approved by the commissioners were presented to Anne on 23 July 1706 and ratified by the Scottish and English Parliaments on 16 January and 6 March 1707, respectively. Under the Acts of Union, England and Scotland were united into a single kingdom called Great Britain, with one parliament, on 1 May 1707. A consistent and ardent supporter of union despite opposition on both sides of the border, Anne attended a thanksgiving service in St Paul's Cathedral. The Scot Sir John Clerk, 1st Baronet, who also attended, wrote, \"nobody on this occasion appeared more sincerely devout and thankful than the Queen herself\".\nTwo-party politics.\nAnne's reign was marked by the further development of a two-party system. In general, the Tories were supportive of the Anglican church and favoured the landed interest of the country gentry, while the Whigs were aligned with commercial interests and Protestant Dissenters. As a committed Anglican, Anne was inclined to favour the Tories. Her first ministry was predominantly Tory, and contained such High Tories as Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham, and her uncle Laurence Hyde, 1st Earl of Rochester. It was headed by Lord Treasurer Lord Godolphin and Anne's favourite the Duke of Marlborough, who were considered moderate Tories, along with the Speaker of the House of Commons, Robert Harley.\nAnne supported the Occasional Conformity Bill of 1702, which was promoted by the Tories and opposed by the Whigs. The bill aimed to disqualify Protestant Dissenters from public office by closing a loophole in the Test Acts, legislation that restricted public office to Anglican conformists. The existing law permitted nonconformists to take office if they took Anglican communion once a year. Anne's husband was placed in an unfortunate position when Anne forced him to vote for the bill, even though, being a Lutheran, he was an occasional conformist himself. The Whigs successfully blocked the bill for the duration of the parliamentary session. Anne reinstituted the traditional religious practice of touching for the king's evil that had been eschewed by William as papist superstition. After the Great Storm of 1703, Anne declared a general fast to implore God \"to pardon the crying sins of this nation which had drawn down this sad judgement\". The Occasional Conformity Bill was revived in the wake of the storm, but Anne withheld support, fearing its reintroduction was a ruse to cause a political quarrel. Once again it failed. A third attempt to introduce the bill as an amendment to a money bill in November 1704 was also thwarted.\nThe Whigs vigorously supported the War of the Spanish Succession and became even more influential after the Duke of Marlborough won a great victory at the Battle of Blenheim in 1704. Many of the High Tories, who opposed British involvement in the land war against France, were removed from office. Godolphin, Marlborough, and Harley, who had replaced Nottingham as Secretary of State for the Northern Department, formed a ruling \"triumvirate\". They were forced to rely more and more on support from the Whigs, and particularly from the Whig Junto\u2014Lords Somers, Halifax, Orford, Wharton and Sunderland\u2014whom Anne disliked. Sarah, the Duchess of Marlborough, incessantly badgered the Queen to appoint more Whigs and reduce the power of the Tories, whom she considered little better than Jacobites, and the Queen became increasingly discontented with her.\nIn 1706, Godolphin and the Marlboroughs forced Anne to accept Lord Sunderland, a Junto Whig and the Marlboroughs' son-in-law, as Harley's colleague as Secretary of State for the Southern Department. Although this strengthened the ministry's position in Parliament, it weakened the ministry's position with the Queen, as Anne became increasingly irritated with Godolphin and with her former favourite, the Duchess of Marlborough, for supporting Sunderland and other Whig candidates for vacant government and church positions. The Queen turned for private advice to Harley, who was uncomfortable with Marlborough and Godolphin's turn towards the Whigs. She also turned to Abigail Hill, a woman of the bedchamber whose influence grew as Anne's relationship with Sarah deteriorated. Abigail was related to both Harley and the Duchess, but was politically closer to Harley, and acted as an intermediary between him and the Queen.\nThe division within the ministry came to a head on 8 February 1708, when Godolphin and the Marlboroughs insisted that the Queen had to either dismiss Harley or do without their services. When the Queen seemed to hesitate, Marlborough and Godolphin refused to attend a cabinet meeting. Harley attempted to lead business without his former colleagues, and several of those present including Charles Seymour, Duke of Somerset refused to participate until they returned. Her hand forced, the Queen dismissed Harley.\nThe following month, Anne's Catholic half-brother, James Francis Edward Stuart, attempted to land in Scotland with French assistance in an attempt to establish himself as king. Anne withheld royal assent from the Scottish Militia Bill 1708 in case the militia raised in Scotland was disloyal and sided with the Jacobites. She was the last British sovereign to veto a parliamentary bill, although her action was barely commented upon at the time. The invasion fleet never landed and was chased away by British ships commanded by Sir George Byng. As a result of the Jacobite invasion scare, support for the Tories fell and the Whigs were able to secure a majority in the 1708 British general election.\nThe Duchess of Marlborough was angered when Abigail moved into rooms at Kensington Palace that Sarah considered her own, though she rarely if ever used them. In July 1708, she came to court with a bawdy poem written by a Whig propagandist, probably Arthur Maynwaring, that implied a lesbian relationship between Anne and Abigail. The Duchess wrote to Anne telling her she had damaged her reputation by conceiving \"a great passion for such a woman\u00a0... strange and unaccountable\". Sarah thought Abigail had risen above her station, writing \"I never thought her education was such as to make her fit company for a great queen. Many people have liked the humour of their chambermaids and have been very kind to them, but 'tis very uncommon to hold a private correspondence with them and put them upon the foot of a friend.\" While some modern commentators have concluded Anne was a lesbian, most have rejected this analysis. In the opinion of Anne's biographers, she considered Abigail nothing more than a trusted servant and was a woman of strong traditional beliefs who was devoted to her husband.\nAt a thanksgiving service for a victory at the Battle of Oudenarde, Anne did not wear the jewels that Sarah had selected for her. At the door of St Paul's Cathedral, they had an argument that culminated in Sarah offending the Queen by telling her to be quiet. Anne was dismayed. When Sarah forwarded an unrelated letter from her husband to Anne, with a covering note continuing the argument, Anne wrote back pointedly, \"After the commands you gave me on the thanksgiving day of not answering you, I should not have troubled you with these lines, but to return the Duke of Marlborough's letter safe into your hands, and for the same reason do not say anything to that, nor to yours which enclosed it.\"\nDeath of Prince George.\nAnne was devastated by Prince George's death in October 1708, and it proved a turning point in her relationship with the Duchess of Marlborough. The Duchess arrived at Kensington Palace shortly before George died, and after his death insisted that Anne leave Kensington for St James's Palace against her wishes. Anne resented the Duchess's intrusive actions, which included removing a portrait of George from the Queen's bedchamber and then refusing to return it in the belief that it was natural \"to avoid seeing of papers or anything that belonged to one that one loved when they were just dead\".\nThe Whigs used George's death to their own advantage. The leadership of the Admiralty was unpopular among the Whig leaders, who had blamed Prince George and his deputy George Churchill (who was Marlborough's brother) for mismanagement of the navy. With Whigs now dominant in Parliament, and Anne distraught at the loss of her husband, they forced her to accept the Junto leaders Lords Somers and Wharton into the cabinet. Anne, however, insisted on carrying out the duties of Lord High Admiral herself, without appointing a member of the government to take George's place. Undeterred, the Junto demanded the appointment of the Earl of Orford, another member of the Junto and one of the prince's leading critics, as First Lord of the Admiralty. Anne appointed the moderate Earl of Pembroke, on 29 November 1708. Pressure mounted on Pembroke, Godolphin and the Queen from the dissatisfied Junto Whigs, and Pembroke resigned after less than a year in office. Another month of arguments followed before the Queen finally consented to put Orford in control of the Admiralty as First Lord in November 1709.\nSarah continued to berate Anne for her friendship with Abigail and, in October 1709, Anne wrote to the Duke of Marlborough asking that his wife \"leave off teasing &amp; tormenting me &amp; behave herself with the decency she ought both to her friend and Queen\". On Maundy Thursday 6 April 1710, Anne and Sarah saw each other for the last time. According to Sarah, the Queen was taciturn and formal, repeating the same phrases\u2014\"Whatever you have to say you may put in writing\" and \"You said you desired no answer, and I shall give you none\"\u2014over and over.\nWar of the Spanish Succession.\nAs the expensive War of the Spanish Succession grew unpopular, so did the Whig administration. The impeachment of Henry Sacheverell, a high church Tory Anglican who had preached anti-Whig sermons, led to further public discontent. Anne thought Sacheverell ought to be punished for questioning the Glorious Revolution, but that his punishment should only be a mild one to prevent further public commotion. In London, riots broke out in support of Sacheverell, but the only troops available to quell the disturbances were Anne's guards, and Secretary of State Sunderland was reluctant to use them and leave the Queen less protected. Anne declared God would be her guard and ordered Sunderland to redeploy her troops. In line with Anne's views, Sacheverell was convicted, but his sentence\u2014suspension of preaching for three years\u2014was so light as to render the trial a mockery.\nThe Queen, increasingly disdainful of the Marlboroughs and her ministry, finally took the opportunity to dismiss Sunderland in June 1710. Godolphin followed in August. The Junto Whigs were removed from office, although Marlborough, for the moment, remained as commander of the army. In their place, she appointed a new ministry headed by Harley, which began to seek peace with France. Unlike the Whigs, Harley and his ministry were ready to compromise by giving Spain to the Bourbon claimant, Philip of Anjou, in return for commercial concessions. In the parliamentary elections that soon followed his appointment, Harley, aided by government patronage, secured a large Tory majority. In January 1711, Anne forced Sarah to resign her court offices, and Abigail took over as Keeper of the Privy Purse. Harley was stabbed by a disgruntled French refugee, the Marquis de Guiscard, in March, and Anne wept at the thought he would die. He recovered slowly. Godolphin's death from natural causes in September 1712 reduced Anne to tears; she blamed their estrangement on the Marlboroughs.\nThe elder brother of Archduke Charles, Emperor Joseph I, died in April 1711 and Charles succeeded him in Austria, Hungary and the Holy Roman Empire. To also give him the Spanish throne was no longer in Britain's interests, but the proposed Peace of Utrecht submitted to Parliament for ratification did not go as far as the Whigs wanted to curb Bourbon ambitions. In the House of Commons, the Tory majority was unassailable, but the same was not true in the House of Lords. The Whigs secured the support of the Earl of Nottingham against the treaty by promising to support his Occasional Conformity bill. Seeing a need for decisive action to erase the anti-peace majority in the House of Lords, and seeing no alternative, Anne reluctantly created twelve new peers, even though such a mass creation of peers was unprecedented. Abigail's husband, Samuel Masham, was made a baron, although Anne protested to Harley that she \"never had any design to make a great lady of [Abigail], and should lose a useful servant\". On the same day, Marlborough was dismissed as commander of the army. The peace treaty was ratified and Britain's military involvement in the War of the Spanish Succession ended.\nBy signing the Treaty of Utrecht, Louis XIV of France recognised the Hanoverian succession in Britain. Nevertheless, gossip that Anne and her ministers favoured the succession of her half-brother rather than the Hanoverians continued, despite Anne's denials in public and in private. The rumours were fed by her consistent refusals to permit any of the Hanoverians to visit or move to England, and by the intrigues of Harley and the Tory Secretary of State Lord Bolingbroke, who were in separate and secret discussions with her half-brother about a possible Stuart restoration until early 1714.\nDeath.\nAnne was unable to walk between January and July 1713. At Christmas, she was feverish, and lay unconscious for hours, leading to rumours of her impending death. She recovered, but was seriously ill again in March 1714. By July, Anne had lost confidence in Harley; his secretary recorded that Anne told the cabinet \"that he neglected all business; that he was seldom to be understood; that when he did explain himself, she could not depend upon the truth of what he said; that he never came to her at the time she appointed; that he often came drunk; [and] last, to crown all, he behaved himself towards her with ill manner, indecency and disrespect.\" On 27 July 1714, during Parliament's summer recess, she dismissed Harley as Lord Treasurer. Despite failing health, which her doctors blamed on the emotional strain of matters of state, she attended two late-night cabinet meetings that failed to determine Harley's successor. A third meeting was cancelled when she became too ill to attend. She was rendered unable to speak by a stroke on 30 July 1714, the anniversary of Gloucester's death, and on the advice of the Privy Council handed the treasurer's staff of office to Whig grandee Charles Talbot, 1st Duke of Shrewsbury.\nAnne died around 7:30\u00a0a.m. on 1 August 1714. John Arbuthnot, one of her doctors, thought her death was a release from a life of ill-health and tragedy; he wrote to Jonathan Swift, \"I believe sleep was never more welcome to a weary traveller than death was to her.\" She was buried beside her husband and children in the Henry VII Chapel on the South Aisle of Westminster Abbey on 24 August.\nSuccession.\nThe Electress Sophia had died on 28 May, two months before Anne, so Sophia's son, George, Elector of Hanover, succeeded pursuant to the Act of Settlement 1701. The possible Catholic claimants, including Anne's half-brother, James Francis Edward Stuart, were ignored. The Elector's accession was relatively stable: a Jacobite rising in 1715 failed. Marlborough was reinstated, and the Tory ministers were replaced by Whigs.\nLegacy.\nThe Duchess of Marlborough \"unduly disparaged\" Anne in her memoirs, and her prejudiced recollections persuaded many early biographers that Anne was \"a weak, irresolute woman beset by bedchamber quarrels and deciding high policy on the basis of personalities\". The Duchess wrote of Anne:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;She certainly meant well and was not a fool, but nobody can maintain that she was wise, nor entertaining in conversation. She was ignorant in everything but what the parsons had taught her when a child\u00a0... Being very ignorant, very fearful, with very little judgement, it is easy to be seen she might mean well, being surrounded with so many artful people, who at last compassed their designs to her dishonour.\nHistorians have since viewed Anne more favourably. In his biography of 1980, Edward Gregg presents the Queen as a woman of invincible stubbornness, who was the central figure of her age. Gregg's argument depicts her reign as: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;a period of significant progress for the country: Britain became a major military power on land, the union of England and Scotland created a united kingdom of Great Britain, and the economic and political base for the golden age of the 18th century was established. However, the Queen herself has received little credit for these achievements and has long been depicted as a weak and ineffectual monarch, dominated by her advisers.\nIn the opinion of modern historians, traditional assessments of Anne as fat, constantly pregnant, under the influence of favourites, and lacking political astuteness or interest may derive from sexist prejudices against women. Author David Green noted, \"Hers was not, as used to be supposed, petticoat government. She had considerable power; yet time and time again she had to capitulate.\" Gregg concluded that Anne was often able to impose her will, even though, as a woman in an age of male dominance and preoccupied by her health, her reign was marked by an increase in the influence of ministers and a decrease in the influence of the Crown. She attended more cabinet meetings than any of her predecessors or successors, and presided over an age of artistic, literary, scientific, economic and political advancement that was made possible by the stability and prosperity of her reign. In architecture, Sir John Vanbrugh constructed Blenheim Palace and Castle Howard. Queen Anne-style architecture and Queen Anne-style furniture were named after her. Writers such as Daniel Defoe, Alexander Pope, and Jonathan Swift flourished. Henry Wise laid out new gardens at Blenheim, Kensington, Windsor and St James's. The union of England and Scotland, which Anne had fervently supported, created Europe's largest free trade area. The political and diplomatic achievements of Anne's governments, and the absence of constitutional conflict between monarch and parliament during her reign, indicate that she chose ministers and exercised her prerogatives wisely.\nTitles and styles.\nThe official style of Anne before 1707 was \"Anne, by the Grace of God, Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.\" After the union, her style was \"Anne, by the Grace of God, Queen of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.\" In line with other monarchs of England between 1340 and 1800, Anne was styled \"Queen of France\", but did not actually reign in France.\nArms.\nAs queen regnant, Anne's coat of arms before the union were the Stuart royal arms, in use since 1603: Quarterly; I and IV grandquarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lis Or (for France) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England); II, Or, a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III, Azure, a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland). In 1702, Anne adopted the motto \"semper eadem\" (\"always the same\"), the same motto used by Queen Elizabeth I.\nThe Acts of Union declared that: \"the Ensigns Armorial of the said United Kingdom be such as Her Majesty shall appoint\". In 1707, the union was heraldically expressed by the impalement, or placing side by side in the same quarter, of the arms of England and Scotland, which had previously been in different quarters. The new arms were: Quarterly; I and IV, Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England) impaling Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); II, Azure, three fleurs-de-lis Or (for France); III, Azure, a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland). In Scotland, a separate form of arms was used on seals until the Act of Union.\nPregnancies and issue.\nAnne had seventeen pregnancies, of which five were live births. None of her children survived to adulthood.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46685", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46685", "title": "Russian Foreign Affairs after the Crimean War", "text": ""}
{"id": "46688", "revid": "42779570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46688", "title": "Charles II of England", "text": "King of England, Scotland, and Ireland from 1660 to 1685\nCharles II (29 May 1630 \u2013 6 February 1685) was King of Scotland from 1649 until 1651 and King of England, Scotland, and Ireland from the 1660 Restoration of the monarchy until his death in 1685.\nCharles II was the eldest surviving child of Charles I of England, Scotland and Ireland and Henrietta Maria of France. After Charles I's execution at Whitehall on 30 January 1649, at the climax of the English Civil War, the Parliament of Scotland proclaimed Charles II king on 5 February 1649. However, England entered the period known as the English Interregnum or the English Commonwealth with a republican government eventually led by Oliver Cromwell. Cromwell defeated Charles II at the Battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651, and Charles fled to mainland Europe. Cromwell became Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland. Charles spent the next nine years in exile in France, the Dutch Republic and the Spanish Netherlands. A political crisis after Cromwell's death in 1658 resulted in the restoration of the monarchy in 1660, and Charles was invited to return to Britain. On 29 May 1660, his 30th birthday, he was received in London to public acclaim. \nCharles's English Parliament enacted the Clarendon Code, to shore up the position of the re-established Church of England. Charles acquiesced to these new laws even though he favoured a policy of religious tolerance. The major foreign policy issue of his early reign was the Second Anglo-Dutch War. In 1670, he entered into the Treaty of Dover, an alliance with his cousin, King Louis XIV of France. Louis agreed to aid him in the Third Anglo-Dutch War and pay him a pension, and Charles secretly promised to convert to Catholicism at an unspecified future date. Charles attempted to introduce religious freedom for Catholics and Protestant dissenters with his 1672 Royal Declaration of Indulgence, but the English Parliament forced him to withdraw it. In 1679, Titus Oates's fabrication of a supposed Popish Plot sparked the Exclusion Crisis when it was revealed that Charles's brother and heir presumptive, James, Duke of York, had become a Catholic. The crisis saw the birth of the pro-exclusion Whig and anti-exclusion Tory parties. Charles sided with the Tories and, after the discovery of the Rye House Plot to murder Charles and James in 1683, some Whig leaders were executed or forced into exile. Charles dissolved the English Parliament in 1681 and ruled alone until his death in 1685.\nA patron of the arts and sciences, Charles became known for his affability and friendliness, and for allowing his subjects easy access to his person. But he also showed an almost impenetrable reserve, especially concerning his political agendas. His court gained a reputation for moral laxity. Charles's marriage to Catherine of Braganza produced no surviving children, but the king acknowledged at least 12 illegitimate children by various mistresses. He was succeeded by his brother James.\nEarly life, civil war and exile.\nCharles was born at St James's Palace on 29 May 1630. He was the eldest surviving son of Charles I, king of England, Scotland and Ireland, and his wife Henrietta Maria of France, sister of King Louis XIII. Charles was their second child (the first being a son born about a year before, who had died within a day). He was baptised on 27 June in the Chapel Royal by William Laud, a future archbishop of Canterbury, and during his infancy was supervised by the Protestant Countess of Dorset. His godparents included his maternal uncle Louis XIII and maternal grandmother, Marie de' Medici, the Dowager Queen of France, both of whom were Catholics. At birth, Charles automatically became Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay, and the possessor of several other associated titles. At or around his eighth birthday, he was designated Prince of Wales, though he was never formally invested.\nIn August 1642, the long-running dispute between Charles I and Parliament culminated in the outbreak of the First English Civil War. In October, Prince Charles and his younger brother James were present at the Battle of Edgehill and spent the next two years based in the Royalist capital of Oxford. In January 1645, Charles was given his own Council and made titular head of Royalist forces in the West Country. By spring 1646, most of the region had been occupied by Parliamentarian forces and Charles went into exile to avoid capture. From Falmouth, he went first to the Isles of Scilly, then to Jersey, and finally to France, where his mother was already living under the protection of his first cousin, the eight-year-old Louis XIV. Charles I surrendered into captivity in May 1646.\nDuring the Second English Civil War in 1648, Charles moved to The Hague, where his sister Mary and his brother-in-law William II, Prince of Orange, seemed more likely to provide substantial aid to the Royalist cause than his mother's French relations. Although part of the Parliamentarian fleet defected, it did not reach Scotland in time to join up with the Royalist Engager army led by the Duke of Hamilton before it was defeated at Preston by the New Model Army.\nAt The Hague, Charles had a brief affair with Lucy Walter, who later falsely claimed that they had secretly married. Her son, James Crofts (afterwards Duke of Monmouth and Duke of Buccleuch), was one of Charles's many illegitimate children who became prominent in British society. Despite his son's diplomatic efforts to save him, Charles I was executed in January 1649, and England became a republic. On 5 February, the Covenanter Parliament of Scotland proclaimed Charles II as \"King of Great Britain, France and Ireland\" at the Mercat Cross, Edinburgh, but refused to allow him to enter Scotland unless he agreed to establish Presbyterianism as the state religion in all three of his kingdoms.\nWhen negotiations with the Scots stalled, Charles authorised Lord Montrose to land in the Orkney Islands with a small army to threaten the Scots with invasion, in the hope of forcing an agreement more to his liking. Montrose feared that Charles would accept a compromise, and so chose to invade mainland Scotland anyway. He was captured and executed. Charles reluctantly promised that he would abide by the terms of a treaty agreed between him and the Scots Parliament at Breda, and support the Solemn League and Covenant, which authorised Presbyterian church governance across Britain. Upon his arrival in Scotland on 23 June 1650, he formally agreed to the Covenant; his abandonment of Episcopal church governance, although winning him support in Scotland, left him unpopular in England. Charles himself soon came to despise the \"villainy\" and \"hypocrisy\" of the Covenanters. Charles was provided with a Scottish court, and the record of his food and household expenses at Falkland Palace and Perth survives.\nCharles's alliance with the Scots led to the Anglo-Scottish War of 1650 to 1652. On 3 September 1650, the Covenanters were defeated at Dunbar by a much smaller force commanded by Oliver Cromwell. The Scots were divided between moderate Engagers and the more radical Kirk Party, who even fought each other. Disillusioned by these divisions, Charles rode north to join an Engager force in October, an event which became known as \"the Start\", but within two days members of the Kirk Party had recovered him. Nevertheless, the Scots remained Charles's best hope of restoration, and he was crowned King of Scotland at Scone Abbey on 1 January 1651. With Cromwell's forces threatening Charles's position in Scotland, it was decided to mount an attack on England, but many of their most experienced soldiers had been excluded on religious grounds by the Kirk Party, whose leaders also refused to participate, among them Lord Argyll. Opposition to what was primarily a Scottish army meant few English Royalists joined as it moved south, and the invasion ended in defeat at the Battle of Worcester on 3 September 1651. Charles managed to escape and landed in Normandy six weeks later on 16 October, even though there was a reward of \u00a31,000 on his head, anyone caught helping him was at risk of being put to death, and he was difficult to disguise, being over , which was unusually tall for the time.\nUnder the Instrument of Government passed by Parliament, Cromwell was appointed Lord Protector of England, Scotland and Ireland in 1653, effectively placing the British Isles under military rule. Charles lived a life of leisure at Saint-Germain-en-Laye near Paris, living on a grant from Louis XIV of 600 livres a month. Charles could not obtain sufficient finance or support to mount a serious challenge to Cromwell's government. Despite the Stuart family connections through Henrietta Maria and the Princess of Orange, France and the Dutch Republic allied themselves with Cromwell's government from 1654, forcing Charles to leave France and turn to Spain for aid, which at that time ruled the Southern Netherlands.\nCharles made the Treaty of Brussels with Spain in 1656. This gathered Spanish support for a restoration in return for Charles's contribution to the war against France. Charles raised a ragtag army from his exiled subjects; this small, underpaid, poorly equipped and ill-disciplined force formed the nucleus of the post-Restoration army. The Commonwealth made the Treaty of Paris with France in 1657 to join them in war against Spain in the Netherlands. Royalist supporters in the Spanish force were led by Charles's younger brother James, Duke of York. At the Battle of the Dunes in 1658, as part of the larger Spanish force, Charles's army of around 2,000 clashed with Commonwealth troops fighting with the French. By the end of the battle Charles's force was about 1,000 and with Dunkirk given to the English the prospect of a Royalist expedition to England was dashed.\nRestoration.\nAfter Oliver Cromwell's death in 1658, Charles's initial chances of regaining the Crown seemed slim; Cromwell was succeeded as Lord Protector by his son Richard but the new Lord Protector had little experience of either military or civil administration. In 1659, the Rump Parliament was recalled and Richard Cromwell resigned. During the civil and military unrest that followed, George Monck, the Governor of Scotland, was concerned that the nation would descend into anarchy. Monck and his army marched into the City of London, and forced the Rump Parliament to readmit members of the Long Parliament who had been excluded in December 1648, during Pride's Purge. Parliament dissolved itself, and there was a general election for the first time in almost 20 years. The outgoing Parliament defined the electoral qualifications intending to bring about the return of a Presbyterian majority.\nThe restrictions against royalist candidates and voters were widely ignored, and the elections resulted in a House of Commons that was fairly evenly divided on political grounds between Royalists and Parliamentarians and on religious grounds between Anglicans and Presbyterians. The so-called Convention Parliament assembled on 25 April 1660, and soon afterwards welcomed the Declaration of Breda, in which Charles promised lenience and tolerance. There would be liberty of conscience, and Anglican church policy would not be harsh. He would not exile past enemies nor confiscate their wealth. There would be pardons for nearly all his opponents except the regicides. Above all, Charles promised to rule in cooperation with Parliament. The English Parliament resolved to proclaim Charles king and invite him to return, a message that reached Charles at Breda on 8 May 1660. In Ireland, a convention had been called earlier in the year and had already declared for Charles. On 14 May, he was proclaimed king in Dublin.\nCharles set out for England from Scheveningen, arrived in Dover on 25 May 1660 and reached London on 29 May, his 30th birthday. Although Charles and Parliament granted amnesty to nearly all of Cromwell's supporters in the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, 50 people were specifically excluded. In the end nine of the regicides were executed: they were hanged, drawn and quartered, whereas others were given life imprisonment or excluded from office for life. The bodies of Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton and John Bradshaw were subjected to posthumous decapitations.\nThe English Parliament granted Charles an annual income to run the government of \u00a31.2\u00a0million, generated largely from customs and excise duties. The grant, however, proved to be insufficient for most of Charles's reign. For the most part, the actual revenue was much lower, which led to attempts to economise at court by reducing the size and expenses of the royal household and raising money through unpopular innovations such as the hearth tax.\nIn the latter half of 1660, Charles's joy at the Restoration was tempered by the deaths of his siblings Henry and Mary of smallpox. At around the same time, Anne Hyde, the daughter of Lord Chancellor Edward Hyde, revealed that she was pregnant by Charles's brother James, whom she had secretly married. Edward Hyde, who had not known of either the marriage or the pregnancy, was created Earl of Clarendon and his position as Charles's favourite minister was strengthened.\nClarendon Code.\nThe Convention Parliament was dissolved in December 1660, and, shortly after Charles's English coronation, the second English Parliament of the reign assembled. Dubbed the Cavalier Parliament, it was overwhelmingly Royalist and Anglican. It sought to discourage non-conformity to the Church of England and passed several acts to secure Anglican dominance. The Corporation Act 1661 required municipal officeholders to swear allegiance; the Act of Uniformity 1662 made the use of the 1662 \"Book of Common Prayer\" compulsory; the Conventicle Act 1664 prohibited religious assemblies of more than five people, except under the auspices of the Church of England; and the Five Mile Act 1665 prohibited expelled non-conforming clergymen from coming within five\u00a0miles (8\u00a0km) of a parish from which they had been banished. The Conventicle and Five Mile Acts remained in effect for the remainder of Charles's reign. The Acts became known as the Clarendon Code, after Lord Clarendon, even though he was not directly responsible for them and even spoke against the Five Mile Act.\nThe Restoration was accompanied by social change. Puritanism lost its momentum. Theatres reopened after having been closed during the protectorship of Oliver Cromwell, and bawdy \"Restoration comedy\" became a recognisable genre. Theatre licences granted by Charles required that female parts be played by \"their natural performers\", rather than by boys as was often the practice before; and Restoration literature celebrated or reacted to the restored court, which included libertines such as Lord Rochester. Of Charles II, Rochester supposedly said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo which Charles is reputed to have replied \"that the matter was easily accounted for: For that his discourse was his own, his actions were the ministry's\".\nGreat Plague and Great Fire.\nIn 1665, the Great Plague of London began, peaking in September with up to 7,000 deaths per week. Charles, his family, and the court fled London in July to Salisbury; Parliament met in Oxford. Plague cases ebbed over the winter, and Charles returned to London in February 1666.\nAfter a long spell of hot and dry weather through mid-1666, the Great Fire of London started on 2 September 1666 in Pudding Lane. Fanned by strong winds and fed by wood and fuel stockpiled for winter, the fire destroyed about 13,200 houses and 87 churches, including St Paul's Cathedral. Charles and his brother James joined and directed the firefighting effort. The public blamed Catholic conspirators for the fire.\nForeign policy and marriage.\nSince 1640, Portugal had been fighting a war against Spain to restore its independence after a dynastic union of 60 years between the crowns of Spain and Portugal. Portugal had been helped by France, but in the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659 Portugal was abandoned by its French ally. Negotiations with Portugal for Charles's marriage to Catherine of Braganza began during his father's reign. Upon the restoration, Queen Lu\u00edsa of Portugal, acting as regent, reopened negotiations with England that resulted in an alliance. On 23 June 1661, a marriage treaty was signed; England acquired Catherine's dowry of the port of Tangier in North Africa, the Seven Islands of Bombay in India (which had a major influence on the development of the British Empire), valuable trading privileges in Brazil and the East Indies, religious and commercial freedom in Portugal, and two million Portuguese crowns (equivalent to \u00a3300,000 then). Portugal obtained military and naval support against Spain and liberty of worship for Catherine. Since Philip IV of Spain was an enemy of the Braganza dynasty and was against a marriage between Catherine and any powerful European monarch, the Spanish government proposed Princess Maria of Orange-Nassau, the youngest of the Dutch princesses of the House of Orange, as a bride for Charles II of England, instead of Catherine. If the English king accepted this proposal, then Philip IV would provide the dowry for the princess. However, Charles II dismissed the offer of the Spanish government, and chose to marry Catherine because of her huge dowry. Catherine journeyed from Portugal to Portsmouth on 13\u201314 May 1662, but was not visited by Charles there until 20 May. The next day the couple were married at Portsmouth in two ceremonies\u2014a Catholic one conducted in secret, followed by a public Anglican service.\nThe same year, in an unpopular move, Charles sold Dunkirk to King Louis XIV of France for about \u00a3375,000. The channel port, although a valuable strategic outpost, was a drain on Charles's limited finances, as it cost the Treasury \u00a3321,000 per year.\nBefore Charles's restoration, the Navigation Acts of 1650 had hurt Dutch trade by giving English vessels a monopoly, and had started the First Dutch War (1652\u20131654). To lay foundations for a new beginning, envoys of the States General appeared in November 1660 with the Dutch Gift. The Second Dutch War (1665\u20131667) was started by English attempts to muscle in on Dutch possessions in Africa and North America. The conflict began well for the English, with the capture of New Amsterdam (renamed New York in honour of Charles's brother James, Duke of York) and a victory at the Battle of Lowestoft, but in 1667 the Dutch launched a surprise attack on England (the Raid on the Medway) when they sailed up the River Thames to where a major part of the English fleet was docked. Almost all of the ships were sunk except for the flagship, \"Royal Charles\", which was taken back to the Netherlands as a prize. The Second Dutch War ended with the signing of the Treaty of Breda.\nAs a result of the Second Dutch War, Charles dismissed Lord Clarendon, whom he used as a scapegoat for the war. Clarendon fled to France when impeached for high treason (which carried the penalty of death). Power passed to five politicians known collectively by a whimsical acronym as the Cabal\u2014the Baron \"Clifford\", Earl of \"Arlington\", Duke of \"Buckingham\", Baron \"Ashley\" (afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury) and Duke of \"Lauderdale\". In fact, the Cabal rarely acted in concert, and the court was often divided between two factions led by Arlington and Buckingham, with Arlington the more successful.\nIn 1668, England allied itself with Sweden and with its former enemy the Netherlands to oppose Louis XIV in the War of Devolution. Louis made peace with the Triple Alliance, but he continued to maintain his aggressive intentions towards the Netherlands. In 1670, Charles, seeking to solve his financial troubles, agreed to the Treaty of Dover, under which Louis would pay him \u00a3160,000 each year. In exchange, Charles agreed to supply Louis with troops and to announce his conversion to Catholicism \"as soon as the welfare of his kingdom will permit\". Louis was to provide him with 6,000 troops to suppress those who opposed the conversion. Charles endeavoured to ensure that the Treaty\u2014especially the conversion clause\u2014remained secret. It remains unclear whether Charles ever seriously intended to convert.\nMeanwhile, by a series of five charters, Charles granted the East India Company the rights to autonomous government of its territorial acquisitions, to mint money, to command fortresses and troops, to form alliances, to make war and peace, and to exercise both civil and criminal jurisdiction over its possessions in the Indies. Earlier in 1668 he leased the islands of Bombay to the company for a nominal sum of \u00a310 paid in gold. The Portuguese territories that Catherine brought with her as a dowry proved too expensive to maintain; Tangier was abandoned in 1684. In 1670, Charles granted control of the entire Hudson Bay drainage basin to the Hudson's Bay Company by royal charter, and named the territory Rupert's Land, after his cousin Prince Rupert of the Rhine, the company's first governor.\nConflict with Parliament.\nAlthough previously favourable to the Crown, the Cavalier Parliament was alienated by the king's wars and religious policies during the 1670s. In 1672, Charles issued the Royal Declaration of Indulgence, in which he purported to suspend all penal laws against Catholics and other religious dissenters. In the same year, he openly supported Catholic France and started the Third Anglo-Dutch War.\nThe Cavalier Parliament opposed the Declaration of Indulgence on constitutional grounds by claiming that the king had no right to arbitrarily suspend laws passed by Parliament. Charles withdrew the Declaration, and also agreed to the Test Act, which not only required public officials to receive the sacrament under the forms prescribed by the Church of England, but also later forced them to denounce transubstantiation and the Catholic Mass as \"superstitious and idolatrous\". Clifford, who had converted to Catholicism, resigned rather than take the oath, and died shortly after, possibly from suicide. By 1674, England had gained nothing from the Anglo-Dutch War, and the Cavalier Parliament refused to provide further funds, forcing Charles to make peace. The power of the Cabal waned, and that of Clifford's replacement Lord Danby grew.\nQueen Catherine was unable to produce an heir; her four pregnancies had ended in miscarriages and stillbirths in 1662, February 1666, May 1668, and June 1669. Charles's heir presumptive was therefore his unpopular Catholic brother, James, Duke of York. Partly to assuage public fears that the royal family was too Catholic, Charles agreed that James's daughter Mary should marry the Protestant William of Orange. In 1678, Titus Oates, who had been alternately an Anglican and Jesuit priest, falsely warned of a \"Popish Plot\" to assassinate the king, even accusing the queen of complicity. Charles did not believe the allegations, but ordered his chief minister Lord Danby to investigate. While Danby seems to have been rightly sceptical of Oates's claims, the Cavalier Parliament took them seriously. The people were seized with an anti-Catholic hysteria; judges and juries across the land condemned the supposed conspirators; numerous innocent individuals were executed.\nLater in 1678, the House of Commons impeached Danby for high treason. Although much of the nation had sought war with Catholic France, Charles had secretly negotiated with Louis XIV, trying to reach an agreement under which England would remain neutral in return for money. Danby had publicly professed that he was hostile to France, but had reservedly agreed to abide by Charles's wishes. The House of Commons did not view him as a reluctant participant in the scandal, instead believing that he was the author of the policy. To save Danby from the impeachment trial, Charles dissolved the Cavalier Parliament in January 1679.\nThe new English Parliament, which met in March of the same year, was quite hostile to Charles. Many members feared that he had intended to use the standing army to suppress dissent or impose Catholicism. However, with insufficient funds voted by Parliament, Charles was forced to gradually disband his troops. Having lost the support of Parliament, Danby resigned his post of Lord High Treasurer, but received a pardon from the king. In defiance of the royal will, the House of Commons declared that the dissolution of Parliament did not interrupt impeachment proceedings, and that the pardon was therefore invalid. When the House of Lords attempted to impose the punishment of exile\u2014which the Commons thought too mild\u2014the impeachment became stalled between the two Houses. As he had been required to do so many times during his reign, Charles bowed to his opponents' wishes, committing Danby to the Tower of London, in which he was held for another five years.\nScience.\nIn Charles's early childhood, William Cavendish, Earl of Newcastle, was governor of the royal household and Brian Duppa, the Dean of Christ Church, Oxford, was his tutor. Neither man thought that the study of science subjects was appropriate for a future king, and Newcastle even advised against studying any subject too seriously. However, as Charles grew older, the surgeon William Harvey was appointed his tutor. He was famous for his work on blood circulation in the human body and already held the position of physician to Charles I; his studies were to influence Charles's own attitude to science. As the king's chief physician, Harvey accompanied Charles I to the Battle of Edgehill and, although some details are uncertain, he had charge of Prince Charles and the Duke of York in the morning, but the two boys were back with the king for the start of battle. Later in the afternoon, with their father concerned for their safety, the two princes left the battlefield accompanied by Sir W. Howard and his pensioners.\nDuring his exile, in France, Charles continued his education, including physics, chemistry and mathematics. His tutors included the cleric John Earle, well known for his satirical book \"Microcosmographie\", with whom he studied Latin and Greek, and Thomas Hobbes, the philosopher and author of \"Leviathan\", with whom he studied mathematics. In France, Charles assisted his childhood friend, George Villiers, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, with his experiments in chemistry and alchemy, with the Earl convinced he was close to producing the philosopher's stone. Although some of Charles's studies, while abroad, may have helped to pass the time, on his return to England he was already knowledgeable in the mathematics of navigation and was a competent chemist. Such was his knowledge of naval architecture that he was able to participate in technical discussions on the subject with Samuel Pepys, William Petty and John Evelyn.\nThe new concepts and discoveries being found at this time fascinated Charles, not only in science and medicine, but in topics such as botany and gardening. A French traveller, Sorbier, while visiting the English court, was astonished by the extent of the king's knowledge. The king freely indulged in his many interests, including astronomy, which had been stimulated by a visit to Gresham College, in October 1660, to see the telescopes made by the astronomer Sir Paul Neile. Charles was so impressed by what he saw that he ordered his own 36' telescope, which he had installed in the Privy Garden at Whitehall. He would invite his friends and acquaintances to view the heavens through his new telescope and, in May 1661, Evelyn describes his visit to the Garden, with several other scientists, to view Saturn's rings. Charles also had a laboratory installed in Whitehall, within easy access to his bedroom.\nFrom the beginning of his reign, Charles appointed experts to assist him in his scientific pursuits. These included: Timothy Clarke, a celebrated anatomist, who performed some dissections for the king; Robert Morison as his chief botanist (Charles had his own botanical garden); Edmund Dickinson, a chemist and alchemist, who was tasked with carrying out experiments in the king's laboratory; Sir Thomas Williams, who was skillful in compounding and inventing medicines, some of which were prepared in the royal presence; and Nicasius le Febure (or Nicolas LeFevre), who was invited to England as royal professor of chemistry and apothecary to the king's household. Evelyn visited his laboratory with the king.\nIn addition to his many other interests, the king was fascinated by clock mechanisms and had clocks distributed all around Whitehall, including seven of them in his bedroom. Robert Bruce (later Earl of Ailesbury), a Gentleman of the Bedchamber, complained that the continual noise of the clocks chiming disturbed his sleep, whenever it was necessary for him to stay close by to the king. Also, Charles had a sundial installed in the Privy Garden, by which he could set his personal pocket watch. (For a while, the king personally recorded the performance of the latest spring-balance watch, presented to him by Robert Hooke.)\nIn 1662, Charles was pleased to grant a royal charter to a group of scientists and others who had established a formal society in 1660 to give a more academic and learned approach to science and to conduct experiments in physics and mathematics. Sir Robert Moray, a member of Charles's court, played an important part in achieving this outcome, and he was to be the first president of this new Royal Society. Over the years, Moray was an important go-between for Charles and the Society, and his standing with the king was so high that he was given access to the royal laboratory to perform his own experiments there.\nCharles never attended a Society meeting, but he remained aware of the activities there from his discussions with Society members, especially Moray. In addition, Robert Boyle gave him a private viewing of the Boyle/Hooke air-pump, which was used at many of the Wednesday meetings. However, Charles preferred experiments that had an immediate practical outcome and he laughed at the efforts of the Society members \"to weigh air\". He seemed unable to grasp the significance of the basic laws of physics being established at that time, including Boyle's law and Hooke's law and the concept of atmospheric pressure and the barometer and the importance of air for the support of life.\nAlthough Charles lost interest in the activities of the society, he continued to support scientific and commercial endeavours. He founded the Mathematical School at Christ's Hospital in 1673 and, two years later, following concerns over French advances in astronomy, he founded the Royal Observatory at Greenwich. He maintained an interest in chemistry and regularly visited his private laboratory. There, dissections observed by the king were occasionally carried out. Pepys noted in his diary that on the morning of Friday, 15 January 1669, while he was walking to Whitehall, he met the king, who invited him to view his chemistry laboratory. Pepys confessed to finding what he saw there beyond him.\nCharles developed painful gout in later life which limited the daily walks that he took regularly when younger. His keenness was now channelled to his laboratory where he would devote himself to his experiments for hours at a time, sometimes helped by Moray. Charles was particularly interested in alchemy, which he had first encountered many years earlier during his exile with the Duke of Buckingham. Charles resumed his experiments with mercury and would spend whole mornings attempting to distill it. Heating mercury in an open crucible releases mercury vapour, which is toxic and may have contributed to his later ill health.\nNavy.\nCharles had a great interest in naval affairs. He regularly attended meetings of the Admiralty Board and was the most frequent participant between January 1674 and April 1679. Samuel Pepys described the management of the navy, between 1673 and 1679, as being \"wholly performed by the immediate direction of\" the king, with the advice of the Duke of York (the future James II). The decisions made by the king alone and those made by the Admiralty Board can be differentiated in Pepys's minutes by his terminology. This makes clear that decision-making on the deployment of warships and the appointment of their commissioned officers was almost exclusively carried out by Charles. Surviving Royal records on the navy contain sailing orders and instructions which are not recorded in the Admiralty minutes, confirming this conclusion.\nCharles voluntarily took on more mundane management tasks. He signed all captains' and lieutenants' commissions, and his signature was, for example, on the warrant for Thomas Shish as master shipwright at Sheerness, with Charles having the final choice, 6 months later, of appointing Shish to the same position in the Woolwich Dockyard. He was present at most of the important ship launches and many minor ones. Since all ship names were decided on by Charles, with no apparent input from anyone else, the name of a new ship usually travelled to the launching ceremony in the king's head.\nFollowing the political crisis of 1678 the Admiralty Board demanded, in January 1679, that they regain control of some functions carried out by the King. On 10May, before Charles ultimately conceded, he appointed 88 warrant officers for the new ships being built under the thirty ship programme, to ensure that he had his own choice of people in these jobs before the Board took over. Thereafter, he used the royal prerogative to get his way on any other decision with which he disagreed. An example of Charles's continuing control of operational naval matters is his support for Arthur Herbert as commander-in-chief in the Mediterranean from 1679 to 1683. Herbert was widely disliked, and the Admiralty Board and Pepys (who were not normally allies) asked for his dismissal. The King consistently resisted, with the benefit that Herbert's tactic of relying on convoys to protect British ships was shown to have the best result.\nFurther political problems had, by 1682, left the Admiralty Board split along political lines, reducing its ability to function. (Pepys was no longer in post.) Charles took advantage of this by creating the \"Irish Squadron\". This naval force was under his direct administration, with orders going through the Secretary of State, rather than the Admiralty. The squadron was immediately used to supply the English colony in Tangier. All the detailed orders for these ships came from Charles with the Secretary of State merely passing them on.\nCharles had a good understanding of naval architecture and took decisions on the plans for new ships. For instance, among the interventions he made to the thirty ship programme, he pointed out that with the French as a likely enemy in future wars, English warships would need to spend longer at sea than when fighting the Dutch. Consequently, Charles insisted on the third-rates being built larger than the minimum size laid down by parliament. This increased the capacity of stores, but also made the ships more seaworthy and better gun platforms. He guaranteed to pay the extra costs from his own funds, but with the ships built, he then reneged on this promise. Charles also instructed that ships in the programme should be launched as soon as the hulls were ready, with remaining work to be done afloat. This freed up docks and slipways for the next ship to be started, so helping speed up the ambitious construction timetable.\nNot all Charles's efforts in naval architecture were successful. When launched, the experimental needed immediate remedial work to correct her instability. Charles supported a suggestion by Pepys that the draught of ships in the thirty ship programme could be reduced. This was strongly resisted by the shipwrights, and the King ultimately deferred to their expert opinion.\nCharles learnt to sail when he had fled the Royalist defeat in the Civil War. Taking refuge in Jersey in 1646, he was provided with a pinnace for his amusement. He regularly took the helm and was under the tuition of Royalist naval officers who had similarly left England. After the Restoration, Charles had a number of Royal Yachts and frequently chose to make use of them.\nLater years.\nCharles faced a political storm over his brother James, a Catholic, being next in line to the throne. The prospect of a Catholic monarch was vehemently opposed by the 1st Earl of Shaftesbury (a former member of the Cabal, which had fallen apart in 1673). Lord Shaftesbury's power base was strengthened when the House of Commons of 1679 introduced the Exclusion Bill, which sought to exclude the Duke of York from the line of succession. Some even sought to confer the Crown on the Protestant Duke of Monmouth, the eldest of Charles's illegitimate children. The \"Abhorrers\"\u2014those who thought the Exclusion Bill was abhorrent\u2014were named Tories (after a term for dispossessed Irish Catholic bandits), while the \"Petitioners\"\u2014those who supported a petitioning campaign in favour of the Exclusion Bill\u2014were called Whigs (after a term for rebellious Scottish Presbyterians).\nAbsolute monarch.\nFearing that the Exclusion Bill would be passed, and bolstered by some acquittals in the continuing Plot trials, which seemed to him to indicate a more favourable public mood towards Catholicism, Charles dissolved the English Parliament, for a second time that year, in mid-1679. Charles's hopes for a more moderate Parliament were not fulfilled; within a few months he had dissolved Parliament yet again, after it sought to pass the Exclusion Bill. When a new Parliament assembled at Oxford in March 1681, Charles dissolved it for a fourth time after just a few days. During the 1680s, however, popular support for the Exclusion Bill ebbed, and Charles experienced a nationwide surge of loyalty. Lord Shaftesbury was prosecuted (albeit unsuccessfully) for treason in 1681 and later fled to Holland, where he died. For the remainder of his reign, Charles ruled without Parliament.\nCharles's opposition to the Exclusion Bill angered some Protestants. Protestant conspirators formulated the Rye House Plot, a plan to murder him and the Duke of York as they returned to London after horse races in Newmarket. A great fire, however, destroyed Charles's lodgings at Newmarket, which forced him to leave the races early, thus inadvertently avoiding the planned attack. News of the failed plot was leaked. Protestant politicians such as the Earl of Essex, Algernon Sydney, Lord Russell and the Duke of Monmouth were implicated in the plot. Essex slit his own throat while imprisoned in the Tower of London; Sydney and Russell were executed for high treason on very flimsy evidence; and the Duke of Monmouth went into exile at the court of William of Orange. Lord Danby and the surviving Catholic lords held in the Tower were released and the king's Catholic brother, James, acquired greater influence at court. Titus Oates was convicted and imprisoned for defamation.\nThus through the last years of Charles's reign, his approach towards his opponents changed, and he was compared by Whigs to the contemporary Louis XIV of France, with his form of government in those years termed \"slavery\". Many of them were prosecuted and their estates seized, with Charles replacing judges and sheriffs at will and packing juries to achieve conviction. To destroy opposition in London, Charles first disenfranchised many Whigs in the 1682 municipal elections, and in 1683 the London charter was forfeited. In retrospect, the use of the judicial system by Charles (and later his brother and heir James) as a tool against opposition helped establish the idea of separation of powers between the judiciary and the Crown in Whig thought.\nDeath.\nCharles suffered a sudden apoplectic fit on the morning of 2 February 1685, and died four days later at the Palace of Whitehall, at 11:45\u00a0am, aged 54. The suddenness of his illness and death led to suspicion of poison in the minds of many, including one of the royal doctors, but a more modern medical analysis has held that the symptoms of his final illness are similar to those of uraemia, a clinical syndrome due to kidney dysfunction. Charles had a laboratory among his many interests where, prior to his illness, he had been experimenting with mercury. Mercuric poisoning can produce irreversible kidney damage, but the case for that being a cause of his death is unproven. In the days between his collapse and his death, Charles endured a variety of torturous treatments, including bloodletting, purging and cupping, in the hope of effecting a recovery, which may have exacerbated his uraemia through dehydration, rather than helping to alleviate it.\nOn his deathbed, Charles asked his brother, James, to look after his mistresses: \"be well to Portsmouth, and let not poor Nelly starve\". He told his courtiers, \"I am sorry, gentlemen, for being such a time a-dying\", and expressed regret at his treatment of his wife. On the last evening of his life he was received into the Catholic Church, in the presence of Father John Huddleston, though the extent to which he was fully conscious or committed, and with whom the idea originated, is unclear. He was buried in Westminster Abbey \"without any manner of pomp\" on 14 February.\nCharles was succeeded by his brother James II and VII.\nLegacy.\nCharles delighted and bored listeners with tales of his escape after his defeat at the Battle of Worcester for many years. Numerous accounts of his adventures were published, particularly in the immediate aftermath of the Restoration. Though not averse to his escape being ascribed to divine providence, Charles himself seems to have delighted most in his ability to sustain his disguise as a man of ordinary origins, and to move unrecognised through his realm. Ironic and cynical, Charles took pleasure in stories that demonstrated the undetectable nature of any inherent majesty he possessed.\nCharles had no legitimate children, but acknowledged at least twelve by seven mistresses, including five by Barbara Villiers, Lady Castlemaine, for whom the Dukedom of Cleveland was created. His other mistresses included Moll Davis, Nell Gwyn, Elizabeth Killigrew, Catherine Pegge, Lucy Walter and Louise de K\u00e9rouaille, Duchess of Portsmouth. As a result, in his lifetime he was often nicknamed \"Old Rowley\", the name of his favourite racehorse, notable as a stallion.\nCharles's subjects resented paying taxes that were spent on his mistresses and their children, many of whom received dukedoms or earldoms. The present Dukes of Buccleuch, Richmond, Grafton and St Albans descend from Charles in unbroken male line. Charles II is an ancestor of both King Charles III's first wife, Diana Spencer, and his second wife, Queen Camilla. Charles and Diana's son, William, Prince of Wales, is likely to be the first British monarch descended from Charles II. \nCharles's eldest son, the Duke of Monmouth, led a rebellion against James II, but was defeated at the Battle of Sedgemoor on 6 July 1685, captured and executed. James was eventually dethroned in 1688, in the course of the Glorious Revolution.\nIn the words of his contemporary John Evelyn, \"a prince of many virtues and many great imperfections, debonair, easy of access, not bloody or cruel\". John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester, wrote of Charles:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLooking back on Charles's reign, Tories tended to view it as a time of benevolent monarchy whereas Whigs perceived it as a terrible despotism. Professor Ronald Hutton summarises a polarised historiography:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHutton says Charles was a popular king in his own day and a \"legendary figure\" in British history.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe anniversary of the Restoration (which was also Charles's birthday)\u201429 May\u2014was recognised in England until the mid-nineteenth century as Oak Apple Day, after the Royal Oak in which Charles hid during his escape from the forces of Oliver Cromwell. Traditional celebrations involved the wearing of oak leaves but these have now died out. Charles II is depicted extensively in art, literature and media. Charleston, South Carolina, and South Kingstown, Rhode Island, are named after him. King Charles's Island and Charles Island are previous names of both Floreana Island and Espa\u00f1ola Island in the Galapagos Archipelago, both in his honour.\nTitles, styles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nThe official style of Charles II as king (after 1649) was \"Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.\" The claim to France was only nominal, and had been asserted by every English monarch since Edward III, regardless of the amount of French territory actually controlled.\nArms.\nCharles's coat of arms as Prince of Wales was the royal arms (which he later inherited), differenced by a label of three points Argent. His arms as monarch were: Quarterly, I and IV Grandquarterly, Azure three fleurs-de-lis Or (for France) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or (for England); II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory-counter-flory Gules (for Scotland); III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent (for Ireland).\nIssue.\nBy Lucy Walter (c.\u00a01630 \u2013 1658):\nBy Elizabeth Killigrew (1622\u20131680), daughter of Sir Robert Killigrew and wife of Francis Boyle, 1st Viscount Shannon:\nBy Catherine Pegge:\nBy Barbara Villiers (1641\u20131709), wife of Roger Palmer, 1st Earl of Castlemaine, and created Duchess of Cleveland in her own right:\nBy Nell Gwyn (1650\u20131687):\nBy Louise Ren\u00e9e de Penancoet de K\u00e9rouaille (1649\u20131734), created Duchess of Portsmouth in her own right (1673):\nBy Mary 'Moll' Davis, courtesan and actress of repute:\nOther probable mistresses include:\nLetters claiming that Marguerite or Margaret de Carteret bore Charles a son named James de la Cloche in 1646 are dismissed by historians as forgeries.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46689", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46689", "title": "Saracen", "text": "Archaic term for Arabs and later for Muslims\nThe word \"Saracen\" ( ) was commonly used in medieval Europe to refer to a person who lived in or near what the ancient Romans knew as Arabia Petraea and Arabia Deserta. Its original meaning in Greek and Latin is not known with certainty. By the early medieval period, it had come to be associated with the Arabian tribes. Following the rise of Islam, which occurred in Arabia, the word's definition evolved to refer not only to Arabs, but to Muslims as well. It eventually became the standard adjective among European Christians for all people and things from the Muslim world, regardless of whether they were Arab in origin.\nThe oldest known source mentioning \"Saracens\" in association with Muslims is the Greek-language Christian tract \"Doctrina Jacobi\", which was compiled in the Byzantine Empire amidst the Muslim conquest of the Levant. The word became particularly widespread in European societies during the Crusades, when it was used by the Roman Catholic Church and by several European Christian political and military figures.\nBy the 12th century, \"Saracen\" had developed various overlapping definitions that generally conflated peoples and cultures in the Abbasid Caliphate, comprising all those in the Near East and beyond. Such an expansion in its meaning had begun centuries earlier, as evidenced in a number of 8th-century Byzantine documents in which Muslims are called Saracens. Before the 16th century, \"Muslim\" and \"Islam\" were generally not used in European discourse, with a few isolated exceptions; \"Saracen\" was gradually rendered obsolete amidst the Age of Discovery, whereafter \"Mohammedan\" became commonplace, though it also fell out of use by the 20th century and is now considered a misnomer or impertinent by many Muslims because it may suggest that they worship Muhammad rather than God.\nEarly usage and origins.\nThe Latin term \"Saraceni\" is of unknown original meaning. There are claims of it being derived from the Semitic triliteral root \"\u0161rq\" \"east\" and \"\u0161rkt\" \"tribe, confederation\". Another possible Semitic root is \"srq\" \"to steal, rob, thief\", more specifically from the noun \"s\u0101riq\" (), pl. \"s\u0101riq\u012bn\" (), which means \"thief, marauder\". In his \"Levantine Diary\", covering the years 1699\u20131740, the Damascene writer Hamad bin Kanan al-Salhi\n() () used the term \"sarkan\" to mean \"travel on a military mission\" from the Near East to parts of Southern Europe which were under Ottoman Empire rule, particularly Cyprus and Rhodes.\nPtolemy's 2nd-century work, \"Geography\", describes \"Sarak\u0113n\u1e17\" () as a region in the northern Sinai Peninsula. Ptolemy also mentions a people called the \"Sarak\u0113no\u00ed\" () living in the northwestern Arabian Peninsula (near neighbor to the Sinai). Eusebius in his \"Ecclesiastical history\" narrates an account wherein Pope Dionysius of Alexandria mentions Saracens in a letter while describing the persecution of Christians by the Roman Emperor Decius: \"Many were, in the Arabian mountain, enslaved by the barbarous 'sarkenoi'.\" The \"Augustan History\" also refers to an attack by \"Saraceni\" on Pescennius Niger's army in Egypt in 193, but provides little information as to identifying them.\nBoth Hippolytus of Rome and Uranius mention three distinct peoples in Arabia during the first half of the third century: the \"Taeni\", the \"Saraceni\", and the \"Arabes\". The \"Taeni\", later identified with the Arab people called \"Tayy\", were located around Khaybar (an oasis north of Medina) and also in an area stretching up to the Euphrates. The \"Saraceni\" were placed north of them. These Saracens, located in the northern Hejaz, were described as people with a certain military ability who were opponents of the Roman Empire and who were classified by the Romans as barbarians.\nThe Saracens are described as forming the \"equites\" from Phoenicia and Thamud. In one document, the defeated enemies of Diocletian's campaign in the Syrian Desert are described as Saracens. Other 4th-century military reports make no mention of Arabs, but refer to \"Saracen\" groups ranging as far east as Mesopotamia who were involved in battles on both the Sasanian and Roman sides. The Saracens were named in the Roman administrative document \"Notitia Dignitatum\", dating from the time of Theodosius I in the 4th century, as comprising distinctive units in the Roman army. They were distinguished in the document from Arabs.\nMedieval usage of the term.\nNo later than the early fifth century, Jewish and Christian writers began to equate Saracens with Arabs. Saracens were associated with Ishmaelites (descendants of Abraham's firstborn Ishmael) in some strands of Jewish, Christian, and Islamic genealogical thinking. The writings of Jerome (d. 420) are the earliest known version of the claim that Ishmaelites chose to be called Saracens in order to identify with Abraham's \"free\" wife Sarah, rather than as Hagarenes, which would have highlighted their association with Abraham's \"slave woman\" Hagar. This claim was popular during the Middle Ages, but derives more from Paul's allegory in the New Testament letter to the Galatians than from historical data. The name \"Saracen\" was not indigenous among the populations so described but was applied to them by Greco-Roman historians based on Greek place names.\nAs the Middle Ages progressed, usage of the term in the Latin West changed, but its connotation remained associated with opponents of Christianity, and its exact definition is unclear. In an 8th-century polemical work, the Arab monk John of Damascus criticized the Saracens as followers of a \"false\" prophet and \"forerunner[s] to the Antichrist,\" and further connected their name to Ishmael and his expulsion.\nBy the 12th century, Medieval Europeans used the term \"Saracen\" as both an ethnic and religious marker. In some Medieval literature, Saracens were equated with Muslims in general and described as dark-skinned, while Christians lighter-skinned. An example is in \"The King of Tars\", a medieval romance. \"The Song of Roland\", an Old French 11th-century heroic poem, refers to the black skin of Saracens as their only exotic feature.\nThe term \"Saracen\" remained in use in the West as a synonym for \"Muslim\" until the 18th century. When the Age of Discovery commenced, it gradually lost popularity to the newer term \"Mohammedan\", which came into usage from at least the 16th century. After this point, \"Saracen\" enjoyed only sporadic usage (for example, in the phrase \"Indo-Saracenic architecture\") before being outmoded entirely.\nIn the Wiltshire dialect, the meaning of \"Sarsen\" (Saracen) was eventually extended to refer to anything regarded as non-Christian, whether Muslim or pagan. From that derived the still current term \"sarsen\" (a shortening of \"Saracen stone\"), denoting the kind of stone used by the builders of Stonehenge, long predating Islam.\nUse in medieval entertainment: Crusade cycle.\nThe rhyming stories of the Old French \"Crusade cycle\" were popular with medieval audiences in Northern France, Occitania and Iberia. Beginning in the late 12th century, stories about the sieges of Antioch and Jerusalem gave accounts of battle scenes and suffering, and of Saracen plunder, their silks and gold, and masterfully embroidered and woven tents. From the story of the Frankish knights at the tent of Saracen leader Corbaran:\n&lt;poem&gt;The tent was very rich, draped with brilliant silk,\nand patterned green silk was thrown over the grass,\nwith lengths of cut fabric worked with birds and beasts.\nThe cords with which it was tied are of silk,\nand the quilt was sewn with a shining, delicate \"samit\".&lt;/poem&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46690", "revid": "5862", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46690", "title": "Xenu leaflet", "text": ""}
{"id": "46693", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46693", "title": "Sherman Antitrust Act", "text": "1890 U.S. anti-monopoly law\nThe Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 (26\u00a0Stat.\u00a0https://, \u00a0https://\u2013https://) is a United States antitrust law which prescribes the rule of free competition among those engaged in commerce and consequently prohibits unfair monopolies. It was passed by Congress and is named for Senator John Sherman, its principal author.\nThe Sherman Act broadly prohibits 1) anticompetitive agreements and 2) unilateral conduct that monopolizes or attempts to monopolize the relevant market. The Act authorizes the Department of Justice to bring suits to enjoin (i.e. prohibit) conduct violating the Act, and additionally authorizes private parties injured by conduct violating the Act to bring suits for treble damages (i.e. three times as much money in damages as the violation cost them). Over time, the federal courts have developed a body of law under the Sherman Act making certain types of anticompetitive conduct per se illegal, and subjecting other types of conduct to case-by-case analysis regarding whether the conduct unreasonably restrains trade.\nThe law attempts to prevent the artificial raising of prices by restriction of trade or supply. \"Innocent monopoly\", or monopoly achieved solely by merit, is legal, but acts by a monopolist to artificially preserve that status, or nefarious dealings to create a monopoly, are not. The purpose of the Sherman Act is not to protect competitors from harm from legitimately successful businesses, nor to prevent businesses from gaining honest profits from consumers, but rather to preserve a competitive marketplace to protect consumers from abuses.\nBackground.\nIn \"Spectrum Sports, Inc. v. McQuillan\" 506 U.S. 447 (1993) the Supreme Court said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAccording to its authors, it was not intended to impact market gains obtained by honest means, by benefiting the consumers more than the competitors. Senator George Hoar of Massachusetts, another author of the Sherman Act, stated that \"a man who merely by superior skill and intelligence [...] got the whole business because nobody could do it as well as he could was not a monopolist,\" but that it was monopoly if their business practices \"made it impossible for other persons to engage in fair competition\".\nIn 1937, the business Apex Hosiery suffered losses when strikers occupied their business, and prevented shipments of orders, including shipments to other states. Apex attempted to sue the union leader for treble damages as provided by the Sherman Act. Apex argued that the union had interfered with interstate commerce. The court held that the Sherman Act did not apply to the unlawful occupation of a business.\nThe Supreme Court stated in the case \"Apex Hosiery Co. v. Leader\" http://, http://-93 and n. 15:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The legislative history of the Sherman Act, as well as the decisions of this Court interpreting it, show that it was not aimed at policing interstate transportation or movement of goods and property. The legislative history and the voluminous literature which was generated in the course of the enactment and during fifty years of litigation of the Sherman Act give no hint that such was its purpose.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They do not suggest that, in general, state laws or law enforcement machinery were inadequate to prevent local obstructions or interferences with interstate transportation, or presented any problem requiring the interposition of federal authority. \nIn 1890, when the Sherman Act was adopted, there were only a few federal statutes imposing penalties for obstructing or misusing interstate transportation. With an expanding commerce, many others have since been enacted safeguarding transportation in interstate commerce as the need was seen, including statutes declaring conspiracies to interfere or actual interference with interstate commerce by violence or threats of violence to be felonies. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The law was enacted in the era of \"trusts\" and of \"combinations\" of businesses and of capital organized and directed to control of the market by suppression of competition in the marketing of goods and services, the monopolistic tendency of which had become a matter of public concern. The goal was to prevent restraints of free competition in business and commercial transactions which tended to restrict production, raise prices, or otherwise control the market to the detriment of purchasers or consumers of goods and services, all of which had come to be regarded as a special form of public injury. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For that reason the phrase \"restraint of trade,\" which, as will presently appear, had a well understood meaning in common law, was made the means of defining the activities prohibited. The addition of the words \"or commerce among the several States\" was not an additional kind of restraint to be prohibited by the Sherman Act, but was the means used to relate the prohibited restraint of trade to interstate commerce for constitutional purposes, Atlantic Cleaners &amp; Dyers v. United States, 286 U. S. 427, 286 U. S. 434, so that Congress, through its commerce power, might suppress and penalize restraints on the competitive system which involved or affected interstate commerce. Because many forms of restraint upon commercial competition extended across state lines so as to make regulation by state action difficult or impossible, Congress enacted the Sherman Act, 21 Cong.Rec. 2456. It was in this sense of preventing restraints on commercial competition that Congress exercised \"all the power it possessed.\" Atlantic Cleaners &amp; Dyers v. United States, supra, 286 U. S. 435.\nAt \"Addyston Pipe and Steel Company v. United States\", 85 F.2d 1, \"affirmed\", http:// U.S. 211;\nAt \"Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey v. United States\", http://, http://-58.\nProvisions.\nOriginal text.\nThe Sherman Act is divided into three sections. Section 1 delineates and prohibits specific means of anticompetitive conduct, while Section 2 deals with end results that are anti-competitive in nature. Thus, these sections supplement each other in an effort to prevent businesses from violating the spirit of the Act, while technically remaining within the letter of the law. Section 3 simply extends the provisions of Section 1 to U.S. territories and the District of Columbia.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Section 1:\nEvery contract, combination in the form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, is hereby declared to be illegal.\nSection 2:\nEvery person who shall monopolize, or attempt to monopolize, or combine or conspire with any other person or persons, to monopolize any part of the trade or commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor [. . . ]\nSubsequent legislation expanding its scope.\nThe Clayton Antitrust Act, passed in 1914, proscribes certain additional activities that had been discovered to fall outside the scope of the Sherman Antitrust Act. The Clayton Antitrust Act added certain practices to the list of impermissible activities:\nThe Clayton Antitrust Act specifically states that unions are exempt from this ruling.\nThe Robinson\u2013Patman Act of 1936 amended the Clayton Act. The amendment proscribed certain anti-competitive practices in which manufacturers engaged in price discrimination against equally-situated distributors.\nLegacy.\nThe federal government began filing cases under the Sherman Antitrust Act in 1890. Some cases were successful and others were not; many took several years to decide, including appeals.\nNotable cases filed under the act include:\nLegal application.\nConstitutional basis for legislation.\nCongress claimed power to pass the Sherman Act through its constitutional authority to regulate interstate commerce. Therefore, federal courts only have jurisdiction to apply the Act to conduct that restrains or substantially affects either interstate commerce. (Congress also has ultimate authority over economic rules within the District of Columbia and US territories under the 17th enumerated power and the , respectively.) This requires that the plaintiff must show that the conduct occurred during the flow of interstate commerce or had an appreciable effect on some activity that occurs during interstate commerce.\nElements.\nA Section 1 violation has three elements:\nA Section 2 monopolization violation has two elements:\nSection 2 also bans attempted monopolization, which has the following elements:\nViolations \"per se\" and violations of the \"rule of reason\".\nViolations of the Sherman Act fall (loosely) into two categories:\nModern trends.\nInference of conspiracy.\nA modern trend has increased difficulty for antitrust plaintiffs as courts have come to hold plaintiffs to increasing burdens of pleading. Under older Section 1 precedent, it was not settled how much evidence was required to show a conspiracy. For example, a conspiracy could be inferred based on parallel conduct, etc. That is, plaintiffs were only required to show that a conspiracy was conceivable. Since the 1970s, however, courts have held plaintiffs to higher standards, giving antitrust defendants an opportunity to resolve cases in their favor before significant discovery under FRCP 12(b)(6). That is, to overcome a motion to dismiss, plaintiffs, under \"Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly\", must plead facts consistent with FRCP 8(a) sufficient to show that a conspiracy is plausible (and not merely conceivable or possible). This protects defendants from bearing the costs of antitrust \"fishing expeditions\"; however it deprives plaintiffs of perhaps their only tool to acquire evidence (discovery).\nManipulation of market.\nSecond, courts have employed more sophisticated and principled definitions of markets. Market definition is necessary, in rule of reason cases, for the plaintiff to prove a conspiracy is harmful. It is also necessary for the plaintiff to establish the market relationship between conspirators to prove their conduct is within the per se rule.\nIn early cases, it was easier for plaintiffs to show market relationship, or dominance, by tailoring market definition, even if it ignored fundamental principles of economics. In \"U.S. v. Grinnell\", 384 U.S. 563 (1966), the trial judge, Charles Wyzanski, composed the market only of alarm companies with services in every state, tailoring out any local competitors; the defendant stood alone in this market, but had the court added up the entire national market, it would have had a much smaller share of the national market for alarm services that the court purportedly used. The appellate courts affirmed this finding; however, today, an appellate court would likely find this definition to be flawed. Modern courts use a more sophisticated market definition that does not permit as manipulative a definition.\nMonopoly.\nSection 2 of the Act forbids monopoly. In Section 2 cases, the court has, again on its own initiative, drawn a distinction between coercive and innocent monopoly. The act is not meant to punish businesses that come to dominate their market passively or on their own merit, only those that intentionally dominate the market through misconduct, which generally consists of conspiratorial conduct of the kind forbidden by Section 1 of the Sherman Act, or Section 3 of the Clayton Act.\nApplication of the act outside pure commerce.\nWhile the Act was aimed at regulating businesses, its prohibition of contracts restricting commerce was applied to the activities of labor unions until the 1930s. This is because unions were characterized as cartels as well (cartels of laborers). In 1914 the Clayton Act created exceptions for certain union activities, but the Supreme Court ruled in \"Duplex Printing Press Co. v. Deering\" that the actions allowed by the Act were already legal. Congress included provisions in the Norris\u2013La Guardia Act in 1932 to more explicitly exempt organized labor from antitrust enforcement, and the Supreme Court upheld these exemptions in \"United States v. Hutcheson\" https://.\nPreemption by Section 1 of state statutes that restrain competition.\nTo determine whether the Act preempts a state law, courts will engage in a two-step analysis, as set forth by the Supreme Court in \"Rice v. Norman Williams Co.\"\nThe antitrust laws allow coincident state regulation of competition. The Supreme Court enunciated the test for determining when a state statute is in irreconcilable conflict with Section 1 of the Sherman Act in Rice v. Norman Williams Co. Different standards apply depending on whether a statute is attacked on its face or for its effects.\nA statute can be condemned on its face only when it mandates, authorizes or places irresistible pressure on private parties to engage in conduct constituting a per se violation of Section 1.\nIf the statute does not mandate conduct violating a per se rule, the conduct is analyzed under the rule of reason, which requires an examination of the conduct's actual effects on competition. If unreasonable anticompetitive effects are created, the required conduct violates Section 1 and the statute is in irreconcilable conflict with the Sherman Act. Then statutory arrangement is analyzed to determine whether it qualifies as \"state action\" and is thereby saved from preemption.\n\"Rice\" sets out guidelines to aid in preemption analysis. Preemption should not occur \"simply because in a hypothetical situation a private party's compliance with the statute might cause him to violate the antitrust laws\". This language suggests that preemption occurs only if economic analysis determines that the statutory requirements create \"an unacceptable and unnecessary risk of anticompetitive effect\", and does not occur simply because it is possible to use the statute in an anticompetitive manner. It should not mean that preemption is impossible whenever both procompetitive and anticompetitive results are conceivable. The per se rule \"reflects the judgment that such cases are not sufficiently common or important to justify the time and expense necessary to identify them\".\nAnother important, yet, in the context of \"Rice\", ambiguous guideline regarding preemption by Section 1 is the Court's statement that a \"state statute is not preempted by the federal antitrust laws simply because the state scheme might have an anticompetitive effect\". The meaning of this statement is clarified by examining the three cases cited in \"Rice\" to support the statement.\nIn \"New Motor Vehicle Board v. Orrin W. Fox Co.\", automobile manufacturers and retail franchisees contended that the Sherman Act preempted a statute requiring manufacturers to secure the permission of a state board before opening a new dealership if and only if a competing dealer protested. They argued that a conflict existed because the statute permitted \"auto dealers to invoke state power for the purpose of restraining intrabrand competition\".\nIn \"Exxon Corp. v. Governor of Maryland\", oil companies challenged a state statute requiring uniform statewide gasoline prices in situations where the Robinson-Patman Act would permit charging different prices. They reasoned that the Robinson-Patman Act is a qualification of our \"more basic national policy favoring free competition\" and that any state statute altering \"the competitive balance that Congress struck between the Robinson-Patman and Sherman Acts\" should be preempted.\nIn both \"New Motor Vehicle\" and \"Exxon\", the Court upheld the statutes and rejected the arguments presented as\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Merely another way of stating that the ... statute will have an anticompetitive effect. In this sense, there is a conflict between the statute and the central policy of the Sherman Act \u2013 'our charter of economic liberty'. ... Nevertheless, this sort of conflict cannot itself constitute a sufficient reason for invalidating the ... statute. For if an adverse effect on competition were, in and of itself, enough to render a state statute invalid, the States' power to engage in economic regulation would be effectively destroyed.\nThis indicates that not every anticompetitive effect warrants preemption. In neither \"Exxon\" nor \"New Motor Vehicle\" did the created effect constitute an antitrust violation. The \"Rice\" guideline therefore indicates that only when the effect unreasonably restrains trade, and is therefore a violation, can preemption occur.\nThe third case cited to support the \"anticompetitive effect\" guideline is \"Joseph E. Seagram &amp; Sons v. Hostetter\", in which the Court rejected a facial Sherman Act preemption challenge to a statute requiring that persons selling liquor to wholesalers affirm that the price charged was no higher than the lowest price at which sales were made anywhere in the United States during the previous month. Since the attack was a facial one, and the state law required no per se violations, no preemption could occur. The Court also rejected the possibility of preemption due to Sherman Act violations stemming from misuse of the statute. The Court stated that rather than imposing \"irresistible economic pressure\" on sellers to violate the Sherman Act, the statute \"appears firmly anchored to the assumption that the Sherman Act will deter any attempts by the appellants to preserve their ... price level [in one state] by conspiring to raise the prices at which liquor is sold elsewhere in the country\". Thus, \"Seagram\" indicates that when conduct required by a state statute combines with other conduct that, taken together, constitutes an illegal restraint of trade, liability may be imposed for the restraint without requiring preemption of the state statute.\n\"Rice v. Norman Williams Co.\" supports this misuse limitation on preemption. \"Rice\" states that while particular conduct or arrangements by private parties would be subject to per se or rule of reason analysis to determine liability, \"[t]here is no basis ... for condemning the statute itself by force of the Sherman Act.\"\nThus, when a state requires conduct analyzed under the rule of reason, a court must carefully distinguish rule of reason analysis for preemption purposes from the analysis for liability purposes. To analyze whether preemption occurs, the court must determine whether the inevitable effects of a statutory restraint unreasonably restrain trade. If they do, preemption is warranted unless the statute passes the appropriate state action tests. But, when the statutory conduct combines with other practices in a larger conspiracy to restrain trade, or when the statute is used to violate the antitrust laws in a market in which such a use is not compelled by the state statute, the private party might be subjected to antitrust liability without preemption of the statute.\nEvidence from legislative history.\nThe Act was not intended to regulate existing state statutes regulating commerce within state borders. The House committee, in reporting the bill which was adopted without change, declared:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;No attempt is made to invade the legislative authority of the several States or even to occupy doubtful grounds. No system of laws can be devised by Congress alone which would effectually protect the people of the United States against the evils and oppression of trusts and monopolies. Congress has no authority to deal, generally, with the subject within the States, and the States have no authority to legislate in respect of commerce between the several States or with foreign nations.\nSee also the statement on the floor of the House by Mr. Culberson, in charge of the bill,\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no attempt to exercise any doubtful authority on this subject, but the bill is confined strictly and alone to subjects over which, confessedly, there is no question about the legislative power of Congress.\nAnd see the statement of Senator Edmunds, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee which reported out the bill in the form in which it passed, that in drafting that bill the committee thought that \"we would frame a bill that should be clearly within our constitutional power, that we would make its definition out of terms that were well known to the law already, and would leave it to the courts in the first instance to say how far they could carry it or its particular definitions as applicable to each particular case as the occasion might arise.\"\nSimilarly Senator Hoar, a member of that committee who with Senator Edmunds was in charge of the bill, stated\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now we are dealing with an offense against interstate or international commerce, which the State cannot regulate by penal enactment, and we find the United States without any common law. The great thing that this bill does, except affording a remedy, is to extend the common-law principles, which protected fair competition in trade in old times in England, to international and interstate commerce in the United States.\nCriticism.\nAlan Greenspan, in his essay entitled \"Antitrust\", described the Sherman Act as stifling innovation and harming society. \"No one will ever know what new products, processes, machines, and cost-saving mergers failed to come into existence, killed by the Sherman Act before they were born. No one can ever compute the price that all of us have paid for that Act which, by inducing less effective use of capital, has kept our standard of living lower than would otherwise have been possible.\" Greenspan summarized the nature of antitrust law as \"a jumble of economic irrationality and ignorance\". Greenspan at that time was a disciple and friend of Ayn Rand, and he first published \"Antitrust\" in Rand's monthly publication \"The Objectivist Newsletter.\" Rand, who described herself as \"a radical for capitalism\", opposed antitrust law not only on economic grounds but also morally, as a violation of property rights, asserting that the \"meaning and purpose\" of antitrust law is \"the penalizing of ability for being ability, the penalizing of success for being success, and the sacrifice of productive genius to the demands of envious mediocrity\".\nIn 1890, Representative William E. Mason said \"trusts have made products cheaper, have reduced prices; but if the price of oil, for instance, were reduced to one cent a barrel, it would not right the wrong done to people of this country by the trusts which have destroyed legitimate competition and driven honest men from legitimate business enterprise.\" Consequently, if the primary goal of the act is to protect consumers, and consumers are protected by lower prices, the act may be harmful if it reduces economy of scale, a price-lowering mechanism, by breaking up big businesses. Mason put small business survival, a justice interest, on a level concomitant with the pure economic rationale of consumer interest.\nEconomist Thomas DiLorenzo notes that Senator Sherman sponsored the 1890 William McKinley tariff just three months after the Sherman Act, and agrees with \"The New York Times\" which wrote on October 1, 1890: \"That so-called Anti-Trust law was passed to deceive the people and to clear the way for the enactment of this Pro-Trust law relating to the tariff.\" The \"New York Times\" went on to assert that Sherman merely supported this \"humbug\" of a law \"in order that party organs might say\u00a0... 'Behold! We have attacked the trusts. The Republican Party is the enemy of all such rings.'\" Dilorenzo writes: \"Protectionists did not want prices paid by consumers to fall. But they also understood that to gain political support for high tariffs they would have to assure the public that industries would not combine to increase prices to politically prohibitive levels. Support for both an antitrust law and tariff hikes would maintain high prices while avoiding the more obvious bilking of consumers.\"\nRobert Bork was well known for his outspoken criticism of the antitrust regime. Another conservative legal scholar and judge, Richard Posner of the Seventh Circuit, does not condemn the entire regime, but expresses concern with the potential that it could be applied to create inefficiency, rather than to avoid inefficiency. Posner further believes, along with a number of others, including Bork, that genuinely inefficient cartels and coercive monopolies, the target of the act, would be self-corrected by market forces, making the strict penalties of antitrust legislation unnecessary. Conversely, liberal U.S. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas criticized the judiciary for interpreting and enforcing the antitrust law unequally: \"From the beginning it [the Sherman Act] has been applied by judges hostile to its purposes, friendly to the empire builders who wanted it emasculated\u00a0... trusts that were dissolved reintegrated in new forms\u00a0... It is ironic that the Sherman Act was truly effective in only one respect, and that was when it was applied to labor unions. Then the courts read it with a literalness that never appeared in their other decisions.\"\nAccording to a 2018 study in the journal \"Public Choice\", \"Senator John Sherman of Ohio was motivated to introduce an antitrust bill in late 1889 partly as a way of enacting revenge on his political rival, General and former Governor Russell Alger of Michigan, because Sherman believed that Alger personally had cost him the presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican national convention\u00a0... Sherman was able to pursue his revenge motive by combining it with the broader Republican goals of preserving high tariffs and attacking the trusts.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46696", "revid": "49579902", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46696", "title": "Machaeridia (annelid)", "text": "Extinct class of annelid worms\nMachaeridia is an extinct group of armoured, segmented annelid worms, known from the Early Ordovician (Late Tremadoc) to Carboniferous. It consists of three distinct families: the plumulitids, turrilepadids and lepidocoleids.\nFossils.\nOnly the calcitic sclerites (\"armour plates\") of these worms tend to be preserved in the fossil record. These are tiny, and usually found disarticulated: articulated specimens reach about a centimeter in length, and are incredibly rare \u2013 hence the limited degree of study since their description in 1857.\nThe machaeridians are characterized by having serialized rows of calcitic shell plates. The dorsal sclerites were convex and almost isometric; lateral sclerites were flatter and longer. The plates comprised two calcite layers: the outer layer is thin and formed by lamellar deposition, whereas new elements were added to the thicker inner layer as it grew. Scales are ridged with growth lines, implying that they grew episodically. A few taxa experimented with different approaches to scale formation; some were only very weakly calcified and may have mainly been organic in nature. They were never moulted, and each scale could be moved with an attached muscle.\nThe front two segments of the machaeridians were commonly different from the rest, bearing fewer spiny projections.\nThe plumulitids are flattened from above and looks much like the coat of mail armour of chitons. The two other families are laterally compressed and some lepidocoleids formed a dorsal hinge, which make these machaeridians look like a string of bivalves.\nEcology.\nMachaeridians are often found in association with stylophorans - the cornutes and mitrates. This suggests that they possessed a similar ecology. They probably fed on organic detritus, perhaps even the faeces of the accompanying stylophorans.\nTheir scales almost certainly performed a defensive role.\nThe organisms would have had limited ability to flex to the right and left (in the sagittal plane), but would have been able to roll up. While most possessed bilateral symmetry, the scales on the right and left side of \"Turrilepas wrightiana\" are different in shape and form.\nThe Plumulitid machaeridians would have moved across the surface of the sea floor using parapodia, whereas the fully armoured Turrelepids and Lepidocoelids burrowed in a peristaltic fashion reminiscent of their evolutionary cousins, the earthworms. This burrowing role has subjected them to the same evolutionary pressures which affect burrowing bivalves; convergent evolution as a result of their shared function probably contributed to early suggestions that the machaeridians should be classified with the molluscs.\nTaxonomic affinity.\nHistorically the group has been assigned to the echinoderms, barnacles, annelids and mollusks. Relationships to other Cambrian forms (such as the Halkieriids) have been proposed and discounted. In 2008, the discovery of a fossil preserving soft tissue (including chaetae and parapodia) established an annelid affinity. Machaeridians represent the only instance of this group developing calcitic armour (notwithstanding certain polychaetes that integrate calcite into their chaetae). The exact position with annelids remains unresolved, though some characters indicate a relationship to Aphroditacean annelids (Vinther et al. 2008). In an accompanying commentary, Jean-Bernard Caron suggested that machaeridians must be a stem group based on number of specialised features. However, one cannot assess crown group/stem group affinities based on autapomorphies, but on shared morphological traits or the lack thereof. He also suggested that machaeridians might be polyphyletic, but machaerdians are a well defined group with a number of shared characters and morphological gradations among all three families.\nA study in 2019 recognized machaeridians as phyllodocids based on their jaws.\nArticulated specimens.\nArticulated machaeridians are known from:\n... and possibly elsewhere\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46697", "revid": "49064472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46697", "title": "Halkeria", "text": ""}
{"id": "46698", "revid": "31322263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46698", "title": "Property damage", "text": "Damage or destruction of property caused by negligence, willful destruction, or act of nature\nProperty damage (sometimes called damage to property) is the damage or destruction of real or tangible personal property, caused by negligence, willful destruction, or an act of nature. Destruction of property (sometimes called property destruction, or criminal damage in England and Wales) is a sub-type of property damage that involves damage to property that results from willful misconduct and is punishable as a crime.\nDestruction of property encompasses vandalism (deliberate damage, destruction, or defacement), building implosion (destroying property with explosives), and arson (destroying property with fire), and similar crimes that involve unlawful infliction of damage to or destruction of personal property or real property.\nProperty damage in insurance claims.\nProperty damage also refers to loss of tangible property in insurance loss claims, related to residential and commercial buildings, as well as motor vehicles. In motor vehicle accidents, typically there may be loss to structures, personal items, and vehicles, which would be referred to as property damage.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46699", "revid": "44912316", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46699", "title": "Electoral fusion in the United States", "text": "Electoral strategy\nElectoral fusion in the United States is an arrangement where two or more United States political parties on a ballot list the same candidate, allowing that candidate to receive votes on multiple party lines in the same election.\nElectoral fusion is also known as fusion voting, cross endorsement, multiple party nomination, multi-party nomination, plural nomination and ballot freedom.\nElectoral fusion was once widespread in the U.S. and legal in every state. However, as of 2024, it remains legal and common only in New York and Connecticut.\nOverview.\nIn 2016, \"Business Insider\" wrote: \"Fusion voting gives voters a chance to support a major candidate while registering their unhappiness with that candidate's party. A cross-endorsement from a smaller party like the Working Families Party can also help inform voters about where candidates stand on certain issues\".\nIn 2019, \"The Nation\" wrote: \"Fusion is a response to the winner-take-all electoral system. It solves the 'wasted vote' or 'spoiler' dilemmas that otherwise plague third parties, and allows citizens who don't fit neatly into the Democratic or Republican boxes to nevertheless participate constructively in politics\".\nBefore the Civil War, fusion voting was a common electoral tactic of abolitionist forces, who formed a number of anti-slavery third parties, including the Liberty and Free Soil parties. These and other abolitionist third parties cross-nominated major party candidates running under the Whig label, fusing more than one party behind a single candidate.\nAfter the Civil War, agrarian interest groups and the political parties they founded continued to use fusion voting to form alliances between third parties and the weaker of the two major parties, usually the Democrats in the West and Midwest. In the 19th and early 20th century, minor parties used fusion as a way to signal that their support for a major party candidate brought a meaningful number of voters to the candidate. Votes for fusion candidates were tallied first by party, then added together to produce the outcome. Historian Peter Argersinger argues that this helped \"maintain a significant third party tradition by guaranteeing that dissenters' votes could be more than symbolic protest\". Fusion allowed minor parties to avoid the \"wasted vote\" and \"spoiler\" dilemmas that small parties face in a non-proportional voting system.\nThe People's Party (also known as the Populists) is regarded as the most successful third party of the era. That success produced a counter-reaction from the dominant major parties, who then used state legislatures to enact bans against fusion in the late nineteenth and early 20th century. In northern and western states, fusion was largely banned by Republican-led legislatures. One Republican Minnesota state legislator said: \"We don't propose to allow the Democrats to make allies of the Populists, Prohibitionists, or any other party, and get up combination tickets against us. We can whip them single-handed, but don't intend to fight all creation.\" In southern states, fusion was largely banned by Democrats who supported Jim Crow, in an attempt to prevent political alliances between newly-enfranchised Black voters and poor white farmers.\nMost states banned fusion by the early 20th century. South Dakota banned the practice in 1999, Delaware banned it in 2011, and South Carolina banned it in 2022. In \"Timmons v. Twin Cities Area New Party\" (1997), the US Supreme Court ruled that prohibiting electoral fusion does not violate the First Amendment of the Constitution.\nElectoral fusion was once widespread in the US, but as of 2024, it remains legal and common only in New York and Connecticut. It is partially legal in three others: California allows fusion in presidential elections only, and Pennsylvania and Maryland permit it in certain elections, including but not limited to the judiciary. In Oregon and Vermont, a system of dual-labeling exists, which allows a candidate to list multiple party endorsements on a single line, but disallows the traditional fusion system in which a minor party has its own ballot line and votes are tallied by party. In New Hampshire, fusion is legal in rare cases when primary elections are won by write-in candidates.\nAs of 2024, the Alianza de Pa\u00eds in Puerto Rico, the New Jersey Moderate Party, the Common Sense Party in Michigan and the United Kansas Party are attempting to use litigation to bring back fusion voting in their areas.\nNew Mexico, Massachusetts, and Rhode Island had bills to allow fusion voting.\nHistorical examples.\nPresidential elections.\nIn 1872, both the newly formed Liberal Republican Party and the Democratic Party nominated the Liberal Republican Horace Greeley as their candidate for US President: \"If [the Democratic Party] was to stand any chance at all against Grant, it must avoid putting up a candidate of its own who would merely split the opposition vote. It must take Greeley.\"\nIn the presidential election of 1896, William Jennings Bryan was nominated by both the Democratic Party and the Populist Party, albeit with different vice presidential candidates, Arthur Sewall for the Democrats and Thomas E. Watson for the Populists. This election led to the downfall of the Populist Party, especially in Southern states (such as Watson's Georgia, as well as North Carolina and Tennessee) where the Populist party had engaged in electoral fusion or other alliances with Republicans against the dominant Bourbon Democrats.\nIn the 1936 and 1940, the American Labor Party nominated Franklin Roosevelt for president, and in 1944, the Liberal Party of New York cross-nominated Roosevelt, fusing with the ALP. Roosevelt won the state of New York in each election, but in 1940 and 1944 he would not have won New York without the support of votes gained via the fusion parties and their voters.\nDonald Trump appeared on the 2016 presidential ballot in California with two ballot labels by his name, as the nominee of both the Republican Party and the American Independent Party, a small far-right party. Trump was the first fusion presidential candidate on the California ballot in at least eighty years.\nConnecticut.\nConnecticut allows cross-endorsements, listing candidates on more than one ballot line. Minor parties include the Working Families Party and Independent Party. In 2010, Dannel Malloy won within the Working Families' margin.\nNew York.\nIn 1936, labor leaders in New York City took advantage of fusion and\u00a0founded the American Labor Party (ALP). Their immediate goal was to provide a way for New Yorkers who despised the Tammany Hall political machine to support Franklin Roosevelt without voting for the Democratic Party. In its first showing at the polls, the party garnered a significant amount of the vote in New York City but was not important with regard to Roosevelt's victory. In the 1937 election cycle, the ALP built on its past performance by electing members to the city council, and by delivering so many votes to Mayor Fiorello La Guardia that the \"New York Times\" ran a front page article declaring that the ALP held the balance of power in city and state politics. The importance of the ALP was demonstrated again in 1938 when the party provided the margin of victory for the Democratic candidate for Governor, and in 1940 when the ALP did the same for President Roosevelt. In the 1944 presidential election, fusion provided CIO unions in New York an opportunity to build and back a labor party, an uncommon occurrence in the US. Labor leaders knew that fusion permitted them to field candidates and win elections on the American Labor Party line in local elections, and to back Democrats in statewide or national races where they did not have the capacity to field successful candidates. Given the presence of fusion in New York, the Greater New York Industrial Union Council (GNYIUC), the CIO's local labor federation in New York, formally affiliated with the party making it the political arm of the New York CIO. This relationship would continue until 1948 when the GNYIUC opted to back Henry Wallace for president, instead of using fusion to back President Truman. This led to internal conflicts within the CIO and ultimately contributed to the decision by the national CIO to revoke the charter of the GNYIUC, thereby ending its relationship with the ALP.\nAs of 2023, to obtain or maintain automatic ballot access, a party's candidate for Governor in midterm election years or President in presidential years must receive either 130,000 votes or 2% of votes cast (whichever is greater) on that party's line.\nOther parties, such as the Libertarian Party of New York and the Green Party of New York, have sought ballot access by first getting a gubernatorial candidate on the ballot via petition (by collecting 45,000 valid signatures of registered voters), and then by getting 130,000 votes for that candidate on their line. As a general rule, neither party uses electoral fusion, and both rely on their own candidates. The Green Party, which had first achieved ballot status in 1998, failed to gain 50,000 votes (then the requirement) and also lost its ballot status in 2002, but regained its line when the 2010 election results were certified. In 2018, Larry Sharpe, the Libertarian Party candidate for governor in New York, received over 90,000 votes, giving the party ballot status for the first time in its history.\nIn July 2019, the New York Legislature passed a budget bill that included the creation of a Public Campaign Financing Commission, which was given authority to investigate and create rules for public financing of campaigns. The Conservative Party of New York and the Working Families Party each filed lawsuits against the state in response, alleging that the commission was a disguised attempt to end fusion voting and thus the existence of New York's third parties.\nOregon.\nPrior to 1958, Oregon practiced a form of fusion that required the state to list multiple nominating parties on the candidate's ballot line. Sylvester Pennoyer was elected governor in 1886 and 1890 as a candidate of the Democratic and People's parties. In 1906, seven members of the Oregon House were also elected as candidates of the People's Party and either the Democratic or Republican parties. In 2008, a lawsuit was brought by the Independent Party of Oregon against the Oregon Secretary of State claiming that modifications to the ballot design statute in 1995 once again required the state to list multiple nominating parties on the candidate's ballot line. The lawsuit gave rise to legislation to allow candidates to list up to three party labels after their name. This bill passed both houses of the Oregon legislature during the 2009 legislative session. Governor Ted Kulongoski signed the bill into law on 23 July 2009.\nPennsylvania.\nIn Pennsylvania, fusion can occur when members of a party write in the name of a member of a different party in a primary election and secure enough write-in votes to nominate that party's candidate. For example, if Bob Jones is running for school board in a primary election as a Democrat and secures both enough votes from members of his own party as well as enough write-in votes from members of the Republican Party, then electoral fusion occurs, and Bob will appear on the ballot as both a Republican and a Democrat. Similarly, a member of one party may lose their own party's nomination in a primary election but gain enough write-in votes from members of the opposing party to win that party's nomination. For example, in May 2023, Stephen Zappala lost the Democratic primary for Allegheny County District Attorney to challenger Matt Dugan. However, although Zappala is a Democrat, he received the requisite number (500 or more) of write-in votes from Republicans to appear as a Republican on the ballot in November 2023. Running on the ballot as a Republican, Zappala won the general election in November 2023, beating Dugan.\nVermont.\nIn Vermont, candidates can only run in one party primary, but can run write-in campaigns in others. Political science professor Jack Gierzynski said \"When parties work together in a fusion sense, they're much more likely to be successful. ... [Progressives] running on a fusion ticket has had a big influence on moving the public policy needle to the left.\"\nFusion voting had been at risk due to a sore loser provision of ranked-choice voting legislation.\nWisconsin.\nIn Milwaukee, Wisconsin, during the heyday of the sewer socialists, the Republican and Democratic parties would agree not to run candidates against each other in some districts, concentrating instead on defeating the socialists. These candidates were usually called non-partisan, but sometimes were termed fusion candidates instead.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46701", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46701", "title": "Bodily harm", "text": "Legal term\nBodily harm is a legal term of art used in the definition of both statutory and common law offences in Australia, Canada, England and Wales and other common law jurisdictions. It is a synonym for injury or bodily injury and similar expressions, though it may be used with a precise and limited meaning in any given jurisdiction. The expression grievous bodily harm first appeared in a statute in Lord Ellenborough's Act (1803).\nCanada.\nIn the Canadian Criminal Code, \"bodily harm\" is defined as \"any hurt or injury to a person that interferes with the health or comfort of the person and that is more than merely transient or trifling in nature.\"\nEngland and Wales.\nThe expression is not defined by any statute. It currently appears in a number of offences under the Offences against the Person Act 1861 (ss. 18, 20, 23, 26, 28, 29, 31, 35, and 47) and in the offence of burglary under the Theft Act 1968 (s. 9). It is also used in the definition of murder (as it appears in case law) in the guise of grievous bodily harm.\nPsychiatric disorder\nNon-physical or \"psychiatric injury\" can be considered \"bodily harm\" whether \"actual\" or \"grievous\", but there must be formal medical evidence to verify the injury.\nIn R v Ireland, R v Burstow, Lord Steyn said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The proposition that the Victorian legislator when enacting sections 18, 20 and 47 of the Act 1861, would not have had in mind psychiatric illness is no doubt correct. Psychiatry was in its infancy in 1861.\nIn modern times, the practice of statutory interpretation frequently refers to the actual intention of the draftsman as expressed in the words of the Act, but considered in the light of contemporary knowledge. http:// applied this approach. Hobhouse LJ. said the prosecution \"chose to introduce into the case an allegation that even if Mr Martins had suffered no physical injury at all as a result of the assault upon him by the Appellant, he had nevertheless been reduced to a mental state which in itself, without more, amounted to actual bodily harm. The only evidence to which the prosecution could point in support of this allegation was the evidence of Mr Martins that he felt abused and humiliated, that he had been threatened with further violence, and that he was very frightened. There was no medical or psychiatric evidence to support the allegation. There was no evidence that he was in a state of shock at any time prior to receiving the injuries which he suffered as a result of falling from the window.\"\nHobhouse LJ. said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The first question on the present appeal is whether the inclusion of the word \"bodily\" is the phrase \"actual bodily harm\" limits harm to harm to the skin, flesh and bones of the victim. Mr Justice Lynskey rejected this submission. In our judgment he was right to do so. The body of the victim includes all parts of his body, including his organs, his nervous system and his brain. Bodily injury therefore may include injury to any of those parts of his body responsible for his mental and other faculties.\nHe went on to say:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Accordingly the phrase \"actual bodily harm\" is capable of include psychiatric injury. But it does not include mere emotions such as fear or distress nor panic nor does it include, as such, states of mind that are not themselves evidence of some identifiable clinical condition.\nHe said that juries \"should not be directed that an assault which causes a hysterical and nervous condition is an assault occasioning actual bodily harm\".\nThis was followed by the Court of Appeal in R v Constanza, and the House of Lords which confirmed the principle in http://. Ireland caused three women to develop psychiatric illnesses. Burstow's victim was fearful of personal violence and was diagnosed with a severe depressive illness. The best medical practice today accepts a link between the body and psychiatric injury, so the words \"bodily harm\" in sections 20 and 47 were capable of covering recognised psychiatric illnesses, such as an anxiety disorders or a depressive disorder, which affect the central nervous system of the body. However, to qualify, those neuroses must be more than simple states of fear, or problems in coping with everyday life, which do not amount to psychiatric illnesses.\nVenereal and other communicable disease\nSee http:// [2004] EWCA Crim 1103\nThe Law Commission stated its view that \"the deliberate or reckless causing of disease should not be beyond the reach of the criminal law\" and there is continuing debate over whether the transmission of HIV is covered as grievous bodily harm or under sections 22 to 24 of the Offences against the Person Act 1861.\nIn R v Clarence, it appeared that at a time when the prisoner knew, but his wife did not know, that he had gonorrhoea, he had \"connection\" with her; that the result was that the disease was communicated to her, and that had she been aware of the prisoner's condition she would not have submitted to the intercourse.\nLord Coleridge CJ., Pollock and Huddleston BB., Stephen, Manisty, Mathew, A L Smith, Wills and Grantham JJ., held that the conduct of the prisoner did not amount to an offence under either section 20 or section 47. Field, Hawkins, Day and Charles JJ. dissented.\nWills J. said \"the facts are ... that he infected her, and that from such infection she suffered grievous bodily harm\".\nHawkins J. said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In this condition of things the prisoner had sexual intercourse with his wife and in doing so communicated to her his disease and thereby caused her grievous bodily harm.\nField J. said (a footnote has been included in the body of the text, indicated by \"(1)\"):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is, I think, also clear that if the condition of the man is such that it is an ordinary and natural consequence of the contact to communicate an infectious disease to the woman, and he does so, he does in fact inflict upon her both \"actual\" and \"grievous bodily harm.\" Such an act produces what a great authority, Lord Stowell, describes as \"an injury of a most malignant kind:\" see the note to Durant v. Durant. (1) 1 Hagg. Eccl. Cases, 768.\nUnconsciousness\nSee http:// [2003] EWHC 266 (Admin), [2003] Crim LR 622.\nHair\nSee DPP v. Smith [2006] EWHC 94 (Admin)\nPain or hurt such as persisting headaches, vomiting, pains in joints, stomach aches not caused by physical trauma\nMentioned in http:// [1998] Cr App R 386\nGreat pain followed by tenderness and soreness for some time afterwards\nThis may constitute actual bodily harm, even though there is no physically discernible injury. See Reigate Justices ex p.\u00a0Counsell (1984) 148 JP 193, DC\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46704", "revid": "44217690", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46704", "title": "Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act", "text": "United States bill proposed in 2002\nThe Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act (CBDTPA) () was a United States bill proposed in 2002 that would have prohibited any kind of technology that could be used to read digital content without digital rights management (DRM)\u2014which prohibits copying and reading any content under copyright without permission of the copyright owner. The bill was known in early drafts as the Security Systems and Standards Certification Act (SSSCA) and was sometimes called the Consume But Don't Try Programming Act.\nLegislation.\nThe CBDTPA was proposed by South Carolina senator Fritz Hollings (D-SC). Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT), chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, had stated that he could \"not support\" the proposed legislation and, as chairman, intended to block consideration of the controversial bill. This essentially killed the bill in 2002.\nProposed penalties for violating the CBDTPA ranged from five to twenty years in prison, and fines between $50,000 and $1 million.\nRichard Stallman criticized this act due to the restrictions that it would place in the immediate and long-term future on free software, dubbing the bill the \"Consume But Don't Try Programming Act.\"\nOther U.S. senators named as sponsors of the CBDTPA bill include:"}
{"id": "46707", "revid": "15941844", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46707", "title": "CBDTPA", "text": ""}
{"id": "46708", "revid": "5870361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46708", "title": "List of Senators and Representatives of Ohio", "text": ""}
{"id": "46709", "revid": "50900371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46709", "title": "County Cork", "text": "County in Ireland\nCounty Cork () is the largest and the southernmost county of Ireland, named after the city of Cork, the country's second-largest city. It is in the province of Munster and the Southern Region. Its largest market towns are Mallow, Macroom, Midleton, and Skibbereen. In 2022, the county had a population of 584,156, making it the third-most populous county in Ireland. Cork County Council is the local authority for the county, while Cork City Council governs the city of Cork and its environs. Notable Corkonians include Michael Collins, Jack Lynch, Mother Jones, Roy Keane, Sonia O'Sullivan, Paul O'Donovan, Fintan McCarthy, Rory Gallagher, Fiona Shaw, Cillian Murphy, Jonathan Rhys Meyers and Graham Norton.\nCork borders four other counties: Kerry to the west, Limerick to the north, Tipperary to the north-east and Waterford to the east. The county contains the southern section of the Golden Vale pastureland that extends into the Blackwater valley. The south-west region, including West Cork, is one of Ireland's main tourist destinations, known for its rugged coast and megalithic monuments and as the starting point for the Wild Atlantic Way. The largest third-level institution is University College Cork, founded in 1845, and has a total student population of around 22,000. Local industry and employers include technology company Dell EMC, the European headquarters of Apple, and the farmer-owned dairy co-operative Dairygold.\nThe county is known as the \"rebel county\", a name given to it by King Henry VII of England for its support, in a futile attempt at a rebellion in 1491, of Perkin Warbeck, who claimed to be Richard of Shrewsbury, Duke of York.\nPolitical and governance.\nThe local government areas of county Cork and the city of Cork are administered by the local authorities of Cork County Council and Cork City Council respectively. The boundary between these two areas was altered by the 2019 Cork boundary change. It is part of the Southern Region and has five representatives on the Southern Regional Assembly.\nFor elections to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann, the city and county are divided into five constituencies: Cork East, Cork North-Central, Cork North-West, Cork South-Central and Cork South-West. Together they return 20 deputies (TDs) to the D\u00e1il. It is part of the South constituency for European elections.\nGeography.\nCork is the largest county in Ireland by land area, and the largest of Munster's six counties by population and area. At the latest census in 2022, the population of the entire county stood at 584,156. Cork is the second-most populous county in the State, and the third-most populous county on the island of Ireland.\nCounty Cork is located in the province of Munster, bordering Kerry to the west, Limerick to the north, Tipperary to the north-east and Waterford to the east. The county shares separate mountainous borders with Tipperary and Kerry. The terrain on the Kerry border was formed between 360 and 374 million years ago, as part of the rising of the MacGillycuddy's Reeks and Caha Mountains mountains ranges. This occurred during the Devonian period when Ireland was part of a larger continental landmass and located south of the equator. The region's topography of peaks and valleys are characterised by steep ridges formed during the Hercynian period of folding and mountain formation some 300 million years ago.\nTwenty-four historic baronies are in the county\u2014the most of any county in Ireland. While baronies continue to be officially defined units, they are no longer used for many administrative purposes. Their official status is illustrated by Placenames Orders made since 2003, where official Irish names of baronies are listed. The county has 253 civil parishes. Townlands are the smallest officially defined geographical divisions in Ireland, with about 5447 townlands in the county.\nMountains and upland habitats.\nThe county's mountains rose during a period mountain formation some 374 to 360\u00a0million years ago and include the Slieve Miskish and Caha Mountains on the Beara Peninsula, the Ballyhoura Mountains on the border with Limerick and the Shehy Mountains which contain Knockboy (706 m), the highest point in Cork. The Shehy Mountains are on the border with Kerry and may be accessed from the area known as Priests Leap, near the village of Coomhola. \nThe upland areas of the Ballyhoura, Boggeragh, Derrynasaggart, and Mullaghareirk Mountain ranges add to the range of habitats found in the county. Important habitats in the uplands include blanket bog, heath, glacial lakes, and upland grasslands. Cork has the 13th-highest county peak in Ireland.\nRivers and lakes.\nThree rivers, the Bandon, Blackwater and Lee and their valleys dominate central Cork. Habitats of the valleys and floodplains include woodlands, marshes, fens, and species-rich limestone grasslands. The River Bandon flows through several towns, including Dunmanway to the west of the town of Bandon before draining into Kinsale Harbour on the south coast. \nCork's sea loughs include Lough Hyne and Lough Mahon, and the county also has many small lakes. An area has formed where the River Lee breaks into a network of channels weaving through a series of wooded islands, forming 85 hectares of swampland around Cork's wooded area. The Environmental Protection Agency carried out a survey of surface waters in County Cork between 1995 and 1997, which identified 125 rivers and 32 lakes covered by the regulations.\nLand and forestry.\nLike many parts of Munster, Cork has fertile agricultural land and many bog and peatlands. Cork has around 74,000 hectares of peatlands, which amount to 9.8% of the county's total land area. Cork has the highest share of the national forest area, with around of forest and woodland area, constituting 11.6% of the national total and approximately 12% of Cork's land area. It is home to one of the last remaining pieces of native woodland in Ireland and Europe.\nWildlife.\nThe hooded crow, \"Corvus cornix\" is a common bird, particularly in areas nearer the coast. Due to this bird's ability to (rarely) prey upon small lambs, the gun clubs of County Cork have killed many of these birds in modern times. A collection of the marine algae was housed in the herbarium of the botany department of the University College Cork. \nParts of the South West coastline are hotspots for sightings of rare birds, with Cape Clear being a prime location for bird watching. The island is also home to one of only a few gannet colonies around Ireland and the UK. The coastline of Cork is sometimes associated with whale watching, with some sightings of fin whales, basking sharks, pilot whales, minke whales, and other species.\nCoastline.\nCork has a mountainous and flat landscape with many beaches and sea cliffs along its coast. The southwest of Ireland is known for its peninsulas and some in Cork include the Beara Peninsula, Sheep's Head, Mizen Head, and Brow Head. Brow Head is the most southerly point of mainland Ireland. There are many islands off the coast of the county, in particular, off West Cork. Carbery's Hundred Isles are the islands around Long Island Bay and Roaringwater Bay.\nFastnet Rock lies in the Atlantic Ocean 11.3\u00a0 km south of mainland Ireland, making it the most southerly point of Ireland. Many notable islands lie off Cork, including Bere, Great Island, Sherkin, and Cape Clear. With an estimated of coastline, Cork is one of three counties which claims to have the longest coastline in Ireland, alongside Mayo and Donegal. Cork is also one of just three counties to border two bodies of water \u2013 the Celtic Sea to the south and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. Cork marks the end of the Wild Atlantic Way, the tourism trail from County Donegal's Inishowen Peninsula to Kinsale\nHistory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe county is colloquially referred to as \"The Rebel County\", although uniquely Cork does not have an official motto. This name has 15th-century origins, but from the 20th century, the name has been more commonly attributed to the prominent role Cork played in the Irish War of Independence (1919\u20131921) when it was the scene of considerable fighting. In addition, it was an anti-Treaty stronghold during the Irish Civil War (1922\u201323). Much of what is now county Cork was once part of the Kingdom of \"Deas Mumhan\" (South Munster), anglicised as the \"Desmond\", ruled by the MacCarthy M\u00f3r dynasty. \nAfter the Norman invasion in the 12th century, the McCarthy clan were pushed westward into what is now West Cork and County Kerry. Dunlough Castle, standing just north of Mizen Head, is one of the oldest castles in Ireland (AD 1207). The north and east of Cork were taken by the Hiberno-Norman FitzGerald dynasty, who became the Earls of Desmond. Cork City was given an English Royal Charter in 1318 and for many centuries was an outpost for Old English culture. The Fitzgerald Desmond dynasty was destroyed in the Desmond Rebellions of 1569\u20131573 and 1579\u20131583. Much of county Cork was devastated in the fighting, particularly in the Second Desmond Rebellion. In the aftermath, much of Cork was colonised by English settlers in the Plantation of Munster. \nIn 1491, Cork played a part in the English Wars of the Roses when Perkin Warbeck, a pretender to the English throne spread the story that he was really Richard of Shrewsbury (one of the Princes in the Tower), landed in the city and tried to recruit support for a plot to overthrow King Henry VII of England. The Cork people supported Warbeck because he was Flemish and not English; Cork was the only county in Ireland to join the fight. The mayor of Cork and several important citizens went with Warbeck to England, but when the rebellion collapsed they were all captured and executed. Cork's nickname of the 'rebel county' (and Cork city's of the 'rebel city') originates in these events.\nIn 1601, the decisive Battle of Kinsale took place in County Cork, which was to lead to English domination of Ireland for centuries. Kinsale had been the scene of the 4th Spanish Armada to help Irish rebels in the Nine Years' War (1594\u20131603). When this force was defeated, the rebel hopes for victory in the war were all but ended. County Cork was officially created by a division of the older County Desmond in 1606.\nIn the early 17th century, the townland of Leamcon (near Schull) was a pirate stronghold, and pirates traded easily in Baltimore and Whiddy Island.\nIn the 19th century, Cork was a centre for the Fenians and for the constitutional nationalism of the Irish Parliamentary Party, from 1910 that of the All-for-Ireland Party. The county was a hotbed of guerrilla activity during the Irish War of Independence (1919\u20131921). Three Cork Brigades of the Irish Republican Army operated in the county and another in the city. Prominent actions included the Kilmichael Ambush in November 1920 and the Crossbarry Ambush in March 1921.\nThe activity of IRA flying columns, such as the one under Tom Barry in west Cork, was popularised in the Ken Loach film \"The Wind That Shakes The Barley\". On 11 December 1920, Cork City centre was gutted by fires started by the Black and Tans in reprisal for IRA attacks. Over 300 buildings were destroyed; many other towns and villages around the county, including Fermoy, suffered a similar fate.\nDuring the Irish Civil War (1922\u201323), most of the IRA units in Cork sided against the Anglo-Irish Treaty. From July to August 1922 they held the city and county as part of the so-called Munster Republic. However, Cork was taken by troops of the Irish Free State in August 1922 in the Irish Free State offensive, which included both overland and seaborne attacks. For the remainder of the war, the county saw sporadic guerrilla fighting until the Anti-Treaty side called a ceasefire and dumped their arms in May 1923. Michael Collins, a key figure in the War of Independence, was born near Clonakilty and assassinated during the civil war in B\u00e9al na Bl\u00e1th, both in west Cork.\nIrish language.\nCounty Cork has two Gaeltacht areas in which the Irish language is the primary medium of everyday speech. These are (Muskerry) in the north of the county, especially the villages of (Kilnamartyra), (Ballyvourney), (Coolea), (Ballingeary), and (Cape Clear Island).\nThere are 14,829 Irish language speakers in County Cork, with 3,660 native speakers in the Cork Gaeltacht. In 2011, there were 6,273 pupils attending the 21 Gaelscoileanna and six Gaelchol\u00e1ist\u00ed all across the county. In 2006, there were 4,896 people in the county who identified as daily Irish speakers outside of the education system. The village of Ballingeary is a centre for Irish language tuition, with a summer school, Col\u00e1iste na Mumhan, or the College of Munster.\nAnthem.\nThe song \"The Banks of My Own Lovely Lee\" is traditionally associated with the county. It is sometimes heard at GAA and other sports fixtures involving the county.\nMedia.\nSeveral media publications are printed and distributed in County Cork. These include the \"Irish Examiner\" (formerly the \"Cork Examiner\") and its sister publication \"The Echo\" (formerly the \"Evening Echo\"). Local and regional newspapers include the \"Carrigdhoun\", the \"Cork Independent\", \"The Corkman\", the \"Mallow Star\", the \"Douglas Post\", the \"East Cork Journal\" and \"The Southern Star\". Local radio stations include Cork's 96FM and dual-franchise C103, Red FM, and a number of community radio stations, such as CRY 104.0FM.\nPlaces of interest.\nTourist sites include the Blarney Stone at Blarney Castle, Blarney. The port of Cobh in County Cork was the point of embarkation for many Irish emigrants travelling to Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa or the United States. Cobh (at the time named 'Queenstown') was the last stop of the RMS \"Titanic\" before it departed on its fated journey.\nFota Wildlife Park, on Fota Island, is also a tourist attraction. Nearby is Fota House and Gardens and the Fota Golf Club and Resort; a European Tour standard golf course which hosted the Irish Open in 2001, 2002 and 2014.\nWest Cork is known for its rugged natural environment, beaches and social atmosphere, and is a common destination for British, German, French and Dutch tourists.\nEconomy.\nThe South-West Region, comprising counties Cork and Kerry, contributed \u20ac103.2 billion (approximately US$111.6 billion) towards the Irish GDP in 2020.\nThe harbour area east of Cork city is home to many pharmaceutical and medical companies. Mahon Point Shopping Centre is Cork's largest, and Munster's second-largest, shopping centre; it contains over 75 stores including a retail park. The Golden Vale is among the most productive farmland for dairy in Ireland. The chief milk processor is Dairygold, a farmer-owned co-operative based in Mitchelstown, which processes 1.4\u00a0billion litres a year, converting the milk into cheeses and powder dairy nutrition for infant formula.\nDemographics.\nThe city of Cork forms the largest urban area in the county, with a total population of 224,004 as of 2022. Cork is the second-most populous city in the Republic of Ireland, and the third-most populous city on the island of Ireland. In 2022, the county had 13 towns with a population of over 4,000. The county has a population density of . A large percentage of the population lives in urban areas.\nIn the 1841 census, before the outbreak of the Great Famine, County Cork had a recorded population of 854,118. By the 2022 census, Cork city and county had a combined population of 584,156 people.\nIn the 2022 census, ethnically the population included 78.5% White Irish people, 9.9% other White background, 1.4% Asian and 1.1% Black. In 2022, the largest religious denominations in Cork were: Catholicism (71%), Church of Ireland (2.3%), Orthodox (1.2%), and Islam (1.2%). Those stating that they had no religion accounted for 15.7% of the population in 2022.\nTransport.\nCork's main transport is serviced from:\nPeople.\nCommon surnames in the county include Barry, Buckley, Callaghan, Connell, Connor, Crowley, Lynch, McCarthy, Murphy, O'Leary, O'Sullivan, Sheehan, Walsh, and Fitzgerald (the latter with a Norman derivation).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46710", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46710", "title": "Fort Ticonderoga", "text": "Historic fort in New York State\nFort Ticonderoga (), formerly Fort Carillon, is a large 18th-century star fort built by the French at a narrows near the south end of Lake Champlain in northern New York. It was constructed between October 1755 and 1757 by French-Canadian military engineer Michel Chartier de Lotbini\u00e8re, Marquis de Lotbini\u00e8re during the French and Indian War, sometimes known overseas as the \"North American theater\" of the Seven Years' War. The fort was of strategic importance during the 18th-century colonial conflicts between Great Britain and France, and again played an important role during the American Revolutionary War.\nThe site controlled a river portage alongside the mouth of the rapids-infested La Chute River, in the between Lake Champlain and Lake George. It was strategically placed for the trade routes between the British-controlled Hudson River Valley and the French-controlled Saint Lawrence River Valley.\nThe terrain amplified the importance of the site. Both lakes were long and narrow and oriented north\u2013south, as were the many ridge lines of the Appalachian Mountains which extend as far south as Georgia. The mountains created nearly impassable terrains to the east and west of the Great Appalachian Valley that the site commanded.\nThe name \"Ticonderoga\" comes from the Iroquois word \"tekontar\u00f3:ken\", meaning \"it is at the junction of two waterways\".\nDuring the 1758 Battle of Carillon, 4,000 French defenders were able to repel an attack by 16,000 British troops. In 1759, the British returned and drove a token French garrison from the fort. The British controlled the fort at the beginning of the Revolutionary War, but the Green Mountain Boys and other state militia under the command of Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold captured it on May 10, 1775. Henry Knox led a party to transport many of the fort's cannon to Boston to assist in the siege against the British, who evacuated the city in March 1776. The Americans held the fort until June 1777, when British forces under General John Burgoyne occupied high ground above it; the threat resulted in the Continental Army troops withdrawing from the fort and its surrounding defenses. The only direct attack on the fort during the Revolution took place in September 1777, when John Brown led 500 Americans in an unsuccessful attempt to capture it from about 100 British defenders.\nThe British abandoned the fort after the failure of the Saratoga campaign, and it ceased to be of military value after 1781. The United States allowed the fort to fall into ruin, and local residents stripped it of much of its usable materials. It was purchased by a private family in 1820 and became a stop on tourist routes of the area. Early in the 20th century, its private owners restored the fort. The Fort Ticonderoga Association now operates it as a tourist attraction, museum, and research center.\nGeography and early history.\nLake Champlain forms part of the border between New York and Vermont, and the Hudson River together formed an important travel route that was used by American Indians long before the arrival of European colonists. The route was relatively free of obstacles to navigation, with only a few portages. One strategically important place on the route lies at a narrows near the southern end of Lake Champlain. Ticonderoga Creek was known in colonial times as La Chute River because it was named by French colonists; enters the lake at this point carrying water from Lake George. The site provides commanding views of the southern extent of Lake Champlain, Mount Defiance, at , and two other hills (Mount Hope and Mount Independence) overlook the area.\nAmerican Indians had occupied the area for centuries before French explorer Samuel de Champlain first arrived there in 1609. Champlain recounted that the Algonquins with whom he was traveling battled a group of Iroquois nearby. In 1642, French missionary Isaac Jogues was the first white man to traverse the portage at Ticonderoga while escaping a battle between the Iroquois and members of the Huron tribe.\nThe French had colonized the Saint Lawrence River valley to the north, and the English had taken over the Dutch settlements that became the Province of New York to the south. The French and English began contesting the area as early as 1691, when Pieter Schuyler built a small wooden fort at the Ticonderoga point on the western shore of the lake. These colonial conflicts reached their height in the French and Indian War, which began in 1754 and is sometimes considered to be the North American front of the Seven Years' War.\nConstruction.\nThe French decided to construct a fort here in 1755, following the Battle of Lake George. Marquis de Vaudreuil, the governor of the French Province of Canada, sent his cousin Michel Chartier de Lotbini\u00e8re to design and construct a fortification at this militarily important site, which the French called Fort Carillon. Some have attributed the name \"Carillon\" to French officer Philippe de Carrion du Fresnoy, who established a trading post at the site in the late 17th century. It is more commonly attributed to the sounds made by the rapids of La Chute River, which were said to resemble the chiming bells of a carillon. Construction on the star-shaped fort was based on designs of the renowned French military engineer Vauban. It began in October 1755 and proceeded slowly during the warmer-weather months of 1756 and 1757, using troops stationed at nearby Fort St. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric and from Canada.\nThe work in 1755 consisted primarily of beginning construction on the main walls and on the Lotbini\u00e8re redoubt, an outwork to the west of the site that provided additional coverage of La Chute River. During the next year, the four main bastions were built, as well as a sawmill on La Chute. Work slowed in 1757, when many of the troops participated in the attack on Fort William Henry. The barracks and demi-lunes were not completed until spring 1758.\nWalls and bastions.\nThe French built the fort to control the south end of Lake Champlain and prevent the British from gaining military access to the lake. Consequently, its most important defenses, the Reine and Germaine bastions, were directed to the northeast and northwest, away from the lake, with two demi-lunes further extending the works on the land side. The Joannes and Languedoc bastions overlooked the lake to the south, providing cover for the landing area outside the fort. The walls were high and thick, and the whole works was surrounded by a glacis and a dry moat deep and wide. When the walls were first erected in 1756, they were made of squared wooden timbers, with earth filling the gap. The French then began to dress the walls with stone from a quarry about one mile (1.6\u00a0km) away, although this work was never fully completed. When the main defenses became ready for use, the fort was armed with cannons hauled from Montreal and Fort St. Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric.\nInside and outside.\nThe fort contained three barracks and four storehouses. One bastion held a bakery capable of producing 60 loaves of bread a day. A powder magazine was hacked out of the bedrock beneath the Joannes bastion. All the construction within the fort was of stone.\nA wooden palisade protected an area outside the fort between the southern wall and the lake shore. This area contained the main landing for the fort and additional storage facilities and other works necessary for maintenance of the fort. When it became apparent in 1756 that the fort was too far to the west of the lake, the French constructed an additional redoubt to the east to enable cannon to cover the lake's narrows.\nAnalysis.\nThe fort was largely complete by 1758; the only ongoing work thereafter consisted of dressing the walls with stone. Still, General Montcalm and two of his military engineers surveyed the works in 1758 and found something to criticize in almost every aspect of the fort's construction: the buildings were too tall and thus easier for cannons to hit, the powder magazine leaked, and the masonry was of poor quality. The critics apparently failed to notice the fort's significant strategic weakness: several nearby hills overlooked the fort and made it possible for besiegers to fire down on the defenders from above. Lotbini\u00e8re's career suffered for years afterwards.\nWilliam Nester notes additional problems with the fort's construction. The fort was small for a Vauban-style fort, about wide, with a barracks capable of holding only 400 soldiers. Storage space inside the fort was similarly limited, requiring the storage of provisions outside the walls in exposed places. Its cistern was small, and the water quality was supposedly poor.\nMilitary history.\nFrench and Indian War.\nIn August 1757, the French captured Fort William Henry in an action launched from Fort Carillon. This and a string of other French victories in 1757 prompted the British to organize a large-scale attack on the fort as part of a multi-campaign strategy against French Canada. In June 1758, British General James Abercromby began amassing a large force at Fort William Henry in preparation for a military campaign directed up the Champlain Valley. These forces landed at the north end of Lake George on July 6, only four miles from the fort. French General Louis-Joseph de Montcalm had only arrived at Carillon in late June, and he engaged his troops in a flurry of work to improve the fort's outer defenses. They built entrenchments in two days around a rise between the fort and Mount Hope, about three-quarters of a mile (one kilometer) northwest of the fort, and then constructed an abatis (felled trees with sharpened branches pointing out) below these entrenchments. They conducted the work unimpeded by military action, as Abercromby failed to advance directly to the fort on July 7. Abercromby's second-in-command was Brigadier General George Howe, who had been killed when his column encountered a French reconnaissance troop. Abercromby felt Howe's death \"most heavily\" and may have been unwilling to act immediately.\nOn July 8, 1758, Abercromby ordered a frontal attack against the hastily assembled French works. He tried to move rapidly against the few French defenders, opting to forgo field cannon and relying instead on the numerical superiority of his 16,000 troops, but the British were soundly defeated by the 4,000 French defenders in the Battle of Carillon. The battle took place far enough away from the fort that its guns were rarely used. The battle gave the fort a reputation for impregnability, which affected future military operations in the area, notably during the American Revolutionary War. Following the French victory, Montcalm anticipated further British attacks, so he ordered additional work on the defenses, including the construction of the Germain and Pontleroy redoubts to the northeast of the fort, named for the engineers under whose direction they were constructed. However, the British did not attack again in 1758, so the French withdrew all but a small garrison in November for the winter.\nThe British under General Jeffery Amherst captured the fort the following year in the 1759 Battle of Ticonderoga. In this confrontation, 11,000 British troops used emplaced artillery and drove off the token garrison of 400 Frenchmen. The French used explosives to destroy what they could of the fort as they withdrew and spiked the cannons that they did not take with them. The British worked to repair and improve the fort in 1759-60, but it was not part of any further significant action in the war. After the war, the British garrisoned the fort with a small number of troops and allowed it to fall into disrepair. Colonel Frederick Haldimand was in command of the fort in 1773, and he wrote that it was in \"ruinous condition\".\nEarly Revolutionary War.\nIn 1775, Fort Ticonderoga was in disrepair but still manned by a token British force. They found it extremely useful as a supply and communication link between Canada and New York. A small American force surprised the 48 British soldiers within the fort on May 10, 1775, less than one month after the American Revolutionary War was ignited with the battles of Lexington and Concord. The Americans consisted of Vermont's Green Mountain Boys led by Ethan Allen, and militia volunteers from Massachusetts and Connecticut led by Benedict Arnold. Allen called out, \"Come out you old Rat!\" to the fort's commander Captain William Delaplace. He also demanded that the British commander surrender the fort \"in the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental Congress!\" The surrender demand was actually made to Lieutenant Jocelyn Feltham and not the fort's commander, but Delaplace did later appear and surrender his sword.\nWith the capture of the fort, the Patriot forces obtained a large supply of cannons and other armaments, much of which Henry Knox transported to Boston during the winter of 1775\u20131776. Ticonderoga's cannons were instrumental in ending the siege of Boston when they were used to fortify Dorchester Heights, forcing the British to evacuate the city in March 1776. The capture of Fort Ticonderoga by the Americans also made communication much more difficult between the British commands in Canada and America.\nBenedict Arnold remained in control of the fort until a thousand Connecticut troops arrived in June 1775 under the command of Benjamin Hinman. However, Arnold was never notified that Hinman was to take command due to a series of political maneuvers and miscommunications. A delegation from Massachusetts arrived to clarify the matter, and Arnold resigned his commission and departed, leaving the fort in Hinman's hands.\nBeginning in July 1775, Ticonderoga was used as a staging area for the invasion of Quebec, planned to begin in September under the leadership of generals Philip Schuyler and Richard Montgomery. Men and materials for the invasion were accumulated there through July and August. Montgomery received word on August 28 that British forces at Fort Saint-Jean, not far from the New York\u2013Quebec border, were nearing completion of boats to launch onto Lake Champlain. He launched an invasion, leading 1,200 troops down the lake. Ticonderoga continued to serve as a staging base for the action in Quebec until the battle and siege at Quebec City which resulted in Montgomery's death.\nIn May 1776, British troops began to arrive at Quebec City, where they broke the Continental Army's siege. The British chased the American forces back to Ticonderoga in June and then moved down Lake Champlain under Guy Carleton in October, after several months of ship building. The British destroyed a small fleet of American gunboats in the Battle of Valcour Island in mid-October, but snow was already falling, so the British retreated to winter quarters in Quebec. About 1,700 troops from the Continental Army wintered at Ticonderoga under the command of Colonel Anthony Wayne. The British offensive resumed the next year in the Saratoga campaign under General John Burgoyne.\nSaratoga campaign.\nDuring the summer of 1776, the Americans added substantial defensive works to the area under the direction of General Schuyler, and later under General Horatio Gates. Mount Independence is almost completely surrounded by water, and it was fortified with trenches near the water, a horseshoe artillery battery part way up the side, a citadel at the summit, and redoubts armed with cannons surrounding the summit area. These defenses were linked to Ticonderoga with a pontoon bridge that was protected by land batteries on both sides. The works on Mount Hope were improved to include a star-shaped fort. Mount Defiance remained unfortified.\nIn March 1777, American generals were strategizing about possible British military movements and thought it likely that the enemy would make an attempt on the Hudson River corridor. General Schuyler headed the forces stationed at Ticonderoga, and he requested 10,000 troops to guard Ticonderoga and 2,000 to guard the Mohawk River valley against British invasion from the north. George Washington had never been to Ticonderoga, but he believed that an overland attack was unlikely from the north because of the alleged impregnability of Ticonderoga. This and continuing incursions up the Hudson River valley by British forces occupying New York City led Washington to believe that any attack on the Albany area would be from the south, as it was part of the supply line to Ticonderoga and would necessitate a withdrawal from the fort. As a result, no significant actions were taken to further fortify Ticonderoga or significantly increase its garrison. The garrison consisted of about 2,000 men under General Arthur St. Clair and was too small to man all the defenses.\nGeneral Gates oversaw the northern defenses and was aware that Mount Defiance threatened the fort. John Trumbull had pointed this out as early as 1776, when a shot fired from the fort was able to reach Defiance's summit, and several officers inspecting the hill noted that there were approaches to its summit where gun carriages could be pulled up the sides. The garrison was too small to properly defend all the existing works in the area, so Mount Defiance was left undefended. Anthony Wayne left Ticonderoga in April 1777 to join Washington's army; he reported to Washington that \"all was well\", and that the fort \"can never be carried, without much loss of blood\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Where a goat can go, a man can go; and where a man can go, he can drag a gun.\"\nBritish Major General William Phillips, as his men brought cannon to the top of Mount Defiance in 1777\nGeneral Burgoyne led 7,800 British and Hessian forces south from Quebec in June 1777. They occupied nearby Fort Crown Point without opposition on June 30, then prepared to besiege Ticonderoga. Burgoyne recognized the tactical advantage of the high ground and had his troops haul cannons to the top of Mount Defiance, and General St. Clair ordered Ticonderoga abandoned on July 5, 1777. Burgoyne's troops moved in the next day, with advance guards pursuing the retreating Americans. Washington heard of Burgoyne's advance and the retreat from Ticonderoga and stated that the event was \"not apprehended, nor within the compass of my reasoning\". News of the abandonment of the \"Impregnable Bastion\" without a fight caused \"the greatest surprise and alarm\" throughout the colonies. General St. Clair was court-martialed in 1778, but he was cleared on all charges.\nOne last attack.\nTiconderoga and the surrounding defenses were garrisoned by 700 British and Hessian troops under the command of Brigadier General Henry Watson Powell. Most of these forces were on Mount Independence, with only 100 each at Fort Ticonderoga and a blockhouse that they were constructing on top of Mount Defiance. George Washington sent General Benjamin Lincoln into Vermont to \"divide and distract the enemy\". Lincoln was aware that the British were housing American prisoners in the area, and he decided to test the British defenses. On September 13, he sent 500 men to Skenesboro, which they found the British had abandoned, and 500 each against the defenses on either side of the lake at Ticonderoga. Colonel John Brown led the troops on the west side, with instructions to release prisoners if possible and attack the fort if it seemed feasible.\nEarly on September 18, Brown's troops surprised a British contingent holding some prisoners near the Lake George landing, while a detachment of his troops snuck up Mount Defiance and captured most of the sleeping construction crew. Brown and his men then moved down the portage trail toward the fort, surprising more troops and releasing prisoners along the way. The fort's occupants were unaware of the action until Brown's men skirmished with British troops occupying the old French lines. At this point, Brown's men dragged two captured six-pound guns up to the lines and began firing on the fort. The men who had captured Mount Defiance began firing a twelve-pounder from that site. The column that was to attack Mount Independence was delayed, and its numerous defenders were alerted to the action at the fort below before the attack began on their position. Their musket fire and grapeshot fired from ships anchored nearby intimidated the Americans sufficiently that they never launched an assault on the defensive positions on Mount Independence. A stalemate persisted with regular exchanges of cannon fire until September 21, when 100 Hessians arrived from the Mohawk Valley to provide reinforcement to the besieged fort.\nBrown eventually sent a truce party to the fort to open negotiations; the party was fired on, and three of its five members were killed. Brown realized that their weaponry was insufficient to take the fort and decided to withdraw, destroying many bateaux and seizing a ship on Lake George. He then set off to annoy British positions on the lake. His action resulted in the freeing of 118 Americans and the capture of 293 British troops, while suffering fewer than 10 casualties.\nAbandonment.\nThe fort at Ticonderoga became increasingly irrelevant after Burgoyne's defeat at Saratoga. The British abandoned it and nearby Fort Crown Point in November 1777, destroying both as best they could before their withdrawal. The fort was occasionally reoccupied by British raiding parties in the following years, but it no longer held a prominent strategic role in the war. It was finally abandoned by the British for good in 1781, following their surrender at Yorktown. In the years following the war, area residents stripped the fort of usable building materials, even melting some of the cannons down for the metal.\nTourist attraction.\nIn 1785, the fort's lands became the property of the state of New York. The state donated the property to Columbia University and Union College in 1803, and the colleges sold the property to William Ferris Pell in 1820.\nPell first used the property as a summer retreat. Completion of railroads and canals connecting the area to New York City brought tourists to the area, so he converted his summer house into a hotel to serve the tourist trade. In 1848, Hudson River School artist Russell Smith painted \"Ruins of Fort Ticonderoga\", depicting the condition of the fort.\nThe Pell family hired English architect Alfred Bossom to restore the fort and opened it to the public in 1909 as a historic site. The ceremonies commemorated the 300th anniversary of the discovery of Lake Champlain by European explorers and were attended by President William Howard Taft. Stephen Hyatt Pell spearheaded the restoration effort and founded the Fort Ticonderoga Association in 1931, which is now responsible for the fort. Funding for the restoration also came from Robert M. Thompson, father of Stephen Pell's wife Sarah Gibbs Thompson.\nBetween 1900 and 1950, the foundation acquired the historically important lands around the fort, including Mount Defiance, Mount Independence, and much of Mount Hope. The fort was rearmed with fourteen 24-pound cannons provided by the British government. These cannons had been cast in England for use during the American Revolution, but the war ended before they were shipped over.\nThe fort has been designated a National Historic Landmark by the Department of Interior and is now operated by the foundation as a tourist attraction, early American military museum, and research center. The fort opens annually around May 10, the anniversary of the 1775 capture, and closes in late October.\nThe fort has been on a watchlist of National Historic Landmarks since 1998 because of the poor condition of some of the walls and of the 19th-century pavilion constructed by William Ferris Pell. The pavilion was being restored in 2009. The powder magazine was destroyed by the French in 1759, but it was reconstructed in 2008 by Tonetti Associates Architects, based in part on the original 1755 plans. A major donor withdrew financial support in 2008, which forced the museum to consider selling Thomas Cole's \"Gelyna, View near Ticonderoga\", one of their major art works. However, fund raising activities were able to prevent the sale.\nThe not-for-profit Living History Education Foundation conducts teacher programs at Fort Ticonderoga during the summer that last approximately one week. The program trains teachers how to teach Living History techniques, and to understand and interpret the importance of Fort Ticonderoga during the French and Indian War and the American Revolution. The fort conducts other seminars, symposia, and workshops throughout the year, including the annual War College of the Seven Years' War in May and the Seminar on the American Revolution in September.\nThe Pell family estate is located north of the fort. In 1921, Sarah Pell undertook reconstruction of the gardens. She hired Marian Cruger Coffin, one of the most famous American landscape architects of the period. In 1995, the gardens were restored and later opened for public visiting; they are known as the King's Garden.\nMemorials.\nThe U.S. Navy has given the name 'Ticonderoga' to five different vessels, as well as to entire classes of cruisers and aircraft\u00a0carriers.\nThe fort was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960. Included in the landmarked area are Mount Independence and Mount Defiance, as well as the fort. It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1966. \nThe Ticonderoga pencil, manufactured by the Dixon Ticonderoga Corporation, is named for the fort.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nFort history sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBattle history sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46715", "revid": "1063872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46715", "title": "Judicial execution", "text": ""}
{"id": "46719", "revid": "7279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46719", "title": "Searle's Chinese room", "text": ""}
{"id": "46720", "revid": "50395120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46720", "title": "William Tecumseh Sherman", "text": "United States Army General (1820\u20131891)\nWilliam Tecumseh Sherman ( ; February 8, 1820\u00a0\u2013 February 14, 1891) was an American soldier, businessman, educator, and author. He served as a general in the Union Army during the American Civil War (1861\u20131865), earning recognition for his command of military strategy but criticism for the harshness of his scorched-earth policies, which he implemented in his military campaign against the Confederate States. British military theorist and historian B.\u00a0H. Liddell Hart declared that Sherman was \"the most original genius of the American Civil War\" and \"the first modern general\".\nBorn in Lancaster, Ohio, into a politically prominent family, Sherman graduated in 1840 from the United States Military Academy at West Point. In 1853, he interrupted his military career to pursue private business ventures, without much success. In 1859, he became superintendent of the Louisiana State Seminary of Learning &amp; Military Academy, now Louisiana State University, but resigned when Louisiana seceded from the Union. Sherman commanded a brigade of volunteers at the First Battle of Bull Run in 1861, and then was transferred to the Western Theater. He was stationed in Kentucky, where his pessimism about the outlook of the war led to a breakdown that required him to be briefly put on leave. He recovered and forged a close partnership with General Ulysses S. Grant. Sherman served under Grant in 1862 and 1863 in the Battle of Fort Henry and the Battle of Fort Donelson, the Battle of Shiloh, the campaigns that led to the fall of the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg on the Mississippi River, and the Chattanooga campaign, which culminated with the routing of the Confederate armies in the state of Tennessee.\nIn 1864, when Grant went east to serve as the General-in-Chief of the Union Armies, Sherman succeeded him as the commander in the Western Theater. He led the capture of the strategic city of Atlanta, a military success that contributed to the re-election of President Abraham Lincoln. Sherman's subsequent famous \"March to the Sea\" through Georgia and the Carolinas involved little fighting but large-scale destruction of military and civilian infrastructure, a systematic policy intended to undermine the ability and willingness of the Confederacy to continue fighting. Sherman accepted the surrender of all the Confederate armies in the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida in April 1865, but the terms that he negotiated were considered too generous by U.S. Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, who ordered General Grant to modify them.\nWhen Grant became President of the United States in March 1869, Sherman succeeded him as Commanding General of the Army. Sherman served in that capacity from 1869 until 1883 and was responsible for the U.S. Army's engagement in the Indian Wars. He steadfastly refused to be drawn into party politics. In 1875, he published his memoirs, which became one of the best-known first-hand accounts of the Civil War.\nEarly life.\nSherman was born in 1820 in Lancaster, Ohio, near the banks of the Hocking River. His father, Charles Robert Sherman, a lawyer who was a justice on the Ohio Supreme Court, died unexpectedly of typhoid fever in 1829. His widow, Mary Hoyt Sherman, remained with eleven children and no inheritance. Nine-year-old Sherman was raised by a Lancaster neighbor and family friend, attorney Thomas Ewing. Ewing was a prominent member of the Whig Party who became U.S. senator for Ohio and the first Secretary of the Interior. Sherman was a fifth cousin three times removed of US founding father Roger Sherman.\nSherman's older brother Charles Taylor Sherman became a federal judge. One of his younger brothers, John Sherman, was one of the founders of the Republican Party and served as a U.S. Representative, Senator, and cabinet secretary. Another younger brother, Hoyt Sherman, was a successful banker. Two of his foster brothers served as major generals in the Union Army during the Civil War: Hugh Boyle Ewing, later an ambassador and author, and Thomas Ewing Jr., who was a defense attorney in the military trials of the Lincoln conspirators. Sherman's niece, Euthanasia Sherman Meade, was a pioneering woman physician in California.\nNames.\nSherman's unusual given name has always attracted attention. One 19th-century source, for example, states that \"General Sherman, we believe, is the only eminent American named from an Indian chief\". According to Sherman's \"Memoirs\", he was named William Tecumseh because his father had \"caught a fancy for the great chief of the Shawnees, 'Tecumseh'\". However, Lloyd Lewis's 1932 biography claimed that Sherman was originally named only Tecumseh and that he acquired the name William at the age of nine or ten, when he was baptized as a Catholic at the behest of his foster family. According to Lewis's account, which was repeated by later authors, Sherman was baptized in the Ewing home by a Dominican priest who found the pagan name Tecumseh unsuitable and instead named the child William after the saint on whose feast day the baptism took place. Sherman had already been baptized as an infant by a Presbyterian minister and recent biographers believe, contrary to Lewis's claims, that he was probably given the first name William at that time. As an adult, Sherman signed all his correspondence, including to his wife, \"W. T. Sherman\". His friends and family called him Cump.\nMilitary training and service.\nSenator Ewing secured an appointment for the 16-year-old Sherman as a cadet in the United States Military Academy at West Point. Sherman roomed with and befriended another important future Civil War general for the Union, George Henry Thomas. Sherman excelled academically at West Point, but he treated the demerit system with indifference. Fellow cadet William Rosecrans remembered Sherman as \"one of the brightest and most popular fellows\" at the academy and as \"a bright-eyed, red-headed fellow, who was always prepared for a lark of any kind\". About his time at West Point, Sherman says only the following in his \"Memoirs\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;At the Academy I was not considered a good soldier, for at no time was I selected for any office, but remained a private throughout the whole four years. Then, as now, neatness in dress and form, with a strict conformity to the rules, were the qualifications required for office, and I suppose I was found not to excel in any of these. In studies I always held a respectable reputation with the professors, and generally ranked among the best, especially in drawing, chemistry, mathematics, and natural philosophy. My average demerits, \"per annum\", were about one hundred and fifty, which reduced my final class standing from number four to six.\nUpon graduation in 1840, Sherman entered the army as a second lieutenant in the 3rd U.S. Artillery and saw action in Florida in the Second Seminole War. In his memoirs he noted that \"it was a great pity to remove the Seminoles at all [as Florida] was the Indian's paradise\" and still had (at the time that Sherman wrote his memoirs in the 1870s) \"a population less than should make a good State\". Sherman was later stationed in Georgia and South Carolina. As the foster son of a prominent Whig politician, in Charleston the popular Lieutenant Sherman moved within the upper circles of Old South society.\nWhile many of his colleagues engaged in the Mexican\u2013American War, Sherman was assigned to administrative duties in the captured territory of California. Along with fellow Lieutenants Henry Halleck and Edward Ord, Sherman embarked from New York City on the 198-day journey around Cape Horn, aboard the converted sloop USS \"Lexington\". During that voyage, Sherman grew close to Ord and especially to the intellectually distinguished Halleck. In his memoirs, Sherman relates a hike with Halleck to the summit of Corcovado, overlooking Rio de Janeiro in Brazil, in order to examine the city's aqueduct design.\nSherman and Ord disembarked in Monterey, California on January 28, 1847, two days before the town of Yerba Buena acquired the new name of \"San Francisco\". Sherman and Halleck lived in a house in Monterey, now known as the \"Sherman Quarters\", from 1847 to 1849. In June 1848, Sherman accompanied the military governor of California, Col. Richard Barnes Mason, to inspect the gold mines at Sutter's Fort. Sherman unwittingly helped to launch the California Gold Rush by drafting the official documents in which Governor Mason confirmed that gold had been discovered in the region.\nAt John Augustus Sutter Jr.'s request, Sherman assisted Captain William H. Warner in surveying the new city of Sacramento, laying its street grid in 1848. He also opened a general store in Coloma, which earned him $1,500 in 1849 while his army salary was only $70 a month. Sherman also earned money from surveying and by the sale of lots in Sacramento and Benicia. Even though he earned a brevet promotion to captain in 1848 for his \"meritorious service\", his lack of combat experience and relatively slow advancement within the army discouraged him. Sherman would eventually become one of the few high-ranking officers of the American Civil War who had not fought in Mexico.\nMarriage and business career.\nOn May 1, 1850, Sherman married his foster sister, Ellen Boyle Ewing, who was four years and eight months his junior. Ellen's father, Thomas Ewing, was the US Secretary of the Interior at that time. Father James A. Ryder, president of Georgetown College, officiated at the Washington, D.C., ceremony. President Zachary Taylor, Vice President Millard Fillmore and other political luminaries attended the wedding. Ellen Ewing Sherman was a devout Catholic, and the couple's children were reared in that faith.\nTheir eight children were:\nSherman was appointed as captain in the Army's Commissary Department on September 27, 1850, with offices in St. Louis, Missouri. He resigned his commission in 1853 and entered civilian life as manager of the San Francisco branch of the Bank of Lucas, Turner &amp; Co., whose corporate headquarters were in St. Louis. Sherman survived two shipwrecks and floated through the Golden Gate on the overturned hull of a foundering lumber schooner.\nSherman suffered from asthma attacks, which he attributed in part to stress caused by the city's aggressive business culture. Late in life, Sherman said of his time in San Francisco, under frenzied real estate speculation: \"I can handle a hundred thousand men in battle, and take the City of the Sun, but am afraid to manage a lot in the swamp of San Francisco.\"\nThe failure of Page, Bacon &amp; Co. triggered a panic surrounding the \"Black Friday\" of February 23, 1855, leading to the closure of several of San Francisco's principal banks and many other businesses. Sherman, however, succeeded in keeping his own bank solvent. In 1856, during the vigilante period, he served briefly as a major general of the California militia.\nSherman's San Francisco branch closed in May 1857, and he relocated to New York City on behalf of the same bank, travelling on the steamer SS \"Central America\". When the bank failed during the Panic of 1857, he closed the New York branch. In early 1858, he returned to California to finalize the bank's outstanding accounts there. Later in 1858, he moved to Leavenworth, Kansas, where he worked as the office manager of the law firm established by his brothers-in-law Hugh Ewing and Thomas Ewing Jr. Sherman obtained a license to practice law, despite not having studied for the bar, but had little success as a lawyer.\nMilitary college superintendent.\nIn 1859, Sherman accepted a job as the first superintendent of the Louisiana State Seminary of Learning &amp; Military Academy in Pineville, Louisiana, a position he sought at the suggestion of Major Don Carlos Buell and obtained through the support of General George Mason Graham. Sherman was an effective and popular leader of the institution, which would later become Louisiana State University. Colonel Joseph P. Taylor, brother of the late President Zachary Taylor, declared that \"if you had hunted the whole Army, from one end of it to the other, you could not have found a man in it more admirably suited for the position in every respect than Sherman.\"\nSherman's younger brother John was, from his seat in the U.S. Congress, a prominent advocate against slavery. Before the Civil War, however, the more conservative William had expressed some sympathy for the white Southerners' defense of their traditional agrarian system, including the institution of slavery. On the other hand, he was adamantly opposed to the secession of the southern states. In Louisiana, he became a close friend of professor David French Boyd, a native of Virginia and an enthusiastic secessionist. Boyd later recalled witnessing that, when news of South Carolina's secession from the United States reached them at the Seminary, \"Sherman burst out crying, and began, in his nervous way, pacing the floor and deprecating the step which he feared might bring destruction on the whole country.\" In what some authors have seen as an accurate prophecy of the conflict that would engulf the United States during the next four years, Boyd recalled Sherman declaring:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You people of the South don't know what you are doing. This country will be drenched in blood, and God only knows how it will end. It is all folly, madness, a crime against civilization! You people speak so lightly of war; you don't know what you're talking about. War is a terrible thing! You mistake, too, the people of the North. They are a peaceable people but an earnest people, and they will fight, too. They are not going to let this country be destroyed without a mighty effort to save it\u00a0... Besides, where are your men and appliances of war to contend against them? The North can make a steam engine, locomotive, or railway car; hardly a yard of cloth or pair of shoes can you make. You are rushing into war with one of the most powerful, ingeniously mechanical, and determined people on Earth\u2014right at your doors. You are bound to fail. Only in your spirit and determination are you prepared for war. In all else you are totally unprepared, with a bad cause to start with. At first you will make headway, but as your limited resources begin to fail, shut out from the markets of Europe as you will be, your cause will begin to wane. If your people will but stop and think, they must see in the end that you will surely fail.\nIn January 1861, as more Southern states seceded from the Union, Sherman was required to take receipt of arms surrendered to the Louisiana State Militia by the U.S. arsenal at Baton Rouge. Instead of complying, he resigned his position as superintendent, declaring to the governor of Louisiana that \"on no earthly account will I do any act or think any thought hostile to or in defiance of the old Government of the United States.\"\nSt. Louis interlude.\nSherman departed Louisiana and traveled to Washington, D.C., possibly in the hope of securing a position in the U.S. Army. At the White House, Sherman met with Abraham Lincoln a few days after his inauguration as president of the United States. Sherman expressed grave concerns about the North's poor state of preparedness for the looming civil war, but he found Lincoln unresponsive.\nSherman then moved to St. Louis to become president of a streetcar company called the Fifth Street Railroad. Thus, he was living in the border state of Missouri as the secession crisis reached its climax. While trying to hold himself aloof from politics, he observed first-hand the efforts of Congressman Frank Blair, who later served under Sherman in the U.S. Army, to keep Missouri in the Union. In early April, Sherman declined Montgomery Blair's offer of the administrative position of chief clerk in the War Department, despite Blair's promise that it would be followed by nomination as Assistant Secretary of War after the U.S. Congress assembled in July.\nAfter the April 12\u201313 bombardment of Fort Sumter and its subsequent capture by the Confederacy, Sherman hesitated about committing to military service. He privately ridiculed Lincoln's call for 75,000 three-month volunteers to quell secession, reportedly saying: \"Why, you might as well attempt to put out the flames of a burning house with a squirt-gun.\" In May, however, he offered himself for service in the regular Army. Senator John Sherman (his younger brother and a political ally of President Lincoln) and other connections in Washington helped him to obtain a commission. On June 3, he wrote in a letter to his brother-in-law: \"I still think it is to be a long war\u2014very long\u2014much longer than any Politician thinks.\"\nCivil War service.\nFirst commissions and Bull Run.\nSherman was first commissioned as colonel of the 13th U.S. Infantry Regiment, effective May 14, 1861. This was a new regiment yet to be raised. In fact, Sherman's first command was a brigade of three-month volunteers who fought in the First Battle of Bull Run on July 21, 1861. It was one of the four brigades in the division commanded by General Daniel Tyler, which was in turn one of the five divisions in the Army of Northeastern Virginia under General Irvin McDowell.\nThe engagement at Bull Run was a disastrous defeat for the Union, dashing hopes for a rapid resolution of the conflict. Sherman was one of the few Union officers to distinguish himself in the field and historian Donald L. Miller has characterized Sherman's performance at Bull Run as \"exemplary\". During the fighting, Sherman was grazed by bullets in the knee and shoulder. According to British military historian Brian Holden-Reid, \"if Sherman had committed tactical errors during the attack, he more than compensated for these during the subsequent retreat\". Holden-Reid also concluded that Sherman \"might have been as unseasoned as the men he commanded, but he had not fallen prey to the na\u00efve illusions nursed by so many on the field of First Bull Run.\"\nThe outcome at Bull Run caused Sherman to question his own judgment as an officer and the capabilities of his volunteer troops. However, Sherman impressed Lincoln during the President's visit to the troops on July 23, and Lincoln promoted Sherman to brigadier general of volunteers effective May 17, 1861. This made Sherman senior in rank to Ulysses S. Grant, his future commander. Sherman was then assigned to serve under Robert Anderson in the Department of the Cumberland, in Louisville, Kentucky. In October, Sherman succeeded Anderson in command of that department. In his memoirs, Sherman would later write that he saw that new assignment as breaking a promise by President Lincoln that he would not be given such a prominent leadership position.\nKentucky and breakdown.\nHaving succeeded Anderson at Louisville, Sherman now had principal military responsibility for Kentucky, a border state in which the Confederates held Columbus and Bowling Green, and were also present near the Cumberland Gap. He became exceedingly pessimistic about the outlook for his command and he complained frequently to Washington about shortages, while providing exaggerated estimates of the strength of the rebel forces and requesting inordinate numbers of reinforcements. Critical press reports about Sherman began to appear after the U.S. Secretary of War, Simon Cameron, visited Louisville in October 1861. In early November, Sherman asked to be relieved of his command. He was promptly replaced by Don Carlos Buell and transferred to St. Louis. In December, he was put on leave by Henry W. Halleck, commander of the Department of the Missouri, who found him unfit for duty and sent him to Lancaster, Ohio, to recuperate. While he was at home, his wife Ellen wrote to his brother, Senator John Sherman, seeking advice and complaining of \"that melancholy insanity to which your family is subject\". In his private correspondence, Sherman later wrote that the concerns of command \"broke me down\" and admitted to having contemplated suicide. His problems were compounded when the \"Cincinnati Commercial\" described him as \"insane\".\nBy mid-December 1861 Sherman had recovered sufficiently to return to service under Halleck in the Department of the Missouri. In March, Halleck's command was redesignated the Department of the Mississippi and enlarged to unify command in the West. Sherman's initial assignments were rear-echelon commands, first of an instructional barracks near St. Louis and then in command of the District of Cairo. Operating from Paducah, Kentucky, he provided logistical support for the operations of Grant to capture Fort Donelson in February 1862. Grant, the previous commander of the District of Cairo, had just won a major victory at Fort Henry and been given command of the ill-defined District of West Tennessee. Although Sherman was technically the senior officer, he wrote to Grant, \"I feel anxious about you as I know the great facilities [the Confederates] have of concentration by means of the River and R[ail] Road, but [I] have faith in you\u2014Command me in any way.\"\nShiloh.\nAfter Grant captured Fort Donelson, Sherman got his wish to serve under Grant when he was assigned on March 1, 1862, to the Army of West Tennessee as commander of the 5th Division. His first major test under Grant was at the Battle of Shiloh. The massive Confederate attack on the morning of April 6 took most of the senior Union commanders by surprise. Sherman had dismissed the intelligence reports from militia officers, refusing to believe that Confederate General Albert Sidney Johnston would leave his base at Corinth. He took no precautions beyond strengthening his picket lines, and refused to entrench, build abatis, or send out reconnaissance patrols. At Shiloh, he may have wished to avoid appearing overly alarmed in order to escape the kind of criticism he had received in Kentucky. Indeed, he had written to his wife that if he took more precautions \"they'd call me crazy again\". Despite being caught unprepared by the attack, Sherman rallied his division and conducted an orderly, fighting retreat that helped avert a disastrous Union rout.\nWith a heavy rain coming down at the end of the first day of fighting at Shiloh, Sherman came upon Grant standing under a large oak tree, his cigar glowing in the darkness. Heeding, Sherman later said, \"some wise and sudden instinct not to mention retreat,\" he made a noncommittal remark: \"Well, Grant, we've had the devil's own day, haven't we?\" \"Yes,\" Grant replied, puffing on his cigar. \"Lick 'em tomorrow, though.\"\nSherman proved instrumental to mounting the successful Union counterattack of the following day, April 7. At Shiloh, Sherman was wounded twice\u2014in the hand and shoulder\u2014and had three horses shot out from under him. His performance was praised by Grant and Halleck, and after the battle he was promoted to major general of volunteers, effective May 1. This success contributed greatly to raising Sherman's spirits and changing his personal outlook on the Civil War and his role in it. According to Sherman's biographer Robert O'Connell, \"Shiloh marked the turning point of his life.\"\nIn late April, a Union force of 100,000 men under Halleck, with Grant relegated to second-in-command, began advancing slowly against Corinth. Sherman commanded the division on the extreme right of the Union's right wing (under George Henry Thomas). Shortly after the Union forces occupied Corinth on May 30, Sherman persuaded Grant not to resign his command, despite the serious difficulties he was having with Halleck. Sherman offered Grant an example from his own life: \"Before the battle of Shiloh, I was cast down by a mere newspaper assertion of 'crazy', but that single battle gave me new life, and I'm now in high feather.\" He told Grant that, if he remained in the army, \"some happy accident might restore you to favor and your true place\". In July, Grant's situation improved when Halleck left for the East to become general-in-chief. Sherman then became the military governor of occupied Memphis.\nVicksburg.\nIn November 1862, Grant, acting as commander of the Union forces in the state of Mississippi, launched a campaign to capture the city of Vicksburg, the principal Confederate stronghold along the Mississippi River. Grant made Sherman a corps commander and put him in charge of half of his forces. According to historian John D. Winters's \"The Civil War in Louisiana\" (1963), at this stage Sherman\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...had yet to display any marked talents for leadership. Sherman, beset by hallucinations and unreasonable fears and finally contemplating suicide, had been relieved from command in Kentucky. He later began a new climb to success at Shiloh and Corinth under Grant. Still, if he muffed his Vicksburg assignment, which had begun unfavorably, he would rise no higher. As a man, Sherman was an eccentric mixture of strength and weakness. Although he was impatient, often irritable and depressed, petulant, headstrong, and unreasonably gruff, he had solid soldierly qualities. His men swore by him, and most of his fellow officers admired him.\nIn December, Sherman's forces suffered a severe repulse at the Battle of Chickasaw Bayou, just north of Vicksburg. Sherman's operations were supposed to be coordinated with an advance on Vicksburg by Grant from another direction. Unbeknownst to Sherman, Grant abandoned his advance, and Sherman's river expedition met more resistance than expected. Soon after, Major General John A. McClernand ordered Sherman's XV Corps to join in his assault on Arkansas Post. Grant, who was on poor terms with McClernand, regarded this as a politically motivated distraction from the efforts to take Vicksburg, but Sherman had targeted Arkansas Post independently and considered the operation worthwhile. Arkansas Post was taken by the Union army and navy on January 11, 1863.\nThe failure of the first phase of the campaign against Vicksburg led Grant to formulate an unorthodox new strategy, which called for the invading Union army to leave its supply train and subsist by foraging. Sherman initially expressed reservations about the wisdom of these plans, but he soon submitted to Grant's leadership and the campaign in the spring of 1863 cemented Sherman's personal ties to Grant. The bulk of Grant's forces were now organized into three corps: the XIII Corps under McClernand, the XV Corps under Sherman, and the XVII Corps under Sherman's young prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Maj. Gen. James B. McPherson. During the long and complicated maneuvers against Vicksburg, one newspaper complained that the \"army was being ruined in mud-turtle expeditions, under the leadership of a drunkard [Grant], whose confidential adviser [Sherman] was a lunatic\". When Vicksburg fell on July 4, 1863, after a prolonged siege, the Union had achieved a major strategic victory, putting navigation along the Mississippi River entirely under Union control and effectively cutting off the western half of the Confederacy from the eastern half.\nDuring the siege of Vicksburg, Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston had gathered a force of 30,000 men in Jackson, Mississippi, with the intention of relieving the garrison under the command of John C. Pemberton that was trapped inside Vicksburg. After Pemberton surrendered to Grant on July 4, Johnston advanced toward the rear of Grant's forces. In response to this threat, Grant instructed Sherman to attack Johnston. Sherman conducted the ensuing Jackson Expedition, which concluded successfully on July 25 with the re-capture of the city of Jackson. This helped ensure that the Mississippi River would remain in Union hands for the remainder of the war. According to Holden-Reid, Sherman finally \"had cut his teeth as an army commander\" with the Jackson Expedition.\nChattanooga.\nAfter the surrender of Vicksburg and the re-capture of Jackson, Sherman was given the rank of brigadier general in the regular army, in addition to his rank as a major general of volunteers. His family traveled from Ohio to visit him at the camp near Vicksburg. Sherman's nine-year-old son, Willie, the \"Little Sergeant\", died from typhoid fever contracted during the trip.\nOrdered to relieve the Union forces besieged in the city of Chattanooga, Tennessee, Sherman departed from Memphis on October 11, 1863, aboard a train bound for Chattanooga. When Sherman's train passed Collierville it came under attack by 3,000 Confederate cavalry and eight guns under James Ronald Chalmers. Sherman took command of the infantrymen in the local Union garrison and successfully repelled the Confederate attack. Following the defeat of the Army of the Cumberland at the Battle of Chickamauga by Confederate general Braxton Bragg's Army of Tennessee, President Lincoln re-organized the Union forces in the West as the Military Division of the Mississippi, placing it under General Grant's command. Sherman then succeeded Grant at the head of the Army of the Tennessee.\nAt Chattanooga, Grant instructed Sherman to attack the right flank of Bragg's forces, which were entrenched along Missionary Ridge overlooking the city. On November 25, Sherman took his assigned target of Billy Goat Hill at the north end of the ridge, only to find that it was separated from the main spine by a rock-strewn ravine. When he attempted to attack the main spine at Tunnel Hill, his troops were repeatedly repelled by Patrick Cleburne's heavy division, the best unit in Bragg's army. Grant then ordered Thomas to attack the center of the Confederate line. This frontal assault was intended as a diversion, but it unexpectedly succeeded in capturing the enemy's entrenchments and routing the Confederate Army of Tennessee, bringing the Union's Chattanooga campaign to a successful completion.\nAfter Chattanooga, Sherman led a column to relieve Union forces under Ambrose Burnside, thought to be in peril at Knoxville. In February 1864, he commanded an expedition to Meridian, Mississippi, intended to disrupt Confederate infrastructure and communications. Sherman's army captured the city of Meridian on February 14 and proceeded to destroy 105 miles of railroad and 61 bridges, while burning at least 10 locomotives and 28 railcars. The army took 4,000 prisoners and commandeered many wagons and horses. Thousands of refugees, both black and white, joined Sherman's columns, which on February 20 finally withdrew toward Canton.\nAtlanta.\nThe Meridian campaign marked the end of Sherman's brief tenure as commander of the Army of the Tennessee. Sherman had, up to that point, achieved mixed success as a general, and controversy attached especially to his performance at Chattanooga. However, he enjoyed Grant's confidence and friendship. When Lincoln called Grant east in the spring of 1864 to take command of all the Union armies, Grant appointed Sherman (by then known to his soldiers as \"Uncle Billy\") to succeed him as head of the Military Division of the Mississippi, which entailed command of Union troops in the Western Theater of the war. As Grant took overall command of the armies of the United States, Sherman wrote to him outlining his strategy to bring the war to an end: \"If you can whip Lee and I can march to the Atlantic I think ol' Uncle Abe [Lincoln] will give us twenty days leave to see the young folks.\"\nSherman proceeded to invade the state of Georgia with three armies: the 60,000-strong Army of the Cumberland under Thomas, the 25,000-strong Army of the Tennessee under James B. McPherson, and the 13,000-strong Army of the Ohio under John M. Schofield. He conducted a series of flanking maneuvers through rugged terrain against Confederate general Joseph E. Johnston's Army of Tennessee, attempting a direct assault only at the Battle of Kennesaw Mountain. The Confederate victory at Kennesaw Mountain did little to halt Sherman's advance toward Atlanta. In July, the cautious Johnston was replaced by the more aggressive John Bell Hood, who played to Sherman's strength by challenging him to direct battles on open ground. Meanwhile, in August, Sherman \"learned that I had been commissioned a major-general in the regular army, which was unexpected, and not desired until successful in the capture of Atlanta\".\nSherman's Atlanta campaign concluded successfully on September 2, 1864, with the capture of the city, which Hood had been forced to abandon. After ordering almost all civilians to abandon the city in September, Sherman gave instructions that all military and government buildings in Atlanta be burned, although many private homes and shops were burned as well. The capture of Atlanta made Sherman a household name and was decisive in ensuring Lincoln's re-election in November. Sherman's success caused the collapse of the once powerful \"Copperhead\" faction within the Democratic Party, which had advocated immediate peace negotiations with the Confederacy. It also dealt a major blow to the popularity of the Democratic presidential candidate, George B. McClellan, whose victory in the election had until then appeared likely to many, including Lincoln himself. According to Holden-Reid, \"Sherman did more than any other man apart from the president in creating [the] climate of opinion\" that afforded Lincoln a comfortable victory over McClellan at the polls.\nMarch to the Sea.\nDuring September and October, Sherman and Hood played a cat-and-mouse game in northern Georgia and Alabama, as Hood threatened Sherman's communications to the north. Eventually, Sherman won approval from his superiors for a plan to cut loose from his communications and march south, having advised Grant that he could \"make Georgia howl\". In response, Hood moved north into Tennessee. Sherman at first trivialized the corresponding threat, reportedly saying that he would \"give [Hood] his rations\" to go in that direction, as \"my business is down south\". Sherman left forces under Major Generals George H. Thomas and John M. Schofield to deal with Hood; their forces eventually smashed Hood's army in the battles of Franklin (November 30) and Nashville (December 15\u201316).\nAfter the November elections, Sherman began marching on November 15 with 62,000 men in the direction of the port city of Savannah, Georgia, living off the land and causing, by his own estimate, more than $100\u00a0million in property damage. At the end of this campaign, known as Sherman's March to the Sea, his troops took Savannah on December 21. Upon reaching Savannah, Sherman appointed Private A. O. Granger as his personal secretary. Sherman then dispatched a message to Lincoln, offering him the city as a Christmas present.\nSherman's success in Georgia received ample coverage in the Northern press at a time when Grant seemed to be making little progress in his fight against General Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia. A bill was introduced in Congress to promote Sherman to Grant's rank of lieutenant general, probably with a view toward having him replace Grant as commander of the Union Army. Sherman wrote both to his brother, Senator John Sherman, and to General Grant vehemently repudiating any such promotion. According to a war-time account, it was around this time Sherman made his memorable declaration of loyalty to Grant:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;General Grant \"is a great general\". I know him well. He stood by me when I was crazy, and I stood by him when he was drunk; and now, sir, we stand by each other always.\nWhile in Savannah, Sherman learned from a newspaper that his infant son Charles Celestine had died during the Savannah campaign; the general had never seen the child.\nFinal campaigns in the Carolinas.\nGrant then ordered Sherman to embark his army on steamers and join the Union forces confronting Lee in Virginia, but Sherman instead persuaded Grant to allow him to march north through the Carolinas, destroying everything of military value along the way, as he had done in Georgia. He was particularly interested in targeting South Carolina, the first state to secede from the Union, because of the effect that it would have on Southern morale. His army proceeded north through South Carolina against light resistance from the troops of General Johnston. Upon hearing that Sherman's men were advancing on corduroy roads through the Salkehatchie swamps at a rate of a dozen miles per day, Johnston \"made up his mind that there had been no such army in existence since the days of Julius Caesar\".\nSherman captured Columbia, the state capital, on February 17, 1865. Fires began that night and by next morning most of the central city was destroyed. The burning of Columbia has engendered controversy ever since, with some claiming the fires were a deliberate act of vengeance by the Union troops and others that the fires were accidental, caused in part by the burning bales of cotton that the retreating Confederates left behind them.\nLocal Native American Lumbee guides helped Sherman's army cross the Lumber River, which was flooded by torrential rains, into North Carolina. According to Sherman, the trek across the Lumber River and through the swamps, pocosins, and creeks of Robeson County was \"the damnedest marching I ever saw\". Thereafter, his troops did relatively little damage to the civilian infrastructure. North Carolina, unlike its southern neighbor, was regarded by the Union troops as a reluctant Confederate state, having been second from last to secede from the Union, ahead only of Tennessee.\nThe only general engagement during Sherman's marches through Georgia and the Carolinas, the Battle of Bentonville, took place on March 19\u201321. Having defeated the Confederate forces under Johnston at Bentonville, Sherman proceeded to rendezvous at Goldsboro with the Union troops that awaited him there after the captures of the coastal cities of New Bern and Wilmington.\nIn late March, Sherman briefly left his forces and traveled to City Point, Virginia, to confer with Grant. Lincoln happened to be at City Point at the same time, making possible the only three-way meeting of Lincoln, Grant, and Sherman during the war. Also present at the City Point conference was Rear Admiral David Dixon Porter. This meeting was memorialized in G. P. A. Healy's painting \"The Peacemakers\". After returning to Goldsboro, Sherman marched to the state capital, Raleigh, where Sherman sought to communicate with Johnston's army regarding possible terms for ending the war. On April 9, Sherman relayed to his troops the news that Lee had surrendered to Grant at Appomattox Court House and that the Confederate Army of Northern Virginia had ceased to exist.\nConfederate surrender.\nFollowing Lee's surrender and the assassination of Lincoln on April 14, 1865, Sherman met with Johnston on April 17 at Bennett Place in Durham, North Carolina, to negotiate a Confederate surrender. At the insistence of Johnston, Confederate President Jefferson Davis, and Secretary of War John C. Breckinridge, Sherman conditionally agreed to generous terms that dealt with both military and political issues. On April 20, Sherman dispatched a memorandum with those terms to the government in Washington.\nSherman believed that the terms that he had agreed to were consistent with the views that Lincoln had expressed at City Point, and that they offered the best way to prevent Johnston from ordering his men to go into the wilderness and conduct a destructive guerrilla campaign. However, Sherman had proceeded without authority from Grant, the newly installed President Andrew Johnson, or the Cabinet. The assassination of Lincoln had caused the political climate in Washington to turn against the prospect of a rapid reconciliation with the defeated Confederates, and the Johnson administration rejected Sherman's terms. Grant may have had to intervene to save Sherman from dismissal for having overstepped his authority. The U.S. Secretary of War, Edwin M. Stanton, leaked Sherman's memorandum to \"The New York Times\", intimating that Sherman might have been bribed to allow Davis to escape capture by the Union troops. This precipitated a deep and long-lasting enmity between Sherman and Stanton, and it intensified Sherman's disdain for politicians.\nGrant then offered Johnston purely military terms, similar to those that he had negotiated with Lee at Appomattox. Johnston, ignoring instructions from President Davis, accepted those terms on April 26, 1865, formally surrendered his army and all the Confederate forces in the Carolinas, Georgia, and Florida. This was the largest single capitulation of the war. Sherman proceeded with some of his troops to Washington, where they marched in the Grand Review of the Armies on May 24.\nSlavery and emancipation.\nSherman was not an abolitionist before the war and, like others of his time and background, he did not believe in \"Negro equality\". Before the war, Sherman expressed some sympathy with the view of Southern whites that the black race was benefiting from slavery, although he opposed breaking up slave families and advocated that laws forbidding the education of slaves be repealed. Throughout the Civil War, Sherman declined to employ black troops in his armies.\nIn his \"Memoirs\", Sherman commented on the political pressures of 1864\u20131865 to encourage the escape of slaves, in part to avoid the possibility that \"able-bodied slaves will be called into the military service of the rebels\". Sherman rejected this, arguing that it would have delayed the \"successful end\" of the war and the \"[liberation of] \"all\" slaves\". According to Sherman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;My aim then was to whip the rebels, to humble their pride, to follow them to their inmost recesses, and make them fear and dread us. \"Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.\" I did not want them to cast in our teeth what General Hood had once done at Atlanta, that we had to call on \"their\" slaves to help us to subdue them.\nTens of thousands of escaped slaves nonetheless joined Sherman's marches through Georgia and the Carolinas as refugees. Their fate soon became a pressing military and political issue. Some abolitionists accused Sherman of doing too little to alleviate the precarious living conditions of these refugees, motivating Secretary of War Stanton to travel to Georgia in January 1865 to investigate the situation. On January 12, Sherman and Stanton met in Savannah with twenty local black leaders, most of them Baptist or Methodist ministers, invited by Sherman. According to historian Eric Foner, \"the 'Colloquy' between Sherman, Stanton, and the black leaders offered a rare lens through which the experience of slavery and the aspirations that would help to shape Reconstruction came into sharp focus.\"\nAfter Sherman's departure the spokesman for the black leaders, Baptist minister Garrison Frazier, declared in response to Stanton's inquiry about the feelings of the black community:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFour days later, Sherman issued his Special Field Orders, No. 15. The orders provided for the settlement of 40,000 freed slaves and black refugees on land expropriated from white landowners in South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida. Sherman appointed Brig. Gen. Rufus Saxton, an abolitionist from Massachusetts who had previously directed the recruitment of black soldiers, to implement that plan. Those orders, which became the basis of the claim that the Union government had promised freed slaves \"forty acres and a mule\", were revoked later that year by President Johnson.\nToward the end of the Civil War, some elements within the Republican Party regarded Sherman as being strongly prejudiced against black people. Sherman's views on race evolved significantly over time. He dealt in a friendly and unaffected way with the black people that he met during his career. In 1888, near the end of his life, Sherman published an essay in the \"North American Review\" defending the full civil rights of black citizens in the former Confederacy. In that essay, Sherman called upon the South to \"let the negro vote, and count his vote honestly\", adding that \"otherwise, so sure as there is a God in Heaven, you will have another war, more cruel than the last, when the torch and dagger will take the place of the muskets of well-ordered battalions\".\nStrategies.\nSherman's military legacy rests primarily on his command of logistics and on his brilliance as a strategist. The influential 20th-century British military historian and theorist B.\u00a0H. Liddell Hart ranked Sherman as \"the first modern general\" and one of the most important strategists in the annals of war, along with Scipio Africanus, Belisarius, Napoleon Bonaparte, T.\u00a0E. Lawrence, and Erwin Rommel. Liddell Hart's views on the historical significance of Sherman have since been discussed and, to varying extents, defended by subsequent military scholars such as Jay Luvaas, Victor Davis Hanson, and Brian Holden-Reid.\nManeuver warfare.\nLiddell Hart credited Sherman with mastery of maneuver warfare, also known as the \"indirect approach\". In maneuver warfare, a commander seeks to defeat the enemy on the battleground through shock, disruption, and surprise, while minimizing frontal attacks on well-defended positions. According to Liddell Hart, this strategy was most clearly illustrated by Sherman's series of turning movements against Johnston during the Atlanta campaign. Liddell Hart also declared that the study of Sherman's campaigns had contributed significantly to his own \"theory of strategy and tactics in mechanized warfare\", and claimed that this had in turn influenced Heinz Guderian's doctrine of and Rommel's use of tanks during the Second World War. Another World War II-era student of Liddell Hart's writings on Sherman was General George S. Patton, who \"spent a long vacation studying Sherman's campaigns on the ground in Georgia and the Carolinas, with the aid of [Liddell Hart's] book\" and later \"carried out his [bold] plans, in super-Sherman style\".\nHard war.\nLike Grant and Lincoln, Sherman was convinced that the Confederacy's strategic, economic, and psychological ability to wage further war needed to be crushed if the fighting were to end. Therefore, he believed that the North had to conduct its campaign as a war of conquest, employing scorched earth tactics to break the backbone of the rebellion. Historian Mark Grimsley promoted the use of the term \"hard war\" to refer to this strategy in the context of the American Civil War. Sherman's advance through Georgia and the Carolinas was characterized by widespread destruction of civilian supplies and infrastructure. This strategy has been characterized by some military historians as an early form of total war, although the appropriateness of that term has been questioned by many scholars. Holden-Reid, for instance, argued that \"the concept of 'total war' is deeply flawed, an imprecise label that at best describes the two world wars but is of dubious relevance to the U.S. Civil War.\"\nAfter the fall of Atlanta in 1864, Sherman ordered the city's immediate evacuation. When the city council appealed to him to rescind that order, on the grounds that it would cause great hardship to women, children, the elderly, and others who bore no responsibility for the conduct of the war, Sherman sent a written response in which he sought to articulate his conviction that a lasting peace would be possible only if the Union were restored, and that he was therefore prepared to do all he could do to end the rebellion:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You cannot qualify war in harsher terms than I will. War is cruelty, and you cannot refine it; and those who brought war into our country deserve all the curses and maledictions a people can pour out. I know I had no hand in making this war, and I know I will make more sacrifices to-day than any of you to secure peace. But you cannot have peace and a division of our country. If the United States submits to a division now, it will not stop, but will go on until we reap the fate of Mexico, which is eternal war\u00a0... I want peace, and believe it can only be reached through union and war, and I will ever conduct war with a view to perfect and early success.\nThe damage done by Sherman's marches through Georgia and the Carolinas was almost entirely limited to the destruction of property. Looting was officially forbidden, but historians disagree on how rigorously this regulation was enforced. Though exact figures are not available, the loss of civilian life appears to have been very small. Consuming supplies, wrecking infrastructure, and undermining morale were Sherman's stated goals, and several of his Southern contemporaries noted this and commented on it. For instance, Alabama-born Major Henry Hitchcock, who served in Sherman's staff, declared that \"it is a terrible thing to consume and destroy the sustenance of thousands of people\", but if the scorched earth strategy served \"to paralyze their husbands and fathers who are fighting\u00a0[...] it is mercy in the end\". One of Sherman's tactics was to destroy the railways by pulling up the rails, heating them over a bonfire, and twisting them to leave behind what came to be known as \"Sherman's neckties\". This made repairs extremely difficult at a time when the Confederacy lacked both iron and heavy machinery.\nThe severity of the destructive acts by Union troops was significantly greater in South Carolina than in Georgia or North Carolina. This appears to have been a consequence of the animosity felt by Union soldiers and officers for the state that they regarded as the \"cockpit of secession\". One of the most serious accusations against Sherman was that he allowed his troops to burn the city of Columbia. Some pro-Confederate sources have repeated a claim that Oliver Otis Howard, the commander of Sherman's 15th Corps, said in 1867 that \"It is useless to deny that our troops burnt Columbia, for I saw them in the act.\" Sherman stated that \"[i]f I had made up my mind to burn Columbia I would have burnt it with no more feeling than I would a common prairie dog village; but I did not do it\". Sherman's official report on the burning placed the blame on Confederate Lieutenant General Wade Hampton, who Sherman said had ordered the burning of cotton in the streets. In his memoirs, Sherman said, \"In my official report of this conflagration, I distinctly charged it to General Wade Hampton, and confess I did so pointedly, to shake the faith of his people in him, for he was in my opinion boastful, and professed to be the special champion of South Carolina.\" Historian James M. McPherson has concluded that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The fullest and most dispassionate study of this controversy blames all parties in varying proportions\u2014including the Confederate authorities for the disorder that characterized the evacuation of Columbia, leaving thousands of cotton bales on the streets (some of them burning) and huge quantities of liquor undestroyed\u00a0[...] Sherman did not deliberately burn Columbia; a majority of Union soldiers, including the general himself, worked through the night to put out the fires.\nIn this general connection, Sherman and his subordinates (particularly John A. Logan) took steps to protect Raleigh, North Carolina, from acts of revenge after the assassination of President Lincoln.\nPostwar service.\nIn May 1865, after the major Confederate armies had surrendered, Sherman wrote in a personal letter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I confess, without shame, I am sick and tired of fighting\u2014its glory is all moonshine; even success the most brilliant is over dead and mangled bodies, with the anguish and lamentations of distant families, appealing to me for sons, husbands and fathers\u00a0... tis only those who have never heard a shot, never heard the shriek and groans of the wounded and lacerated\u00a0... that cry aloud for more blood, more vengeance, more desolation. \nIn June 1865, two months after Lee's surrender at Appomattox, Sherman received his first postwar command, originally called the Military Division of the Mississippi, later the Military Division of the Missouri, which came to comprise the territory between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains. Sherman's efforts in that position were focused on protecting the main wagon roads, such as the Oregon, Bozeman, and Santa Fe Trails. Tasked with guarding a vast territory with limited forces, Sherman grew weary of the multitude of requests for military protection addressed to him. On July 25, 1866, the U.S. Congress created the new rank of General of the Army for Grant, while also promoting Sherman to Grant's previous rank of lieutenant general.\nIndian Wars.\nThere was little large-scale military action against the Indians during the first three years of Sherman's tenure as divisional commander, as Sherman allowed negotiations between the U.S. government and Indian leaders to proceed, while he built up his troops and awaited completion of the Union Pacific and Kansas Pacific Railroads. During this time, he was a member of the Indian Peace Commission. Though the commission was responsible for the negotiation of the Medicine Lodge Treaty and the Treaty of Fort Laramie, Sherman did not have a significant role in drafting those treaties because in both cases he was called away to Washington during the negotiations. In one instance, he was summoned to testify as a witness in the impeachment of Andrew Johnson. He testified in the trial on April 11 and 13, 1868. He successfully negotiated other treaties, such as the removal of Navajos from the Bosque Redondo to traditional lands in Western New Mexico.\nWhen the Medicine Lodge Treaty failed in 1868, Sherman authorized his subordinate in Missouri, Major General Philip Sheridan, to lead the winter campaign of 1868\u20131869, which included the Battle of Washita River. Sheridan used hard-war tactics similar to those he and Sherman had employed in the Civil War. In 1871, Sherman ordered that the leaders of the Warren Wagon Train raid, an attack by a Kiowa and Comanche war party from which Sherman himself had narrowly escaped, be tried for murder in Jacksboro, Texas. The resulting trial of Satanta and Big Tree marked the first occasion in which Native American chiefs were tried by a civilian court in the United States.\nSherman regarded the expansion of the railroad system \"as the most important element now in progress to facilitate the military interests of our Frontier\". One of the main concerns of his postwar service was, therefore, to protect the construction and operation of the railroads from hostile Indians. Sherman's views on Indian matters were often strongly expressed. Following the 1866 Fetterman Massacre, in which 81 U.S. soldiers were ambushed and killed by Native American warriors, Sherman telegraphed Grant that \"we must act with vindictive earnestness against the Sioux, even to their extermination, men, women and children\". In 1867, he wrote to Grant that \"we are not going to let a few thieving, ragged Indians check and stop the progress\" of the railroads. In 1873, Sherman wrote in a private letter that \"during an assault, the soldiers can not pause to distinguish between male and female, or even discriminate as to age. As long as resistance is made, death must be meted out, but the moment all resistance ceases, the firing will stop and all survivors turned over to the proper Indian agent\".\nDisplacement of the Plains Indians was facilitated by the growth of the railroads and the eradication of the bison. Sherman believed that bison eradication should be encouraged as a means of weakening Indian resistance to assimilation. He voiced this view in remarks to a joint session of the Texas legislature in 1875, although the U.S. Army under Sherman's command never conducted its own program of bison extermination. Sherman encouraged bison hunting by private citizens and, when Congress passed a law in 1874 to protect the bison from over-hunting, Sherman helped convince President Grant to use a pocket veto to prevent it from coming into force.\nGeneral of the Army.\nWhen Grant became president in 1869, Sherman was appointed Commanding General of the United States Army and promoted to the rank of full general. After the death of John A. Rawlins, Sherman also served for one month as acting Secretary of War.\nSherman's early tenure as Commanding General was marred by political difficulties, many of which stemmed from disagreements with Secretary of War Rawlins and his successor, William W. Belknap, both of whom Sherman felt had assumed too much power over the army and reduced the position of Commanding General to a sinecure. Sherman also clashed with Eastern humanitarians who were critical of the army's harsh treatment of the Indians and who had apparently found an ally in President Grant. To escape from these difficulties, Sherman moved his headquarters to St. Louis in 1874. He returned to Washington in 1876, when the new Secretary of War, Alphonso Taft, promised him greater authority.\nMuch of Sherman's time as Commanding General was devoted to making the Western and Plains states safe for settlement through the continuation of the Indian Wars, which included three significant campaigns: the Modoc War, the Great Sioux War of 1876, and the Nez Perce War. Despite his harsh treatment of the warring tribes, Sherman spoke out against speculators and government agents who abused the Native Americans living within the reservations. During this time, Sherman also reorganized the U.S. Army forts to better accommodate the shifting frontier.\nIn 1875, ten years after the end of the Civil War, Sherman became one of the first Civil War generals to publish his memoirs. The \"Memoirs of General William T. Sherman. By Himself\", published by D. Appleton &amp; Company in two volumes, began with the year 1846 (when the Mexican War began) and ended with a chapter about the \"military lessons of the [civil] war\". The publication of Sherman's memoirs sparked controversy and drew complaints from many quarters. Grant, who was president when Sherman's memoirs appeared, later remarked that others had told him that Sherman treated Grant unfairly but \"when I finished the book, I found I approved every word; that\u00a0... it was a true book, an honorable book, creditable to Sherman, just to his companions\u2014to myself particularly so\u2014just such a book as I expected Sherman would write.\"\nAccording to critic Edmund Wilson, Sherman:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[H]ad a trained gift of self-expression and was, as Mark Twain says, a master of narrative. [In his \"Memoirs\"] the vigorous account of his pre-war activities and his conduct of his military operations is varied in just the right proportion and to just the right degree of vivacity with anecdotes and personal experiences. We live through his campaigns\u00a0... in the company of Sherman himself. He tells us what he thought and what he felt, and he never strikes any attitudes or pretends to feel anything he does not feel.\nDuring the election of 1876, Southern Democrats who supported Wade Hampton for governor used mob violence to attack and intimidate African American voters in Charleston. Republican Governor Daniel Henry Chamberlain appealed to President Grant for military assistance. In October 1876, Grant, after issuing a proclamation, instructed Sherman to gather all available Atlantic region troops and dispatch them to South Carolina to stop the mob violence.\nOn June 19, 1879, Sherman delivered a wholly inspirational address to the graduating class of the Michigan Military Academy, in which he did not use the word hell, nor mention the horrors of war. However, on August 12, 1880, he addressed a crowd of more than 10,000 in Columbus, Ohio: \"There is many a boy here today who looks on war as all glory, but, boys, it is all hell.\" One month later a reporter for the Columbus Dispatch simplified those words to \"Gen. Sherman said war was hell\". By June 1881 it had become mainstream that General Sherman had said \"War is hell\".\nIn 1880, Sherman organized and accompanied President Rutherford B. Hayes' tour of the West Coast of the United States, the first undertaken by a president. One of Sherman's significant contributions as head of the Army was the establishment of the Command School (now the Command and General Staff College) at Fort Leavenworth in 1881. Sherman stepped down as commanding general on November 1, 1883, and retired from the army on February 8, 1884, at the then-mandatory retirement age of 64.\nFinal years.\nSherman lived most of the rest of his life in New York City. He was devoted to the theater and to amateur painting and was in demand as a colorful speaker at dinners and banquets, in which he indulged a fondness for quoting Shakespeare. During this period, he remained in contact with war veterans, and he was an active member of various social and charitable organizations.\nProposed as a Republican candidate for the presidential election of 1884, Sherman declined as emphatically as possible, saying, \"I will not accept if nominated and will not serve if elected.\" Such a categorical rejection of a candidacy is now referred to as a \"Shermanesque statement\".\nIn 1886, after the publication of Grant's memoirs, Sherman produced a \"second edition, revised and corrected\" of his own memoirs. This new edition, published by Appleton, added a second preface, a chapter about his life up to 1846, a chapter concerning the post-war period (ending with his 1884 retirement from the army), several appendices, portraits, improved maps, and an index. For the most part, Sherman refused to revise his original text on the ground that \"I disclaim the character of historian, but assume to be a witness on the stand before the great tribunal of history\" and \"any witness who may disagree with me should publish his own version of [the] facts in the truthful narration of which he is interested\". However, Sherman did include the views of some others in the appendices to the new edition.\nDeath.\nSherman died of pneumonia in New York City at 1:50\u00a0PM on February 14, 1891, six days after his 71st birthday. President Benjamin Harrison, who served under Sherman, sent a telegram to Sherman's family and ordered all national flags to be flown at half staff. Harrison, in a message to the Senate and the House of Representatives, wrote that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;He was an ideal soldier, and shared to the fullest the \"esprit de corps\" of the army, but he cherished the civil institutions organized under the Constitution, and was only a soldier that these might be perpetuated in undiminished usefulness and honor.\nOn February 19, a funeral service was held at his home, followed by a military procession. Joseph E. Johnston, the Confederate officer who had commanded the resistance to Sherman's troops in Georgia and the Carolinas, served as a pallbearer in New York City. It was a bitterly cold day and a friend of Johnston, fearing that the general might become ill, asked him to put on his hat. Johnston replied: \"If I were in [Sherman's] place, and he were standing in mine, he would not put on his hat.\" Johnston did catch a serious cold and died one month later of pneumonia.\nSherman's body was then transported to St. Louis, where another service was conducted at a local Catholic church on February 21, 1891. His son, Thomas Ewing Sherman, who was a Jesuit priest, presided over his father's funeral masses in New York City and in St. Louis. Former U.S. president and Civil War veteran Rutherford B. Hayes, who attended both ceremonies, said at the time that Sherman had been \"the most interesting and original character in the world.\" He is buried in Calvary Cemetery in St. Louis.\nReligious views.\nSherman's birth family was Presbyterian and he was originally baptized as such. His foster mother, Maria Ewing, was devoutly Catholic and raised her own children in that faith. Sherman was re-baptized as a Catholic, but Maria's husband, Senator Thomas Ewing, insisted that the young Sherman not be compelled to practice Catholicism. Sherman observed but did not join in the religious ceremonies of the Ewing household. He later married his foster sister Ellen, who was also a devout Catholic. In 1864, she took up temporary residence in South Bend, Indiana, in order to have her young family educated at the University of Notre Dame and St. Mary's College, both Catholic institutions.\nSherman wrote to his wife in 1842: \"I believe in good works rather than faith.\" In letters written in 1865 to Thomas, his eldest surviving son, General Sherman said \"I don't want you to be a soldier or a priest, but a good useful man\", and complained that Thomas's mother Ellen \"thinks religion is so important that everything else must give way to it\". Thomas's decision to abandon his career as a lawyer in 1878 to join the Jesuits and prepare for the Catholic priesthood caused Sherman profound distress, and he referred to it as a \"great calamity\". Father and son, however, were reconciled when Thomas returned to the United States in August 1880, after having travelled to England for his religious instruction.\nSome modern historians have characterized Sherman as a deist in the manner of Thomas Jefferson, while others identify him as an agnostic who accepted many Christian values but lacked faith. Except during the personal crisis triggered by his son Thomas's decision to become a priest, Sherman's personal attitude toward the Catholic Church was tolerant and even friendly at a time when anti-Catholic prejudice was common in the United States. In 1888, Sherman wrote publicly that \"my immediate family are strongly Catholic. I am \"not\" and cannot be.\" Upon Sherman's death, his son Thomas publicly declared: \"My father was baptized in the Catholic Church, married in the Catholic Church, and attended the Catholic Church until the outbreak of the civil war. Since that time he has not been a communicant of any church.\"\nHistorical reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSince the public mind has settled to the conclusion that the institution of slavery was so interwoven in our system that nothing but the interposition of Providence and horrid war could have eradicated it, and now that it is in the distant past, and that we as a nation, North and South, East and West, are the better for it, we believe that the war was worth to us all it cost in life and treasure. \u2013 W. T. Sherman (1887)\nIn the years immediately after the war, Sherman was popular in the North and well regarded by his own soldiers. At the same time, he was generally respected in the South as a military man, while his conservative politics were attractive to many white Southerners. By the 1880s, however, Southern \"Lost Cause\" writers began to demonize Sherman for his attacks on civilians in Georgia and South Carolina. The magazine \"Confederate Veteran\", based in Nashville, dedicated more attention to Sherman than to any other Union general, in part to enhance the visibility of the Civil War's western theater. In this new discourse, Sherman's devastation of railroads and plantations mattered less than his perceived insults to southern dignity and especially to its unprotected white womanhood. Sherman was thus presented by Lost-Cause authors as the antithesis of the Southern ideals of chivalry supposedly embodied by General Lee.\nIn the early 20th century, Sherman's role in the Civil War attracted attention from influential British military intellectuals, including Field Marshal Lord Wolseley, Maj. Gen. J. F. C. Fuller, and especially Capt. Liddell Hart. American historian Wesley Moody has argued that these commentators tended to filter Sherman's actions and his hard-war strategy through their own ideas about modern warfare, thereby contributing to the exaggeration of his \"atrocities\" and unintentionally feeding into the negative assessment of Sherman's moral character associated with the \"Lost Cause\" school of Southern historiography. This led to the publication of several works, notably John B. Walters's \"Merchant of Terror: General Sherman and Total War\" (1973), that presented Sherman as responsible for \"a mode of warfare which transgressed all ethical rules and showed an utter disregard for human rights and dignity.\" Following Walters, James Reston Jr. argued in 1984 that Sherman had planted the \"seed for the Agent Orange and Agent Blue programs of food deprivation in Vietnam\". More recently, historians such as Brian Holden-Reid have challenged such readings of Sherman's record and of his contributions to modern warfare.\nThe influential literary critic Edmund Wilson found in Sherman's \"Memoirs\" a fascinating and disturbing account of an \"appetite for warfare\" that \"grows as it feeds on the South\". Former U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara refers equivocally to the statement that \"war is cruelty and you cannot refine it\" in both the book \"Wilson's Ghost\" and in his interview for the documentary film \"The Fog of War\" (2003). When comparing Sherman's scorched-earth campaigns to the actions of the British Army during the Second Boer War (1899\u20131902)\u2014another war in which civilians were targeted because of their central role in sustaining a belligerent power\u2014South African historian Hermann Giliomee claims that it \"looks as if Sherman struck a better balance than the British commanders between severity and restraint in taking actions proportional to legitimate needs\". The admiration of scholars such as B. H. Liddell Hart, Lloyd Lewis, Victor Davis Hanson, John F. Marszalek, and Brian Holden-Reid for Sherman owes much to what they see as an approach to the exigencies of modern armed conflict that was both effective and principled.\nMonuments and tributes.\nThe gilded bronze Sherman Memorial (1902) by Augustus Saint-Gaudens stands at the Grand Army Plaza near the main entrance to New York City's Central Park. Sherman is represented astride his horse Ontario and led by a winged female figure of \"Victory\". Saint-Gaudens's \"Bust of William Tecumseh Sherman\", which he used as the basis for the larger Memorial, is at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Arlington National Cemetery features a smaller version of Saint-Gaudens's statue of \"Victory\".\nThe General William Tecumseh Sherman Monument (1903) by Carl Rohl-Smith stands near President's Park in Washington, D.C. The bronze monument consists of an equestrian statue of Sherman and a platform with a soldier at each corner, representing the infantry, artillery, cavalry, and engineer branches of the U.S. Army. The site was chosen because Sherman was reported to have stood there while reviewing returning Civil War troops in May 1865.\nOther posthumous tributes include Sherman Circle in the Petworth neighborhood of Washington, D.C., the M4 Sherman tank, which was named by the British during World War II, and the \"General Sherman\" Giant Sequoia tree, which is the most massive documented single-trunk tree in the world.\nThere are only a few Generals of the US Army who are honored on a US postage stamp, and even fewer who appear more than twice as General Sherman has. The first postage stamp to honor Sherman was released to the public by the US Post Office on February 22, 1893, a little more than two years after his death, on Washington's birthday.\nPublications.\nBooks.\nThis is actually a re-printing of the second, revised edition of 1889, published by D. Appleton &amp; Company, of New York City. The first edition was published in 1875 by Henry S. King &amp; Co., of London, and by Appleton in New York. All other \"editions\" of Sherman's memoirs are re-printings of the 1889 or, in some cases, the 1875 edition.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46721", "revid": "2387872", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46721", "title": "Edward VII", "text": "King of the United Kingdom from 1901 to 1910\nEdward VII (Albert Edward; 9 November 1841 \u2013 6 May 1910) was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Emperor of India, from 22 January 1901 until his death in 1910.\nThe second child and eldest son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Edward, nicknamed \"Bertie\", was Prince of Wales and heir apparent to the British throne for almost 60 years. During his mother's long reign, he was largely excluded from political influence and came to personify the leisured elite. He married Princess Alexandra of Denmark in 1863; the couple had six children. As Prince of Wales, Edward travelled throughout Britain performing ceremonial public duties and represented Britain on visits abroad. His tours of North America in 1860 and of the Indian subcontinent in 1875 proved popular successes. Despite this public approval, his reputation as a playboy prince soured his relationship with his mother.\nEdward inherited the throne on his mother's death in 1901. He played a role in the modernisation of the British Home Fleet and the reorganisation of the British Army after the Second Boer War of 1899 to 1902. He re-instituted traditional ceremonies as public displays and broadened the range of people with whom royalty socialised. He fostered good relations between Britain and other European countries, especially France, for which he was popularly called \"Peacemaker\", but his relationship with his nephew, German Emperor Wilhelm\u00a0II, was poor.\nThe Edwardian era, which covered Edward's reign and was named after him, coincided with the start of a new century and heralded significant changes in technology and society, including steam turbine propulsion and the rise of socialism. Edward died in the midst of a constitutional crisis that was resolved by the Parliament Act 1911, which restricted the power of the unelected House of Lords. Edward was succeeded as king by his only surviving son, George\u00a0V.\nEarly life and education.\nEdward was born at 10:48 am on 9 November 1841 at Buckingham Palace. He was the eldest son and second child of Queen Victoria and her husband, Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha. He was christened \"Albert Edward\" at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 25 January 1842. He was named Albert after his father and Edward after his maternal grandfather, Prince Edward, Duke of Kent and Strathearn. He was known as \"Bertie\" to the royal family throughout his life.\nAs the eldest son of the British sovereign, Edward was automatically Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay at birth. As a son of Prince Albert, he also held the titles of Prince of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Duke of Saxony. He was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester on 8 December 1841, Earl of Dublin on 17 January 1850, a Knight of the Garter on 9 November 1858, and a Knight of the Thistle on 24 May 1867. In 1863, he renounced his succession rights to the Duchy of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha in favour of his younger brother Alfred.\nThe Queen and Prince Albert were determined that their eldest son should have an education that would prepare him to be a model constitutional monarch. At age seven, Edward embarked on a rigorous educational programme devised by Albert, and supervised by several tutors. Unlike his elder sister Victoria, he did not excel in his studies. He tried to meet the expectations of his parents, but to no avail. Although Edward was not a diligent student\u2014his true talents were those of charm, sociability and tact\u2014Benjamin Disraeli described him as informed, intelligent and of sweet manner. After the completion of his secondary-level studies, his tutor Frederick Waymouth Gibbs was replaced by Robert Bruce as his personal governor.\nAfter an educational trip to Rome, undertaken in the first few months of 1859, Edward spent the summer of that year studying at the University of Edinburgh under, among others, the chemist Lyon Playfair. In October, he matriculated as an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford. Now released from the educational strictures imposed by his parents, he enjoyed studying for the first time and performed satisfactorily in examinations. In 1861, he transferred to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was tutored in history by Charles Kingsley, Regius Professor of Modern History. Kingsley's efforts brought forth the best academic performances of Edward's life, and Edward actually looked forward to his lectures.\nEarly adulthood.\nIn 1860, Edward undertook the first tour of North America by a Prince of Wales. His genial good humour and confident \"bonhomie\" made the tour a great success. He inaugurated the Victoria Bridge, Montreal, across the St Lawrence River, and laid the cornerstone of Parliament Hill, Ottawa. He watched Charles Blondin traverse Niagara Falls by highwire, and stayed for three days with President James Buchanan at the White House. Buchanan accompanied the prince to Mount Vernon, to pay his respects at the tomb of George Washington. Vast crowds greeted Edward everywhere. He met Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Ralph Waldo Emerson and Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Prayers for the royal family were said in Trinity Church, New York, for the first time since 1776. The four-month tour throughout Canada and the United States considerably boosted Edward's confidence and self-esteem, and had many diplomatic benefits for Great Britain.\nEdward had hoped to pursue a career in the British Army, but his mother vetoed an active military career. He had been gazetted colonel on 9 November 1858\u2014to his disappointment, as he had wanted to earn his commission by examination. In September 1861, he was sent to Germany, supposedly to watch military manoeuvres, but actually in order to engineer a meeting between him and Princess Alexandra of Denmark. The Queen and Prince Albert had already decided that Edward and Alexandra should marry. They met at Speyer on 24 September under the auspices of Edward's elder sister, Victoria, who had married the Crown Prince of Prussia in 1858. Princess Victoria, acting upon instructions from her mother, had met Alexandra at Strelitz in June; Alexandra made a very favourable impression. She and Edward were friendly from the start, and marriage plans advanced.\nEdward gained a reputation as a playboy. Determined to get some army experience, he attended manoeuvres in Ireland, during which he spent three nights with an actress, Nellie Clifden, who was hidden in the camp by his fellow officers. Albert, though ill, was appalled and visited Edward at Cambridge to issue a reprimand. Albert died in December 1861, just two weeks after the visit. The Queen was inconsolable, wore mourning clothes for the rest of her life and blamed Edward for his father's death. At first, she regarded her son with distaste as frivolous, indiscreet and irresponsible. She wrote to her eldest daughter, \"I never can, or shall, look at him without a shudder.\"\nMarriage.\nOnce widowed, the Queen effectively withdrew from public life. Shortly after Prince Albert's death, she arranged for Edward to embark on an extensive tour of the Middle East, visiting Egypt, Jerusalem, Damascus, Beirut and Istanbul. The British government wanted Edward to secure the friendship of Egypt's ruler, Said Pasha, to prevent French control of the Suez Canal if the Ottoman Empire collapsed. It was the first royal tour on which an official photographer, Francis Bedford, was in attendance.\nAs soon as Edward returned to Britain, preparations were made for his engagement, which was sealed at Laeken in Belgium on 9 September 1862. Edward married Alexandra at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 10 March 1863. He was 21; she was 18.\nThe couple established Marlborough House as their London residence and Sandringham House in Norfolk as their country retreat. They entertained on a lavish scale. Their marriage met with disapproval in certain circles because most of the Queen's relations were German, and Denmark was at loggerheads with Germany over the territories of Schleswig and Holstein. When Alexandra's father, King Christian\u00a0IX, inherited the throne of Denmark in November 1863, the German Confederation took the opportunity to invade and annex Schleswig-Holstein. The Queen was of two minds as to whether it was a suitable match, given the political climate. After the marriage, she expressed anxiety about their socialite lifestyle and attempted to dictate to them on various matters, including the names of their children.\nEdward had mistresses throughout his married life. He socialised with actress Lillie Langtry; Lady Randolph Churchill; Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick; actress Sarah Bernhardt; noblewoman Lady Susan Vane-Tempest; singer Hortense Schneider; prostitute Giulia Beneni (known as \"La Barucci\"); wealthy humanitarian Agnes Keyser; and Alice Keppel. At least fifty-five liaisons are conjectured. How far these relationships went is not always clear. Edward always strove to be discreet, but this did not prevent society gossip or press speculation. Keppel's great-granddaughter Camilla Parker Bowles became the mistress and subsequent wife of King Charles III, Edward's great-great-grandson. It was rumoured that Camilla's grandmother Sonia Keppel was fathered by Edward, but she was \"almost certainly\" the daughter of George Keppel, whom she resembled. Edward never acknowledged any illegitimate children. Alexandra was aware of his affairs, and seems to have accepted them.\nIn 1869, Sir Charles Mordaunt, a British Member of Parliament, threatened to name Edward as co-respondent in his divorce suit. Ultimately, he did not do so but Edward was called as a witness in the case in early 1870. It was shown that Edward had visited the Mordaunts' house while Sir Charles was away sitting in the House of Commons. Although nothing further was proven and Edward denied he had committed adultery, the suggestion of impropriety was damaging.\nHeir apparent.\nDuring his mother's widowhood, Edward pioneered the idea of royal public appearances as they are understood today\u2014for example, opening the Thames Embankment in 1871, the Mersey Railway Tunnel in 1886, and Tower Bridge in 1894\u2014but his mother did not allow him an active role in the running of the country until 1898. He was sent summaries of important government documents, but she refused to give him access to the originals. Edward annoyed his mother, who favoured the Germans, by siding with Denmark on the Schleswig-Holstein Question in 1864 and in the same year annoyed her again by making a special effort to meet Giuseppe Garibaldi, the Italian general and revolutionary, who was a leader in the movement for Italian unification. Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone sent him papers secretly. From 1886, Foreign Secretary Lord Rosebery sent him Foreign Office despatches, and from 1892 some Cabinet papers were opened to him.\nIn 1870 republican sentiment in Britain was given a boost when the French Emperor, Napoleon III, was defeated in the Franco-Prussian War and the French Third Republic was declared. However, in the winter of 1871, a brush with death led to an improvement in both Edward's popularity with the public and his relationship with his mother. While staying at Londesborough Lodge, near Scarborough, North Yorkshire, Edward contracted typhoid fever, the disease that was believed to have killed his father. There was great national concern, and one of his fellow guests (Lord Chesterfield) died. Edward's recovery was greeted with almost universal relief. Public celebrations included the composition of Arthur Sullivan's Festival Te Deum. Edward cultivated politicians from all parties, including republicans, as his friends, and thereby largely dissipated any residual feelings against him.\nOn 26 September 1875, Edward set off for India on an extensive eight-month tour; on the way, he visited Malta, Brindisi and Greece. His advisors remarked on his habit of treating all people the same, regardless of their social station or colour. In letters home, he complained of the treatment of the native Indians by the British officials: \"Because a man has a black face and a different religion from our own, there is no reason why he should be treated as a brute.\" Consequently, Lord Salisbury, the Secretary of State for India, issued new guidance and at least one resident was removed from office. He returned to England on 11 May 1876, after stopping off at Portugal. At the end of the tour, Queen Victoria was given the title Empress of India by Parliament, in part as a result of the tour's success.\nEdward was regarded worldwide as an arbiter of men's fashions. He made wearing tweed, Homburg hats and Norfolk jackets fashionable, and popularised the wearing of black ties with dinner jackets, instead of white tie and tails. He pioneered the pressing of trouser legs from side to side in preference to the now normal front and back creases, and was thought to have introduced the stand-up turn-down shirt collar, created for him by Charvet. A stickler for proper dress, he is said to have admonished Lord Salisbury for wearing the trousers of an Elder Brother of Trinity House with a privy councillor's coat. Deep in an international crisis, Salisbury informed Edward that it had been a dark morning, and that \"my mind must have been occupied by some subject of less importance.\" The tradition of men not buttoning the bottom button of waistcoats is said to be linked to Edward, who supposedly left his undone because of his large girth. His waist measured 48\u00a0inches (122\u00a0cm) shortly before his coronation. He introduced the practice of eating roast beef and potatoes with horseradish sauce and Yorkshire pudding on Sundays, a meal that remains a staple British favourite for Sunday lunch. He was a lifelong heavy smoker, but not a heavy drinker, though he did drink champagne and, occasionally, port.\nEdward was a patron of the arts and sciences and helped found the Royal College of Music. He opened the college in 1883 with the words, \"Class can no longer stand apart from class\u00a0... I claim for music that it produces that union of feeling which I much desire to promote.\" At the same time, he enjoyed gambling and country sports, and was an enthusiastic hunter. He ordered all the clocks at Sandringham to run half an hour ahead to provide more daylight time for shooting. This tradition of so-called Sandringham time continued until 1936, when it was abolished by Edward\u00a0VIII. He also laid out a golf course at Windsor. By the 1870s Edward had taken a keen interest in horseracing and steeplechasing. In 1896, his horse Persimmon won both the Derby and the St Leger. In 1900, Persimmon's brother, Diamond Jubilee, won five races, including the Triple Crown of Derby, St Leger and 2000 Guineas, as well as the Newmarket Stakes and Eclipse Stakes. The same year, another of Edward's horses, Ambush II, won the Grand National.\nIn 1891 Edward was embroiled in the royal baccarat scandal, when it was revealed he had played an illegal card game for money the previous year. He was forced to appear as a witness in court for a second time when one of the participants unsuccessfully sued his fellow players for slander after being accused of cheating. In the same year Edward was involved in a personal conflict, when Lord Charles Beresford threatened to reveal details of Edward's private life to the press, as a protest against Edward interfering with Beresford's affair with Daisy Greville, Countess of Warwick. The friendship between the two men was irreversibly damaged, and their bitterness would last for the remainder of their lives. Usually, Edward's outbursts of temper were short-lived, and \"after he had let himself go\u00a0... [he would] smooth matters by being especially nice\".\nIn late 1891, Edward's eldest son, Albert Victor, was engaged to Princess Victoria Mary of Teck. Just a few weeks later, in early 1892, Albert Victor died of pneumonia. Edward was grief-stricken. \"To lose our eldest son\", he wrote, \"is one of those calamities one can never really get over\". Edward told the Queen, \"[I would] have given my life for him, as I put no value on mine\". Albert Victor was the second of Edward's children to die. In 1871, his youngest son, Alexander John, had died just 24 hours after being born. Edward had insisted on placing Alexander John in a coffin personally with \"the tears rolling down his cheeks\".\nOn his way to Denmark through Belgium on 4 April 1900, Edward was the victim of an attempted assassination when 15-year-old Jean-Baptiste Sipido shot at him in protest over the Second Boer War. The culprit was acquitted by a Belgian court because he was underage. The perceived laxity of the Belgian authorities, combined with British disgust at Belgian atrocities in the Congo, worsened the already poor relations between the United Kingdom and the Continent. However, in the next ten years, Edward's affability and popularity, as well as his use of family connections, assisted Britain in building European alliances.\nReign.\nAccession.\nWhen his mother died on 22 January 1901, Edward became King of the United Kingdom, Emperor of India and, in an innovation, King of the British Dominions. He chose to reign under the name of Edward VII, instead of Albert Edward\u2014the name his mother had intended for him to use\u2014declaring that he did not wish to \"undervalue the name of Albert\" and diminish the status of his father with whom the \"name should stand alone\". The numeral VII was occasionally omitted in Scotland, even by the national church, in deference to protests that the previous Edwards were English kings who had \"been excluded from Scotland by battle\". J. B. Priestley recalled, \"I was only a child when he succeeded Victoria in 1901, but I can testify to his extraordinary popularity. He was in fact the most popular king England had known since the earlier 1660s.\"\nEdward donated his parents' house, Osborne on the Isle of Wight, to the state and continued to live at Sandringham. He could afford to be magnanimous; his private secretary, Sir Francis Knollys, claimed that he was the first heir to succeed to the throne in credit. Edward's finances had been ably managed by Sir Dighton Probyn, Comptroller of the Household, and had benefited from advice from Edward's financier friends, some of whom were Jewish, such as Ernest Cassel, Maurice de Hirsch and the Rothschild family. At a time of widespread antisemitism, Edward attracted criticism for openly socialising with Jews.\nEdward's coronation had originally been scheduled for 26 June 1902. However, two days before, he was diagnosed with appendicitis. The disease was generally not treated operatively. It carried a high mortality rate, but developments in anaesthesia and antisepsis in the preceding 50 years made life-saving surgery possible. Sir Frederick Treves, with the support of Lord Lister, performed a then-radical operation of draining a pint of pus from the infected abscess through an incision in the king's abdomen; this outcome showed that the cause was not cancer. The next day, Edward was sitting up in bed, smoking a cigar. Two weeks later, it was announced that he was out of danger. Treves was honoured with a baronetcy (which the King had arranged before the operation) and appendix surgery entered the medical mainstream. Edward was crowned at Westminster Abbey on 9 August 1902 by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Frederick Temple.\nEdward refurbished the royal palaces, reintroduced the traditional ceremonies, such as the State Opening of Parliament, that his mother had foregone, and founded new honours, such as the Order of Merit, to recognise contributions to the arts and sciences. In 1902, the Shah of Persia, Mozzafar-al-Din, visited England expecting to receive the Order of the Garter. The King refused to bestow the honour on the Shah because the order was meant to be in his personal gift and the Foreign Secretary, Lord Lansdowne, had promised it without his consent. He also objected to inducting a Muslim into a Christian order of chivalry. His refusal threatened to damage British attempts to gain influence in Persia, but Edward resented his ministers' attempts to reduce his traditional powers. Eventually, he relented and Britain sent a special embassy to the Shah with a full Order of the Garter the following year.\n\"Uncle of Europe\".\nAs King, Edward's main interests lay in the fields of foreign affairs and naval and military matters. Fluent in French and German, he reinvented royal diplomacy by numerous state visits across Europe. He took annual holidays in Biarritz and Marienbad. One of his most important foreign trips was an official visit to France in May 1903 as the guest of President \u00c9mile Loubet. Following a visit to Pope Leo XIII in Rome, this trip helped create the atmosphere for the Anglo-French Entente Cordiale, an agreement delineating British and French colonies in North Africa, and ruling out any future war between the two countries. The Entente was negotiated in 1904 between the French foreign minister, Th\u00e9ophile Delcass\u00e9, and the British foreign secretary, Lord Lansdowne. It marked the end of centuries of Anglo-French rivalry and Britain's splendid isolation from Continental affairs, and attempted to counterbalance the growing dominance of the German Empire and its ally, Austria-Hungary.\nEdward was related to nearly every other European monarch, and came to be known as the \"uncle of Europe\". German Emperor Wilhelm II and Emperor Nicholas II of Russia were his nephews; Queen Victoria Eugenia of Spain, Crown Princess Margaret of Sweden, Crown Princess Marie of Romania, Crown Princess Sophia of Greece, and Empress Alexandra of Russia were his nieces; King Haakon VII of Norway was both his nephew and his son-in-law; kings Frederick VIII of Denmark and George I of Greece were his brothers-in-law; kings Albert I of Belgium, Ferdinand I of Bulgaria, and Carlos I and Manuel II of Portugal were his second cousins. Edward doted on his grandchildren, and indulged them, to the consternation of their governesses. However, there was one relation whom Edward did not like: Wilhelm II. His difficult relationship with his nephew exacerbated the tensions between Germany and Britain.\nIn April 1908, during Edward's annual stay at Biarritz, he accepted the resignation of British Prime Minister Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. In a break with precedent, Edward asked Campbell-Bannerman's successor, H. H. Asquith, to travel to Biarritz to kiss hands. Asquith complied, but the press criticised the action of the King in appointing a prime minister on foreign soil instead of returning to Britain. In June 1908, Edward became the first reigning British monarch to visit the Russian Empire, despite refusing to visit in 1906, when Anglo-Russian relations were strained in the aftermath of the Russo-Japanese War, the Dogger Bank incident, and the Tsar's dissolution of the Duma. The previous month, he visited the Scandinavian countries, becoming the first British monarch to visit Sweden.\nPolitical opinions.\nWhile Prince of Wales, Edward had to be dissuaded from breaking with constitutional precedent by openly voting for W. E. Gladstone's Representation of the People Bill (1884) in the House of Lords. On other matters, he was more conservative; for example, he did not favour giving votes to women, although he did suggest that the social reformer Octavia Hill serve on the Commission for Working Class Housing. He was also opposed to Irish Home Rule, instead preferring a form of dual monarchy.\nAs Prince of Wales, Edward had come to enjoy warm and mutually respectful relations with Gladstone, whom his mother detested, but the statesman's son, Home Secretary Herbert Gladstone, angered the King by planning to permit Roman Catholic priests in vestments to carry the Host through the streets of London, and by appointing two ladies, Lady Frances Balfour and May Tennant (wife of H. J. Tennant), to serve on a Royal Commission on reforming divorce law\u2014Edward thought divorce could not be discussed with \"delicacy or even decency\" before ladies. Edward's biographer Philip Magnus-Allcroft suggests that Gladstone may have become a whipping boy for the King's general irritation with the Liberal government. Gladstone was sacked in the reshuffle the following year and the King agreed, with some reluctance, to appoint him Governor-General of South Africa.\nEdward involved himself heavily in discussions over army reform, the need for which had become apparent with the failings of the Second Boer War. He supported the redesign of army command, the creation of the Territorial Force, and the decision to provide an Expeditionary Force supporting France in the event of war with Germany. Reform of the Royal Navy was also suggested, partly due to the ever-increasing Naval Estimates, and because of the emergence of the Imperial German Navy as a new strategic threat. Ultimately a dispute arose between Admiral Lord Charles Beresford, who favoured increased spending and a broad deployment, and the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir John Fisher, who favoured efficiency savings, scrapping obsolete vessels, and a strategic realignment of the Royal Navy relying on torpedo craft for home defence backed by the new dreadnoughts.\nThe King lent support to Fisher, in part because he disliked Beresford, and eventually Beresford was dismissed. Beresford continued his campaign outside of the navy and Fisher ultimately announced his resignation in late 1909, although the bulk of his policies were retained. The King was intimately involved in the appointment of Fisher's successor as the Fisher-Beresford feud had split the service, and the only truly qualified figure known to be outside of both camps was Sir Arthur Wilson, who had retired in 1907. Wilson was reluctant to return to active duty, but Edward persuaded him to do so, and Wilson became First Sea Lord on 25 January 1910.\nEdward was rarely interested in politics, although his views on some issues were notably progressive for the time. During his reign, he said use of the word \"nigger\" was \"disgraceful\", despite it then being in common parlance. In 1904, Wilhelm II and Edward met during an Anglo-German summit in Kiel. Wilhelm, with the Russo-Japanese War in mind, started to go on about the \"Yellow Peril\", which he called \"the greatest peril menacing\u00a0... Christendom and European civilisation. If the Russians went on giving ground, the yellow race would, in twenty years time, be in Moscow and Posen\". Wilhelm went on to attack his British guests for supporting Japan against Russia, suggesting that the British were committing \"race treason\". In response, Edward stated that he \"could not see it. The Japanese were an intelligent, brave and chivalrous nation, quite as civilised as the Europeans, from whom they only differed by the pigmentation of their skin\". Although Edward lived a life of luxury often far removed from that of the majority of his subjects, they expected it, and his personal charm with all levels of society and his strong condemnation of prejudice went some way to assuage republican and racial tensions building during his lifetime.\nConstitutional crisis.\nIn the last year of his life, Edward became embroiled in a constitutional crisis when the Conservative majority in the House of Lords refused to pass the \"People's Budget\" proposed by the Liberal government of Prime Minister Asquith. The crisis eventually led\u2014after Edward's death\u2014to the removal of the Lords' right to veto legislation. The King was displeased at Liberal attacks on the peers, which included a polemical speech by David Lloyd George at Limehouse. Cabinet minister Winston Churchill publicly demanded a general election, for which Asquith apologised to the King's adviser Lord Knollys and rebuked Churchill at a Cabinet meeting. Edward was so dispirited at the tone of class warfare\u2014although Asquith told him that party rancour had been just as bad over the First Home Rule Bill in 1886\u2014that he introduced his son to Secretary of State for War Richard Haldane as \"the last King of England\". After the King's horse Minoru won the Derby on 26 July 1909, he returned to the racetrack the following day and laughed when a man shouted: \"Now, King. You've won the Derby. Go back home and dissolve this bloody Parliament!\"\nIn vain, the King urged Conservative leaders Arthur Balfour and Lord Lansdowne to pass the budget, which Lord Esher had advised him was not unusual, as Queen Victoria had helped to broker agreements between the two Houses over Irish disestablishment in 1869 and the Third Reform Act in 1884. On Asquith's advice, however, he did not offer them an election (at which, to judge from recent by-elections, they were likely to gain seats) as a reward for doing so.\nThe Finance Bill passed the Commons on 5 November 1909, but was rejected by the Lords on 30 November; they instead passed a resolution of Lord Lansdowne's stating that they were entitled to oppose the bill as it lacked an electoral mandate. The King was annoyed that his efforts to urge passage of the budget had become public knowledge and had forbidden Knollys, who was an active Liberal peer, from voting for the budget, although Knollys had suggested that this would be a suitable gesture to indicate royal desire to see the budget pass. In December 1909, a proposal to create peers (to give the Liberals a majority in the Lords) or give the prime minister the right to do so was considered \"outrageous\" by Knollys, who thought the King should abdicate rather than agree to it.\nTalk of removing the Lords' veto played a major role in the January 1910 election. Early in the election campaign, Lloyd George talked of \"guarantees\" and Asquith of \"safeguards\" that would be necessary before forming another Liberal government, but such talk ceased after the King informed Asquith that he would not be willing to contemplate creating peers until after a second general election. Balfour refused to say whether or not he would be willing to form a Conservative government, but advised the King not to promise to create peers until he had seen the terms of any proposed constitutional change. During the campaign, the leading Conservative Walter Long asked Knollys for permission to state that the King did not favour Irish Home Rule, but Knollys refused on the grounds that it was not appropriate for the monarch's views to be known in public.\nThe election resulted in a hung parliament, with the Liberal government dependent on the support of the third-largest party, the nationalist Irish Parliamentary Party. The King suggested a compromise whereby only 50 peers from each side would be allowed to vote, which would also obviate the large Conservative majority in the Lords, but Lord Crewe, Liberal leader in the Lords, advised that this would reduce the Lords' independence, as only peers who were loyal party supporters would be picked. Pressure to remove the Lords' veto now came from the Irish nationalist MPs, who wanted to remove the Lords' ability to block the introduction of Home Rule. They threatened to vote against the budget unless they had their way (an attempt by Lloyd George to win their support by amending whiskey duties was abandoned as the Cabinet felt this would recast the budget too much). Asquith now revealed that there were no \"guarantees\" for the creation of peers. The Cabinet considered resigning and leaving it up to Balfour to try to form a Conservative government.\nThe King's speech from the throne on 21 February made reference to introducing measures restricting the Lords' power of veto to one of delay, but Asquith inserted a phrase \"in the opinion of my advisers\" so the King could be seen to be distancing himself from the planned legislation. The Commons passed resolutions on 14 April that would form the basis for the Parliament Act 1911: to remove the power of the Lords to veto money bills, to replace their veto of other bills with a power to delay, and to reduce the term of Parliament from seven years to five (the King would have preferred four). However, in that debate Asquith hinted\u2014to ensure the support of the nationalist MPs\u2014that he would ask the King to break the deadlock \"in that Parliament\" (i.e. contrary to Edward's earlier stipulation that there be a second election). The budget was passed by both Commons and Lords in April.\nBy April, the Palace was having secret talks with Balfour and Randall Davidson, Archbishop of Canterbury, who both advised that the Liberals did not have sufficient mandate to demand the creation of peers. The King thought the whole proposal \"simply disgusting\" and that the government was \"in the hands of Redmond &amp; Co\". Lord Crewe announced publicly that the government's wish to create peers should be treated as formal \"ministerial advice\" (which, by convention, the monarch must accept), although Lord Esher argued that the monarch was entitled \"in extremis\" to dismiss the government rather than take their \"advice\". Esher's view has been called \"obsolete and unhelpful\".\nDeath.\nEdward habitually smoked twenty cigarettes and twelve cigars a day. In 1907, a rodent ulcer, a type of cancer affecting the skin next to his nose, was cured with radium. Towards the end of his life he increasingly suffered from bronchitis. He suffered a momentary loss of consciousness during a state visit to Berlin in February 1909. In March 1910, he was staying at Biarritz when he collapsed. He remained there to convalesce, while in London Asquith tried to get the Finance Bill passed. The King's continued ill health was unreported, and he attracted criticism for staying in France while political tensions were so high. On 27 April he returned to Buckingham Palace, still suffering from severe bronchitis. Alexandra returned from visiting her brother, George I of Greece, in Corfu a week later on 5 May.\nOn 6 May, Edward suffered several heart attacks, but refused to go to bed, saying, \"No, I shall not give in; I shall go on; I shall work to the end.\" Between moments of faintness, his son the Prince of Wales (shortly to be King George\u00a0V) told him that his horse, Witch of the Air, had won at Kempton Park that afternoon. The King replied, \"Yes, I have heard of it. I am very glad\": his final words. At 11:30\u00a0pm he lost consciousness for the last time and was put to bed. He died 15 minutes later, aged 68.\nAlexandra refused to allow Edward's body to be moved for eight days afterwards, though she allowed small groups of visitors to enter his room. On 11 May, the late king was dressed in his uniform and placed in a massive oak coffin, which was moved on 14 May to the throne room, where it was sealed and lay in state, with a guardsman standing at each corner of the bier. Despite the time that had elapsed since his death, Alexandra noted his body remained \"wonderfully preserved\". On the morning of 17 May, the coffin was placed on a gun carriage and drawn by black horses to Westminster Hall, with the new king, his family and Edward's favourite dog, Caesar, walking behind. Following a brief service, the royal family left, and the hall was opened to the public; over 400,000 people filed past the coffin over the next two days. As Barbara Tuchman noted in \"The Guns of August\", his funeral, held on 20 May 1910, marked \"the greatest assemblage of royalty and rank ever gathered in one place and, of its kind, the last.\" A royal train conveyed the King's coffin from London to Windsor Castle, where Edward was buried at St George's Chapel.\nLegacy.\nBefore his accession to the throne, Edward was the longest-serving heir apparent in British history. He was surpassed by his great-great-grandson Charles III on 20 April 2011. The title Prince of Wales is not automatically held by the heir apparent; it is bestowed by the reigning monarch at a time of his or her choosing. Edward was the longest-serving holder of that title until surpassed by Charles on 9 September 2017. Edward was Prince of Wales between 8 December 1841 and 22 January 1901 (59 years, 45 days); Charles held the title between 26 July 1958 and 8 September 2022 ().\nAs king, Edward VII proved a greater success than anyone had expected, but he was already past the average life expectancy and had little time left to fulfil the role. In his short reign, he ensured that his second son and heir, George V, was better prepared to take the throne. Contemporaries described their relationship as more like affectionate brothers than father and son, and on Edward's death George wrote in his diary that he had lost his \"best friend and the best of fathers\u00a0... I never had a [cross] word with him in my life. I am heart-broken and overwhelmed with grief\".\nEdward has been recognised as the first truly constitutional British sovereign and the last sovereign to wield effective political power. Though lauded as \"Peacemaker\", he had been afraid that German Emperor Wilhelm II, who was one of his nephews, would tip Europe into war. Four years after Edward's death, the First World War broke out. The naval reforms he had supported and his part in securing the Triple Entente between Britain, France, and Russia, as well as his relationships with his extended family, fed the paranoia of the German Emperor, who blamed Edward for the war. Publication of the official biography of Edward was delayed until 1927 by its author, Sidney Lee, who feared German propagandists would select material to portray Edward as an anti-German warmonger. Lee was also hampered by the extensive destruction of Edward's personal papers; Edward had left orders that all his letters should be burned on his death. Subsequent biographers have been able to construct a more rounded picture of Edward by using material and sources that were unavailable to Lee.\nHistorian R. C. K. Ensor, writing in 1936, praised the King's political personality:\n ...he had in many respects great natural ability. He knew how to be both dignified and charming; he had an excellent memory; and his tact in handling people was quite exceptional. He had a store of varied, though unsystematised, knowledge gathered at first-hand through talking to all sorts of eminent men. His tastes were not particularly elevated, but they were thoroughly English; and he showed much (though not unfailing) comprehension for the common instincts of the people over whom he reigned. This was not the less remarkable because, though a good linguist in French and German, he never learned to speak English without a German accent.\nEnsor rejects the widespread notion that the King exerted an important influence on British foreign policy, believing he gained that reputation by making frequent trips abroad, with many highly publicised visits to foreign courts. Ensor thought surviving documents showed \"how comparatively crude his views on foreign policy were, how little he read, and of what na\u00efve indiscretions he was capable.\" Edward received criticism for his apparent pursuit of self-indulgent pleasure, but he received great praise for his affable manners and diplomatic tact. As his grandson Edward\u00a0VIII wrote, \"his lighter side\u00a0... obscured the fact that he had both insight and influence.\" \"He had a tremendous zest for pleasure but he also had a real sense of duty\", wrote J. B. Priestley. Lord Esher wrote that Edward VII was \"kind and debonair and not undignified\u2014but too human\".\nArms.\nEdward's coat of arms as the Prince of Wales was the royal arms differenced by a label of three points argent and an inescutcheon of the Duchy of Saxony, representing his paternal arms. When he acceded as King, he gained the royal arms undifferenced.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46722", "revid": "41448434", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46722", "title": "Duncan Campbell (died 1758)", "text": "British Army officer\nDuncan Campbell was a Scots nobleman who died on 18 July 1758 as a result of wounds received in an unsuccessful frontal attack against French forces at Fort Carillon (renamed Fort Ticonderoga when the British took the fort a year later). The legend associated with Campbell is that a number of years prior\u2014while still living in Scotland\u2014Campbell gave shelter to a stranger who turned out to have killed Duncan's cousin. Faced with the conflict between betraying a guest or taking vengeance for the death of his cousin, Campbell compromised by allowing the killer to hide out in a cave. The ghost of Campbell's cousin is claimed to have appeared to Campbell in a dream and promised to meet him again at \"Ticonderoga\", a place that Duncan surely had never heard of previously. This story was published in the poem \"Ticonderoga a Legend of the West Highlands\" by Robert Louis Stevenson in \"Scribner's Magazine\" December 1887.\nCampbell's 42nd Regiment of Foot Highlanders took many casualties in the ill-fated attack on Fort Carillon. Legend has it that the battle was replicated in the clouds over Inveraray Castle in Scotland on the afternoon of the attack. The story of the ghostly prediction and the apparition in the clouds over Inverawe has been repeated a number of times in magazines, song, and used several times in television scripts.\nHis remains are interred at the Union Cemetery in Fort Edward, NY alongside Jane McCrea and her cousin Sara McNeil.\nSongs.\nInspired by the history and legend, Rich Nardin wrote (circa 1980) the song \"Piper's Refrain\", about the end of Campbell's story. The song was first released on Nardin's 1983 album, and has been recorded by multiple artists since. The song is in the folk tradition and may be thought by some to be a traditional ballad when sung by others. The story further inspired Margaret MacArthur to write \"The Legend of Duncan Campbell\" as an accompanying song which explores the beginning of the tale in Scotland.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46723", "revid": "1292919312", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46723", "title": "Pope Paul I", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 757 to 767\nPope Paul I (; 700\u00a0\u2013 28 June 767) was the bishop of Rome and ruler of the emerging Papal States from 29 May 757 to his death on 28 June 767. He first served as a Roman deacon and was frequently employed by his brother, Pope Stephen II, in negotiations with the Lombard kings.\nRise.\nPaul was a Roman aristocrat and member of the Orsini family. He and his brother Stephen had been educated for the priesthood at the Lateran Palace. Stephen became pope in 752. After Stephen's death on 26 April 757, Paul prevailed over a faction that wanted to make Archdeacon Theophylact pope and was chosen to succeed his brother by the majority that wished a continuation of Stephen's policy.\nPontificate.\nPaul I's reign was dominated by relations with the Frankish and Lombard kings and with the Eastern Roman emperor. He wrote to Pepin the Short that the Frankish alliance should be maintained unimpaired. Paul was likely concerned of the danger posed by the Lombard king Desiderius. The Lombards held the cities of Imola, Osimo, Bologna, and Ancona, which were claimed by the papacy, and in 758 seized upon the duchies of Spoleto and Benevento.\nOn his return from suppressing a revolt in Benevento, Desiderius visited Rome and compelled Paul to write to Pepin asking him to concede all the Lombard claims. He promised to return Imola, but on condition that the pope should persuade Pepin to send back Lombard hostages held by the Franks. Paul agreed and sent a letter to Pepin. Pepin found it advisable to maintain good relations with Desiderius, and Paul apparently accomplished little by his double-dealing. Later, however, Pepin gave the pope some support and acted as arbiter between the Roman and Lombard claims.\nIn 765, papal privileges were restored in the duchies of Benevento and Tuscany and partially in Spoleto. Meanwhile, the alienation from the Eastern Roman Empire grew greater. On several occasions, especially in 759, Paul feared that the emperor would send an army against Rome. This meant that he lived in constant dread of Eastern Roman ambitions turning the Frankish influence in favor of the Lombards. This was actually attempted, but Pepin held to his original policy regarding Italy.\nPaul died in Rome on 28 June 767.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46725", "revid": "40126538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46725", "title": "Arion", "text": "Legendary musician of ancient Greece\nArion (; ) was a kitharode in ancient Greece, a Dionysiac poet credited with inventing the dithyramb. The islanders of Lesbos claimed him as their native son, but Arion found a patron in Periander, tyrant of Corinth. Although notable for his musical inventions, Arion is chiefly remembered for the fantastic myth of his kidnapping by pirates and miraculous rescue by dolphins, a folktale motif.\nOrigins.\nArion was a native of Methymna in Lesbos, and, according to some mythological accounts, a son of Cyclon or of Poseidon and the nymph Oncaea. All traditions about him agree in describing him as a contemporary and friend of Periander, tyrant of Corinth. He appears to have spent a great part of his life at the court of Periander, but respecting his life and his poetical or musical productions, scarcely anything is known beyond the story of his escape from the sailors with whom he sailed from Sicily to Corinth.\nThe dithyramb.\nArion is often called the inventor of the dithyrambic poetry, and of the name dithyramb. As Arthur Wallace writes: \"As a literary composition for chorus dithyramb was the creation of Arion of Corinth,\" His fame was established in antiquity, and Herodotus says \"Arion was second to none of the lyre-players in his time and was also the first man we know of to compose and name the dithyramb and teach it in Corinth\". However, J. H. Sleeman observes of the dithyramb, or circular chorus, \"It is first mentioned by Archilochus (c. 665 BC) ... Arion flourished at least 50 years later ... probably gave it a more artistic form, adding a chorus of 50 people, personating satyrs... who danced around an altar of Dionysus. He was doubtless the first to introduce the dithyramb into Corinth\". Armand D'Angour notes that Arion's contribution to the reform of the dithyramb, which was eventually performed in a circle and called \"kuklios choros\", was recognised by ancient sources by the fact that they named his father \"Kukleus\" (\"Circle-man\").\nArion is also associated with the origins of tragedy: of Solon John the Deacon reports: \u201cArion of Methymna first introduced the drama [i.e. action] of tragedy, as Solon indicated in his poem entitled \"Elegies\"\".\nKidnapping by pirates.\nAccording to Herodotus' account of the Lydian empire under the Mermnads, Arion attended a musical competition in Sicily, which he won. On his return trip from Tarentum, whose onomastic founder has a similar story, avaricious sailors plotted to kill Arion and steal the rich prizes he carried home. Arion was given the choice of suicide with a proper burial on land, or being thrown in the sea to perish. He asked for permission to sing a last song to win time.\nPlaying his kithara, Arion sang a praise to Apollo, the god of poetry, and his song attracted a number of dolphins around the ship. Some argue that the dolphins were sent by Apollo to rescue Arion. At the end of the song, Arion threw himself into the sea rather than be killed, but one of the dolphins saved his life and carried him to safety at the sanctuary of Poseidon at Cape Tainaron. When he reached land, being eager for his journey, he failed to return the dolphin to the sea and it perished there. He told his misfortunes to Periander, the Tyrant of Corinth, who ordered the dolphin to be buried, and monument raised to it. Shortly after, word came to Periander that the ship on which Arion had sailed had been brought to Corinth by a storm. He ordered the crew to be led before him, and inquired about Arion, but they replied that he had died and that they had buried him. The tyrant replied: \"Tomorrow you will swear to that at the Dolphin's monument.\" Because of this he ordered them to be kept under guard, and instructed Arion to hide in the dolphin's monument the next morning, attired as he had been when he had thrown himself into the sea. When the tyrant brought the ship's crew to the dolphin's monument and ordered them to swear by the departed spirit of the dolphin that Arion was dead, Arion came out of the monument. In amazement, wondering by what divinity he had been saved, the ship's crew was silent. The tyrant ordered them to be crucified at the dolphin's monument. Apollo, because of Arion's skill with the kithara, placed him and the dolphin among the stars. This dolphin was catasterised as the constellation Delphinus, by the blessing of Apollo.\nThe story as Herodotus tells it was taken up in other literature. Lucian of Samosata wittily imagined the dialogue between Poseidon and the very dolphin who bore Arion.\nAugustine of Hippo asserted that pagans \"believed in what they read in their own books\" and took Arion to be a historical individual. \"There is no historicity in this tale\", according to Eunice Burr Stebbins, Arion and the dolphins are given as an example of \"a folkloristic motif especially associated with Apollo\" by Irad Malkin. Erasmus instanced Arion as one of the traditional poet's topics that sound like \"historia\" rather than \"fabulae\", though he misremembered that Augustine had taken the Arion story to be historical.\nMythological parallels.\nThe pirates episode may be seen as a doublet of the fate of Melicertes, where the leap into the sea was that of his mother, Ino, transformed into the \"white goddess\" Leucothea. Melicertes was carried more dead than alive to the shores where the Isthmian Games were celebrated in his honour, as he was transformed to the hero Palaimon, who was placated with a nocturnal chthonic rite, and the whose winners were crowned with a barren wreath of spruce.\nA similar story of told of the founding of Taras in Megale Hellas (Magna Graecia), modern Taranto, Apulia, Italy. When a son of Poseidon called Taras was shipwrecked, his father rescued him by sending a dolphin which he rode to traverse the sea from the promontory of Taenarum to the south of Italy. Brought ashore, Taras founded the city of the same name. According to Pausanias, he was worshiped as a hero who named both the city and the river, Taras after himself.\nAnother parallel is the myth of Dionysus and the sailors, related in the Homeric Hymns: Tyrrhenian pirates try to lash the god to the mast, but the wood itself starts to sprout and the mast is entwined with ivy (like the god's thyrsus); the sailors leap into the sea and are transformed into dolphins. This is especially interesting because Arion is credited with the invention of the dithyramb, a dionysiac song form.\nScholarly interpretations.\nIn light of the above parallels, Walter Burkert interprets the story as a significant development in the history of Dionysiac cult: \"Released from this gloomy background, the cheerful and liberating legend of the sixth century further developed the image of the dolphin-rider under the colours of the renewed cult of Dionysus.\". C. M. Bowra tied the myth to the period following the expulsion from Corinth of the aristocratic Bacchiadae, who traced their descent from Dionysus: \"the cult of the god had to develop new and more democratic forms.\"\nStewart Flory identified Herodotus' characteristic use of the episode in a historicising context as an example of what Flory calls his \"brave gestures\", a man faced with death performs with calm dignity some spirited but unnecessary gesture that demonstrates contempt for danger.\nSurviving fragment.\nA fragment of a hymn to Poseidon, quoted by Aelian and by him ascribed to Arion, has survived, and is contained in Bergk's \"Poetae Lyrici Graeci.\" A poetic translation was made by the English schoolmaster Herbert Kynaston. A more literal prose rendering follows: \nChiefest of Gods, sea-lord Poseidon of the trident of gold, earth-shaking king of the swelling brine, the beasts that swim dance all about thee with fins, and lightly bound with nimble flingings of the foot, the snub-nosed coarsing hounds of bristling mane, the dolphin-lovers of the Muse, sea-creatures of Nereus' goddess-daughters that he had of Amphitrite, the beasts that bore a wanderer on the Sicilian sea to Taenarum's shore in Pelops' land, ploughing to the untrodden furrow of Nereus' field astride their hump\u00e8d back, when crafty men had cast me from out the hollow wave-going ship into the sea-purple billows of the ocean.\nIn literature.\nLetitia Elizabeth Landon's narrative poem \"Arion\" examines and illustrates the story of Arion's return to Greece.\nAlexander Pushkin's 1827 \"\" poem, where Arion is the sole survivor of a shipwreck after a sea storm and continues to sing the same songs with which he used to delight his shipmates, is thought to be a thinly veiled allusion to his own situation after the Decembrist revolt of 1825.\nGeorge Eliot's poem of the same name recounts Arion's murder by pirates (\"sailors\"), with, however, no mention of him being saved by dolphins.\nIn Amor Towles' 2016 novel A Gentleman in Moscow, the Count tells Anna the story of Arion, after tracing freckles that reminded him of a dolphin on her back.\nIn Astronomy.\nInspired by the lifeguard dolphin story, the name Arion was given in 2015 to a possible exoplanet orbiting the star 18 Delphini, which was named Musica at the same time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46726", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46726", "title": "Digital signal 0", "text": ""}
{"id": "46727", "revid": "17956451", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46727", "title": "T1", "text": "T1, T01, T.1 or T-1 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "46728", "revid": "1236034400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46728", "title": "E-carrier", "text": "Telephone transmission carrier system used outside US\nThe E-carrier is a member of the series of carrier systems developed for digital transmission of many simultaneous telephone calls by time-division multiplexing. The European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT) originally standardised the E-carrier system, which revised and improved the earlier American T-carrier technology, and this has now been adopted by the International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T). It was widely used in almost all countries outside the US, Canada, and Japan. E-carrier deployments have steadily been replaced by Ethernet as telecommunication networks transition towards all IP.\nE1 frame structure.\nAn E1 link operates over two separate sets of wires, usually unshielded twisted pair (balanced cable) or using coaxial (unbalanced cable). A nominal 3 volt peak signal is encoded with pulses using a method avoiding long periods without polarity changes. The line data rate is 2.048\u00a0Mbit/s (full duplex, i.e. 2.048\u00a0Mbit/s downstream and 2.048\u00a0Mbit/s upstream) which is split into 32 timeslots, each being allocated 8\u00a0bits in turn. Thus each timeslot sends and receives an 8-bit PCM sample, usually encoded according to A-law algorithm, 8,000 times per second (8 \u00d7 8,000 \u00d7 32 = 2,048,000). This is ideal for voice telephone calls where the voice is sampled at that data rate and reconstructed at the other end. The timeslots are numbered from 0 to 31.\nSpecial timeslots.\nOne timeslot (TS0) is reserved for framing purposes, and alternately transmits a fixed pattern. This allows the receiver to lock onto the start of each frame and match up each channel in turn. The standards allow for a full cyclic redundancy check to be performed across all bits transmitted in each frame, to detect if the circuit is losing bits (information), but this is not always used. An alarm signal may also be transmitted using timeslot TS0. Finally, some bits are reserved for national use.\nOne timeslot (TS16) is often reserved for signalling purposes, to control call setup and teardown according to one of several standard telecommunications protocols. This includes channel-associated signaling (CAS) where a set of bits is used to replicate opening and closing the circuit (as if picking up the telephone receiver and pulsing digits on a rotary phone), or using tone signalling which is passed through on the voice circuits themselves. More recent systems use common-channel signaling (CCS) such Signalling System 7 (SS7) where no particular timeslot is reserved for signalling purposes, the signalling protocol being transmitted on a freely chosen set of timeslots or on a different physical channel.\nWhen using E1 frames for data communication, some systems use those timeslots slightly differently, either\nHierarchy levels.\nThe PDH based on the E0 signal rate is designed so that each higher level can multiplex a set of lower level signals. Framed E1 is designed to carry 30 or 31 E0 data channels plus 1 or 2 special channels, all other levels are designed to carry 4 signals from the level below. Because of the necessity for overhead bits, and justification bits to account for rate differences between sections of the network, each subsequent level has a capacity greater than would be expected from simply multiplying the lower level signal rate (so for example E2 is 8.448\u00a0Mbit/s and not 8.192\u00a0Mbit/s as one might expect when multiplying the E1 rate by 4).\nNote, because bit interleaving is used, it is very difficult to demultiplex low level tributaries directly, requiring equipment to individually demultiplex every single level down to the one that is required.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46730", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46730", "title": "E1", "text": "E1, E01, E.I or E-1 may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Topics referred to by the same termThis page lists articles associated with the same title formed as a letter\u2013number combination."}
{"id": "46732", "revid": "50983397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46732", "title": "Narses", "text": "6th-century Byzantine general\nNarses (also spelled Nerses; ; ; ; c. 478\u2013573) was a distinguished Roman general and statesman of Armenian heritage, renowned for his critical role in Emperor Justinian I\u2019s military campaigns. Alongside the famed Belisarius, Narses was instrumental in the reconquest of Italy during the Gothic War (535\u2013554), which sought to restore the western provinces of the Roman Empire.\nNarses first gained significant recognition by suppressing the Nika riots in 532, using his diplomatic skills and wealth to help quell the revolt. His later campaigns in Italy were marked by decisive victories, most notably at the Battle of Taginae in 552, where he defeated the Ostrogothic king Totila, and at the Battle of Mons Lactarius in 553, effectively ending the Ostrogothic kingdom.\nOrigins.\nNarses was born in Persarmenia, the eastern region of Armenia ceded to the Sasanian Empire under the Peace of Acilisene around AD 387. He was of Armenian heritage, part of a substantial Armenian population that played a prominent role within the Byzantine Empire.\nSome sources, have mistakenly conflated Narses the eunuch with his namesake, Narses of the Kamsarakan family, a noble Armenian lineage. However, scholarly consensus now holds that the general had no verifiable ties to this princely house. His first appearance in historical records is by Procopius around AD 530, in connection with the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian conflicts.\nThe exact year of Narses' birth is uncertain, with dates typically cited as 478, 479, or 480. His death date is also debated, estimated between 566 and 574, suggesting he lived to an age of between eighty-six and ninety-six years. Details of his family background, early life, and the circumstances of his castration remain obscure, often shrouded in speculation and legend.\nThe historian Agathias Scholasticus of Myrina offered a vivid description of Narses: \"He was a man of sound mind, and clever at adapting himself to the times. He was not versed in literature nor practiced in oratory, [but] made up for it by the fertility of his wits.\" Physically, Agathias noted he was \"small and of a lean habit, but stronger and more high-spirited than would have been believed.\"\nReligion.\nNarses was reported to be a very pious man with a special devotion to the Virgin Mary. Evagrius Scholasticus in Ecclesiastica Historia reported that She would tell him the proper time to attack, and Narses would never engage in battle without Her consent. Narses also was reported to be generous to the poor and zealous when it came to restoring churches. He was so devoted to prayers and vigils that \"he obtained victory more by the supplications he poured forth to God, than by arms of war.\" Before accepting supreme command of the army, Narses built a church and monastery in Cappadocia, intent upon going there upon his retirement. Paul the Deacon, a late 8th century Lombard writer, insisted that Narses was a Catholic, but John of Ephesus, a Monophysite contemporary of Narses, wrote that Narses staffed his monastery with exiled Monophysite monks.\nEarly career.\nHow or when Narses arrived in Constantinople, or exactly how he found a footing in the \"officium\" of the Grand Chamberlain, remains unknown. When Procopius first mentions Narses, he was serving as Emperor Justinian I's steward (\"cubicularius\") in 530. Narses was also a high treasurer who dealt with the emperor's finances and payments from the imperial treasury, probably holding the post of \"sacellarius\". He rose through the ranks, became the commander of the emperor's eunuch bodyguard (\"spatharius\") c. 532, and eventually became Grand Chamberlain (\"praepositus sacri cubiculi\") around 537/538. Despite his later military commands, he is never attested as Master of Soldiers (\"magister militum\") in formal documents. Narses became a patrician in the 550s. Although Theodosius II was alleged to have, in 422, barred eunuchs from serving as patricians, Justinian overturned this law.\nNika riots.\nNarses played a crucial role in suppressing the Nika riots of 532, the largest uprising in the history of Byzantium and Constantinople. The revolt began during chariot races at the Imperial Hippodrome, when longstanding tensions erupted into mass protests. Initially, the rebels demanded the abdication of Emperor Justinian I, and the disorder escalated into widespread violence that left much of the city in ruins. Facing the threat of losing his throne, Justinian considered fleeing, but Empress Theodora persuaded him to stay and resist.\nNarses was entrusted with a large sum of gold and instructed to infiltrate the Blue faction\u2019s camp. Unarmed and accompanied by only a few attendants, he approached the Blues\u2019 section of the Hippodrome and, risking his life, skillfully distributed bribes. Narses convinced many influential senators and Blue leaders that supporting Hypatius, who had been declared emperor by the rebels, was not in their best interest. Following this intervention, the senators and many Blues, chanting \u201cJustiniane Auguste, tu vincas!\u201d (\u201cJustinian Augustus, may you triumph!\u201d), abandoned the rebellion, significantly weakening its leadership.\nShortly afterward, a detachment of the Armenian corps led by John the Armenian entered the city, soon joined by Herulian infantry. Justinian then ordered a decisive assault on the remaining rebels. Generals Belisarius, John the Armenian, and Mund, with their loyal troops, stormed the Hippodrome and carried out a brutal massacre, while Narses and his detachment surrounded the Hippodrome, preventing escape. Contemporary sources report that around 35,000 people were killed in the Hippodrome and its surroundings.\nThe crushing of the Nika revolt marked a turning point, solidifying the inner circle of Justinian and Theodora, with Narses becoming a key figure. In gratitude for his loyalty and service, Justinian promoted him to the senatorial rank of vir illustris, and in 538, Narses was appointed \"praepositus sacri cubiculi\", effectively serving as the emperor\u2019s chief chamberlain and close advisor. This position made Narses one of the most influential and trusted individuals in the Byzantine Empire.\nMilitary career.\nNarses' involvement and help in suppressing the Nika Riots suddenly found him in charge of a moderately-sized army that would go to Italy to help Belisarius. The army arrived in June of 538 probably in Ancona and consisted of roughly 7,000 soldiers. (Every army that Narses commanded was made up of very diverse peoples, drawing from many of the surrounding tribes.) Procopius referred to Narses as the eunuch and keeper of the royal treasuries, and described him as \"keen and more energetic than would be expected of a eunuch\". Narses met with Belisarius at Firmum where a council of war was held. The council discussed what should happen regarding the Siege of Ariminum and with the commander of troops, John, who was a close friend of Narses. Narses commented that he had already been punished for his \"insolence\" and that if the Goths took Rimini then it could turn the tide of the war. Belisarius and Narses led a column of troops through inland mountainous routes to descend upon Rimini from the northwest.\nJohn owed his thanks to Narses for convincing Belisarius, and according to Procopius, commented on the relationship between the two men. \"And from that time both these men [Belisarius and Narses] began to regard each other with great suspicion.\" During the autumn and winter months of 538\u201339, the Army in Italy was divided into two parties, between Belisarius and Narses. Justinian himself dispatched a letter to Belisarius, stating that \"We have not sent our steward Narses to Italy in order to command the army; for we wish Belisarius alone to command the whole army in whatever manner seems to him best, and it is the duty of all of you to follow him in the interest of the state.\" The division however remained and the city of Milan was to fall victim to the divided command. Narses was recalled to Constantinople, but not in disgrace, as he was allowed to retain some of his barbarian guardsmen.\nAfter being recalled, Narses seemed to have lost \"none of his favour at court, [and] remained the most trusted servant and minister of the Emperor and his consort.\" In 541, Narses was believed to have helped the Empress Theodora and Antonina (wife of Belisarius) with the overthrow of John the Cappadocian. In late 541 or early 542, Narses was sent by Justinian to investigate popular disturbances near the Golden Gate of Constantinople. He received a report that a prophetess' foretelling of deadly floods had agitated the crowds. In 545, Justinian sent Narses to the rulers of the Heruli to recruit troops to join Belisarius in Italy. When the Heruli troops were accompanying Narses to Thrace, they unexpectedly encountered and defeated the Sclaveni raiders.\nReturn to Italy.\nFinally in 551, Narses was sent back to Italy, where he was to achieve his greatest victories. Germanus, a cousin of the Emperor, was appointed by Justinian to finish what Belisarius had started a decade before. However, on his way to Italy in 550, Germanus fell ill and \"abruptly reached the term of life.\" Narses was appointed the new commander of the army, given supreme command and returned to Italy where twelve years previously he had been recalled. Many historians believe that Narses was put in command because of his old age, so that he would never be able to rebel successfully against Justinian.\nNarses' greatest asset in his newfound position was to have access to the Emperor's financial resources. With the treasury, Narses was able to amass anywhere between 20,000 and 30,000 troops. Narses also seemed to be well liked by many of the soldiers of fortune, as he had treated them \"especially well\". Procopius reported that Narses had built an army that in the requirement of men and arms was \"worthy of the Roman Empire\". The army reflected many of Narses' previous commands, in that most of the troops were barbarians.\nNarses was to take more than a year to reach Italy after his appointment, as his entire army made a long march along the coast of the Adriatic Sea. Totila the Ostrogothic king controlled the sea of eastern Italy and hampered supply ships that set sail for Narses' army. John from Salona led 38 ships and Valerian sailed with 12 to meet Totila's force and bring relief to Ancona. Procopius described the subsequent Battle of Sena Gallica as a naval battle that resembled a battle on land. \"There were arrows discharged and fighting at close quarters with sword and spear, just as on a battle field.\" The Byzantine victory at Sena Gallica was overwhelming, as 36 of the 47 Gothic ships were destroyed, and Gibal, a Gothic admiral, was captured. Historian Archibald R. Lewis pointed out that victory could only come to Narses after Totila's sea dominance was brought to an end.\nThere were a number of reasons that Narses' march was very slow. Totila had dispatched various troops to employ delaying tactics and the Franks were enemies of Narses' allies the Lombards, and did not allow free passage. Procopius stated that Narses was \"completely bewildered\", but John was familiar with that part of Italy and advised him how to continue. Using this advice, Narses was able to reach Ravenna unopposed. Totila may have believed that Narses was going to come from the sea, whence all the previous invasions had come.\nBattle of Taginae.\nOn his way to seek Totila's main army, Narses encountered a small Gothic garrison at the town of Rimini. John, who had previously been in command at Rimini when it was besieged by Gothic forces, again gave advice to Narses on how to proceed. The exact route taken was not precisely indicated by Procopius and has led to confusion on the reconstruction of the coming battles. Procopius referred to the next battle as \"Busta Gallorum\", but many historians now refer to it as the Battle of Taginae.\nNarses sent word to Totila and gave him a chance to either surrender, or give the day in which the battle would take place. Procopius quoted Totila's response, \"At the end of eight days let us match our strength.\" Narses was not fooled by this and preferred the tactical defensive upon meeting Totila, as his army would have been larger than that of Totila. The following battle would be Narses' ultimate victory, and would set the estimation of his military talents as not inferior to those of Belisarius.\nTactics.\nNarses' great success at the Battle of Taginae was to come from the disposition of his forces before the battle began. Narses arrayed his troops in a \"crescent shaped\" formation with mostly infantry in the middle, flanked by archers. The infantry were in fact dismounted barbarian cavalry, since many of the Goths thought that typical infantry was frail and would flee in the face of a charge. Some historians feel there may have been a political motivation by placing the Heruli and Lombards in the centre dismounted, Narses possibly suspecting them of having sympathy or admiration for Totila.\nOn the sides of the crescent, foot-archers were placed, and this enabled them to destroy the Gothic cavalry through enfilading fire. (This disposition of the archers and their effect upon the battle is strikingly parallel to the later Battle of Agincourt.) Next, Narses placed much of his cavalry on the immediate sides of the dismounted infantry. Normally the cavalry would have been behind the centre, but they were not meant to aid any of the struggling line. Instead they were used to deliver a surprise attack on the Goths when they became fully enveloped. Narses knew that Totila would take the advantage of attacking the \"weak\" centre, and therefore allowed Narses to completely destroy the Ostrogothic army. Procopius said that Totila had been \"out-generalled by his own folly\", because Totila had instructed his troops to only engage with spears, as he thought a quick strike would win the battle.\nTotila sent wave after wave of troops, who became so disorganized by the raining arrow storm that by the time they met the dismounted infantrymen they were completely broken. The Gothic infantry never even engaged in actual combat as they hesitated to advance far enough to actually become effective. They were kept in the rear of the advance, fearing that Narses' horsemen would outflank them from the hill. Finally, Totila's cavalry was pressed backwards onto their own line of infantry, Narses then charged with his own cavalry, which had been held in reserve. The retreat quickly turned into a rout, as the Gothic cavalry rushed right over the infantry, who joined them in the withdrawal.\nTotila himself was killed at this battle and Procopius gave two versions as to the fate of the Ostrogothic king. The first has Totila initially surviving the battle and fleeing the field of battle with only five of his followers. Asbad, leader of the Gepids, overtook him and drove his spear into Totila. The body was immediately taken to the village of Caprae where it was hurriedly buried. In the second version, Totila was mortally wounded in the first wave, struck by a bowman who did not even recognize his target. The first is more widely accepted by historians, as later a Gothic woman revealed where Totila was buried and the body was exhumed and positively identified.\nRome.\nNarses marched to Rome after the Battle of Taginae and had to conduct a short siege of the city. Narses attacked on one side with a large contingent of archers, while John assaulted another part of the walls. From Rome, Narses would work to remove all of the remaining Ostrogothic forces from Italy. The next major move that Narses undertook was to capture the treasury of Totila that was held in Cumae. Both Procopius and Agathias wrote of the strength of the fortress at Cumae. Procopius called it, \"an exceedingly strong fortress,\" and Agathias declared it \"very well fortified.\"\nAs parts of the army were sent throughout the country to deal with Teias (the son of Totila, and new Gothic king), a considerable detachment was sent to Campania to take Cumae. Teias followed the example set by Narses on his march into Italy and marched around the Imperial Army. After engaging Narses in small skirmishes for nearly two months, Teias retreated into the mountains. They maneuvered onto Mons Lactarius, where they soon faced death from starvation.\nBattle of Mons Lactarius.\nThe Goths suddenly came down the mountain in a compact phalanx, catching the army off guard who were also on foot. The reasons why the Goths attacked horseless is unknown, but the suddenness of the attack seemed to be the reason that Narses fought horseless as well. The ensuing battle was fought for two days and Procopius described the bravery of King Teias. He first introduced the battle as \"a battle of great note,\" and the heroism displayed by King Teias was not \"inferior to any of the heroes of legend.\" It may be noted that Procopius did not witness any of the battle, and only retold it from the account of others.\nTeias led the charge towards Narses. Procopius recounts that every time his shield was filled with arrows, he received another from his man-at-arms. Finally when a spear struck his shield, he received another but was struck with a mortal blow. The soldier cut off his head to display to the Goths their king had died, but instead of disheartening the Goths, it reinvigorated them to fight for another day. The second day was much like the first, as the Goths charged and fought on foot, involving little to no tactics. Finally, the Goths sent some of their officers to Narses who said they would surrender if they were allowed to leave the country safely. Narses, who received more advice from John, accepted those terms of surrender.\nFinal battles.\nAfter the final defeat of the Goths, the Franks, led by the brothers Leutharis and Buccillinus, attempted to invade the recently reconquered lands. From the \"Liber Pontificalis\": \"They (The Franks) in like manner wasted Italy. But with the help of the Lord they too were destroyed by Narses. And all Italy rejoiced.\" For the next year or two, Narses crossed the countryside, reinstituting Byzantine rule and laying siege to towns that resisted. But as more and more Franks poured over the Alps, Narses regrouped in Rome, and once spring came, marched his army against them. The Franks, led by the two brothers, were pursuing separate routes, but plundering the whole time.\nAt the Battle of Casilinum, Narses put true heavy infantry in the centre, instead of dismounted cavalry. These were hand picked troops, \"Ante-signani\", who wore long clad coats of mail that went down to their feet. Highly trained cavalry were on the flanks, armed with everything that the army carried. On the opposing side, Agathias describes the Franks as, \"Very rude and without cavalry. Their swords were worn on the left leg, and their main weapons were the throwing ax and hooked javelins.\" The Franks attacked Narses' centre, which was initially pushed back but was reinforced by the Heruli, who slowed the attackers.\nAt this point Narses had the cavalry wheel in from the flanks, but without directly engaging the Franks. Instead, he had them unleash an enormous number of arrows into the half-naked barbarians. Finally the Franks became disorganized and their tightly held formations broke down. Narses sounded a general charge that blasted their ranks, and mowed them down. The Franks were massacred and Agathias claimed that only five of them escaped from Narses that day. All three of Narses' major victories can be credited to his skillful use of combined tactics involving cavalry and archers to create and exploit disorder in his enemies. Afterwards, in the autumn of 554, the triumphant Narses returned to Rome, possibly to celebrate a formal Triumph; but Agathias, the sole source for the possibility, \"does not provide even a rhetorical account of this\", and gives no further detail.\nFinal years.\nFor the next twelve years, Narses may have stayed in Italy and \"set about to reorganize\" its government. Justinian sent Narses a series of new decrees known as \"pragmatic sanctions\". Many historians refer to Narses in this part of his career as an Exarch. Narses completed some restoration projects in Italy but was unable to return Rome to its former splendor, though he did repair many of the bridges into the city and rebuild the city's walls.\nLittle is known of Narses' last years. Some historians believe he died in 567, while others assert that he died in 574, in which case he may have reached the age of 96.\nLegend has it that Narses was recalled to Constantinople for turning the Romans under his rule into virtual slaves, thereby upsetting the new Emperor Justin II and his wife, the Empress Sophia. Narses then retired to Naples. In an apocryphal but often retold story, Sophia sent Narses a golden distaff with the sarcastic message that he was invited to return to the palace and oversee the women's spinning, and Narses is said to have replied that he would spin a thread of which neither she nor Justin would ever find the end. From Naples, Narses supposedly sent word to the Lombards inviting them to invade northern Italy.\nThe historian Dunlap questions whether there was hostility between the empress and Narses. Paul the Deacon wrote that his body was returned to Constantinople; his peaceful retirement contradicts the story that he had invited the Lombards into Italy. John of Ephesus wrote that Narses was buried in the presence of the Emperor and Empress in a Bithynian monastery founded by him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46736", "revid": "19014806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46736", "title": "Fritz Hollings", "text": "American politician (1922\u20132019)\nErnest Frederick \"Fritz\" Hollings (January 1, 1922\u00a0\u2013 April 6, 2019) was an American politician from the U.S. state of South Carolina. A member of the Democratic Party, he served as a member of the South Carolina House of Representatives representing Charleston County, South Carolina from 1949 to 1954, the 77th lieutenant governor of South Carolina from 1955 to 1959, the 106th governor of South Carolina from 1959 to 1963, and a member of the United States Senate from 1966 to 2005. He served alongside Democrat-turned-Republican U.S. Senate member Strom Thurmond for 36 years, making them the longest-serving duo in U.S. Senate history. At the time of his death, he was the oldest living former U.S. senator and the second-oldest living former American governor, the same honorary titles that Daniel J. Evans from the state of Washington later held at the time of his death in September 2024. As of 2025, he is the last Democrat to hold or win a U.S. Senate seat in South Carolina.\nBorn in Charleston, South Carolina, Hollings graduated from The Citadel in 1942 and joined a law practice in Charleston after attending the Joseph F. Rice School of Law. During World War II, he served as an artillery officer in campaigns in North Africa and Europe. After the war, Hollings successively won election to the South Carolina House of Representatives, as lieutenant governor, and as governor. He sought election to the Senate in 1962 but was defeated by incumbent U.S. Senate member Olin D. Johnston.\nJohnston died in 1965, and the following year Hollings won a special election to serve the remainder of Johnston's term. Hollings remained popular and continually won re-election, becoming one of the longest-serving members of the United States Senate in U.S. history. Hollings sought the Democratic nomination in the 1984 presidential election but dropped out of the race after the New Hampshire presidential primary. He declined to seek re-election in 2004 and was succeeded by Republican Jim DeMint.\nEarly life.\nHollings was born in Charleston, South Carolina, the son of Wilhelmine Dorothea Meyer (1888\u20131982) and Adolph Gevert Hollings, Sr. (1882\u20131940). He was of German descent. Hollings was raised at 338 President St. in the Hampton Park Terrace neighborhood from age 10 until he enrolled in college.\nEducation and personal life.\nHollings graduated from The Citadel in 1942, receiving a Bachelor of Arts degree. He achieved a Bachelor of Laws in 1947 after one year and nine months at the University of South Carolina, and joined a law practice in Charleston. Hollings was a member of the Pi Kappa Phi fraternity. He was a member of the German Friendly Society of Charleston from 1976 to 1991.\nHollings was then married to Rita Liddy \"Peatsy\" Hollings from August 21, 1971, until her death in October 2012. He had four children (Michael, Helen, Patricia Salley, and Ernest III) with his first wife, Martha Patricia Salley Hollings, who he first married on March 30, 1946. He was a Lutheran. In addition, Fritz and Patricia had two sons who died.\nHollings served as an officer in the United States Army's 353rd and 457th Artillery units from 1942 to 1945, during World War II, and was awarded the Bronze Star Medal for meritorious service in direct support of combat operations from December 13, 1944, to May 1, 1945, in France and Germany. He received the European\u2013African\u2013Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with five Bronze Service Stars for participation in the Tunisia, Southern France, Rome-Arno, and Central Europe Campaigns.\nPolitical career.\nHollings served three terms in the South Carolina House of Representatives from 1949 to 1954. In 1950, following the notorious Lynching of Willie Earle, Hollings authored a law that mandated the death penalty for lynching. No lynchings occurred in South Carolina after that law was enacted. After only one term, Hollings's colleagues elected him Speaker \"Pro Tempore\" in 1951 and 1953. He was subsequently elected Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina in 1954, and Governor of South Carolina in 1958 at the age of 36.\nGovernor of South Carolina (1959-1963).\nAs governor of South Carolina from January 20, 1959, to January 15, 1963, Hollings worked to improve the state's educational system, helping to bring more industry and employment opportunities to the state. His term in office saw the establishment of the state's technical education system and its educational television network. He also called for and achieved significant increases in teachers' salaries, bringing them closer to the regional average. At the 1961 Governor's Conference on Business, Industry, Education and Agriculture in Columbia, South Carolina, he declared, \"Today, in our complex society, education is the cornerstone upon which economic development must be built\u00a0\u2013 and prosperity assured.\"\nDuring Hollings's term as governor, the Confederate battle flag was flown above the South Carolina State House underneath the U.S. and state flags. The battle flag was placed over the dome in 1962 by a concurrent resolution of the state legislature during the commemoration of the Civil War centennial. The resolution failed to designate a time for its removal. In 2000 the state legislature voted to move the flag from above the state house to a Confederate soldiers' monument in front of the building, where it remained until 2015, when Republican governor Nikki Haley ordered it removed following Charleston church shooting by a Neo-Confederate in the state earlier that year.\nHollings did little to either support or oppose the civil rights movement as governor, and instead took pride in the lack of civil rights violence that occurred in the state. In his last address to the General Assembly on January 9, 1963, ahead of the peaceful admission to Clemson University of its first African American student, Harvey Gantt, Hollings declared: \"As we meet, South Carolina is running out of courts... this General Assembly must make clear South Carolina's choice, a government of laws rather than a government of men... This should be done with dignity. It should be done with law and order.\"\nHollings oversaw the last executions in South Carolina before \"Furman v. Georgia\", a decision by the Supreme Court of the United States, which temporarily banned capital punishment. During his term, eight inmates were put to death by electric chair. The last was rapist Douglas Thorne, on April 20, 1962.\nHe sought the Democratic nomination for a seat in the United States Senate in 1962 but lost to incumbent Olin D. Johnston.\nAccording to one study, Hollings was the first of a series of \u201cmoderately liberal\u201d Democratic governors who would lead South Carolina for the next 16 years.\nUnited States Senator (1966-2005).\nEarly Senate career.\nJohnston died on April 18, 1965. Hollings' successor as governor, Donald S. Russell, resigned in order to accept appointment to the Senate seat. In the summer of 1966, Hollings defeated Russell in the Democratic primary for the remaining two years of the term. He then narrowly won the special election on November 8, 1966, defeating Democrat-turned-Republican Marshall Parker by 11,758 votes, and was sworn in shortly thereafter. He gained seniority on other newly elected U.S. senators who would have to wait until January 1967 to take the oath of office. In 1967, he was one of eleven senators who voted against the nomination of Thurgood Marshall to become the first black justice on the U.S. Supreme Court. In 1968, Hollings won his first full Senate term, again defeating Parker this time by 155,280 votes.\nFor over 36 years (from November 9, 1966 to January 3, 2003), he served alongside Democratic-turned-Republican Strom Thurmond, making them the longest-serving state delegation duo in history of the United States Senate to date. Thurmond and Hollings generally had a good relationship despite their sometimes sharp philosophical differences, and frequently collaborated on legislation and projects for South Carolina. Hollings was also the thirteenth-longest-serving member of the United States Senate.\nIn 1970, Hollings authored \"The Case Against Hunger: A Demand for a National Policy\", acknowledging the Reverend I. DeQuincey Newman and Sister Mary Anthony for opening his eyes to the despair caused by hunger and helping him realize that he must do something about it. Hollings made headlines the year before when he toured poverty-stricken areas of South Carolina, often referred to as his \"Hunger Tours\". He was accused of drawing unwanted attention to South Carolina while other states, both northern and southern, also faced extreme poverty. Hollings knew South Carolina was not alone in its struggle and thought that if any politician was going to investigate hunger in South Carolina, it was going to at least be a South Carolinian. After a tour of an East Charleston slum, he said, \"I don't want Romney and Kennedy coming here to look at my slums. As a matter of fact when I get caught up with my work, I think I may go look at the slums of Boston.\" For his efforts, Hollings was also accused of \"scheming for the Negro vote\". Hollings, who had seen plenty of white hunger and poverty and slums on his tours, responded, \"You just don't make political points on hunger. The poor aren't registered to vote and they won't vote.\" In February 1969, however, Hollings testified as to what he had seen on his fact-finding tours in front of the United States Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs. Charleston's \"News and Courier\" (now \"The Post and Courier\") reported that \"Senators, members of the press corps and visitors packed in the hearing room watched and listened in disbelief as Hollings detailed dozens of tragically poignant scenes of human suffering in his state.\" Hollings recommended to the committee that free food stamps from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program be distributed to the most needy, and just over a day later, U.S. Senate member George McGovern from South Dakota announced that free food stamps would be distributed in South Carolina as part of a national pilot program for feeding the hungry.\nHollings and his first wife separated in 1970 and divorced in 1971. Their children lived with their mother, and Hollings never discussed the reason for the divorce. Later that year, he married Rita Liddy \"Peatsy\" Hollings (born 1935), who was 13 years his junior. She had joined his administrative staff in 1967. It was her first and his second marriage. They were married 41 years until her death in 2012.\nIn the 1970s, Hollings joined with fellow U.S. Senate members Ted Kennedy from Massachusetts and Henry M. Jackson from Washington in a press conference to oppose President of the United States Gerald Ford's request that Congress end Richard Nixon's price controls on domestic oil, which had helped to cause the gasoline lines during the 1973 oil crisis. Hollings said he believed ending the price controls (as was eventually done in 1981) would be a \"catastrophe\" that would cause \"economic chaos\".\nIn February 1970, during a session of debate on federal aid to school districts serving children living in public housing units, Hollings asked U.S. Senate member Jacob Javits from New York if he would support the anti-busing amendment given that it was based on New York law.\nIn September 1970, during a speech at the University of Georgia in Athens, Georgia, Hollings declared that the United States could not afford such \"leadership by political bamboozle\", calling on Americans to ignore the voices of discord and unite for \"meaningful changes\" in society. Hollings said President Nixon had led the U.S. down a \"clamorous road of drift and division\" and criticized the \"ranting rhetoric\" of Vice President of the United States Spiro Agnew. Hollings attributed the principal blame for the disunity of the U.S. on special interest groups and \"impatient minority blocs\" that had shouted \"non negotiable demands\". Hollings linked former President Johnson and President Nixon with having both \"attacked the politics of the problem rather than the problems themselves\".\nIn February 1971, Hollings introduced Ted Kennedy from Massachusetts in Charleston, South Carolina, ahead of his remarks calling for an end to the Vietnam War. Hollings disclosed that Kennedy had sought his advice on how to answer reporters' questions regarding a possible presidential campaign and that Kennedy believed his visit would spark speculation on the part of reporters about a campaign regardless of what he said.\nIn November 1971, Hollings announced his opposition to the nomination of Earl Butz for United States Secretary of Agriculture.\nIn 1972, Hollings and Republican U.S. Senate member William B. Saxbe from Ohio sponsored a resolution bestowing early United States recognition on Bangladesh as the Nixon administration sought a policy of delaying recognition until \"there were commensurate diplomatic benefits to the United States.\"\nIn 1977, Hollings was one of five Democratic U.S. Senate members to vote against the nomination of Ray Marshall as United States Secretary of Labor.\nIn early 1979, United States Secretary of State Cyrus Vance sought permission from a Senate Appropriations subcommittee to transfer $2million in funds for the American Embassy to the new unofficial American Institute in Taiwan. Hollings was one of four members of the committee to oppose Vance's request during the latter's appearance before the subcommittee and Hollings later sent a letter to Vance declining the request. Hollings explained that \"a smooth transition to unofficial relations may be threatened\" in the event of funds not being transferred to the American Institute before the American Embassy in Taiwan ceased its function by its designated date of March 1. Hollings's opposition was considered unusual given that most requests were approved and State Department officials publicly stated their wishes for Hollings and his colleagues to drop their opposition in the face of Taiwan's reluctant agreement to setting up \"nongovernmental body in Washington\" that would serve as the counterpart to the American Institute in Taipei.\nHollings opposed legislation in 1979 that would admit additional ethnic Chinese refugees amid increased concern regarding moves by the Vietnamese government.\nIn August 1979, Hollings announced his opposition to the United States-Soviet Union nuclear arms treaty, saying the treaty should be defeated unless amended with a reduction of Soviet military power. His proposal was believed to stir Russian disapproval of the treaty if implemented. Hollings also made an unsuccessful attempt to persuade the United States Senate Committee on the Budget to add $2.6billion for a recommendation for military spending that would be included in Congress's second concurrent resolution on the budget.\nPresidential candidate.\nHollings unsuccessfully sought the Democratic nomination for President of the United States in the 1984 United States presidential election. Hollings's wit and experience, as well as his call for a budget freeze, won him some positive attention, but his relatively conservative record alienated liberal Democrats, and he was never really noticed in a field dominated by former U.S. Senate member Walter Mondale of Minnesota, who served in the U.S. Senate from 1964 to 1976 and as Vice President of the United States from 1977 to 1981, and U.S. Senate members John Glenn of Ohio and Gary Hart of Colorado. Hollings dropped out two days after losing badly in the New Hampshire presidential primary, and endorsed Hart a week later. His disdain for his competitors sometimes showed. He notably referred to Mondale as a \"lapdog\" and to former astronaut Glenn as a \"Sky King\" who was \"confused in his capsule\".\nLater Senate career.\nOn March 24, 1981, Hollings introduced legislation that if passed would restore the military draft with limited deferments and exemptions and stipulating that men aged 18 to 22 years old would be required to spend nine months of active service for basic training that potentially would precede reserve duty. Hollings's proposal granted deferments \"to people on active duty, in the reserves or in advanced Reserve Officers Training Corps study; surviving sons or brothers of those killed in war or missing in action; conscientious objectors and ministers; doctors and others in vital health professions, and judges of courts of record and elected officials\". Hollings stated that recruiting for the armed forces had fallen short of requirements by an estimated 23,000 people in 1979 and that he believed the draft applying to women \"should be across the board\" due to the issue continuing to be debated between the public and the courts.\nIn 1981, Hollings apologized to fellow Democratic U.S. Senate member Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio after Hollings referred to him as the \"senator from B'nai B'rith\" on the floor. Metzenbaum, who was Jewish, raised a question of privilege and Hollings's remarks were stricken from the record.\nIn March 1985, the Senate Budget Committee approved a proposal sponsored by Hollings freezing military spending by not allowing any growth above inflation in fiscal year 1986 and bestowing three percent hikes in the following two years, Hollings after the vote saying that a pattern had been set for similar action on other budget items and predicted that the Budget Committee would also go against another Reagan administration supported position by freezing Social Security cost of living increases.\nOn May 1, 1985, the United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation rejected an amendment to a bill reauthorizing the Federal Communications Commission prohibiting public television stations from swapping channels with commercial stations, Hollings afterward stating that the vote was \"a tragic abdication by Congress of its over 60-year-old responsibility to protect the public's interest in broadcasting\".\nIn October 1985, Hollings and Republican United States Senate members Phil Gramm of Texas and Warren Rudman of New Hampshire sponsored an amendment to establish a budget deficit ceiling that would decline to zero by 1991 that was attached to a bill raising the debt limit of the national government by more than $250 billion. The amendment was approved by a vote of 75 to 24 and was stated as a possible prelude to a balanced budget in five years without a tax increase by United States Secretary of the Treasury James Baker.\nDuring the 1988 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Hollings endorsed Jesse Jackson.\nIn October 1989, Hollings announced from his Washington office that he would request the United States Government Accountability Office investigate efforts by the Federal Emergency Management Agency to provide timely assistance and funds to victims of Hurricane Hugo the previous month. Hollings charged FEMA with \"stonewalling, fretting and filling out forms\" and called on the federal government to become more active in trying to relieve areas devastated by Hurricane Hugo.\nIn April 1990, Hollings planned the compiling of the Senate Budget Committee to vote on a cut in the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, an idea initially forwarded at the end of the previous year by fellow Democratic senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan as a way of making Congress address what he considered to be a serious problem in the management of the Social Security trust funds. Hollings sought a revenue figure which reflected the $36billion tax cut through a rollback of Social Security payroll taxes increases that were scheduled to take effect January1 and confirmed he would ask his colleagues on the budget committee to remove the trust funds from the budget deficit calculation and vote on the 1991 budget including a $300billion deficit. Hollings's plan included a five percent value-added tax on goods and services in addition to a ten percent oil import fee as well as an increase in the top income tax rate to thirty-three percent among wealthiest taxpayers. The goal was considered an uphill battle where Hollings could be outmaneuvered in committee with parliamentary tactics that would result in the precluding of a straight up-or-down vote on the Social Security tax cut. Acknowledging this, Hollings said, \"They may try to block me. But we will find a bill by God to cut Social Security taxes. There will be a vote.\"\nIn January 1991, Hollings joined most Democratic senators in voting against a resolution authorizing war against Iraq.\nIn 1993, Hollings told reporters he attended international summits because, \"Everybody likes to go to Geneva. I used to do it for the United States Convention on the Law of the Sea conferences and you'd find those potentates from down in Africa, you know, rather than eating each other, they'd just come up and get a good square meal in Geneva.\" Hollings had previously caused controversy when responding to Yoshio Sakurauchi's commentary that Americans are lazy and illiterate. Hollings replied, \"You should draw a mushroom cloud and put underneath it, 'Made in America by lazy and illiterate Americans and tested in Japan'.\"\nHollings remained very popular in South Carolina over the years, even as the state became increasingly friendly to Republicans at the national level. In his first three bids for a full term, he never won less than 60 percent of the vote. In 1992, however, he faced an unexpectedly close race against former U.S. House of Representatives member Thomas F. Hartnett in what was otherwise a very good year for Democrats nationally. Hartnett had represented the Charleston area in Congress from 1981 to 1987, thus making him Hollings's congressman. His appeal in the South Carolina Lowcountry\u00a0\u2013 traditionally a swing region at the state level\u00a0\u2013 enabled him to hold Hollings to only fifty percent of the vote.\nIn his last Senate race in 1998, Hollings faced Republican U.S. House of Representatives member Bob Inglis. One of the more heated moments of the race was a newspaper interview in which Hollings referred to Inglis as a \"goddamn skunk\". Hollings was re-elected by 75,139 votes. \nOn January 7, 2003, Hollings introduced the controversial Universal National Service Act of 2006, which would require all men and women aged 18\u201326 (with some exceptions) to perform a year of military service.\nBy 2003, Hollings realized that no Democrat could win statewide office in South Carolina's current political climate\u2014not even as entrenched an incumbent as himself. On August 4, 2003, he announced that he would not run for re-election in 2004. Republican Jim DeMint, who was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives member from 1999 to 2005, succeeded him.\nIn his later career, Hollings was moderate politically but was supportive of many civil and political rights bills. In 1982, he voted for re-authorizing the Voting Rights Act of 1965. However, in 1967 he was one of the 11 U.S. Senate members who voted against the confirmation of Thurgood Marshall, the first black Supreme Court of the United States justice. Hollings later voted in favor of the unsuccessful Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination and also for the successful Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination.\nOn fiscal issues, he was generally conservative, and was one of the primary sponsors of the Gramm\u2013Rudman\u2013Hollings Balanced Act, an attempt to enforce limits on government spending.\nHollings and Howell Heflin of Alabama were the only two Democratic U.S. Senate members to vote against the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.\nEntertainment industry.\nAs a senator, Hollings supported legislation in the interests of the established media distribution industry (such as the proposed \"Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act\"). His hard-line support of various client-serve model computer restrictions such as Digital rights management and Trusted Computing led the Fritz chip (Trusted Platform Module, a microchip that enforces such restrictions) to be nicknamed after him. Hollings introduced the Consumer Broadband and Digital Television Promotion Act, a draft of the later CBDTPA, which would have mandated \"manufacturers of all electronic devices and software to embed government approved copy protection technology in their products\". Hollings also sponsored the Online Personal Privacy Act. According to OpenSecrets, between 1997 and 2002, Hollings received more than $300,000 from the entertainment industry.\nHollings was referred to as the \"Senator from Disney\" for his lobbying on behalf of the entertainment industry, including industry groups like the Recording Industry Association of America and the Motion Picture Association.\nPost Senatorial life and death.\nIn retirement, Hollings wrote opinion editorials for newspapers in South Carolina and was a regular contributor to the \"HuffPost\". His opinion editorials were also published every week in EconomyInCrisis.org, an independent protectionist news blog. In 2008, the University of South Carolina Press published \"Making Government Work\", a book authored by Hollings with Washington, D.C., journalist Kirk Victor, imparting Hollings' view on the changes needed in Washington. Among other things, the book recommended a dramatic decrease in the amount of campaign spending. It also attacked free trade policies as inherently destructive, suggesting that certain protectionist measures built the United States and that only a few parties actually benefited from free trade, such as large manufacturing corporations.\nThe Hollings Cancer Center at the Medical University of South Carolina, in Charleston, was established in 1993.\nHollings started the Hollings Scholarship in 2005. It gave more than a hundred undergraduates from around the country a ten-week internship with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and a monetary scholarship for the school year.\nHollings helped to establish the Hollings Center for International Dialogue, an organization that promotes dialogue between the United States and Turkey, the nations of the Middle East, North Africa, and Southwest Asia, and other countries with predominantly Muslim populations in order to open channels of communication, deepen cross-cultural understanding, expand people-to-people contacts, and generate new thinking on important international issues.\nHollings was also on the board of advisors as a distinguished visiting professor of Law with the Charleston School of Law. He delivered the commencement address to the first graduating class there on May 19, 2007.\nIn 2008, the University of South Carolina announced their new library would be named The Ernest F. Hollings Special Collections Library. The $18-million library was built behind the Thomas Cooper Library and is home to The Irvin Department of Rare Books &amp; Special Collections, South Carolina Political Collections, and Digital Collections. It is also home to the Dorothy B. Smith Reading Room.\nOn April 6, 2019, Hollings died at the age of 97 at his home in Isle of Palms, South Carolina, following a period of declining health. Former U.S. Senate member Joe Biden of Delaware, who was U.S. Vice President from 2009 to 2017, and later U.S. President from 2021 to 2025, delivered the eulogy at his funeral."}
{"id": "46737", "revid": "15941874", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46737", "title": "Consumer Broadband and Television Promotion Act", "text": ""}
{"id": "46738", "revid": "20967954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46738", "title": "Goliath", "text": "Philistine giant in the Bible\nGoliath ( ) is a Philistine warrior of giant stature who plays a pivotal role in the origin myth of King David in the Book of Samuel. According to 1 Samuel, Goliath challenges the Israelites to best him in single combat. David, then a young shepherd, takes up up the challenge and kills Goliath with a stone slung from a sling. The narrative signifies King Saul's unfitness to rule for not taking up the giant's challenge himself.\nThe phrase \"David and Goliath\" has taken on a more popular meaning denoting an underdog situation, a contest wherein a smaller, weaker opponent faces a much bigger, stronger adversary. Some modern scholars now believe that the original slayer of Goliath in the text may have been Elhanan, son of Jair, who features in 2 Samuel 21:19, in which Elhanan kills Goliath the Gittite, and that the authors of the Deuteronomistic history changed the original text to credit the victory to the more famous figure of David.\nBiblical accounts.\nIn 1 Samuel 17, Saul and the Israelites are facing the Philistines in the Valley of Elah. Twice a day for 40 days, morning and evening, Goliath, the champion of the Philistines, comes out between the lines and challenges the Israelites to send out a champion of their own to decide the outcome in single combat, but Saul is afraid. David accepts the challenge. Saul reluctantly agrees and offers his armour, which David declines, taking only his staff, sling, and five stones from a brook.\nDavid and Goliath confront each other, Goliath with his armor and javelin, David with his staff and sling. \"The Philistine cursed David by his gods\", but David replies: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"This day the Lord will deliver you into my hand, and I will strike you down, and I will give the dead bodies of the host of the Philistines this day to the birds of the air and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know that there is a god in Israel and that all this assembly may know that God saves not with sword and spear; for the battle is God's, and he will give you into our hand.\"\nDavid hurls a stone from his sling and hits Goliath in the center of his forehead, Goliath falls on his face to the ground, and David cuts off his head. The Philistines flee and are pursued by the Israelites \"as far as Gath and the gates of Ekron\". David puts the armor of Goliath in his own tent and takes the head to Jerusalem, and Saul sends Abner to bring the boy to him. The king asks whose son he is, and David answers: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I am the son of your servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.\"\nComposition of the Book of Samuel.\nThe Books of Samuel, together with the books of Joshua, Judges and Kings, make up a unified history of Israel which biblical scholars call the Deuteronomistic History. The first edition of the history was probably written at the court of Judah's King Josiah (late 7th century BCE) and a revised second edition during the exile (6th century BCE), with further revisions in the post-exilic period. Traces of this can be seen in contradictions within the Goliath story, such as that between 1 Samuel 17:54, which says that David took Goliath's head to Jerusalem, although according to 2 Samuel 5 Jerusalem at that time was still a Jebusite stronghold and was not captured until David became king.\nStructure of the David and Goliath narrative.\nThe Goliath story is made up of base-narrative with numerous additions made probably after the exile:\n\" Original story\"\n\"Additions\"\nTextual considerations.\nGoliath's height.\nThe oldest manuscripts, namely the Dead Sea Scrolls text of Samuel from the late 1st century BCE, the 1st-century CE historian Josephus, and the major Septuagint manuscripts, all give Goliath's height as \"four cubits and a span\" (), whereas the Masoretic Text has \"six cubits and a span\" (). Many scholars have suggested that the smaller number grew in the course of transmission (only a few have suggested the reverse, that an original larger number was reduced), possibly when a scribe's eye was drawn to the number six in line 17:7.\nGoliath and Saul.\nThe underlying purpose of the story of Goliath is to show that Saul is not fit to be king (but that David is). Saul was chosen to lead the Israelites against their enemies, but when faced with Goliath, he refuses to do so; Saul is a head taller than anyone else in all Israel (1 Samuel 9:2), which implies he was over tall and the obvious challenger for Goliath, yet David is the one who eventually defeated him. Also, Saul's armour and weaponry are apparently no better than Goliath's: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"David declares that when a lion or bear came and attacked his father's sheep, he battled against it and killed it, [but Saul] has been cowering in fear instead of rising up and attacking the threat to his sheep (i.e., Israel).\"\nDavid's speech in 1 Samuel 17 can be interpreted as referring to both Saul and Goliath through its animal imagery. When this imagery is considered closely, David can be seen to function as the true king who manipulates wild beasts.\nElhanan and Goliath.\nIn 2 Samuel 21, verse 19, the Hebrew Bible tells how Goliath was killed by \"Elhanan the son of Jaare-oregim, the Bethlehemite\". The fourth-century BC 1 Chronicle 20:5 explains the second Goliath by saying that Elhanan \"slew Lahmi the brother of Goliath\", which is thought by biblical source critics to have constructed the name Lahmi from the last portion of the word \"Bethlehemite\" (\"beit-ha'lahmi\"), and the King James Bible adopted this identification into 2 Samuel 21:18\u201319. Regardless, the Hebrew text at Goliath's name in 2 Samuel 21 makes no mention of the word \"brother\". Most scholars dismiss the later 1 Chronicles 20:5 material as \"an obvious harmonization\".\nGoliath and the Greeks.\nThe armor described in 1 Samuel 17 appears typical of Greek armor of the sixth century BCE; narrative formulae such as the settlement of battle by single combat between champions has been thought characteristic of the Homeric epics (the \"Iliad\") rather than of the ancient Near East. The designation of Goliath as a , \"man of the in-between\" (a longstanding difficulty in translating 1 Samuel 17) appears to be a borrowing from Greek \"man of the \"\" ()\", i.e., the space between two opposite army camps where champion combat would take place. Other scholars argue the description is a trustworthy reflection of the armaments that a Philistine warrior would have worn in the tenth century BCE.\nA story very similar to that of David and Goliath appears in the \"Iliad\", written c.\u2009760\u2013710\u00a0BCE, where Nestor in order to encourage the Greeks to meet a challenge to single combat by Hector recalls when, as a young man, he fought and conquered the giant Ereuthalion. Each giant wields a distinctive weapon\u2014an iron club in Ereuthalion's case, a massive bronze spear in Goliath's; each giant, clad in armor, comes out of the enemy's massed array to challenge all the warriors in the opposing army; in each case the seasoned warriors are afraid, and the challenge is taken up by a stripling, the youngest in his family (Nestor is the twelfth son of Neleus, David the seventh or eighth son of Jesse.) In each case an older and more experienced father figure (Nestor's own father, David's patron Saul) tells the boy that he is too young and inexperienced, but in each case the young hero receives divine aid and the giant is left sprawling on the ground. Nestor, fighting on foot, then takes the chariot of his enemy, while David, on foot, takes the sword of Goliath. The enemy army then flees, the victors pursue and slaughter them and return with their bodies, and the boy-hero is acclaimed by the people. However, some scholars question whether the biblical writers would have ever had access to the Iliad, and argue that the similarities between both tales are also present in other ancient Near Eastern accounts of duels.\nGoliath's name.\nTell es-Safi, the biblical Gath and traditional home of Goliath, has been the subject of extensive excavations by Israel's Bar-Ilan University. The archaeologists have established that this was one of the largest of the Philistine cities until it was destroyed in the ninth century BC, an event from which it never recovered. The Tell es-Safi inscription, a potsherd discovered at the site, and reliably dated to between the tenth to mid-ninth centuries BC, is inscribed with the two names \"\u02beLWT\" and \"WLT\". While the names are not directly connected with the biblical Goliath (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Script/styles_hebrew.css\" /&gt;\u05d2\u05dc\u05d9\u05ea\u200e, \"GLYT\"), they are etymologically related and demonstrate that the name fits with the context of the late tenth- to early ninth-century BC Philistine culture. The name \"Goliath\" itself is non-Semitic and has been linked with the Lydian king Alyattes, which also fits the Philistine context of the biblical Goliath story. A similar name, Uliat, is also attested in Carian inscriptions. Aren Maeir, director of the excavation, comments: \"Here we have very nice evidence [that] the name Goliath appearing in the Bible in the context of the story of David and Goliath... is not some later literary creation.\"\nBased on the southwest Anatolian onomastic considerations, Roger D. Woodard proposed *\"Walwatta\" as a reconstruction of the form ancestral to both Hebrew Goliath and Lydian Alyattes. In this case, the original meaning of Goliath's name would be \"Lion-man,\" thus placing him within the realm of Indo-European warrior-beast mythology.\nThe Babylonian Talmud explains the name \"Goliath, son of Gath\" through a reference to his mother's promiscuity, based on the Aramaic \u05d2\u05b7\u05bc\u05ea (\"gat\", winepress), as everyone threshed his mother as people do to grapes in a winepress (Sotah, 42b).\nThe name sometimes appears in English as Goliah.\nLater traditions.\nJudaism.\nAccording to the Babylonian Talmud (Sotah 42b), Goliath was a son of Orpah, the sister-in-law of Ruth, David's own great-grandmother (Ruth \u2192 Obed \u2192 Jesse \u2192 David). Ruth Rabbah, a haggadic and homiletic interpretation of the Book of Ruth, makes the blood relationship even closer, considering Orpah and Ruth to have been full sisters. Orpah was said to have made a pretense of accompanying Ruth but after forty paces left her. Thereafter she led a dissolute life. According to the Jerusalem Talmud, Goliath was born by polyspermy, and had about one hundred fathers.\nThe Talmud stresses Goliath's ungodliness: his taunts before the Israelites included the boast that it was he who had captured the Ark of the Covenant and brought it to the temple of Dagon, and his challenges to combat were made at morning and evening to disturb the Israelites in their prayers. His armor weighed 60 tons, according to rabbi Hanina; 120, according to rabbi Abba bar Kahana; and his sword, which became the sword of David, had marvelous powers. On his death it was found that his heart carried the image of Dagon, who thereby also came to a shameful downfall.\nIn Pseudo-Philo, believed to have been composed between 135\u00a0BCE and 70\u00a0CE, David picks up seven stones and writes on them his father's name, his own name, and the name of God, one name per stone; then, speaking to Goliath, he says: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Hear this word before you die: were not the two woman from whom you and I were born, sisters? And your mother was Orpah and my mother Ruth\u00a0...\" After David strikes Goliath with the stone he runs to Goliath before he dies, and Goliath says: \"Hurry and kill me and rejoice.\" David replies: \"Before you die, open your eyes and see your slayer.\" Goliath sees an angel and tells David that it is not he who has killed him but the angel. Pseudo-Philo then goes on to say that the angel of the Lord changes David's appearance so that no one recognizes him, and thus Saul asks who he is.\nIslam.\nGoliath appears in chapter 2 of the Quran (2:247\u2013252), in the narrative of David and Saul's battle against the Philistines. Called in Arabic (), Goliath's mention in the Quran is concise, although it remains a parallel to the account in the Hebrew Bible. Muslim scholars have tried to trace Goliath's origins, most commonly with the Amalekites. Goliath, in early scholarly tradition, became a kind of byword or collective name for the oppressors of the Israelite nation before David. Muslim tradition sees the battle with Goliath as a prefiguration of Muhammad's battle of Badr, and sees Goliath as parallel to the enemies that Muhammad faced.\nModern usages of David and Goliath.\nIn modern usage, the phrase \"David and Goliath\" has taken on a secular meaning, denoting an underdog situation, a contest where a smaller, weaker opponent faces a much bigger, stronger adversary; if successful, the underdog may win in an unusual or surprising way.\nTheology professor Leonard Greenspoon, in his essay, \"David vs. Goliath in the Sports Pages\", explains that \"most writers use the story for its underdog overtones (the little guy wins) ... Less likely to show up in newsprint is the contrast that was most important to the biblical authors: David's victory shows the power of his God, while Goliath's defeat reveals the weakness of the Philistine deities.\"\nThe phrase is widely used in news media to succinctly characterize underdog situations in many contexts without religious overtones. Contemporary headlines include: sports (\"Haye relishes underdog role in 'David and Goliath' fight with Nikolai Valuev\"\u2014\"The Guardian\"); business (\"On Internet, David-and-Goliath Battle Over Instant Messages\"\u2014\"The New York Times\"); science (\"David and Goliath: How a tiny spider catches much larger prey\"\u2014\"ScienceDaily\"; politics (\"Dissent in Cuba: David and Goliath\"\u2014\"The Economist\"); social justice (\"David-and-Goliath Saga Brings Cable to Skid Row\"\u2014\"Los Angeles Times\"). The geopolitical conflict between the Philippines and China, in the context of the Spratly Islands dispute, has been likened to a \"David and Goliath\" scenario.\nAside from the above allegorical use of \"David and Goliath\", there is also the use of \"Goliath\" for a particularly tall person. For example, basketball player Wilt Chamberlain was nicknamed \"Goliath\", which he disliked.\nIn popular culture.\nAmerican actor Ted Cassidy portrayed Goliath in the TV series \"Greatest Heroes of the Bible\" (1978). Italian actor Luigi Montefiori portrayed this -tall giant in Paramount's 1985 live-action film \"King David\" as part of a flashback. This film includes the King of the Philistines saying: \"Goliath has challenged the Israelites six times and no one has responded.\" It is then on the seventh time that David meets his challenge.\nToho and Tsuburaya Productions collaborated on a film called \"Daigoro vs. Goliath\" (1972), which follows the story relatively closely but recasts the main characters as \"kaiju\".\nIn 1975, Kaveret recorded and released a humorous interpretation of the Goliath story, with several changes made such as Goliath being the \"Demon from Ashkelon\", and David randomly meeting Goliath rather than dueling each other on a battlefield.\nIn 2005, Lightstone Studios released a direct-to-DVD movie musical titled \"One Smooth Stone\", which was later changed to \"David and Goliath\". It is part of the Liken the scriptures (now just Liken) series of movie musicals on DVD based on scripture stories. Thurl Bailey, a former NBA basketball player, was cast to play the part of Goliath in this film.\nIn 2009, NBC aired Kings, which has a narrative loosely based on the biblical story of King David, but set in a kingdom that culturally and technologically resembles the present-day United States. The part of Goliath is portrayed by a tank, which David destroys with a shoulder-fired rocket launcher.\nItalian Goliath film series (1960\u20131964).\nThe Italians used Goliath as an action superhero in a series of biblical adventure films (peplums) in the early 1960s. He possessed amazing strength, and the films were similar in theme to their Hercules and Maciste movies. After the classic \"Hercules\" (1958) became a blockbuster sensation in the film industry, the 1959 Steve Reeves film \"Terrore dei Barbari\" (\"Terror of the Barbarians\") was retitled \"Goliath and the Barbarians\" in the United States, (after Joseph E. Levine claimed the sole right to the name of \"Hercules\"); the film was so successful at the box office, it inspired Italian filmmakers to do a series of four more films featuring a beefcake hero named Goliath, although the films were not really related to each other. Note that the Italian film \"David and Goliath\" (1960), starring Orson Welles, was not one of these, since that film was a straightforward adaptation of the biblical story.\nThe four titles in the Italian \"Goliath\" series were as follows:\nThe name Goliath was later inserted into the film titles of three other Italian muscle man movies that were retitled for distribution in the United States in an attempt to cash in on the Goliath craze, but these films were not originally made as Goliath films in Italy.\nBoth \"Goliath and the Vampires\" (1961) and \"Goliath and the Sins of Babylon\" (1963) actually featured the famed superhero Maciste in the original Italian versions, but American distributors did not feel the name Maciste had any meaning to American audiences. \"Goliath and the Dragon\" (1960) was originally an Italian Hercules film called \"The Revenge of Hercules\".\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46739", "revid": "15941876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46739", "title": "CBTPA", "text": ""}
{"id": "46740", "revid": "50606890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46740", "title": "Euler's identity", "text": "Mathematical equation linking e, i and \u03c0\nIn mathematics, Euler's identity (also known as Euler's equation) is the equality\nformula_1\nwhere\nEuler's identity is named after the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler. It is a special case of Euler's formula formula_6 when evaluated for formula_7. Euler's identity is considered an exemplar of mathematical beauty, as it shows a profound connection between the most fundamental numbers in mathematics.\nMathematical beauty.\nEuler's identity is often cited as an example of deep mathematical beauty. Three of the basic arithmetic operations occur exactly once each: addition, multiplication, and exponentiation. The identity also links five fundamental mathematical constants:\nThe equation is often given in the form of an expression set equal to zero, which is common practice in several areas of mathematics.\nStanford University mathematics professor Keith Devlin has said, \"like a Shakespearean sonnet that captures the very essence of love, or a painting that brings out the beauty of the human form that is far more than just skin deep, Euler's equation reaches down into the very depths of existence\". Paul Nahin, a professor emeritus at the University of New Hampshire who wrote a book dedicated to Euler's formula and its applications in Fourier analysis, said Euler's identity is \"of exquisite beauty\".\nMathematics writer Constance Reid has said that Euler's identity is \"the most famous formula in all mathematics\". Benjamin Peirce, a 19th-century American philosopher, mathematician, and professor at Harvard University, after proving Euler's identity during a lecture, said that it \"is absolutely paradoxical; we cannot understand it, and we don't know what it means, but we have proved it, and therefore we know it must be the truth\".\nA 1990 poll of readers by \"The Mathematical Intelligencer\" named Euler's identity the \"most beautiful theorem in mathematics\". In a 2004 poll of readers by \"Physics World\", Euler's identity tied with Maxwell's equations (of electromagnetism) as the \"greatest equation ever\".\nAt least three books in popular mathematics have been published about Euler's identity:\nExplanations.\nImaginary exponents.\nEuler's identity asserts that formula_8 is equal to \u22121. The expression formula_8 is a special case of the expression formula_10, where \"z\" is any complex number. In general, formula_10 is defined for complex \"z\" by extending one of the definitions of the exponential function from real exponents to complex exponents. For example, one common definition is:\nformula_12\nEuler's identity therefore states that the limit, as \"n\" approaches infinity, of formula_13 is equal to \u22121. This limit is illustrated in the animation to the right.\nEuler's identity is a special case of Euler's formula, which states that for any real number \"x\",\nformula_14\nwhere the inputs of the trigonometric functions sine and cosine are given in radians.\nIn particular, when \"x\" \n \"\u03c0\",\nformula_15\nSince\nformula_16\nand\nformula_17\nit follows that\nformula_18\nwhich yields Euler's identity:\nformula_19\nGeometric interpretation.\nAny complex number formula_20 can be represented by the point formula_21 on the complex plane. This point can also be represented in polar coordinates as formula_22, where r is the absolute value of z (distance from the origin), and formula_23 is the argument of z (angle counterclockwise from the positive \"x\"-axis). By the definitions of sine and cosine, this point has cartesian coordinates of formula_24, implying that According to Euler's formula, this is equivalent to saying \nEuler's identity says that Since formula_8 is formula_26 for r = 1 and this can be interpreted as a fact about the number \u22121 on the complex plane: its distance from the origin is 1, and its angle from the positive \"x\"-axis is formula_5 radians.\nAdditionally, when any complex number z is multiplied by formula_28, it has the effect of rotating formula_29 counterclockwise by an angle of formula_23 on the complex plane. Since multiplication by \u22121 reflects a point across the origin, Euler's identity can be interpreted as saying that rotating any point formula_5 radians around the origin has the same effect as reflecting the point across the origin. Similarly, setting formula_23 equal to formula_33 yields the related equation which can be interpreted as saying that rotating any point by one turn around the origin returns it to its original position.\nGeneralizations.\nEuler's identity is also a special case of the more general identity that the nth roots of unity, for \"n\" &gt; 1, add up to 0:\nformula_34\nEuler's identity is the case where \"n\" \n 2.\nA similar identity also applies to quaternion exponential: let {\"i\", \"j\", \"k\"} be the basis quaternions; then,\nformula_35\nMore generally, let q be a quaternion with a zero real part and a norm equal to 1; that is, formula_36 with formula_37 Then one has\nformula_38\nThe same formula applies to octonions, with a zero real part and a norm equal to 1. These formulas are a direct generalization of Euler's identity, since formula_3 and formula_40 are the only complex numbers with a zero real part and a norm (absolute value) equal to 1.\nHistory.\nEuler's identity is a direct result of Euler's formula, published in his monumental 1748 work of mathematical analysis, \"Introductio in analysin infinitorum\", but it is questionable whether the particular concept of linking five fundamental constants in a compact form can be attributed to Euler himself, as he may never have expressed it.\nRobin Wilson writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \nWe've seen how [Euler's identity] can easily be deduced from results of Johann Bernoulli and Roger Cotes, but that neither of them seem to have done so. Even Euler does not seem to have written it down explicitly\u2014and certainly it doesn't appear in any of his publications\u2014though he must surely have realized that it follows immediately from his identity [i.e. Euler's formula], \"eix\" \n cos \"x\" + \"i\" sin \"x\". Moreover, it seems to be unknown who first stated the result explicitly\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46741", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46741", "title": "Euler's Identity", "text": ""}
{"id": "46742", "revid": "2003421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46742", "title": "Artificial Intelligence Markup Language", "text": "Type of XML dialect\nArtificial Intelligence Markup Language (AIML) is an XML dialect for creating natural language software agents.\nHistory.\nThe XML dialect called AIML was developed by Richard Wallace and a worldwide free software community between 1995 and 2002. AIML formed the basis for what was initially a highly extended Eliza called \"A.L.I.C.E.\" (\"Artificial Linguistic Internet Computer Entity\"), which won the annual Loebner Prize Competition in Artificial Intelligence three times, and was also the Chatterbox Challenge Champion in 2004.\nBecause the A.L.I.C.E. AIML set was released under the GPL, and because most AIML interpreters are offered under a free or open source license, many \"Alicebot clones\" have been created based upon the original implementation of the program and its AIML knowledge base. Free AIML sets in several languages have been developed and made available by the user community. There are AIML interpreters available in Java, Ruby, Python, C++, C#, Pascal, and other languages (see below ).\nA semi-formal specification and a W3C XML Schema for AIML are available. Noel Bush is credited as the author of the formal specification, while Richard S. Wallace is listed as the creator of AIML, and the Working Draft names contributors including Thomas Ringate, Anthony\u202fTaylor, and Jon\u202fBaer\nSince early 2013, The A.L.I.C.E foundation has been working on a draft specification for AIML 2.0.\nElements of AIML.\nAIML contains several elements. The most important of these are described in further detail below.\nCategories.\nCategories in AIML form the fundamental unit of knowledge. A category consists of at least two further elements: the pattern and template elements. Here is a simple category:\n&lt;category&gt;\n &lt;pattern&gt;WHAT IS YOUR NAME&lt;/pattern&gt;\n &lt;template&gt;My name is Michael N.S Evanious.&lt;/template&gt;\n&lt;/category&gt;\nWhen this category is loaded, an AIML bot will respond to the input \"What is your name\" with the response \"My name is Michael N.S Evanious.\"\nPatterns.\nA pattern is a string of characters intended to match one or more user inputs. A literal pattern like\n WHAT IS YOUR NAME\nwill match only one input, ignoring case: \"what is your name\". But patterns may also contain wildcards, which match one or more words. A pattern like\n WHAT IS YOUR *\nwill match an infinite number of inputs, including \"what is your name\", \"what is your shoe size\", \"what is your purpose in life\", etc.\nThe AIML pattern syntax is a very simple pattern language, substantially less complex than regular expressions and as such less than level 3 in the Chomsky hierarchy. \nTo compensate for the simple pattern matching capabilities, AIML interpreters can provide preprocessing functions to expand abbreviations, remove misspellings, etc.\nThe AIML syntax itself is at least as complex as finite-state machines and as such at least of level 3 in the Chomsky hierarchy. This is because a state correlates to one topic. To implement that behavior, the topic should have a \"*\" Pattern to make sure, that the state is not left accidentally. A state transit is implemented with the Tag. This way, the bot will be able to \"remember\" the topic talked about or even user privileges, which are gained during the chat.\nTemplates.\nA template specifies the response to a matched pattern. A template may be as simple as some literal text, like\n My name is John.\nA template may use variables, such as the example\n My name is &lt;bot name=\"name\"/&gt;.\nwhich will substitute the bot's name into the sentence, or\n You told me you are &lt;get name=\"user-age\"/&gt; years old.\nwhich will substitute the user's age (if known) into the sentence.\nTemplate elements include basic text formatting, conditional response (if-then/else), and random responses.\nTemplates may also redirect to other patterns, using an element called srai (Symbolic Reduction in Artificial Intelligence). This can be used to implement synonymy, as in this example (where CDATA is used to avoid the need for XML escaping):\n&lt;category&gt;\n &lt;pattern&gt;WHAT IS YOUR NAME&lt;/pattern&gt;\n &lt;template&gt;&lt;![CDATA[My name is &lt;bot name=\"name\"/&gt;.]]&gt;&lt;/template&gt;\n&lt;/category&gt;\n&lt;category&gt;\n &lt;pattern&gt;WHAT ARE YOU CALLED&lt;/pattern&gt;\n &lt;template&gt;\n &lt;srai&gt;what is your name&lt;/srai&gt;\n &lt;/template&gt;\n&lt;/category&gt;\nThe first category simply answers an input \"what is your name\" with a statement of the bot's name. The second category, however, says that the input \"what are you called\" should be redirected to the category that matches the input \"what is your name\"\u2014in other words, it is saying that the two phrases are equivalent.\nTemplates can contain other types of content, which may be processed by whatever user interface the bot is talking through. So, for example, a template may use HTML tags for formatting, which can be ignored by clients that don't support HTML.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46743", "revid": "39165258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46743", "title": "Heidelberg", "text": "City in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Germany\nHeidelberg (; ; ) is the fifth-largest city in the German state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, and with a population of about 163,000, of which roughly a quarter consists of students, it is Germany's 51st-largest city. Located about south of Frankfurt, Heidelberg is part of the densely populated Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region which has its centre in Mannheim.\nHeidelberg is located on the Neckar River, at the point where it leaves its narrow valley between the Oden Forest and the Little Oden Forest, and enters the wide Upper Rhine Plain. The old town lies in the valley, the end of which is flanked by the K\u00f6nigstuhl in the south and the Heiligenberg in the north. The majority of the population lives in the districts west of the mountains in the Upper Rhine Plain, into which the city has expanded over time.\nHeidelberg University, founded in 1386, is Germany's oldest and one of Europe's most reputable universities. Heidelberg is a scientific hub in Germany and home to several internationally renowned research facilities adjacent to its university, including the European Molecular Biology Laboratory and four Max Planck Institutes. The city has also been a hub for the arts, especially literature, throughout the centuries, and it was designated a \"City of Literature\" by the UNESCO Creative Cities Network.\nHeidelberg was a seat of government of the former Electorate of the Palatinate and is a popular tourist destination due to its romantic cityscape, including Heidelberg Castle, the Philosophers' Walk, and the Baroque old town.\nGeography.\nHeidelberg is located on the eastern edge of the Upper Rhine Plain (), at the place where the river Neckar leaves its narrow valley through the Odenwald mountains and begins the last leg of its journey across the plain towards Mannheim, where it merges into the Rhine about 20 kilometers downstream.\nA part of Heidelberg, including the historical old town and the famous Heidelberg Castle, is located in the narrow Neckar valley. Other parts (mostly quarters from around the 19th century or newer, or originally independent, later incorporated villages) sprawl out into the Rhine Plain and along the Bergstra\u00dfe (lit.\u2009'mountain road'), the narrow strip of characteristic landscape along the sharp border between the plain and the Odenwald mountains.\nThe town is bordered by the K\u00f6nigstuhl (568 m), the Gaisberg (375 m), and the Heiligenberg (445 m) mountains.\nHeidelberg is on European walking route E1 (Sweden-Umbria).\nFlora and fauna.\nHeidelberg is among the warmest regions of Germany, and plants atypical of the central-European climate flourish there, including almond and fig trees, and many kinds of palm trees and olive trees. Alongside the (Philosophers' Walk) on the opposite side of the Old Town, winegrowing was restarted in 2000.\nThere is a wild population of African rose-ringed parakeets, and a wild population of Siberian swan geese, which can be seen mainly on the islands in the Neckar near the district of Bergheim.\nAdministrative structures.\nHeidelberg is a unitary authority within the Regierungsbezirk Karlsruhe. The Rhein-Neckar-Kreis rural district surrounds it and has its seat in the town, although the town is not a part of the district. Heidelberg is a part of the Rhine-Neckar Metropolitan Region, often referred to as the Rhein-Neckar Triangle.\nThis region consists of the southern part of the State of Hessen, the southern part of the State of Rhineland-Palatinate (), the administrative districts of Mannheim and Heidelberg, and the municipalities of the Rhein-Neckar-Kreis. The Rhein-Neckar Triangle became a European metropolitan area in 2005.\nHeidelberg consists of 15 districts distributed in six sectors of the town. In the central area are Altstadt (the Old Town), Bergheim and Weststadt; in the north, Neuenheim and Handschuhsheim; in the east, Ziegelhausen and Schlierbach; in the south, S\u00fcdstadt, Rohrbach, Emmertsgrund, and Boxberg; in the southwest, Kirchheim; in the west, Pfaffengrund, Wieblingen, and a new district, named , is built on land in Weststadt and Wieblingen. The new district will have approximately 5,000\u20136,000 residents and employment for 7,000. Further, new residential space for 10,000\u201315,000 residents was made available in Patrick Henry Village following the departure of the US Armed Forces.\nNeighbouring communes.\nThe following towns and communes border the city of Heidelberg, beginning in the west and in a clockwise direction: Edingen-Neckarhausen, Dossenheim, Schriesheim, Wilhelmsfeld, Sch\u00f6nau, Neckargem\u00fcnd, Bammental, Gaiberg, Leimen, Sandhausen, Oftersheim, Plankstadt, Eppelheim (all part of the Rhein-Neckar-Kreis), and Mannheim.\nClimate.\nHeidelberg has an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\"), defined by the protected valley between the Pf\u00e4lzerwald and the Odenwald. The almost year round warm temperatures are usually determined by Atlantic air masses in the winter and increased influence from the western Mediterranean in summer.\nIn contrast to the nearby Upper Rhine Plain, Heidelberg's position in the valley leads to more frequent easterly winds than average. The hillsides of the Odenwald favor clouding and precipitation.\nSpring starts earlier than the average in Germany (usually mid February in the recent years). While the weather in spring is typically warm, it is also known to change far more often than in the summer.\nSummer starts typically in June and stays until September. In this time the weather is typically stable, with single thunderstorms marking the only precipitation. Day temperatures of around 30 \u00b0C are typical, but can reach up to 40 \u00b0C during heat waves.\nAutumn starts warm in September and cools down to typical winter temperatures for the region by the end of November. Precipitation levels begin to increase and, due to the decreasing sunlight, the region is affected by fog more frequently from the second part of October onwards.\nWinters are mostly mild, though light nighttime frosts do occur in the coldest months. Snow is a rare event, and precipitation normally falls as rain. Winters are the wettest time of the year, with frequent western winds blowing from the Atlantic. Storms (\"Orkane\") can create severe damage, and the Neckar is often affected by floods.\nAccording to the German Meteorological Service, Heidelberg was the warmest place in Germany in 2009.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nBetween 600,000 and 200,000 years ago, \"Heidelberg Man\" died at nearby Mauer. His jaw bone was discovered in 1907. Scientific dating determined his remains as the earliest evidence of human life in Europe. In the 5th century BC, a Celtic fortress of refuge and place of worship were built on the , or \"Holy Mountain\". Both places can still be identified. In 40 AD, a fort was built and occupied by the 24th Roman cohort and the 2nd Cyrenaican cohort (CCG XXIIII and CCH II CYR). The late Roman Emperor Valentinian I, in 369 AD, built new and maintained older \"castra\" (permanent camps) and a signal tower on the bank of the Neckar. They built a wooden bridge based on stone pillars across it. The camp protected the first civilian settlements and was eventually captured by Germanic tribes. The local administrative centre in Roman times was the nearby city of Lopodunum, today known as Ladenburg.\nMiddle Ages.\nModern Heidelberg can trace its beginnings to the fifth century. The village (Mountain Home) is first mentioned for that period in documents dated to 769 AD. now lies in the middle of modern Heidelberg. The people gradually converted to Christianity. In 870 AD, the monastery of St. Michael was founded on the Heiligenberg inside the double rampart of the Celtic fortress. Around 1130, the Neuburg Monastery was founded in the Neckar valley. At the same time, the bishopric of Worms extended its influence into the valley, founding Sch\u00f6nau Abbey in 1142. Modern Heidelberg can trace its roots to this 12th-century monastery. The first reference to Heidelberg can be found in a document in Sch\u00f6nau Abbey dated to 1196. This is considered to be the town's founding date. In 1156, Heidelberg castle and its neighboring settlement were taken over by the house of Hohenstaufen. Conrad of Hohenstaufen became Count Palatine of the Rhine (). In 1195, the Electorate of the Palatinate passed to the House of Welf through marriage. In 1214, Ludwig I, Duke of Bavaria acquired the Palatinate, as a consequence of which the castle came under his control. By 1303, another castle had been constructed for defense. In 1356, the Counts Palatine were granted far-reaching rights in the Golden Bull, in addition to becoming Electors. In 1386, Heidelberg University was founded by Rupert I, Elector Palatine.\nModern history.\nHeidelberg University played a leading part in Medieval Scholasticism, Renaissance humanism, the German Reformation, and in the subsequent conflict between Lutheranism and Calvinism during the 15th and 16th centuries. In April 1518, a few months after proclaiming his \"Ninety-five Theses\", Martin Luther was received in Heidelberg, to defend them.\nHeidelberg's library, founded in 1421, is the oldest existing public library in Germany.\nIn 1537, the castle located higher up the mountain was destroyed by a gunpowder explosion. The duke's palace was built at the site of the lower castle.\nElector Frederick III, sovereign of the Electoral Palatinate from 1559 to 1576, commissioned the composition of a new Catechism for his territory. While the catechism's introduction credits the \"entire theological faculty here\" (at the University of Heidelberg) and \"all the superintendents and prominent servants of the church\" for the composition of the Catechism, Zacharius Ursinus is commonly regarded as the catechism's principal author. Caspar Olevianus (1536\u20131587) was formerly asserted as a co-author of the document, though this theory has been largely discarded by modern scholarship. Johann Sylvan, Adam Neuser, Johannes Willing, Thomas Erastus, Michael Diller, Johannes Brunner, Tilemann Mumius, Petrus Macheropoeus, Johannes Eisenmenger, Immanuel Tremellius, and Pierre Boquin are all likely to have contributed to the Catechism in some way. Frederick himself wrote the preface to the Catechism and closely oversaw its composition and publication. Frederick, who was officially Lutheran but had strong Reformed leanings, wanted to even out the religious situation of his highly Lutheran territory within the primarily Catholic Holy Roman Empire. The Council of Trent had just concluded with its conclusions and decrees against the Protestant faiths, and the Peace of Augsburg had only granted toleration for Lutheranism within the empire where the ruler was Lutheran. One of the aims of the catechism was to counteract the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church as well as Anabaptists and \"strict\" Gnesio-Lutherans like Tilemann Heshusius and Matthias Flacius, who were resisting Frederick's Reformed influences, particularly on the matter of Eucharist (the Lord's Supper). The Catechism-based each of its statements on biblical proof-texts, and Frederick himself would defend it as biblical, not reformed, at the 1566 Diet of Augsburg when he was called to answer to charges of violating the Peace of Augsburg. This was the Heidelberg Catechism, officially called the \u2033Catechism, or Christian Instruction, according to the Usages of the Churches and Schools of the Electoral Palatinate.\u2033\nIn November 1619, the Royal Crown of Bohemia was offered to the Elector, Frederick V. (He was married to Princess Elizabeth, eldest daughter of James VI and I of Scotland and England, respectively.) Frederick became known as the \"Winter King\", as he reigned for only one winter before the Imperial House of Habsburg regained Bohemia by force. His overthrow in 1621 marked the beginning of the Thirty Years' War. In 1622, after a siege of two months, the armies of the Catholic League, commanded by Johann Tserclaes, Count of Tilly, captured the town. Tilly gave the famous \"Bibliotheca Palatina\" from the Church of the Holy Spirit to the Pope as a present. The Catholic and Bavarian House of Wittelsbach gained control over the Palatinate and the title of Prince-Elector.\nIn late 1634, after the Swedish army had conquered Heidelberg, imperial forces attempted to recapture the city. They quickly took the city, but were unable to take the castle. As they prepared to blow up its fortifications with gunpowder the French army arrived, 30,000 men strong, led by Urbain de Maill\u00e9-Br\u00e9z\u00e9, who had fought in many battles and participated in the Siege of La Rochelle (1627\u20131628), and Jacques-Nompar de Caumont, duc de La Force. They broke the siege and drove off the Imperial forces.\nIn 1648, at the end of the war, Frederick V's son Charles I Louis, Elector Palatine, was able to recover his titles and lands. To strengthen his dynasty, Charles I Louis arranged the marriage of his daughter Liselotte to Philip I, Duke of Orl\u00e9ans, brother of Louis XIV, King of France. In 1685, after the death of Charles Louis' son, Elector Charles II, King Louis XIV laid claim to his sister-in-law's inheritance. The Germans rejected the claim, in part because of religious differences between local Protestants and the French Catholics, as the Protestant Reformation had divided the peoples of Europe. The War of the Grand Alliance ensued. In 1689, French troops took the town and castle, bringing nearly total destruction to the area in 1693. As a result of the destruction due to repeated French invasions related to the War of the Palatinate Succession coupled with severe winters, thousands of German Calvinist Palatines emigrated in the early 18th century. They fled to other European cities and especially to London (where the refugees were called \"the poor Palatines\"). In sympathy for the Protestants, in 1709\u20131710, Queen Anne's government arranged transport for nearly 6,000 Palatines to New York. Others were transported to Pennsylvania, and to South Carolina. They worked their passage and later settled in the English colonies there.\nIn 1720, after assigning a major church for exclusively Catholic use, religious conflicts with the mostly Protestant inhabitants of Heidelberg caused the Roman Catholic Prince-Elector Charles III Philip to transfer his court to nearby Mannheim. The court remained there until the Elector Charles Theodore became Elector of Bavaria in 1777 and established his court in Munich. In 1742, Elector Charles Theodore began rebuilding the Palace. In 1764, a lightning bolt destroyed other palace buildings during reconstruction, causing the work to be discontinued.\n1803 to 1933.\nHeidelberg fell to the Grand Duchy of Baden in 1803. Charles Frederick, Grand Duke of Baden, re-founded the university, named \"Ruperto-Carola\" after its two founders. Notable scholars soon earned it a reputation as a \"royal residence of the intellect\". In the 18th century, the town was rebuilt in the Baroque style on the old medieval layout.\nIn 1810 the French Revolution refugee Count Charles Graimberg began to preserve the palace ruins and establish a historical collection. In 1815, the emperor of Austria, the emperor of Russia and the king of Prussia formed the \"Holy Alliance\" in Heidelberg. In 1848, the German National Assembly was held there. In 1849, during the Palatinate-Baden rebellion of the 1848 Revolutions, Heidelberg was the headquarters of a revolutionary army. It was defeated by a Prussian army near Waghaeusel. The city was occupied by Prussian troops until 1850. Between 1920 and 1933, Heidelberg University became a center of notable physicians Czerny, Erb, and Krehl; and humanists Rohde, Weber, and Gundolf.\nNazism and the World War II period.\nDuring the Nazi period (1933\u20131945), Heidelberg was a stronghold of the NSDAP/Nazi party (the National Socialist German Workers' Party), the strongest party in the elections before 1933 (the NSDAP obtained 30% at the communal elections of 1930). The NSDAP received 45.9% of the votes in the German federal election of March 1933 (the national average was 43.9%).\nIn 1934 and 1935 the (State Labor Service) and Heidelberg University students built the huge \"Thingst\u00e4tte\" amphitheatre on the north of the town, for Nazi Party and SS events. A few months later, the inauguration of the huge Ehrenfriedhof memorial cemetery completed the second and last NSDAP project in Heidelberg. This cemetery is on the southern side of the old part of town, a little south of the K\u00f6nigstuhl hilltop, and faces west towards France. During World War II and after, Wehrmacht soldiers were buried there.\nDuring the \"Kristallnacht\" on 9 November 1938, Nazis burned down synagogues at two locations in the city. The next day, they started the systematic deportation of Jews, sending 150 to Dachau concentration camp. On 22 October 1940, during the \"Wagner Buerckel event\", the Nazis deported 6000 local Jews, including 281 from Heidelberg, to Camp Gurs concentration camp in France. Within a few months, as many as 1000 of them (201 from Heidelberg) died of hunger and disease. Among the deportees from Heidelberg, the poet Alfred Mombert (1872\u20131942) left the concentration camp in April 1941 thanks to the Swiss poet Hans Reinhart but died shortly thereafter due to illness he contracted while held prisoner. From 1942, the deportees who had survived internment in Gurs were deported to Eastern Europe, where most of them were murdered.\nThe U.S. 44th Infantry Division took part in combat in Western Europe throughout 1944 and early 1945, and the division's artillery commander, Brigadier General William A. Beiderlinden, became the subject of international headlines in March 1945, when he helped save Heidelberg from bombing by persuading Nazi troops to withdraw. When his command was ordered to shell the city, Beiderlinden took the initiative to contact the burgomaster and attempt to persuade Nazi soldiers to abandon their positions. Though burgomasters were forbidden from conducting such talks, Heidelberg's burgomaster ignored warnings from the local Nazi gauleiter and discussed the matter with Beiderlinden. The negotiations focused on the importance of sparing Heidelberg University and other historic and culturally significant sites. Beiderlinden and the burgomaster agreed to terms, and the Nazis spared the city by evacuating.\nOn 29 March 1945, German troops left the city after destroying three arches of the old bridge, Heidelberg's treasured river crossing. They also destroyed the more modern bridge downstream. The U.S. Army (63rd Infantry, 7th Army) entered the town on 30 March 1945. The civilian population surrendered without resistance.\nHeidelberg, unlike most German cities and towns, was spared from Allied bombing raids during the war. A popular belief is that Heidelberg escaped bombing because the U.S. Army wanted to use the city as a garrison after the war, but, as Heidelberg was neither an industrial center nor a transport hub, it did not present a tactical or strategic target. Other notable university towns, such as T\u00fcbingen and G\u00f6ttingen, were spared bombing as well. Allied air raids focused extensively on the nearby industrial cities of Mannheim and Ludwigshafen.\nThe U.S. Army may have chosen Heidelberg as a garrison base because of its excellent infrastructure, including the Heidelberg\u2013Mannheim Autobahn (motorway), which connected to the Mannheim\u2013Darmstadt\u2013Frankfurt Autobahn, and the U.S. Army installations in Mannheim and Frankfurt. The intact rail infrastructure was more important in the late 1940s and early 1950s when most heavy loads were still carried by train, not by truck. Heidelberg had the untouched Wehrmacht barracks, the \"Grossdeutschland Kaserne\" which the US Army occupied soon after, renaming it the Campbell Barracks.\nHistory after 1945.\nIn 1945, the university was reopened relatively quickly on the initiative of a small group of professors, among whom were the anti-Nazi economist Alfred Weber and the philosopher Karl Jaspers. The surgeon Karl Heinrich Bauer was nominated rector.\nOn 9 December 1945, US Army General George S. Patton was involved in a car accident in the adjacent city of Mannheim and died in the Heidelberg US Army hospital on 21 December 1945. His funeral ceremony was held at the Heidelberg-Weststadt (Christ Church), and he was buried in the 3rd Army cemetery in Luxembourg.\nDuring the post-war military occupation, the U.S. Army used the for cultural and religious events. Civilian use started in the early to mid-1980s for occasional concerts and other cultural events. Today, the celebrations on , also called Walpurgis Night, the night of 30 April, are a regular \"underground\" fixture at the . Thousands of mostly young people congregate there to drum, to breathe fire, and to juggle. The event has gained fame throughout the region, as well as a certain notoriety due to the amount of litter left behind. Officially, this event is forbidden due to security concerns. The City declares it will fence the Thingst\u00e4tte and prosecute any trespassers.\nIn 2022, a mass shooting occurred in the university, killing a woman and injuring three other people. The gunman then committed suicide.\nPopulation.\nThe population of the city of Heidelberg exceeded 100,000 for the first time in 1946. It is a city with an international population, including one of the largest American communities outside North America, but this is not analysed in the Heidelberg population statistics. At the end of December 2011, the city had 149,633 inhabitants with an official primary residence in Heidelberg (not including the soldiers and employees of the U.S. Army and their dependents, a total of about 20,000 people), a historic high.\nThe following table shows the number of inhabitants within the boundaries of the city at the time. To 1833 they are mostly estimates, then census results or official updates of the statistical offices of the time or the city administration. The data refer from 1843 to the \"local population\", from 1925 to the resident population and since 1987 the \"population at the site of their main dwelling.\" Prior to 1843 the population was determined by non-uniform collection procedures.\nHeidelberg currently has a population of about 160,000 and is the 5th largest city in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg. About 37,000 (24% of the population) are students, which makes Heidelberg one of the largest university cities in Germany. Heidelberg's population has grown since 1945 (after WWII) and has almost never declined due to the popularity of this city, where many workers, students, and entrepreneurs have moved to Heidelberg.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWith a fertility rate of 1.1 children per woman in the (county), Heidelberg had the lowest fertility rate in Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg in 2008.\nPolitics.\nSince 2006, the (lord mayor) of Heidelberg has been the independent Eckart W\u00fcrzner. From 1990 to 2006, the mayor was Beate Weber (SPD).\nThe council consists of 48 members with the mayor as chairman. The council is directly elected for a term of five years. The task of the council is to decide all the affairs of the city, with the mayor presiding. The council controls the city administration and oversees the enforcement of its decisions.\nHeidelberg has always been a stronghold of The Greens. For the municipal elections in 2009, they split into the Green Alternative List and Alliance 90/The Greens and each ran their own lists. Together they gained 10 seats to become the strongest force for the first time. In September 2011, two members of the GAL Group joined the Alliance 90/The Greens, so that together with the members of generation.hd, they formed the largest group in the council.\nFor elections to the Bundestag, the city is part of the Heidelberg constituency.\nMayor and city council.\nThe most recent mayoral election was held on 6 November 2022, with a runoff held on 27 November, and the results were as follows:\nThe Heidelberg city council governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 9 June 2024, and the results were as follows:\nCityscape.\nThe old town.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe \"old town\" (), on the south bank of the Neckar, is long and narrow. It is dominated by the ruins of Heidelberg Castle, 80 metres above the Neckar on the steep wooded slopes of the (King's chair or throne) hill.\nHeidelberg Castle.\nThe castle is a mix of styles from Gothic to Renaissance. Prince Elector Ruprecht III (1398\u20131410) erected the first building in the inner courtyard as a royal residence. The building was divided into a ground floor made of stone and framework upper levels. Another royal building is located opposite the Ruprecht Building: the Fountain Hall. Prince Elector Philipp (1476\u20131508) is said to have arranged the transfer of the hall's columns from a decayed palace of Charlemagne from Ingelheim to Heidelberg.\nIn the 16th and 17th centuries, the Prince Electors added two palace buildings and turned the fortress into a castle. The two dominant buildings at the eastern and northern side of the courtyard were erected during the rule of Ottheinrich (1556\u20131559) and Friedrich IV (1583\u20131610). Under Friedrich V (1613\u20131619), the main building of the west side was erected, the so-called \"English Building\".\nThe castle and its garden were destroyed several times during the Thirty Years' War and the Palatine War of Succession. As Prince Elector Karl Theodor tried to restore the castle, lightning struck in 1764, and ended all attempts at rebuilding. Later on, the castle was misused as a quarry; stones from the castle were taken to build new houses in Heidelberg. This was stopped in 1800 by Count Charles de Graimberg, who then began the process of preserving the castle.\nAlthough the interior is in Gothic style, the King's Hall was not built until 1934. Today, the hall is used for festivities, e.g. dinner banquets, balls and theatre performances. During the Heidelberg Castle Festival in the summer, the courtyard is the site of open air musicals, operas, theatre performances, and classical concerts performed by the Heidelberg Philharmonics.\nThe castle is surrounded by a park, where the famous poet Johann von Goethe once walked. The Heidelberger Bergbahn funicular railway runs from Kornmakt to the summit of the K\u00f6nigstuhl via the castle.\nThe castle looks over the entire city of Heidelberg and the Neckar Valley.\nPhilosophers' Walk.\nOn the northern side of the Neckar is located the Heiligenberg (\"Saints' Mountain\"), along the side of which runs the Philosophers' Walk (), with scenic views of the old town and castle. Traditionally, Heidelberg's philosophers and university professors would walk and talk along the pathway. Farther up the mountain lie the ruined 11th-century Monastery of St. Michael, the smaller Monastery of St. Stephen, a Nazi-era amphitheater, the so-called Pagan's hole and the remains of an earthen Celtic hill fort from the 4th century BC.\nHeidelberg churches.\nThere are many historical churches in Heidelberg and its surroundings. The Church of the Holy Spirit has been shared over the centuries since the Protestant Reformation by both Catholics and Protestants. It is one of the few buildings to survive the many wars during the past centuries. It was rebuilt after the French set fire to it in 1709 during the War of the Palatinian Succession. The church has remains of the tombs and epitaphs of the past Palatinate electors. This Church stands in the next to the seat of local government. In 1720, Karl III Philip, Elector Palatine came into conflict with the town's Protestants as a result of giving the Church of the Holy Spirit exclusively to the Catholics for their use. It had previously been split by a partition and used by both congregations. Due to pressure by the mostly Protestant powers of Prussia, Holland, and Sweden, Prince Karl III Philip gave way and repartitioned the church for joint use. In 1936 the separating wall was removed. The church is now exclusively used by Protestants. Furthermore, there is the Catholic Church of the Jesuits. Its construction began in 1712. It was completed with the addition of a bell tower from 1866 to 1872. The church is also home to the Museum f\u00fcr sakrale Kunst und Liturgie (Museum of Ecclesiastical Arts). The oldest church in Heidelberg is the St. Peter's Church (now Lutheran). It was built some time during the 12th century.\nEducation.\nUniversities and academia.\nHeidelberg is known for its institutions of higher education. The most famous of those is Heidelberg University. Founded in 1386, it is one of Europe's oldest institutions. In fact, Heidelberg is the oldest university town of today's Germany. Among the prominent thinkers associated with the institution are Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, Karl Jaspers, Hans-Georg Gadamer, J\u00fcrgen Habermas, Karl-Otto Apel, and Hannah Arendt. The campus is situated in two urban areas and several buildings. In numerous historical buildings in the old town there are the Faculties of the Humanities, the Social Science, and the Faculty of Law. The school of applied sciences is located in the \"Science Tower\" in Wieblingen. The Faculties of Medicine and Natural Science are settled on the Neuenheimer Feld Campus.\nThe campus of Heidelberg University has a total undergraduate enrollment of 30,898 as of 2014. The enrollment rate of this university is 16.3 percent. Less than 20 percent of the total student body is international. This university has many areas of study for national students such as; theology, law, philosophy, modern languages, economics, and social sciences. The university does not charge students for tuition. The school's academic calendar is semester based, and the majority of the language for instruction is in German. For international students the academic calendar is based on a block schedule. The international students attend in block periods of 5 weeks. The University or \"Uni\" is spread across three campuses each containing different fields of study.\nSince 1904 there has been a College of Educational Science, the ; since 1979 there has been a college of Jewish Studies, the . It comprises nine branches specializing in both religion and Jewish culture. The Schiller International University, a private American university is also represented with a campus in Heidelberg offering several undergraduate and graduate programs in the fields of International Business and International Relations and Diplomacy.\nResearch.\nIn addition to the research centers and institutes of the university, there are numerous research institutions situated in the city of Heidelberg. Among them are the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO), the German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Max Planck Institute for Medical Research, Max Planck Institute for Astronomy, Max Planck Institute for Nuclear Physics, Max Planck Institute for Comparative Public Law and International Law.\nSchools.\nHeidelberg is home to 23 elementary schools. There are several institutions of secondary education, both public and private, representing all levels of the German school system. There are 14 Gymnasiums, with six of them private. With 52% of secondary students attending a Gymnasium, Heidelberg sits above the German average, perhaps because a large number of academics live in Heidelberg and its environs.\nThe gymnasiums include the Kurf\u00fcrst-Friedrich-Gymnasium, Bunsen-Gymnasium, Helmholtz-Gymnasium, H\u00f6lderlin-Gymnasium and Elisabeth-von-Thadden-Schule. Then there are seven Realschule, ten Hauptschule, and nine vocational schools (the so-called ). In addition, there are several folk high schools with different specialisations. Heidelberg International School serves the local expatriate community.\nEconomy.\nTourism.\nIn 2004, 81.8% of people worked for service industries, including tourism. As a relic of the period of Romanticism, Heidelberg has been labeled a \"Romantic town\". This is used to attract more than https:// every year. Many events are organized to attract visitors. One of the biggest tourist attractions is the Christmas market during the winter time.\nIndustry.\nOnly 18% of employment is provided by industry. Printing and publishing are important enterprises; nearby Walldorf is a center of the IT industry and SAP World Headquarters. Noted pen manufacturer Lamy has its headquarters and factory in Heidelberg-Wieblingen. Heidelberger Druckmaschinen has its headquarters here; its factory is located in Walldorf. Soft-drink company Wild-Werke, manufacturer of the Capri-Sonne (Capri-Sun in the U.S.) is located nearby in Eppelheim. Heidelberg is also home to the headquarters of HeidelbergCement, the world's second largest cement producer. The company has its roots in the suburb of Leimen where one of its cement plants is still located. With its long Hauptstra\u00dfe, Heidelberg is a shopping destination for people from the surrounding smaller towns.\nRoads.\nThe A 5 autobahn runs through the western outskirts of Heidelberg, connecting the region to Frankfurt am Main in the north and Karlsruhe to the south. The A 656 commences just west of the city, connecting Heidelberg with Mannheim. Both highways meet at Heidelberg autobahn intersection in the city of Heidelberg, and the A 656 connects to the A 6 at the Mannheim autobahn intersection, which connects to the east towards Stuttgart.\nFurthermore, the B 3 (Frankfurt\u2013Karlsruhe) runs north\u2013south through the town, and the B 37 (Mannheim\u2013Eberbach) runs east\u2013west. Both meet in the city center at the Bismarckplatz. The B 535 begin in the south of Heidelberg and runs to Schwetzingen.\nTourist roads.\nHeidelberg is located on four tourist roads: Bergstra\u00dfe, Bertha Benz Memorial Route, Castle Road, and Stra\u00dfe der Demokratie (Road of Democracy).\nRailways.\nHeidelberg Central Station (Hauptbahnhof) is on the Rhine Valley Railway and is served by Intercity-Express, Euro City trains. This station is served by the RheinNeckar S-Bahn. There is also a station for intercity bus services outside the central station.\nPublic transport.\nThe main transport hub of Heidelberg is the Bismarckplatz. Several main thoroughfares of the city intersect here and one of the longest pedestrian streets in Europe, the Hauptstra\u00dfe (main street) runs from here through the entire old town of Heidelberg. Heidelberg Central Station was nearby for many years, which was a combined terminal and through station. In 1955, it was moved about 1.5\u00a0km further to the west, which removed the necessity for trains continuing north or south to reverse. The new central station became the second major transport hub of Heidelberg.\nHeidelberg has had a public transport service since 1883, when horse-drawn trams were established. Due to the rapidly rising patronage it was decided on 20 December 1901 to convert the Heidelberg tramway network to electrical operation. On 16 March 1902, the first electric tram ran on Rohrbacher Stra\u00dfe, sharing use of the suburban tracks built by the in 1901 between Heidelberg and Wiesloch. Until the 1950s, the tram network was expanded a bit at a time. The rapidly growing popularity of car transport presented the operator of the trams with increasingly difficult problems and the tram network was gradually dismantled. It was not until 10 December 2006 that the network was extended again with the opening of a new tram line from Kirchheim. Tram and bus services are now operated by Rhein-Neckar-Verkehr (RNV). Since 1989, all fares are set under a uniform scheme by the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Neckar (Rhine-Neckar Transport Association, VRN). Carsharing increasingly provides a complement to public transport. More than 50 car-sharing stations are available to users in 12 of the 14 districts of Heidelberg offering a total of more than 100 cars.\nSince 14 December 2003, Heidelberg has been connected to the network of the Rhine-Neckar S-Bahn, which opens up the entire Rhine-Neckar region, with lines connecting with the Palatinate, the Saarland, and southern Hesse.\nThe Heidelberger Bergbahn (Heidelberg Mountain Railway) has run since 2005 with new cars on the lower part from Kornmarkt to Molkenkur and historic cars built in 1907 on the upper section of the funicular from Molkenkur to K\u00f6nigstuhl. It is one of the most popular means to reach Heidelberg Castle. The first plans for the funicular were drawn up in 1873. Due to a lack of funds, the first section of the funicular was not opened until 1890. In 2004, the upper section of the funicular was listed as part of the heritage of the state of Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nUnited States military installations.\nDuring World War II, Heidelberg was one of the few major cities in Germany not significantly damaged by Allied bombing. Situated in the American Zone of Germany, Heidelberg became the headquarters of the American forces in Europe. The main military facilities were Campbell Barracks, the former Wehrmacht Grossdeutschland-Kaserne, which housed the US Army, Europe (USAREUR) and NATO's Component Command-Land Headquarters. (Until 2004, this was designated Joint Headquarters Centre, and before that, LANDCENT).\nCampbell Barracks and Mark Twain Village were both in S\u00fcdstadt; Patton Barracks was in nearby Kirchheim. Nachrichten Kaserne in Rohrbach was home to the former Heidelberg Army Hospital, later designated the Heidelberg Health Center. Patrick Henry Village, the largest U.S. military housing area in the Heidelberg area, was west of Kirchheim. These installations, including Tompkins Barracks and Kilbourne Kaserne in nearby Schwetzingen, plus the Germersheim Depot, made up the U.S. Army Garrison Heidelberg. Tompkins Barracks was home to http://. The Heidelberg U.S. Army Air Field (Heidelberg AAF) was converted to an heliport (mostly Blackhawk Helicopters) after the NATO Kosovo campaign.\nThe children of United States Department of Defense employees based in Heidelberg attended on-base schools operated by the DODDS-E (Department of Defense Dependents Schools\u00a0\u2013 Europe). There were three schools of this kind: Heidelberg High School in Mark Twain Village (Mark Twain Elementary School closed at the completion of the 2010\u20132011 school year), and Heidelberg Middle School and Patrick Henry Elementary in Patrick Henry Village.\nOn 19 October 2009, the U.S. Army announced that it would be building new headquarters for USAREUR in Wiesbaden. The move from Heidelberg took place in 2012 and 2013, and was completed in 2014. By 2015 all United States forces had left Heidelberg. The barracks and the housing areas were returned to the German state for conversion to civilian use.\nCulture.\nEvents.\nSeveral festivals and events hosted and organized in Heidelberg throughout the year. In February, the (Ball of the Vampires) is arranged and Fasching, the equivalent of Mardi Gras or Carnival in some German regions, with a giant vampire-themed costume party at the local castle or city hall is celebrated. In March or April the Heidelberger Fr\u00fchling, the Classic Music Festival and the international Easter egg market are conducted. During the last weekend of April there is an annually organized half marathon. In the summertime there are the on the Messeplatz (May) and Illumination of the castle and bridge with lights and fireworks take place. In September, on the last Saturday the \"Old Town Autumn Festival\" is held. It includes a Medieval Market, an arts and crafts market, a flea market, and music from Samba to Rock. During October or November there are the \"Heidelberger Theater Days\" and the Enjoy Jazz festival. Every year in November the International Filmfestival Mannheim-Heidelberg take place in the city, too. The festival presents arthouse films of international newcomer directors and is held jointly by both of the cities. During Christmas there is a Christmas market throughout the oldest part of the city. A famous gift is the chocolate called Heidelberger (student kiss).\nCinemas.\nThe nationwide trend of cinema closures hit Heidelberg harder than many other places in Germany.\nRecent years saw the low-point of this development, when in this city of over 150,000 people there were just three small cinemas left, with a total capacity of under 450 seats. The situation has slightly improved since late 2017, when Heidelberg got a new multiplex adjacent to the new Bahnstadt development, the \"Luxor Filmpalast\".\nLuxor shows mainly Blockbuster movies in German, but some showings in English are on offer for selected films.\nThe small 2-screen cinema \"Gloria/Gloriette\" (Old Town), together with the affiliated \"Kamera\" (Neuenheim) offers arthouse and independent films, with some showings being offered in the films original language, usually with German subtitles.\nThe non-profit \"Karlstorkino\" (at the far eastern edge of the Old Town, next to the river) offers international arthouse fare and the occasional documentary. The vast majority of non-German films at this cinema are shown in their original language with either English or German subtitles, depending on the film.\nMuseums and exhibitions.\nAmong the most prominent museums of Heidelberg are for instance the Carl Bosch Museum which shows life and work of chemist and Nobel Prize-winner Carl Bosch. Then there is the Documentation and Culture Centre of German Sinti and Roma (Dokumentations- und Kulturzentrum Deutscher Sini und Roma) describing the Nazi genocide of the Sinti and Roma peoples. The German Packing Museum (Deutsches Verpackungsmuseum) gives an overview of the history of packing and wrapping goods, whereas the German Pharmacy Museum (Deutsches Apothekenmuseum) which is located in the castle illustrates the history of Pharmacy in Germany. The (Palatinate Museum) offers a great art collection and some Roman archeological artifacts from the region. In honour of Friedrich Ebert the President Friedrich Ebert Memorial, which commemorates the life of Germany's first democratic head of state, was established. Besides, there are guided tours in most of the historical monuments of Heidelberg, as well as organized tourist tours through the city available in several languages.\nHeidelberg Romanticism.\nHeidelberg was the centre of the epoch of (Romanticism) in Germany. The phase after Jena Romanticism is often called Heidelberg Romanticism (see also Berlin Romanticism). There was a famous circle of poets (the Heidelberg Romantics), such as Joseph von Eichendorff, Johann Joseph von G\u00f6rres, Ludwig Achim von Arnim, and Clemens Brentano. A relic of Romanticism is the Philosophers' Walk (), a scenic walking path on the nearby Heiligenberg, overlooking Heidelberg.\nThe epoch of German philosophy and literature, was described as a movement against classical and realistic theories of literature, a contrast to the rationality of the Age of Enlightenment. It elevated medievalism and elements of art and narrative perceived to be from the medieval period. It also emphasized folk art, nature, and an epistemology based on nature, which included human activity conditioned by nature in the form of language, custom and usage.\nOld Heidelberg.\nIn 1901 Wilhelm Meyer-F\u00f6rster wrote the play \"Old Heidelberg\" which was followed by a large number of film adaptations. It was the basis for Sigmund Romberg's 1924 operetta \"The Student Prince\" which was itself turned into a film of the same title.\n\"I Lost My Heart in Heidelberg\".\nThe 1925 song \"I Lost My Heart in Heidelberg\" composed by Fred Raymond was a major hit and inspired a stage musical and two films. It remains the theme song of Heidelberg.\nSport.\nHeidelberg is one of the centres of Rugby union in Germany, along with Hanover. In 2008\u201309, four out of nine clubs in the Rugby-Bundesliga were from Heidelberg, these being RG Heidelberg, who play at the Fritz-Grunebaum-Sportpark, SC Neuenheim, Heidelberger RK, and TSV Handschuhsheim. Heidelberger TV has a rugby department.\nRugby League Deutschland has two teams based in Heidelberg, Heidelberg Sharks formed in 2005 and Rohrbach Hornets formed in 2007.\nThe city is also home to the USC Heidelberg (Academics Heidelberg), which won 9 German Basketball Championships and remains the second most successful team in the history of German professional basketball. Today, the club plays in Germany's second division ProA. It is primarily known for its youth department which developed several members of Germany's senior national basketball team.\nHeidelberger SC and SG Heidelberg-Kirchheim are local football teams.\nThe city hosted events during the 1972 Summer Paralympics.\nThey also hosted the 2019 WU24 Championships from 13 to 20 July. It was the fifth edition of this world championship and marked the third time Germany has hosted an ultimate frisbee tournament.\nGermany's oldest tennis club, which was founded in 1890, is located in Heidelberg.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nHeidelberg is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFriendly cities.\nHeidelberg also has friendly relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46744", "revid": "48126893", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46744", "title": "Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother", "text": "Queen of the United Kingdom from 1936 to 1952\nElizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon (4 August 1900 \u2013 30 March 2002) was Queen of the United Kingdom and the Dominions of the British Commonwealth from 11 December 1936 to 6 February 1952 as the wife of King George\u00a0VI. She was also the last Empress of India from 1936 until the British Raj was dissolved on 15 August 1947. After her husband died, she was officially known as Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother to avoid confusion with her daughter Queen Elizabeth\u00a0II.\nBorn into a family of British nobility, Elizabeth came to prominence in 1923 when she married Prince Albert, Duke of York, the second son of King George\u00a0V and Queen Mary. The couple and their daughters, Elizabeth and Margaret, embodied traditional ideas of family and public service. As Duchess of York, Elizabeth undertook a variety of public engagements and became known for her consistently cheerful countenance.\nIn 1936, Elizabeth's husband unexpectedly ascended the throne as George VI when his older brother, Edward\u00a0VIII, abdicated in order to marry American divorc\u00e9e Wallis Simpson. Elizabeth then became queen consort. She accompanied her husband on diplomatic tours to France and North America before the start of the Second World War. During the war, her seemingly indomitable spirit provided moral support to the British public. After the war, her husband's health deteriorated, and she was widowed at the age of 51. Her elder daughter, aged 25, became the new monarch.\nAfter the death of Queen Mary in 1953, Elizabeth was viewed as the matriarch of the British royal family. In her later years, she was a consistently popular member of the family, even at times when other royals were suffering from low levels of public approval. She continued an active public life until just a few months before her death at the age of 101, seven weeks after the death of her younger daughter, Princess Margaret.\nEarly life.\nElizabeth Angela Marguerite Bowes-Lyon was the youngest daughter and the ninth of ten children of Claude Bowes-Lyon, Lord Glamis (later the 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne in the Peerage of Scotland), and his wife, Cecilia Cavendish-Bentinck. Her mother was descended from British prime minister William Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of Portland, and Governor-General of India Richard Wellesley, 1st Marquess Wellesley, who was the elder brother of another prime minister, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington.\nThe location of Elizabeth's birth remains uncertain, but reputedly she was born either in her parents' Westminster home at Belgrave Mansions, Grosvenor Gardens, or in a horse-drawn ambulance on the way to a hospital. Other possible locations include Forbes House in Ham, London, the home of her maternal grandmother, Louisa Scott. Her birth was registered at Hitchin, Hertfordshire, near the Strathmores' English country house, St Paul's Walden Bury, which was also given as her birthplace in the 1901 and 1911 censuses. She was christened there on 23 September 1900, in the local parish church, All Saints.\nElizabeth spent much of her childhood at St Paul's Walden and at Glamis Castle, the Earl's ancestral home in Scotland. She was educated at home by a governess until the age of eight, and was fond of field sports, ponies and dogs. When she started school in London, she astonished her teachers by precociously beginning an essay with two Greek words from Xenophon's \"Anabasis\". Her best subjects were literature and scripture. After returning to private education under a German Jewish governess, K\u00e4the K\u00fcbler, she passed the Oxford Local Examination with distinction at age thirteen.\nOn Elizabeth's fourteenth birthday, Britain declared war on Germany. Four of her brothers served in the army. Her elder brother Fergus, an officer in the Black Watch Regiment, was killed in action at the Battle of Loos in 1915. Another brother, Michael, was reported missing in action on 28 April 1917. Three weeks later, the family discovered he had been captured after being wounded. He remained in a prisoner of war camp for the rest of the war. Glamis was turned into a convalescent home for wounded soldiers, which Elizabeth helped to run. She was particularly instrumental in organising the rescue of the castle's contents during a serious fire on 16 September 1916. One of the soldiers she treated wrote in her autograph book that she was to be \"Hung, drawn, &amp; quartered\u00a0... Hung in diamonds, drawn in a coach and four, and quartered in the best house in the land.\" On 5 November 1916, she was confirmed at St John's Scottish Episcopal Church in Forfar.\nThe first love of Elizabeth was considered to be Charles Gordon-Lennox, Lord Settrington, whose sister, Lady Doris, was a close friend of hers. Upon his death, Elizabeth called him \"my only true friend\", writing: \"I was not shy about him and he was so delightful. It's terrible, and his family just adored him.[...] Charlie was the only one I could talk to in a completely natural and simple way \u2013 he was dear to me, and I miss him very much\". Settrington died of wounds received in action while serving as an officer with the Royal Fusiliers in the North Russia Relief Force on 24 August 1919.\nMarriage.\nPrince Albert, Duke of York\u2014\"Bertie\" to the family\u2014was the second son of King George V and Queen Mary. He initially proposed to Elizabeth in 1921, but she turned him down, being \"afraid never, never again to be free to think, speak and act as I feel I really ought to\". When he declared he would marry no other, Queen Mary visited Glamis to see for herself the young woman who had won her son's love. She became convinced that Elizabeth was \"the one girl who could make Bertie happy\", but refused to interfere. At the same time, Elizabeth was courted by James Stuart, Albert's equerry, until he left the prince's service for a better-paid job in the American oil business.\nIn February 1922, Elizabeth was a bridesmaid at the wedding of Albert's sister, Princess Mary, to Viscount Lascelles. The following month, Albert proposed again, but she refused him once more. Eventually in January 1923, Elizabeth agreed to marry Albert, despite her misgivings about royal life. Albert's freedom in choosing Elizabeth, not a member of a royal family, though the daughter of a peer, was considered a gesture in favour of political modernisation; previously, princes were expected to marry princesses from other royal families. They selected a platinum engagement ring featuring a Kashmir sapphire with two diamonds adorning its sides.\nThe couple married on 26 April 1923, at Westminster Abbey. Unexpectedly, Elizabeth laid her bouquet at the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior on her way into the abbey, in memory of her brother Fergus. Elizabeth became styled \"Her Royal Highness The Duchess of York\". Following a wedding breakfast at Buckingham Palace prepared by chef Gabriel Tschumi, Elizabeth and Albert honeymooned at Polesden Lacey, a manor house in Surrey owned by the wealthy socialite and friend Margaret Greville. They then went to Scotland, where she caught \"unromantic\" whooping cough.\nDuchess of York.\nAfter a successful royal visit to Northern Ireland in July 1924, the Labour government agreed that Albert and Elizabeth could tour East Africa from December 1924 to April 1925. The Labour government was defeated by the Conservatives in a general election in November (which Elizabeth described as \"marvellous\" to her mother) and the Governor-General of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Sir Lee Stack, was assassinated three weeks later. Despite this, the tour went ahead, and they visited Aden, Kenya, Uganda, and Sudan, but Egypt was avoided because of political tensions.\nAlbert had a stammer, which affected his ability to deliver speeches, and after October 1925, Elizabeth assisted in helping him through the therapy devised by Lionel Logue, an episode portrayed in the 2010 film \"The King's Speech\". In 1926, Elizabeth gave birth to their first child, Princess Elizabeth\u2014known as \"Lilibet\" to the family\u2014who would later become Queen Elizabeth II. Albert and Elizabeth, without their child, travelled to Australia to open Parliament House in Canberra in 1927. She was, in her own words, \"very miserable at leaving the baby\". Their journey by sea took them via Jamaica, the Panama Canal and the Pacific; Elizabeth fretted constantly over her baby back in Britain, but their journey was a public relations success. She charmed the public in Fiji when, as she was shaking hands with a long line of official guests, a stray dog walked in on the ceremony and she shook its paw as well. In New Zealand she fell ill with a cold and missed some engagements, but enjoyed the local fishing in the Bay of Islands accompanied by Australian sports fisherman Harry Andreas. On the return journey, via Mauritius, the Suez Canal, Malta and Gibraltar, their transport, , caught fire and they prepared to abandon ship before the fire was brought under control.\nThe couple's second daughter, Princess Margaret, was born at Glamis Castle in 1930. The couple initially lived at White Lodge, Richmond Park, before moving to 145 Piccadilly.\nQueen consort.\nOn 20 January 1936, George V died and his eldest son, Edward, Prince of Wales, became King Edward VIII. Elizabeth's husband, Albert, became heir presumptive. Just months into Edward's reign, the King's decision to marry the American divorc\u00e9e Wallis Simpson caused a constitutional crisis that resulted in his abdication. Albert reluctantly became king of the United Kingdom and emperor of India on 11 December 1936 under the regnal name of George VI. Elizabeth became queen and empress. Their coronation took place in Westminster Abbey on 12 May 1937, the date previously scheduled for Edward VIII's coronation. Elizabeth's crown was made of platinum and was set with the Koh-i-Noor diamond.\nEdward married Wallis Simpson, and they became the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, but while Edward was a Royal Highness, George VI withheld the style from Wallis, a decision that Elizabeth supported. Elizabeth was later quoted as referring to Wallis as \"that woman\", and Wallis referred to Elizabeth as \"Cookie\", because of her supposed resemblance to a fat Scots cook. Claims that Elizabeth remained embittered towards Wallis were denied by her close friends; the Duke of Grafton wrote that she \"never said anything nasty about the Duchess of Windsor, except to say she really hadn't got a clue what she was dealing with\".\nOverseas visits.\nIn summer 1938, a state visit to France by the King and Queen was postponed for three weeks because of the death of Elizabeth's mother. In two weeks, Norman Hartnell created an all-white trousseau for Elizabeth, who could not wear colours as she was still in mourning. The visit was designed to bolster Anglo-French solidarity in the face of aggression from Nazi Germany. The French press praised the demeanour and charm of the royal couple during the delayed but successful visit, augmented by Hartnell's wardrobe.\nNevertheless, Nazi aggression continued, and the government prepared for war. After the Munich Agreement of 1938 appeared to forestall the advent of armed conflict, the British prime minister Neville Chamberlain was invited onto the balcony of Buckingham Palace with the King and Queen to receive acclamation from a crowd of well-wishers. While broadly popular among the general public, Chamberlain's policy towards Hitler was the subject of some opposition in the House of Commons, which led historian John Grigg to describe George VI's behaviour in associating himself so prominently with a politician as \"the most unconstitutional act by a British sovereign in the present century\". However, historians argue that the King only ever followed ministerial advice and acted as he was constitutionally bound to do.\nIn May and June 1939, Elizabeth and her husband toured Canada from coast to coast and back, the first time a reigning monarch had toured Canada. They also visited the United States, spending time with President Franklin D. Roosevelt at the White House and his Hudson Valley estate. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt said that Elizabeth was \"perfect as a Queen, gracious, informed, saying the right thing &amp; kind but a little self-consciously regal\". The tour was designed to bolster trans-Atlantic support in the event of war, and to affirm Canada's status as an independent kingdom sharing with Britain the same person as monarch.\nAccording to an often-told story, during one of the earliest of the royal couple's repeated encounters with the crowds, a Boer War veteran asked Elizabeth, \"Are you Scots or are you English?\" She replied, \"I am a Canadian!\" Their reception by the Canadian and U.S. public was extremely enthusiastic, and largely dissipated any residual feeling that they were a lesser substitute for Edward VIII. Elizabeth told Canadian prime minister William Lyon Mackenzie King, \"that tour made us\", and she returned to Canada frequently both on official tours and privately.\nSecond World War.\nDuring the Second World War, the royal couple became symbols of the fight against fascism. Shortly after the declaration of war, \"The Queen's Book of the Red Cross\" was conceived. Fifty authors and artists contributed to the book, which was fronted by Cecil Beaton's portrait of Elizabeth and was sold in aid of the Red Cross. She also broadcast to the nation in an attempt to comfort families during the evacuation of children and the mobilisation of fighting-age men. Elizabeth publicly refused to leave London or send the children to Canada, even during the Blitz, when the British Cabinet advised her to do so. She declared, \"The children won't go without me. I won't leave the King. And the King will never leave.\"\nElizabeth visited troops, hospitals, factories, and parts of Britain that were targeted by the German Luftwaffe, in particular the East End near London's docks. Her visits initially provoked hostility; rubbish was thrown at her and the crowds jeered, in part because she wore expensive clothes that served to alienate her from people suffering the deprivations of war. She explained that if the public came to see her they would wear their best clothes, so she should reciprocate in kind; Norman Hartnell dressed her in gentle colours and avoided black to represent \"the rainbow of hope\". When Buckingham Palace itself took several hits during the height of the bombing, Elizabeth said, \"I'm glad we've been bombed. It makes me feel I can look the East End in the face.\"\nThough the King and Queen spent the working day at Buckingham Palace, partly for security and family reasons they stayed at night at Windsor Castle about west of central London with their daughters. The palace had lost much of its staff to the army, and most of the rooms were shut. The windows were shattered by bomb blasts, and had to be boarded up. During the \"Phoney War\" the Queen was given revolver training because of fears of imminent invasion.\nFrench prime minister \u00c9douard Daladier characterised Elizabeth as \"an excessively ambitious young woman who would be ready to sacrifice every other country in the world so that she may remain Queen.\" Adolf Hitler is said to have called her \"the most dangerous woman in Europe\" because he viewed her popularity as a threat to German interests. However, before the war both she and her husband, like most of Parliament and the British public, had supported appeasement and Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, believing after the experience of the First World War that war had to be avoided at all costs. After the resignation of Chamberlain, the King asked Winston Churchill to form a government. Although the King was initially suspicious of Churchill's character and motives, in due course the royal couple came to respect and admire him.\nPost-war years.\nIn the 1945 British general election, Churchill's Conservative Party was soundly defeated by the Labour Party of Clement Attlee. Elizabeth's political views were rarely disclosed, but a letter she wrote in 1947 described Attlee's \"high hopes of a socialist heaven on earth\" as fading and presumably describes those who voted for him as \"poor people, so many half-educated and bemused. I do love them.\" Woodrow Wyatt thought her \"much more pro-Conservative\" than other members of the royal family, but she later told him, \"I like the dear old Labour Party.\" She also told the Duchess of Grafton, \"I love communists.\"\nDuring the 1947 royal tour of South Africa, Elizabeth's serene public behaviour was broken, exceptionally, when she rose from the royal car to strike an admirer with her umbrella because she had mistaken his enthusiasm for hostility. The 1948 royal tour of Australia and New Zealand was postponed because of the King's declining health. In March 1949, he had a successful operation to improve the circulation in his right leg. In summer 1951, Elizabeth and her daughters fulfilled the King's public engagements in his place. In September, he was diagnosed with lung cancer. After a lung resection, he appeared to recover, but the delayed trip to Australia and New Zealand was altered so that Princess Elizabeth and her husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, went in the King and Queen's place in January 1952. George VI died in his sleep on 6 February 1952 while Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh were in Kenya on a Commonwealth tour, and with George's death his daughter immediately became Queen Elizabeth II.\nQueen mother.\nWidowhood.\nShortly after George VI's death, Elizabeth began to be styled as \"Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother\" because the normal style for the widow of a king, \"Queen Elizabeth\", would have been too similar to the style of her elder daughter, Queen Elizabeth II. Popularly, she became the \"Queen Mother\" or the \"Queen Mum\". She was devastated by her husband's death and retired to Scotland. However, after a meeting with Prime Minister Winston Churchill, she broke her retirement and resumed her public duties. Eventually, she became just as busy as queen mother as she had been as queen consort. In July 1953, she undertook her first overseas visit since the funeral when she visited the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland with Princess Margaret. She laid the foundation stone of the University College of Rhodesia and Nyasaland\u2014the current University of Zimbabwe. Upon her return to the region in 1957, Elizabeth was inaugurated as the college's president, and attended other events that were deliberately designed to be multi-racial. During her daughter's extensive tour of the Commonwealth over 1953\u201354, Elizabeth acted as a counsellor of state and looked after her grandchildren, Charles and Anne. In February 1959, she visited Kenya and Uganda.\nElizabeth oversaw the restoration of the remote Castle of Mey, on the north coast of Scotland, which she used to \"get away from everything\" for three weeks in August and ten days in October each year. She developed her interest in horse racing, particularly steeplechasing, which had been inspired by the amateur jockey Lord Mildmay of Flete in 1949. She owned the winners of approximately 500 races. Although (contrary to rumour) she never placed bets, she did have the racing commentaries piped direct to her London residence, Clarence House, so she could follow the races. As an art collector, she purchased works by Claude Monet, Augustus John and Peter Carl Faberg\u00e9, among others.\nIn February 1964, Elizabeth had an emergency appendectomy, which led to the postponement of a planned tour of Australia, New Zealand, and Fiji until 1966. She recuperated during a Caribbean cruise aboard the royal yacht, \"Britannia\". In December 1966, she underwent an operation to remove a tumour, after she was diagnosed with colon cancer. Contrary to rumours which subsequently spread, she did not have a colostomy. She was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1984 and a lump was removed from her breast. Her bouts with cancer were never made public during her lifetime.\nDuring her widowhood, Elizabeth continued to travel extensively, including on over forty official visits overseas. In 1975, she visited Iran at the invitation of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. The British ambassador and his wife, Anthony and Sheila Parsons, noted how the Iranians were bemused by her habit of speaking to everyone regardless of status or importance, and hoped the Shah's entourage would learn from the visit to pay more attention to ordinary people. Between 1976 and 1984, she made annual summer visits to France, which were among 22 private trips to continental Europe between 1963 and 1992.\nIn 1982, Elizabeth was rushed to hospital when a fish bone became stuck in her throat, and had an operation to remove it. Being a keen angler, she calmly joked afterwards, \"The salmon have got their own back.\" Similar incidents occurred at Balmoral in August 1986, when she was hospitalised at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary overnight but no operation was needed, and in May 1993, when she was admitted to the Infirmary for surgery under general anaesthetic.\nIn 1987, Elizabeth was criticised when it emerged that two of her nieces, Nerissa and Katherine Bowes-Lyon, had been committed to a psychiatric hospital in Redhill, Surrey, in 1941 because they had severe learning disabilities. However, \"Burke's Peerage\" had listed the sisters as dead, apparently because their mother, Fenella (Elizabeth's sister-in-law), \"was 'extremely vague' when it came to filling in forms and might not have completed the paperwork for the family entry correctly\". When Nerissa died in 1986, her grave was originally marked with a plastic tag and a serial number. Elizabeth said that the news of their institutionalisation came as a surprise to her.\nCentenarian.\nIn her later years, Elizabeth became known for her longevity. Her 90th birthday\u20144 August 1990\u2014was celebrated by a parade on 27 June that involved many of the 300 organisations of which she was a patron. In 1995, she attended events commemorating the end of the war fifty years before and had two operations: one to remove a cataract in her left eye and one to replace her right hip. In 1998, her left hip was replaced after it was broken when she slipped and fell during a visit to Sandringham stables.\nElizabeth's 100th birthday was celebrated in a number of ways: a parade, with contributions from Sir Norman Wisdom and Sir John Mills, celebrated highlights of her life; the Royal Bank of Scotland issued a commemorative \u00a320 note with her image; and she attended a lunch at the Guildhall, London, at which George Carey, the Archbishop of Canterbury, accidentally attempted to drink her glass of wine. Her quick admonition of \"That's mine!\" caused widespread amusement. In November 2000, she broke her collarbone in a fall that kept her recuperating at home over Christmas and the New Year holiday.\nOn 1 August 2001, Elizabeth had a blood transfusion for anaemia after suffering from mild heat exhaustion, though she was well enough to make her traditional appearance outside Clarence House three days later to celebrate her 101st birthday. Her final public engagements included planting a cross at the Field of Remembrance on 8 November 2001; a reception at the Guildhall, London, for the reformation of the 600 Squadron, Royal Auxiliary Air Force on 15 November; and attending the re-commissioning of on 22 November.\nIn December 2001, aged 101, Elizabeth fractured her pelvis in a fall. Even so, she insisted on standing for the national anthem during the memorial service for her husband on 6 February the following year. Just three days later, their second daughter, Princess Margaret, died. On 13 February 2002, Elizabeth fell and cut her arm in her sitting room at Sandringham House; an ambulance and doctor were called, and the wound was dressed. She was still determined to attend Margaret's funeral at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, two days later on the Friday of that week, even though the Queen and the rest of the royal family were concerned about the journey the Queen Mother would face to get from Norfolk to Windsor; she was also rumoured to be hardly eating. Nevertheless, she flew to Windsor by helicopter, and so that no photographs of her in a wheelchair (which she hated being seen in) could be taken\u2014she insisted that she be shielded from the press\u2014she travelled to the service in a people carrier with blacked-out windows, which had been previously used by Margaret.\nOn 5 March 2002, Elizabeth attended the luncheon of the annual lawn party of the Eton Beagles and watched the Cheltenham Races on television; however, her health began to deteriorate precipitously during her last weeks, after she retreated to Royal Lodge for the final time.\nDeath.\nOn 30 March 2002, at 3:15\u00a0pm, Elizabeth died at Royal Lodge, Windsor, at the age of 101. Her surviving daughter, Queen Elizabeth II, was by her side. The Queen Mother had been suffering from a chest cold since Christmas 2001. At 101\u00a0years and 238\u00a0days old she was the longest-living member of the British royal family at the time of her death, and the first member of the family to live past the age of 100. Her surviving sister-in-law, Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, exceeded that, dying at the age of 102 on 29 October 2004. She was one of the longest-lived members of any royal family.\nElizabeth grew camellias in each of her gardens, and before her flag-draped coffin was taken from Windsor to lie in state at Westminster Hall, an arrangement of camellias from her own gardens was placed on top. An estimated 200,000 people over three days filed past as she lay in state in Westminster Hall at the Palace of Westminster. Members of the Household Cavalry and other branches of the armed forces stood guard at the four corners of the catafalque. At one point, her four grandsons\u2013Prince Charles, Prince Andrew, Prince Edward and Viscount Linley\u2013mounted the guard as a mark of respect, an honour similar to the Vigil of the Princes at the lying in state of King George V.\nOn the day of Elizabeth's funeral, 9 April, the governor general of Canada, Adrienne Clarkson, issued a proclamation asking Canadians to honour Elizabeth's memory that day. In Australia, Governor-General Peter Hollingworth read the lesson at a memorial service held in St Andrew's Cathedral, Sydney.\nIn London, more than a million people filled the area outside Westminster Abbey and along the route from central London to Elizabeth's final resting place in the King George VI Memorial Chapel beside her husband and younger daughter in St George's Chapel. At her request, after her funeral the wreath that had lain atop her coffin was placed on the Tomb of the Unknown Warrior, in a gesture that echoed her wedding-day tribute 79 years before.\nLegacy.\nKnown for her personal and public charm, Elizabeth was one of the most popular members of the royal family, and helped to stabilise the popularity of the monarchy as a whole.\nElizabeth's critics included Kitty Kelley, who falsely alleged that she did not abide by the rationing regulations during the Second World War. This, however, was contradicted by the official records, and Eleanor Roosevelt during her wartime stay at Buckingham Palace reported expressly on the rationed food served in the Palace and the limited bathwater that was permitted. Claims that Elizabeth used racist slurs to refer to black people were strongly denied by Major Colin Burgess, the husband of Elizabeth Burgess, a mixed-race secretary who accused members of Prince Charles's household of racial abuse. Elizabeth made no public comments on race, but according to Robert Rhodes James, in private she \"abhorred racial discrimination\" and decried apartheid as \"dreadful\". Woodrow Wyatt records in his diary that when he expressed the view that non-white countries have nothing in common with \"us\", she told him, \"I am very keen on the Commonwealth. They're all like us.\" However, she did distrust Germans; she told Wyatt, \"Never trust them, never trust them.\" While she may have held such views, it has been argued that they were normal for British people of her generation and upbringing, who had experienced two vicious wars with Germany.\nIn his official biography, William Shawcross portrays Elizabeth as a person whose indomitable optimism, zest for life, good manners, mischievous sense of humour, and interest in people and subjects of all kinds contributed to her exceptional popularity and to her longevity. Sir Hugh Casson said Elizabeth was like \"a wave breaking on a rock, because although she is sweet and pretty and charming, she also has a basic streak of toughness and tenacity.\u00a0... when a wave breaks on a rock, it showers and sparkles with a brilliant play of foam and droplets in the sun, yet beneath is really hard, tough rock, fused, in her case, from strong principles, physical courage and a sense of duty.\" Sir Peter Ustinov described her during a student demonstration at the University of Dundee in 1968:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As we arrived in a solemn procession the students pelted us with toilet rolls. They kept hold of one end, like streamers at a ball, and threw the other end. The Queen Mother stopped and picked these up as though somebody had misplaced them. [Returning them to the students she said,] 'Was this yours? Oh, could you take it?' And it was her sang-froid and her absolute refusal to be shocked by this, which immediately silenced all the students. She knows instinctively what to do on those occasions. She doesn't rise to being heckled at all; she just pretends it must be an oversight on the part of the people doing it. The way she reacted not only showed her presence of mind, but was so charming and so disarming, even to the most rabid element, that she brought peace to troubled waters.\nElizabeth was well known for her dry witticisms. On hearing that Edwina Mountbatten was buried at sea, she said: \"Dear Edwina, she always liked to make a splash.\" Accompanied by the gay writer Sir No\u00ebl Coward at a gala, she mounted a staircase lined with guards. Noticing Coward's eyes flicker momentarily across the soldiers, she murmured to him: \"I wouldn't if I were you, No\u00ebl; they count them before they put them out.\"\nAfter being advised by a Conservative minister in the 1970s not to employ homosexuals, Elizabeth observed that without them, \"we'd have to go self-service\". On the fate of a gift of a nebuchadnezzar of champagne (20 bottles' worth) even if her family did not come for the holidays, she said, \"I'll polish it off myself.\" Emine Saner of \"The Guardian\" suggests that with a gin and Dubonnet at noon, red wine with lunch, a port and martini at 6\u00a0pm and two glasses of champagne at dinner, \"a conservative estimate puts the number of alcohol units she drank at 70 a week\". Her lifestyle amused journalists, particularly when it was revealed she had a multi-million pound overdraft with Coutts Bank.\nElizabeth's habits were parodied by the satirical 1980s television programme \"Spitting Image\". This was the first satirical depiction on television; the makers initially demurred from featuring her, fearing that it would be considered off-limits by most of the viewing public. In the end, she was portrayed as a perpetually tipsy Beryl Reid soundalike. She was portrayed by Juliet Aubrey in \"Bertie and Elizabeth\", Sylvia Syms in \"The Queen\", Natalie Dormer in \"W.E.\", Olivia Colman in \"Hyde Park on Hudson\", Victoria Hamilton (Seasons 1 and 2), Marion Bailey (Seasons 3 and 4) and Marcia Warren (Season 5 and 6) in \"The Crown\" and in \"The King's Speech\" by Helena Bonham Carter, who was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress and won a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role for her portrayal.\nThe Cunard White Star Line's was named after her. She launched the ship on 27 September 1938 in Clydebank, Scotland. Supposedly, the liner started to slide into the water before Elizabeth could officially launch her, and acting sharply, she managed to smash a bottle of Australian red over the liner's bow just before it slid out of reach. In 1954, Elizabeth sailed to New York on her namesake.\nA statue of Elizabeth by sculptor Philip Jackson was unveiled in front of the George VI Memorial, off The Mall, London, on 24 February 2009, creating the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Memorial.\nIn March 2011, Elizabeth's eclectic musical taste was revealed when details of her small record collection kept at the Castle of Mey were made public. Her records included ska, local folk, Scottish reels and the musicals \"Oklahoma!\" and \"The King and I\", and artists such as yodeller Montana Slim, Tony Hancock, The Goons and No\u00ebl Coward.\nEight years before her death, Elizabeth had reportedly placed two-thirds of her money (an estimated \u00a319 million) into trusts, for the benefit of her great-grandchildren. In her lifetime, she received \u00a3643,000 a year from the Civil List, and spent an estimated \u00a31\u20132 million annually to run her household. By the end of the 1990s, her overdraft was said to be around \u00a34 million. She left the bulk of her estate, estimated to be worth between \u00a350 and \u00a370\u00a0million, including paintings, Faberg\u00e9 eggs, jewellery, and horses, to her surviving daughter, Queen Elizabeth II. Under an agreement reached in 1993, property passing from monarch to monarch is exempt from inheritance tax, as is property passing from the consort of a former monarch to the current monarch, so a tax liability estimated at \u00a328\u00a0million (40 percent of the value of the estate) was not incurred. The most important pieces of art were transferred to the Royal Collection by Elizabeth II. Following her death, the Queen successfully applied to the High Court so that details of her mother's will would be kept secret. This brought criticism from Labour politicians and segments of the public, and the Queen eventually released the outlines of her mother's will.\nTitles, honours and arms.\nTitles and styles.\nElizabeth held numerous titles starting with her birth, as the daughter of an earl and through her marriage to the-then Duke of York, who later became King-Emperor. She was the last person to be Empress of India, and was Queen Mother during widowhood.\nArms.\nElizabeth's coat of arms was the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom (in either the English or the Scottish version) impaled with the canting arms of her father, the Earl of Strathmore; the latter being: 1st and 4th quarters, Argent, a lion rampant Azure, armed and langued Gules, within a double tressure flory-counter-flory of the second (Lyon); 2nd and 3rd quarters, Ermine, three bows stringed paleways proper (Bowes). The shield is surmounted by the imperial crown, and supported by the crowned lion of England and a lion rampant per fess Or and Gules.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46747", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46747", "title": "The Mikado", "text": "1885 comic opera by Gilbert &amp; Sullivan\nThe Mikado; or, The Town of Titipu is a comic opera in two acts, with music by Arthur Sullivan and libretto by W. S. Gilbert, their ninth of fourteen operatic collaborations. It opened on 14 March 1885, in London, where it ran at the Savoy Theatre for 672 performances, the second-longest run for any work of musical theatre and one of the longest runs of any theatre piece up to that time. By the end of 1885, it was estimated that, in Europe and America, at least 150 companies were producing the opera.\n\"The Mikado\" is the most internationally successful Savoy opera and has been especially popular with amateur and school productions. The work has been translated into numerous languages and is one of the most frequently played musical theatre pieces in history. \"The Mikado\" is a satire of late 19th century British institutions, society and politics. By setting the opera in a fantasy Japan, an exotic locale far away from contemporary Britain, Gilbert was able to satirise British politics more freely and soften the impact of his criticisms of British social institutions, in a similar way that he used other \"foreign\" settings in \"Princess Ida\", \"The Gondoliers\", \"Utopia, Limited\" and \"The Grand Duke\". Nevertheless, some 21st-century productions of the opera in the United States have drawn criticism for promoting stereotypes of East Asians.\nOrigins.\nGilbert and Sullivan's opera immediately preceding \"The Mikado\" was \"Princess Ida\" (1884), which ran for nine months, a short duration by Savoy opera standards. When ticket sales for \"Princess Ida\" showed early signs of flagging, the impresario Richard D'Oyly Carte realised that, for the first time since 1877, no new Gilbert and Sullivan work would be ready when the old one closed. On 22 March 1884, Carte gave Gilbert and Sullivan contractual notice that a new opera would be required within six months. Sullivan's close friend, the conductor Frederic Clay, had suffered a serious stroke in December 1883 that effectively ended his career. Reflecting on this, on his own precarious health, and on his desire to devote himself to more serious music, Sullivan replied to Carte that \"it is impossible for me to do another piece of the character of those already written by Gilbert and myself\". Gilbert, who had already started work on a new libretto in which people fall in love against their wills after taking a magic lozenge, was surprised to hear of Sullivan's hesitation. He wrote to Sullivan asking him to reconsider, but the composer replied on 2 April 1884 that he had \"come to the end of my tether\" with the operas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have been continually keeping down the music in order that not one [syllable] should be lost. ... I should like to set a story of human interest &amp; probability where the humorous words would come in a humorous (not serious) situation, &amp; where, if the situation were a tender or dramatic one the words would be of similar character.\nGilbert wrote that Sullivan's letter caused him \"considerable pain\". Sullivan responded that he could not set the \"lozenge plot\", stating that it was too similar to the plot of their 1877 opera \"The Sorcerer\". As April 1884 wore on, Gilbert tried to modify his plot, but he could not satisfy Sullivan. The parties were at a stalemate, and Gilbert wrote, \"And so ends a musical &amp; literary association of seven years' standing \u2013 an association of exceptional reputation \u2013 an association unequaled in its monetary results, and hitherto undisturbed by a single jarring or discordant element.\" But by 8 May 1884, Gilbert was ready to back down, writing: \"am I to understand that if I construct another plot in which no supernatural element occurs, you will undertake to set it? ... a consistent plot, free from anachronisms, constructed in perfect good faith &amp; to the best of my ability.\" The stalemate was broken, and on 20 May, Gilbert sent Sullivan a sketch of the plot to \"The Mikado\". It would take another ten months for \"The Mikado\" to reach the stage. A revised version of \"The Sorcerer\" coupled with their one-act piece \"Trial by Jury\" (1875) played at the Savoy while Carte and their audiences awaited their next work. Gilbert eventually found a place for his \"lozenge plot\" in \"The Mountebanks\", written with Alfred Cellier in 1892.\nIn 1914, Cellier and Bridgeman first recorded the familiar story of how Gilbert found his inspiration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gilbert, having determined to leave his own country alone for a while, sought elsewhere for a subject suitable to his peculiar humour. A trifling accident inspired him with an idea. One day an old Japanese sword that, for years, had been hanging on the wall of his study, fell from its place. This incident directed his attention to Japan. Just at that time a company of Japanese had arrived in England and set up a little village of their own in Knightsbridge.\nThe story is an appealing one, but it is largely fictional. Gilbert was interviewed twice about his inspiration for \"The Mikado\". In both interviews the sword was mentioned, and in one of them he said it was the inspiration for the opera, though he never said the sword had fallen. What puts the entire story in doubt is Cellier and Bridgeman's error concerning the Japanese Village exhibition in Knightsbridge: it did not open until 10 January 1885, eight months after Gilbert sent the outline of the plot to Sullivan and almost two months after Gilbert had completed Act I. Gilbert scholar Brian Jones, in his article \"The Sword that Never Fell\", notes that \"the further removed in time the writer is from the incident, the more graphically it is recalled.\" Leslie Baily, for instance, told it this way in 1952:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A day or so later Gilbert was striding up and down his library in the new house at Harrington Gardens, fuming at the impasse, when a huge Japanese sword decorating the wall fell with a clatter to the floor. Gilbert picked it up. His perambulations stopped. 'It suggested the broad idea,' as he said later. His journalistic mind, always quick to seize on topicalities, turned to a Japanese Exhibition which had recently been opened in the neighbourhood. Gilbert had seen the little Japanese men and women from the Exhibition shuffling in their exotic robes through the streets of Knightsbridge. Now he sat at his writing desk and picked up the quill pen. He began making notes in his plot-book.\nThe story was dramatised in more or less this form in the 1999 film \"Topsy-Turvy\". But although the 1885\u201387 Japanese exhibition in Knightsbridge had not opened when Gilbert conceived of \"The Mikado\", European trade with Japan had increased in recent decades, and an English craze for all things Japanese had built through the 1860s and 1870s. This made the time ripe for an opera set in Japan. Gilbert told a journalist, \"I cannot give you a good reason for our ... piece being laid in Japan. It ... afforded scope for picturesque treatment, scenery and costume, and I think that the idea of a chief magistrate, who is ... judge and actual executioner in one, and yet would not hurt a worm, may perhaps please the public.\"\nIn an 1885 interview with the \"New-York Daily Tribune\", Gilbert said that the short stature of Leonora Braham, Jessie Bond and Sybil Grey \"suggested the advisability of grouping them as three Japanese school-girls\", the opera's \"three little maids\". He also recounted that a young Japanese lady, a tea server at the Japanese Village, came to rehearsals to coach the three women in Japanese dance. On 12 February 1885, one month before \"The Mikado\" opened, \"The Illustrated London News\" wrote about the opening of the Japanese Village noting, among other things, that \"the graceful, fantastic dancing featured ... three little maids!\" In the \"Tribune\" interview, Gilbert also related that he and Sullivan had decided to cut the only solo sung by the opera's title character (who appears only in Act II, played by Savoy veteran Richard Temple), but that members of the company and others who had witnessed the dress rehearsal \"came to us in a body and begged us to restore the excised 'number'\".\nSynopsis.\nAct I.\nGentlemen of the fictitious Japanese town of Titipu are gathered (\"If you want to know who we are\"). A handsome but poor minstrel, Nanki-Poo, arrives and introduces himself (\"A wand'ring minstrel I\"). He inquires about his beloved, a schoolgirl called Yum-Yum, who is a ward of Ko-Ko (formerly a cheap tailor). One of the gentlemen, Pish-Tush, explains that when the Mikado decreed that flirting was a capital crime, the Titipu authorities frustrated the decree by appointing Ko-Ko, a prisoner condemned to death for flirting, to the post of Lord High Executioner (\"Our great Mikado, virtuous man\"). As Ko-Ko was the next prisoner scheduled to be decapitated, the town authorities reasoned that he could \"not cut off another's head until he cut his own off\", and since Ko-Ko was not likely to execute himself, no executions could take place. But all the town officials, except the haughty nobleman Pooh-Bah, proved too proud to serve under an ex-tailor and resigned. Pooh-Bah now holds all their posts and collects all their salaries. He informs Nanki-Poo that Yum-Yum is scheduled to marry Ko-Ko on the very day that he has returned (\"Young man, despair\").\nKo-Ko enters (\"Behold the Lord High Executioner\") and asserts himself by reading off a list of people \"who would not be missed\" if they were executed (\"As some day it may happen\"), such as people \"who eat peppermint and puff it in your face\". Yum-Yum appears with Ko-Ko's other two wards, Peep-Bo and Pitti-Sing (\"Comes a train of little ladies\", \"Three little maids from school\"). Pooh-Bah does not think that the girls have shown him enough respect (\"So please you, sir\"). Nanki-Poo arrives and informs Ko-Ko of his love for Yum-Yum. Ko-Ko sends him away, but Nanki-Poo manages to meet with his beloved and reveals his secret to Yum-Yum: he is the son and heir of the Mikado, but travels in disguise to avoid the amorous advances of Katisha, an elderly lady of his father's court. They lament that the law forbids them to flirt (\"Were you not to Ko-Ko plighted\").\nKo-Ko and Pooh-Bah receive news that the Mikado has just decreed that unless an execution is carried out in Titipu within a month, the town will be reduced to the rank of a village, which would bring \"irretrievable ruin\". Pooh-Bah and Pish-Tush point to Ko-Ko himself as the obvious choice for beheading, since he was already under sentence of death (\"I am so proud\"). But Ko-Ko argues that it would be \"extremely difficult, not to say dangerous\", for someone to attempt to behead himself, and that suicide is a capital offence. Fortuitously, Ko-Ko discovers that Nanki-Poo, in despair over losing Yum-Yum, is preparing to commit suicide. After ascertaining that nothing would change Nanki-Poo's mind, Ko-Ko makes a bargain with him: Nanki-Poo may marry Yum-Yum for one month if, at the end of that time, he allows himself to be executed. Ko-Ko would then marry the young widow.\nEveryone arrives to celebrate Nanki-Poo and Yum-Yum's union (\"With aspect stern and gloomy stride\"), but the festivities are interrupted by the arrival of Katisha, who has come to claim Nanki-Poo as her husband. But the townspeople are sympathetic to the young couple, and Katisha's attempts to reveal Nanki-Poo's secret are drowned out by their shouting. Outwitted but not defeated, Katisha makes clear that she intends to be avenged.\nAct II.\nYum-Yum's friends are preparing her for her wedding (\"Braid the raven hair\"). She muses on her own beauty (\"The sun whose rays\"), but Pitti-Sing and Peep-Bo remind her of the limited duration of her approaching union with Nanki-Poo. Joined by Nanki-Poo and Pish-Tush, they try to keep their spirits up (\"Brightly dawns our wedding-day\"), but soon Ko-Ko and Pooh-Bah enter to inform them of a twist in the law that states that when a married man is beheaded for flirting, his wife must be buried alive (\"Here's a how-de-do\"). Yum-Yum is unwilling to marry under these circumstances, and so Nanki-Poo challenges Ko-Ko to behead him on the spot. It turns out that the soft-hearted Ko-Ko has never executed anyone and cannot execute Nanki-Poo. Instead, he sends Nanki-Poo and Yum-Yum away to be wed (by Pooh-Bah, as Archbishop of Titipu), promising to present to the Mikado a false affidavit in evidence of the fictitious execution.\nThe Mikado and Katisha arrive in Titipu accompanied by a large procession (\"Mi-ya Sa-Ma\", \"From Every Kind of Man\"). The Mikado describes his system of justice (\"A more humane Mikado\"). Ko-Ko assumes that the ruler has come to see whether an execution has been carried out. Aided by Pitti-Sing and Pooh-Bah, he graphically describes the supposed execution (\"The criminal cried\") and hands the Mikado the certificate of death, signed and sworn to by Pooh-Bah as coroner. Ko-Ko notes slyly that most of the town's important officers (that is, Pooh-Bah) were present at the ceremony. But the Mikado has come about an entirely different matter: he is searching for his son. When they hear that the Mikado's son \"goes by the name of Nanki-Poo\", the three panic, and Ko-Ko says that Nanki-Poo \"has gone abroad\". Meanwhile, Katisha is reading the death certificate and notes with horror that the person executed was Nanki-Poo. The Mikado, though expressing understanding and sympathy (\"See How the Fates\"), discusses with Katisha the statutory punishment \"for compassing the death of the heir apparent\" to the Imperial throne \u2013 something lingering, \"with boiling oil ... or melted lead\". With the three conspirators facing painful execution, Ko-Ko pleads with Nanki-Poo to reveal himself to his father. Nanki-Poo fears that Katisha will demand his execution if she finds he is alive, but he suggests that if Katisha could be persuaded to marry Ko-Ko, then Nanki-Poo could safely \"come to life again\", as Katisha would have no claim on him (\"The flowers that bloom in the spring\"). Though Katisha is \"something appalling\", Ko-Ko has no choice: it is marriage to Katisha or painful death for himself, Pitti-Sing and Pooh-Bah.\nKo-Ko finds Katisha mourning her loss (\"Alone, and yet alive\") and throws himself on her mercy. He begs for her hand in marriage, saying that he has long harboured a passion for her. Katisha initially rebuffs him, but is soon moved by his story of a bird who died of heartbreak (\"Tit-willow\"). She agrees (\"There is beauty in the bellow of the blast\") and, once the ceremony is performed (by Pooh-Bah, the Registrar), she begs for the Mikado's mercy for him and his accomplices. Nanki-Poo and Yum-Yum then reappear, sparking Katisha's fury. The Mikado is astonished that Nanki-Poo is alive, as the account of his execution had been given with such \"affecting particulars\". Ko-Ko explains that when a royal command for an execution is given, the person to be executed, legally speaking, \"is as good as dead \u2013 practically, he is dead \u2013 and if he \"is\" dead, why not say so?\" The Mikado deems that \"Nothing could possibly be more satisfactory\", and everyone in Titipu celebrates (\"For he's gone and married Yum-Yum\").\nProductions.\n\"The Mikado\" had the longest original run of the Savoy Operas. It also had the quickest revival: after Gilbert and Sullivan's next work, \"Ruddigore\", closed relatively quickly, three operas were revived to fill the interregnum until \"The Yeomen of the Guard\" was ready, including \"The Mikado\", just 17 months after its first run closed. On 4 September 1891, D'Oyly Carte's touring \"C\" company gave a Royal Command Performance of \"The Mikado\" at Balmoral Castle before Queen Victoria and the Royal Family. The original set design was by Hawes Craven, with men's costumes by C. Wilhelm. The first provincial production of \"The Mikado\" opened on 27 July 1885 in Brighton, with several members of that company leaving in August to present the first authorised American production in New York. From then on, \"The Mikado\" was a constant presence on tour. From 1885 until the company's closure in 1982, there was no year in which a D'Oyly Carte company (or several of them) was not presenting it.\n\"The Mikado\" was revived again while \"The Grand Duke\" was in preparation. When it became clear that that opera was not a success, \"The Mikado\" was given at matinees, and the revival continued when \"The Grand Duke\" closed after just three months. In 1906\u201307, Helen Carte, the widow of Richard D'Oyly Carte, mounted a repertory season at the Savoy, but \"The Mikado\" was not performed, as it was thought that visiting Japanese royalty might be offended by it. It was included, however, in Mrs. Carte's second repertory season, in 1908\u201309. New costume designs were created by Charles Ricketts for the 1926 season and were used until 1982. Peter Goffin designed new sets in 1952.\nIn America, as had happened with \"H.M.S. Pinafore\", the first productions were unauthorised, but once D'Oyly Carte's American production opened in August 1885, it was a success, earning record profits, and Carte formed several companies to tour the show in North America. Burlesque and parody productions, including political parodies, were mounted. More than 150 unauthorised versions cropped up, and, as had been the case with \"Pinafore\", Carte, Gilbert and Sullivan could do nothing to prevent them or to capture any license fees, since there was no international copyright treaty at the time. Gilbert, Sullivan and Carte tried various techniques for gaining an American copyright that would prevent unauthorised productions. The U.S. courts held, however, that the act of publication made the opera freely available for production by anyone. In Australia, \"The Mikado\"'s first authorised performance was on 14 November 1885 at the Theatre Royal, Sydney, produced by J. C. Williamson. During 1886, Carte was touring five Mikado companies in North America.\nCarte toured the opera in 1886 and again in 1887 in Germany and elsewhere in Europe. In September 1886 Vienna's leading critic, Eduard Hanslick, wrote that the opera's \"unparalleled success\" was attributable not only to the libretto and the music, but also to \"the wholly original stage performance, unique of its kind, by Mr D'Oyly Carte's artists ... riveting the eye and ear with its exotic allurement.\" \"The Mikado\" was performed more than 200 times in Berlin alone by 1891 and 100 times in Vienna, of just one of the translations available, by 1894; Sullivan went to Berlin in 1900 to conduct the opera at the Royal Opera as a command performance for Kaiser Wilhelm II. Productions continued in German-speaking countries, both authorised and unauthorised by D'Oyly Carte, and productions were also seen in France, Holland, Hungary, Spain, Belgium, Scandinavia, Russia and elsewhere. Thousands of amateur productions have been mounted throughout the English-speaking world and beyond since the 1880s. One production during World War I was given in the Ruhleben internment camp in Germany.\nAfter the Gilbert copyrights expired in 1962, the Sadler's Wells Opera mounted the first non-D'Oyly Carte professional production in England, with Clive Revill as Ko-Ko. Among the many professional revivals since then was an English National Opera production in 1986, with Eric Idle as Ko-Ko and Lesley Garrett as Yum-Yum, directed by Jonathan Miller. This production, which has been revived numerous times over four decades, is set in a swanky 1920s English seaside hotel, with sets and costumes in black and white \"as an homage to the Marx Brothers, No\u00ebl Coward, and Busby Berkeley\". Canada's Stratford Festival has produced \"The Mikado\" several times, first in 1963 and again in 1982 (revived in 1983 and 1984) and in 1993.\nThe following table shows the history of the D'Oyly Carte productions in Gilbert's lifetime:\nAnalysis and reception.\nThemes of death.\n\"The Mikado\" is a comedy, yet it deals with themes of death and cruelty. This juxtaposition works because Gilbert treats these themes as trivial, even lighthearted issues. For instance, in the song \"Our great Mikado, virtuous man\", Pish-Tush sings: \"The youth who winked a roving eye / Or breathed a non-connubial sigh / Was thereupon condemned to die\u00a0\u2013 / He usually objected.\" The term for this rhetorical technique is meiosis, a drastic understatement of the situation. Other examples of this are when self-decapitation is described as \"an extremely difficult, not to say dangerous, thing to attempt\", and also as merely \"awkward\". When a discussion occurs of Nanki-Poo's life being \"cut short in a month\", the tone remains comic and only mock-melancholy. Burial alive is described as \"a stuffy death\". Finally, execution by boiling oil or by melted lead is described by the Mikado as a \"humorous but lingering\" punishment.\nDeath is treated as a businesslike event in Gilbert's topsy-turvy world. Pooh-Bah calls Ko-Ko, the Lord High Executioner, an \"industrious mechanic\". Ko-Ko also treats his bloody office as a profession, saying, \"I can't consent to embark on a professional operation unless I see my way to a successful result.\" Of course, joking about death does not originate with \"The Mikado\". The plot conceit that Nanki-Poo may marry Yum-Yum if he agrees to die at the end of the month was used in \"A Wife for a Month\", a 17th-century play by John Fletcher. Ko-Ko's final speech affirms that death has been, throughout the opera, a fiction, a matter of words that can be dispelled with a phrase or two: being dead and being \"as good as dead\" are equated. In a review of the original production of \"The Mikado\", after praising the show generally, the critic noted that the show's humour nevertheless depends on \"unsparing exposure of human weaknesses and follies \u2013 things grave and even horrible invested with a ridiculous aspect \u2013 all the motives prompting our actions traced back to inexhaustible sources of selfishness and cowardice... Decapitation, disembowelment, immersion in boiling oil or molten lead are the eventualities upon which [the characters'] attention (and that of the audience) is kept fixed with gruesome persistence... [Gilbert] has unquestionably succeeded in imbuing society with his own quaint, scornful, inverted philosophy; and has thereby established a solid claim to rank amongst the foremost of those latter-day Englishmen who have exercised a distinct psychical influence upon their contemporaries.\"\nJapanese setting.\nThe opera is named after the Emperor of Japan using the term \"mikado\" (\u5fa1\u9580 or \u5e1d or \u307f\u304b\u3069), literally meaning \"the honourable gate\" of the imperial palace, referring metaphorically to its occupant and to the palace itself. The term was commonly used by the English in the 19th century but became obsolete. To the extent that the opera portrays Japanese culture, style and government, it is a fictional version of Japan used to provide a picturesque setting and to capitalise on Japonism and the British fascination with Japan and the Far East in the 1880s. Gilbert wrote, \"The Mikado of the opera was an imaginary monarch of a remote period and cannot by any exercise of ingenuity be taken to be a slap on an existing institution.\" \"The Mikado\" \"was never a story about Japan but about the failings of the British government\".\nBy setting the opera in a foreign land, Gilbert felt able to more sharply criticise British society and institutions. G. K. Chesterton compared the opera's satire to that in Jonathan Swift's \"Gulliver's Travels\": \"Gilbert pursued and persecuted the evils of modern England till they had literally not a leg to stand on, exactly as Swift did. ... I doubt if there is a single joke in the whole play that fits the Japanese. But all the jokes in the play fit the English. ... About England, Pooh-bah is something more than a satire; he is the truth.\" The opera's setting draws on Victorian notions of the far east, gleaned by Gilbert from the glimpses of Japanese fashion and art that immediately followed the beginning of trade between the two island empires, and during rehearsals Gilbert visited the popular Japanese exhibition in Knightsbridge, London. A critic wrote in 2016: \"It has been argued that the theatricality of the show was ... a tribute on the part of Gilbert and Sullivan to the growing British appreciation of the Japanese aesthetic [in the 1880s].\"\nGilbert sought authenticity in the Japanese setting, costumes, movements and gestures of the actors. To that end, he engaged some of the Japanese at the Knightsbridge village to advise on the production and to coach the actors. \"The Directors and Native Inhabitants\" of the village were thanked in the programme that was distributed on the first night. Sullivan inserted into his score, as \"Miya sama\", a version of a Japanese military march song, called \"Ton-yare Bushi\", composed in the Meiji era. Giacomo Puccini later incorporated the same song into \"Madama Butterfly\" as the introduction to \"Yamadori, ancor le pene\". The characters' names in the play are not Japanese names, but rather (in many cases) English baby-talk or simply dismissive exclamations. For instance, a pretty young thing is named \"Pitti-Sing\"; the beautiful heroine is named \"Yum-Yum\"; the pompous officials are \"Pooh-Bah\" and \"Pish-Tush\"; the hero is called \"Nanki-Poo\", baby-talk for \"handkerchief\". The headsman's name, \"Ko-Ko\", is similar to that of the scheming Ko-Ko-Ri-Ko in \"Ba-ta-clan\" by Jacques Offenbach.\nThe Japanese were ambivalent toward \"The Mikado\" for many years. Some Japanese critics saw the depiction of the title character as a disrespectful representation of the revered Meiji Emperor; Japanese theatre was prohibited from depicting the emperor on stage. Japanese Prince Komatsu Akihito, who saw an 1886 production in London, took no offence. When Prince Fushimi Sadanaru made a state visit in 1907, the British government banned performances of \"The Mikado\" from London for six weeks, fearing that the play might offend him \u2013 a manoeuvre that backfired when the prince complained that he had hoped to see \"The Mikado\" during his stay. A Japanese journalist covering the prince's stay attended a proscribed performance and confessed himself \"deeply and pleasingly disappointed.\" Expecting \"real insults\" to his country, he had found only \"bright music and much fun.\"\nAfter World War II, \"The Mikado\" was staged in Japan in a number of private performances. The first public production, given at three performances, was in 1946 in the Ernie Pyle Theatre in Tokyo, conducted by the pianist Jorge Bolet for the entertainment of American troops and Japanese audiences. The set and costumes were opulent, and the principal players were American, Canadian, and British, as were the women's chorus, but the male chorus, the female dancing chorus and the orchestra were Japanese. General Douglas MacArthur banned a large-scale professional 1947 Tokyo production by an all-Japanese cast, but other productions have occurred in Japan. For example, the opera was performed at the Ernie Pyle Theatre in Tokyo in 1970, presented by the Eighth Army Special Service.\nIn 2001, the town of Chichibu (\u79e9\u7236), Japan, under the name of \"Tokyo Theatre Company\", produced an adaptation of \"The Mikado\" in Japanese. Locals believe that Chichibu was the town Gilbert had in mind when he named his setting \"Titipu\", but there is no contemporary evidence for this theory. Although the Hepburn system of transliteration (in which the name of the town appears as \"Chichibu\") is usually found today, it was very common in the 19th century to use the Nihon-shiki system, in which the name \u79e9\u7236 appears as \"Titibu\". Thus, it is easy to surmise that \"Titibu\", found in the London press of 1884, became \"Titipu\" in the opera. Japanese researchers speculate that Gilbert may have heard of Chichibu silk, an important export in the 19th century. The town's Japanese-language adaptation of \"The Mikado\" has been revived several times throughout Japan and, in 2006, the \"Chichibu Mikado\" was performed at the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival in England.\nCriticism.\nSince the 1990s, some productions of the opera in the United States have drawn criticism from the Asian-American community as promoting \"simplistic orientalist stereotypes\". In 2014, after a production in Seattle, Washington, drew national attention to such criticism, the Gilbert biographer Andrew Crowther wrote that \"The Mikado\" \"does not portray any of the characters as being 'racially inferior' or indeed fundamentally any different from British people. The point of the opera is to reflect British culture through the lens of an invented 'other', a fantasy Japan that has only the most superficial resemblance to reality.\" For example, the starting point for the plot of \"The Mikado\" is \"an invented 'Japanese' law against flirting, which makes sense only as a reference to the sexual prudishness of British culture\". Crowther noted that production design and other features of traditionally staged productions of the opera often \"do look somewhat insensitive, not to say insulting. ... It should [be possible] to avoid such things in the future, with a little sensitivity. ... G&amp;S is about silliness, and fun, and ... mocking the powerful, and accepting the fundamental absurdity of life\". Some commentators dismissed the criticism as political correctness but a public discussion of the issue in Seattle a month later drew a large crowd who nearly all agreed that, although works like \"The Mikado\" should not be abandoned in their traditional form, there should be \"some kind of contextualizing apparatus to show that the producers and performers are at least thinking about the problems in the work\".\nIn 2015 a planned production by the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players was withdrawn after its publicity materials ignited a similar protest in the Asian-American blogosphere. A Tokyo-based writer who was sympathetic to Gilbert and Sullivan's original setting of the opera later noted: \"While as a Japanese residing in Japan I am not offended by the production photos [that offended many Asian-Americans], it is not difficult to imagine how Asian-Americans found the racial cross-dressing unbearable, as it may have reminded them of painful incidents of discrimination that they face as a minority in America.\" The company redesigned its \"Mikado\" production and debuted the new concept in December 2016, receiving a warm review from \"The New York Times\". After Lamplighters Music Theatre of San Francisco planned a 2016 production, objections by the Asian-American community prompted them to reset the opera in Renaissance-era Milan, eliminating all references to Japan. Reviewers felt that the change resolved the issue. Among other productions that have experimented with varying the original setting, a 2022 staging by Gilbert &amp; Sullivan Austin, titled \"The McAdo\", relocated the action to Scotland. A reviewer from CTX Live Theater praised the adaptation, writing that \"The Mikado\"'s \"story is universalizing and could be set anywhere on the planet in any society\".\nModernised words and phrases.\nModern productions update some of the words and phrases in \"The Mikado\". For example, two songs in the opera use the word \"nigger\". In \"As some day it may happen\", often called the \"list song\", Ko-Ko names \"the nigger serenader and the others of his race\". In the Mikado's song, \"A more humane Mikado\", the lady who modifies her appearance excessively is to be punished by being \"blacked like a nigger with permanent walnut juice\". These references are to white performers in blackface minstrel shows, a popular entertainment in the Victorian era, rather than to dark-skinned people. Until well into the 20th century, British people did not consider the word \"nigger\" offensive. Audience members objected to the word during the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company's 1948 American tour, however, and Rupert D'Oyly Carte asked A. P. Herbert to supply revised wording. These alterations have been incorporated into the opera's libretto and score since then.\nAlso included in the little list song are \"the lady novelist\" (referring to writers of fluffy romantic novels; these had been lampooned earlier by George Eliot) and \"the lady from the provinces who dresses like a guy\", where \"guy\" refers to the dummy that is part of Guy Fawkes Night, meaning a tasteless woman who dresses like a scarecrow. In the 1908 revival Gilbert allowed substitutions for \"the lady novelist\". To avoid distracting the audience with references that have become offensive over time, lyrics are sometimes modified in modern productions. Changes are also often made, especially in the little list song, to take advantage of opportunities for topical jokes. Richard Suart, a singer well known in the role of Ko-Ko, published a book containing a history of rewrites of the little list song, including many of his own.\nEnduring popularity.\nAs soon as the opera premiered, Gilbert, Sullivan and Carte began to license numerous products that used the opera's name, characters, lyrics, lines and designs, not just for licensing fees, but to drive ticket sales; the show \"was by far the most successful example [of merchandising] in the 19th century\". \"Mikado\" trading cards were created that advertised various products. Other \"Mikado\" products included figurines, fabrics, jewelry, perfumes, puzzles, toothpaste, soap, games, wallpaper, corsets, sewing thread and stoves.\n\"The Mikado\" became the most frequently performed Savoy Opera and has been translated into numerous languages. It is one of the most frequently played musical theatre pieces in history. A feature on Chicago Lyric Opera's 2010 production noted that the opera \"has been in constant production for the past 125 years\", citing its \"inherent humor and tunefulness\". One reviewer recounted seeing three professional productions of \"The Mikado\" in a 27-hour span of time in 2025.\n\"The Mikado\" has been admired by other composers. Dame Ethel Smyth wrote of Sullivan, \"One day he presented me with a copy of the full score of \"The Golden Legend\", adding: 'I think this is the best thing I've done, don't you?' and when truth compelled me to say that in my opinion \"The Mikado\" is his masterpiece, he cried out: 'O you wretch!' But though he laughed, I could see he was disappointed.\"\nHistorical casting.\nThe following tables show the casts of the principal original productions and D'Oyly Carte Opera Company touring repertory at various times through to the company's 1982 closure:\n1Role of Go-To added from April 1885\n\u00b2For the 1896\u201397 revival, Temple returned to play The Mikado during January and February 1896, and again from November 1896\u00a0\u2013 February 1897.\nRecordings.\nAudio recordings.\n\"The Mikado\" has been recorded more often than any other Gilbert and Sullivan opera. Of those by the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company, the 1926 recording is the best regarded. Of the modern recordings, the 1992 Mackerras/Telarc is admired.\nFilms and videos.\nA three-minute silent film of a scene from the opera was made in 1902. This was followed in 1906 by a silent film of the opera by Gaumont Film Company. Sound film versions of 12 of the musical numbers from \"The Mikado\" were produced in Britain and presented as programmes in 1907 titled \"Highlights from The Mikado\". Another production was released the same year by the Walturdaw Company, starring George Thorne as Ko-Ko. Both of these programmes used the Cinematophone sound-on-disc system to synchronize phonograph recordings (Phonosc\u00e8ne) of the performers singing and speaking with the silent footage of the performance. The first full-length film of the opera, called \"Fan Fan\", was a 1918 silent film with a cast of children; theatres could show the film with live musical accompaniment.\nIn 1926, the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company made a brief promotional film of excerpts from \"The Mikado\". Some of the most famous Savoyards of the day are seen in this film, including Darrell Fancourt as The Mikado, Henry Lytton as Ko-Ko, Leo Sheffield as Pooh-Bah, Elsie Griffin as Yum-Yum, and Bertha Lewis as Katisha.\nIn 1939, Universal Pictures released a ninety-minute film adaptation of \"The Mikado\". Made in Technicolor, the film stars Martyn Green as Ko-Ko, Sydney Granville as Pooh-Bah, the American singer Kenny Baker as Nanki-Poo and Jean Colin as Yum-Yum. Many of the other leads and choristers were or had been members of the D'Oyly Carte company. The music was conducted by Geoffrey Toye, a former D'Oyly Carte music director, who was also the producer and was credited with the adaptation, which involved a number of cuts, additions and re-ordered scenes. Victor Schertzinger directed, and William V. Skall received an Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography. Art direction and costume designs were by Marcel Vert\u00e8s. There were some revisions\u00a0\u2013 \"The Sun Whose Rays Are All Ablaze\" is performed twice, first by Nanki-Poo in a new early scene in which he serenades Yum-Yum at her window, and later in the traditional spot. A new prologue which showed Nanki-Poo fleeing in disguise was also added, and much of the Act II music was cut.\nIn 1966, the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company made a film version of \"The Mikado\" that closely reflected their traditional staging, although there are some minor cuts. It was filmed on enlarged stage sets rather than on location, much like the 1965 Laurence Olivier \"Othello\", and was directed by the same director, Stuart Burge. It stars John Reed, Kenneth Sandford, Valerie Masterson, Philip Potter, Donald Adams, Christene Palmer and Peggy Ann Jones and was conducted by Isidore Godfrey. \"The New York Times\" criticised the filming technique and the orchestra and noted, \"Knowing how fine this cast can be in its proper medium, one regrets the impression this \"Mikado\" will make on those not fortunate enough to have watched the company in the flesh. The cameras have captured everything about the company's acting except its magic.\"\nVideo recordings of \"The Mikado\" include a 1972 offering from Gilbert and Sullivan for All; the 1982 Brent-Walker film; the well-regarded 1984 Stratford Festival video; and the 1986 English National Opera production (abridged). Opera Australia have released videos of their 1987 and 2011 productions. Since the 1990s, several professional productions have been recorded on video by the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival.\nOther adaptations.\n\"The Mikado\" was adapted as a children's book by W. S. Gilbert titled \"The Story of The Mikado\", which was Gilbert's last literary work. It is a retelling of \"The Mikado\" with various changes to simplify language or make it more suitable for children. For example, in the \"little list\" song, the phrase \"society offenders\" is changed to \"inconvenient people\", and the second verse is largely rewritten.\nThe D'Oyly Carte Opera Company controlled the copyrights to performances of \"The Mikado\" and the other Gilbert and Sullivan operas in the U.K. until 1961. It usually required authorised productions to present the music and libretto exactly as shown in the copyrighted editions. Since 1961, Gilbert and Sullivan works have been in the public domain and frequently are adapted and performed in new ways. Notable adaptations have included the following:\nIn popular culture.\nA wide variety of popular media, including films, television, theatre, and advertising have referred to, parodied or pastiched \"The Mikado\" or its songs, and phrases from the libretto have entered popular usage in the English language. Some of the best-known of these cultural influences are described below.\nQuotes from \"The Mikado\" were used in letters to the police by the Zodiac Killer, who murdered at least five people in the San Francisco Bay area in 1968 and 1969. A second-season (1998) episode of the TV show \"Millennium\", titled \"The Mikado\", is based on the Zodiac case. \"The Mikado\" is parodied in \"Sumo of the Opera\", which credits Sullivan as the composer of most of its songs. The detective novel \"Death at the Opera\" (1934) by Gladys Mitchell is set against a background of a production of \"The Mikado\". In 2007 the Asian American theatre company Lodestone Theatre Ensemble produced \"The Mikado Project\", an original play by Doris Baizley and Ken Narasaki. It was a deconstruction of the opera premised on a fictional Asian American theatre company attempting to raise funds, while grappling with perceived racism in productions of \"The Mikado\", by producing a revisionist version of the opera. This was adapted as a film in 2010.\nFilm and television references to \"The Mikado\" include the climax of the 1978 film \"Foul Play\", which takes place during a performance of \"The Mikado\". In the 2010 episode \"Robots Versus Wrestlers\" of the TV sitcom \"How I Met Your Mother\", at a high-society party, Marshall strikes an antique Chinese gong. The host rebukes him: \"Young man, that gong is a 500-year-old relic that hasn't been struck since W. S. Gilbert hit it at the London premiere of \"The Mikado\" in 1885!\" Marshall quips, \"His wife's a 500-year-old relic that hasn't been struck since W. S. Gilbert hit it at the London premiere\".\n\"The Mikado\" is a villainous vigilante in the comic book superhero series \"The Question\", by Denny O'Neil and Denys Cowan. He dons a Japanese mask and kills malefactors in appropriate ways\u00a0\u2013 letting \"the punishment fit the crime\". In 1888, Ed J. Smith wrote a stage parody of \"The Mikado\" called \"The Capitalist; or, The City of Fort Worth\" to encourage capital investment in Fort Worth, Texas. The 2-8-2 railroad locomotive was renamed \"The Mikado\" when a U.S. production run of these locomotives was shipped to Japan in 1893. Fans even decorated \"Mikado\" rooms in their homes, and \"Mikado\" clubs were established across America. In 1886, a community in the state of Michigan was named Mikado.\nPopular phrases from \"The Mikado\".\nThe phrase \"A short, sharp shock\", from the Act 1 song \"I am so proud\" has entered the English language, appearing in titles of books and songs, such as in samples of Pink Floyd's \"The Dark Side of the Moon\", as well as political manifestos. \"Let the punishment fit the crime\" is another often-used phrase from the Mikado's Act II song and has been mentioned in the course of British political debates. Both concepts predate Gilbert. Examples of later use include episode 80 of the television series \"Magnum, P.I.\", \"Let the Punishment Fit the Crime\", which features bits of several songs from \"The Mikado\". The phrase and the Mikado's song also are featured in the \"Dad's Army\" episode \"A Soldier's Farewell\". In \"The Parent Trap\" (1961), the camp director quotes the phrase before sentencing the twins to the isolation cabin together. In Season 5, Episode 20 of \"Seinfeld\", George quotes the phrase to Jerry after he and his acquaintances saw George's girlfriend, Jane, topless.\nThe name of the character Pooh-Bah has entered the English language to mean a person who holds many titles, often a pompous or self-important person. Pooh-Bah is mentioned in P. G. Wodehouse's novel \"Something Fresh\" and in other, often political, contexts. In December 2009 BBC presenter James Naughtie, on Radio 4's Today programme, compared UK cabinet member Peter Mandelson to Pooh-Bah because Mandelson held many offices of state, including Secretary of State for Business, First Secretary of State, Lord President of the Council, President of the Board of Trade, and Church Commissioner, and he sat on 35 cabinet committees and subcommittees. Mandelson replied, \"Who is Pooh-Bah?\" Mandelson was also described as \"the grand Pooh-Bah of British politics\" earlier the same week by the theatre critic Charles Spencer of \"The Daily Telegraph\". In the U.S., particularly, the term has come to describe, mockingly, people who hold impressive titles but whose authority is limited. William Safire speculated that invention of Winnie-the-Pooh by the author A. A. Milne might have been influenced by the character. The term \"Grand Poobah\" has been used on television shows, including \"The Flintstones\" and \"Happy Days\", and in other media, as the title of a high-ranking official in a men's club, spoofing clubs like the Freemasons, the Shriners, and the Elks Club.\nReferences to songs in \"The Mikado\".\nPoliticians often use phrases from songs in \"The Mikado\". For example, Conservative Peter Lilley pastiched \"As Someday It May Happen\" to specify some groups to whom he objected, including \"sponging socialists\" and \"young ladies who get pregnant just to jump the housing queue\". Comedian Allan Sherman also did a variant on the \"Little List\" song, presenting reasons one might want to seek psychiatric help, titled \"You Need an Analyst\". In a \"Eureeka's Castle\" Christmas special called \"Just Put it on the List\", the twins, Bogg and Quagmire, describe what they'd like for Christmas to the tune of the song. A 2024 piece in \"The New Republic\" quoted the \"little list\" song from \"The Mikado\" and compared Ko-Ko's little list to Kash Patel's threats to use the F.B.I. and other U.S. government resources to \"persecute\" Donald Trump's \"enemies\". Richard Suart and A.S.H. Smyth released a book in 2008 called \"They'd none of 'em be missed,\" about the history of \"The Mikado\" and the 20 years of little list parodies by Suart, the English National Opera's usual Ko-Ko. In Isaac Asimov's short story \"Runaround\" a robot recites some of the song.\nOther songs in \"The Mikado\" have been referenced in films, television and other media. For example, the movie poster for \"The Little Shop of Horrors\" (pictured) parodies the song title \"The Flowers that Bloom in the Spring, Tra la!\", changing the word \"bloom\" to \"kill\". In \"The Producers\", an auditioner for the musical \"Springtime for Hitler\" begins his audition with Nanki-Poo's song, \"A wand'ring minstrel I\". He is quickly dismissed. In the 2006 film \"Brick\", femme fatale Laura (Nora Zehetner) performs a spoken-word version of \"The Sun Whose Rays are All Ablaze\" while playing piano. In the 1966 \"Batman\" episode \"The Minstrel's Shakedown\", the villain identifies himself as \"The Minstrel\" by singing to the tune of \"A wand'ring minstrel I\". In the \"Top Cat\" episode \"All That Jazz\", Officer Dibble woefully sings the same song. In \"Blackadder Goes Forth\" a recording of \"A Wand'ring Minstrel I\" is played on a gramophone at the beginning of the first episode, and a snatch of the song is also sung by Captain Blackadder in the episode involving \"Speckled Jim\". \"There Is Beauty in the Bellow of the Blast\" is performed by Richard Thompson and Judith Owen on the album \"1000 Years of Popular Music\".\nThe song \"Three Little Maids from School Are We\" is featured in the 1981 film \"Chariots of Fire\", where Harold Abrahams first sees his future wife dressed as one of the three little maids. Television programmes that have featured the song include the \"Cheers\" episode \"Simon Says\" (for which John Cleese won an Emmy Award), the \"Frasier\" episode \"Leapin' Lizards\", the \"Angel\" episode \"Hole in the World\", \"The Simpsons\" episode \"Cape Feare\", \"The Suite Life of Zack &amp; Cody\" episode \"Lost in Translation\", and \"The Animaniacs Vol. 1\" episode \"Hello Nice Warners\". The Capitol Steps performed a parody titled \"Three Little Kurds from School Are We\". On the \"Dinah Shore Show\", Shore sang the song with Joan Sutherland and Ella Fitzgerald in 1963.\nReferences to \"Tit-Willow\" (\"On a tree by a river\") have included Allan Sherman's comedy song \"The Bronx Bird Watcher\", about a Yiddish-accented bird whose beautiful singing leads to a sad end. On \"The Dick Cavett Show\", Groucho Marx and Cavett sang the song. Groucho interrupted the song to quiz the audience on the meaning of the word \"obdurate\". A Season 1 episode of \"The Muppet Show\" (aired on 22 November 1976) featured Rowlf the Dog and Sam Eagle singing the song, with Sam clearly embarrassed at having to sing the word 'tit' (also asking the meaning of \"obdurate\"). In the film \"Whoever Slew Auntie Roo?\", Shelley Winters as the title character sings the song just before she is murdered. In John Betjeman's documentary film \"Metro-Land\" (1973), the song is heard as Betjeman, looking over the lake at Grim's Dyke, laments W. S. Gilbert's sudden death in 1911.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46749", "revid": "1588193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46749", "title": "Prince Charles (disambiguation)", "text": "Prince Charles is the former title of Charles III (born 1948), King of the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms. \nPrince Charles may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46750", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46750", "title": "Virginia opossum", "text": "Species of marsupial\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Virginia opossum (Didelphis virginiana), also known as the North American opossum, is a member of the opossum family found from southern Canada to northern Costa Rica, making it the northernmost marsupial in the world. Commonly referred to simply as the possum, it is a solitary nocturnal animal about the size of a domestic cat, and a successful opportunist.\nOpossums are familiar to many North Americans as they frequently inhabit settled areas near food sources like trash cans, pet food, compost piles, gardens or housemice. Their slow, nocturnal nature and their attraction to roadside carrion make opossums more likely to become roadkill.\nName.\nThe Virginia opossum is the original animal named \"opossum\", a word which comes from Algonquian , meaning \"white animal\". Colloquially, the Virginia opossum is frequently just called a \"possum\". The term is applied more generally to any of the other marsupials of the families Didelphidae and Caenolestidae. The generic name (\"Didelphis\") is derived from Ancient Greek: , \"two\", and , \"womb\".\nThe possums of Australia, whose name derives from their similarity to the American species, are also marsupials, but of the order Diprotodontia.\nThe Virginia opossum is known in Mexico as \"tlacuache\", \"tacuachi\", and \"tlacuachi\", from the Nahuatl word .\nRange.\nThe Virginia opossum's ancestors evolved in South America, but spread into North America as part of the Great American Interchange, which occurred mainly after the formation of the Isthmus of Panama about 3\u00a0million years ago. \"Didelphis\" was apparently one of the later migrants, entering North America about 0.8\u00a0million years ago. It is now found throughout Central America and North America from Costa Rica to southern Ontario and is expanding its range northward, northwesterly and northeasterly at a significant pace.\nIts pre-European settlement range was generally as far north as Maryland; southern Ohio, Indiana and Illinois; Missouri and Kansas. The clearing of dense forests in these areas and further north by settlers allowed the opossum to move northward. Elimination of the opossum's main predators in these areas also contributed to their expansion. Since 1900, it has expanded its range to include most of New England (including Maine); New York, extreme southwestern Quebec; most of southern and eastern Ontario; most of Michigan and Wisconsin; most of Minnesota, southeastern South Dakota and most of Nebraska.\nAreas such as Rhode Island and Waterloo Region and Simcoe County in southern Ontario rarely had sightings of opossums in the 1960s, but now have them regularly; some speculate that this is likely due to global warming causing winters to be warmer. Some people speculate the expansion into Ontario mostly occurred by opossums accidentally being transferred across the St. Lawrence, Niagara, Detroit and St. Clair rivers by motor vehicles or trains they may have climbed upon. As the opossum is not adapted to colder winters or heavy snow, its population may be significantly reduced if a colder winter with heavier snow occurs in a particular northern region.\nThe Virginia opossum was not originally native to the West Coast of the United States. It was intentionally introduced into the West during the Great Depression, probably as a source of food, and now occupies much of the Pacific coast. Its range has been expanding steadily northward into British Columbia.\nSmall isolated populations of Opossums also occur in Eastern New Mexico and parts of Southern and Central Arizona, particularly around Tucson. It is unknown if these populations are native to these regions or were introduced at some point.\nDescription.\nVirginia opossums can vary considerably in size, with larger specimens found to the north of the opossum's range and smaller specimens in the tropics. They measure long from their snout to the base of the tail, with the tail adding another . Males are slightly larger, with an average body length of with an average tail length of , while females are long with a tail. Weight for males ranges from and for females from .\nTheir coats are a dull grayish brown, other than on their faces, which are white. Opossums have long, hairless, prehensile tails, which can be used to grab branches and carry small objects. They also have hairless ears and a long, flat nose. Opossums have 50 teeth, more than any other North American land mammal, and opposable, clawless thumbs on their rear limbs. Opossums have 13 nipples, arranged in a circle of 12 with one in the middle.\nThe dental formula of an opossum is 5.1.3.44.1.3.4. No other mammal in North America has more than 6 upper incisors, but the Virginia opossum has 10.\nPerhaps surprisingly for such a widespread and successful species, the Virginia opossum has one of the lowest encephalization quotients of any marsupial.\nIts brain is one-fifth the size of a raccoon's.\nTracks.\nVirginia opossum tracks generally show five finger-like toes in both the fore and hind prints. The hind tracks are unusual and distinctive due to the opossum's opposable thumb, which generally prints at an angle of 90\u00b0 or greater to the other fingers (sometimes near 180\u00b0). Individual adult tracks generally measure 1.9 in long by 2.0\u00a0in wide (4.8 \u00d7 5.1\u00a0cm) for the fore prints and 2.5 in long by 2.3 in wide (6.4 \u00d7 5.7\u00a0cm) for the hind prints. Opossums have claws on all fingers fore and hind except on the two thumbs (in the photograph, claw marks show as small holes just beyond the tip of each finger); these generally show in the tracks. In a soft medium, such as the mud in this photograph, the foot pads clearly show (these are the deep, darker areas where the fingers and toes meet the rest of the hand or foot, which have been filled with plant debris by wind due to the advanced age of the tracks).\nThe tracks in the photograph were made while the opossum was walking with its typical pacing gait. The four aligned toes on the hind print show the approximate direction of travel.\nIn a pacing gait, the limbs on one side of the body are moved simultaneously, just prior to moving both limbs on the other side of the body. This is illustrated in the pacing diagram, which explains why the left-fore and right-hind tracks are generally found together (and vice versa). If the opossum was not walking (perhaps running), the prints would fall in a different pattern. Other animals that generally employ a pacing gait are raccoons, bears, skunks, badgers, woodchucks, porcupines, and beavers.\nWhen pacing, the opossum's 'stride' generally measures from 7 to 10\u00a0in, or 18 to 25\u00a0cm (in the pacing diagram the stride is 8.5\u00a0in, where one grid square is equal to 1 in2). To determine the stride of a pacing gait, measure from the tip (just beyond the fingers or toes in the direction of travel, disregarding claw marks) of one set of fore/hind tracks to the tip of the next set. By taking careful stride and track-size measurements, one can usually determine what species of animal created a set of tracks, even when individual track details are vague or obscured.\nBehavior.\n\"Playing possum\".\nIf threatened, an opossum will either flee or take a stand. To appear threatening, an opossum will first bare its 50 teeth, snap its jaw, hiss, drool, and stand its fur on end to look bigger. If this does not work, the Virginia opossum is noted for feigning death in response to extreme fear. This is the genesis of the term \"playing possum\", which means pretending to be dead or injured with intent to deceive.\nIn this inactive state it lies limp and motionless on its side, mouth and eyes open, tongue hanging out, and feet clenched. Fear can also cause the opossum to release a green fluid from its anus with a putrid odor that repels predators. Heart rate drops by half, and breathing rate is so slow and shallow it is hardly detectable. Death feigning normally stops when the threat withdraws, and it can last for several hours. Besides discouraging animals that eat live prey, playing possum also convinces some large animals that the opossum is no threat to their young. \"Playing possum\" in response to threats from oncoming traffic often results in death.\nDiet.\nOpossums are omnivorous (sometimes said to be insectivorous) and eat a wide range of plant-based food, as well as animal-based food like small invertebrates, carrion, eggs, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, small mammals, and other small animals.\nInsects such as grasshoppers, crickets, and beetles make up the bulk of the animal foods eaten by opossums. It has been stated that opossums eat up to 95% of the ticks they encounter and may eat up to 5,000 ticks per season, helping to prevent the spread of tick-born illnesses, including Lyme disease and Rocky Mountain spotted fever. This interpretation has been challenged. A widely publicized 2009 study by the Cary Institute indicated that Virginia opossums in a laboratory setting could eat thousands of ticks per week grooming. However, subsequent studies of the stomach contents of wild Virginia opossums have not found any ticks in their diet.\nSmall animals include young rabbits, meadow voles, mice, rats, birds, snakes, lizards, frogs, fish, crayfish, gastropods, and earthworms. The Virginia opossum has been found to be very resistant to snake venom. Attracted to carrion on the side of the highway, opossums are at an increased risk of being hit by motor vehicles.\nPlant foods are mainly eaten in late summer, autumn, and early winter. These include raspberries, blackberries, apples, acorns, beechnuts, seeds, grains, bulbs, and vegetables. Persimmons are one of the opossum's favorite foods during the autumn. Opossums in urban areas scavenge from bird feeders, vegetable gardens, compost piles, garbage cans, and food dishes intended for dogs and cats.\nOpossums in captivity are known to engage in cannibalism, though this is probably uncommon in the wild. Because of this, placing an injured opossum in a confined space with its healthy counterparts is inadvisable.\nSeasonality.\nThe Virginia opossum is most active during the spring and summer. It does not hibernate but reduces its activity during the winter. It may not leave its den for several days if the temperature drops below . Both males and females are at greater risk of injury during breeding season. Males extend their range in search of mates which puts them at greater risk of injury from motor vehicles and predators as they venture into unfamiliar territory. Females carrying young are slower moving and have to forage earlier in the evening and later into the night, also increasing their risk of injury from motor vehicles and predation.\nReproduction.\nThe breeding season for the Virginia opossum can begin as early as December and continue through October with most young born between February and June. A female opossum may have one to three litters per year. During the mating season, the male attracts the female by making clicking sounds with his mouth. The female's estrus cycle is 28 days and lasts 36 hours. Gestation lasts 11\u201313 days and the average litter size is 8\u20139 infants, although over 20 infants may be born. Opossums have a very high mortality rate of their young; only one in ten offspring survive to reproductive adulthood.\nNewborns are the size of a honeybee. Once delivered through the median vagina or central birth canal, newborn opossums climb up into the female opossum's pouch and latch onto one of her 13 teats. The young remain latched for two months and in the pouch for &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2+1\u20442 months. The young then climb onto the mother's back, where she carries them for the remainder of their time together. It is during this time that the young learn survival skills. They leave their mother after about four or five months.\nLike all female marsupials, the female's reproductive system is bifid, with two lateral vaginae, uteri, and ovaries. The male's penis is also bifid, with two heads, and as is common in New World marsupials, the sperm pair up in the testes and only separate as they come close to the egg. Males have three pairs of Cowper's glands.\nLifespan.\nCompared to other mammals, including most other marsupials except dasyuromorphians, opossums have unusually short lifespans for their size and metabolic rate. The Virginia opossum has a maximal lifespan in the wild of only about two years. Even in captivity, opossums live only about four years. The rapid senescence of opossums is thought to reflect the fact that they have few defenses against predators; given that they would have little prospect of living very long regardless, they are not under selective pressure to develop biochemical mechanisms to enable a long lifespan. In support of this hypothesis, one population on Sapelo Island, off the coast of Georgia, which has been isolated for thousands of years without natural predators, was found by Dr. Steven Austad to have evolved lifespans up to 50% longer than those of mainland populations.\nHistorical references.\nAn early description of the opossum comes from explorer John Smith, who wrote in \"Map of Virginia, with a Description of the Countrey, the Commodities, People, Government and Religion\" in 1608 that \"An Opassom hath an head like a Swine, and a taile like a Rat, and is of the bignes of a Cat. Under her belly she hath a bagge, wherein she lodgeth, carrieth, and sucketh her young.\"\nThe opossum was more formally described in 1698 in a published letter entitled \"\"Carigueya, Seu Marsupiale Americanum Masculum\". Or, The Anatomy of a Male Opossum: In a Letter to Dr Edward Tyson\", from Mr William Cowper, Chirurgeon, and Fellow of the Royal Society, London, by Edward Tyson, M.D. Fellow of the College of Physicians and of the Royal Society. The letter suggests even earlier descriptions.\nRelationship with humans.\nOpossums are not considered dangerous to humans. Though their open-mouth hiss when frightened is often mistaken as rabid behavior, opossums are naturally resistant to rabies due to their low body temperature. Opossums can however host parasites and carry diseases such as tuberculosis, leptospirosis, and tularemia, among others. \nLike raccoons, opossums can be found in urban environments, where they eat pet food, rotten fruit, and human garbage. They also are considered a common predator of poultry farming in North America. Research suggests that proximity to humans causes an increase in body size for opossums living in or near urban environments. Though sometimes mistakenly considered to be rats, opossums are not closely related to rodents or any other placental mammals.\nThe opossum was once a favorite game animal in the United States, particularly in the southern regions which have a large body of recipes and folklore relating to it. Their past wide consumption in regions where present is evidenced by recipes available online and in books such as older editions of \"The Joy of Cooking\". A traditional method of preparation is baking, sometimes in a pie or pastry, though at present \"possum pie\" most often refers to a sweet confection containing no meat of any kind.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, the opossum was the subject of numerous songs, including \"Carve dat Possum\", a minstrel song written in 1875 by Sam Lucas.\nAlthough it is widely distributed in the United States, the Virginia opossum's appearance in folklore and popularity as a food item has tied it closely to the American Southeast. In animation, it is often used to depict uncivilized characters or \"hillbillies\". Not surprisingly, then, the Virginia opossum is featured in several episodes of the hit TV show \"The Beverly Hillbillies\", such as the \"Possum Day\" episode in 1965. The title character in Walt Kelly's long-running comic strip \"Pogo\" was an opossum. In an attempt to create another icon like the teddy bear, President William Howard Taft was tied to the character Billy Possum. The character did not do well, as public perception of the opossum led to its downfall. In December 2010, a cross-eyed Virginia opossum in Germany's Leipzig Zoo named Heidi became an international celebrity. She appeared on a TV talk show to predict the 2011 Oscar winners, similar to the World Cup predictions made previously by Paul the Octopus, also in Germany.\nThe Perelman Building in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, an annex of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, was formerly the Fidelity Mutual Life Insurance Company Building. Built in the late 1920s its facade is decorated with polychrome sculptures of animals symbolizing various attributes of insurance, including a possum to represent \"protection\".\nThe Virginia opossum became the official marsupial of North Carolina in 2013 and the official marsupial of New Hampshire in 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46751", "revid": "11406674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46751", "title": "Eneolithic", "text": ""}
{"id": "46752", "revid": "50867215", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46752", "title": "Simon and Garfunkel's Greatest Hits", "text": "1972 compilation album\nSimon and Garfunkel's Greatest Hits is the first compilation album from Simon &amp; Garfunkel, which was released on June 14, 1972, two years after Simon &amp; Garfunkel had parted ways.\nThe album is currently available on CD under Legacy's Playlist banner.\nOverview.\nThe album was a mix of original studio recordings and four previously unreleased live recordings. The album's minimalist packaging does not specifically date the latter; however, the live versions of \"For Emily, Whenever I May Find Her\" and \"Kathy's Song\" included on \"Greatest Hits\" were also included on the 2008 album \"Live 1969\". The liner notes to \"Live 1969\" state that these two songs were both recorded at a November 1969 concert in St. Louis, Missouri. According to the liner notes from \"Collected Works\", however, the version of \"Kathy's Song\" was taken from a 1968 concert in Vermont.\nIn a 1975 BBC Radio 1 interview, Roy Halee identified this version of \"The 59th Street Bridge Song\" as being from Simon &amp; Garfunkel's 1970 performance at Carnegie Hall, \"the last concert they did together\" (prior to their disbanding later in 1970). A live version of \"Homeward Bound\" was also included on the album.\nThe remaining ten studio songs comprise nine singles released between 1965 and 1972, \"America\" being issued as a single several years after its appearance as a track on the \"Bookends\" album, and one album track, \"Bookends\" (without its parent song \"Old Friends\").\nAll the singles included, except \"America,\" \"El Condor Pasa (If I Could),\" and \"Scarborough Fair/Canticle\" made the Top Ten, with the last peaking at No. 11. \"Mrs. Robinson\" topped the chart aided by its appearance in Mike Nichols' hit movie \"The Graduate\". \"The Sound of Silence\" and \"Bridge over Troubled Water\" also peaked at No. 1 as singles in their studio versions, and \"The Boxer\" peaked as a single at No. 7.\nReception.\n\"Simon and Garfunkel's Greatest Hits\" peaked on the U.S. albums chart at No. 5. On the UK Album Chart, it was a No. 2 hit. The album has proven a long and durable seller, currently being certified for 14 million units sold in the U.S. alone. It is easily their best-selling album in the U.S., and holds the record in the U.S. for the best-selling album by a duo.\nIn 2003, the album was ranked No. 293 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time.\nTrack listing.\nAll songs composed by Paul Simon unless otherwise noted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46754", "revid": "50531910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46754", "title": "Sacred geometry", "text": "Symbolic and sacred meanings ascibed to certain geometric shapes\nSacred geometry ascribes symbolic and sacred meanings to certain geometric shapes and certain geometric proportions. It is associated with the belief of a divine creator of the universal geometer. The geometry used in the design and construction of religious structures such as churches, temples, mosques, religious monuments, altars, and tabernacles has sometimes been considered sacred. The concept applies also to sacred spaces such as temenoi, sacred groves, village greens, pagodas and holy wells, Mandala Gardens and the creation of religious and spiritual art.\nAs worldview and cosmology.\nThe belief that a god created the universe according to a geometric plan has ancient origins. Plutarch attributed the belief to Plato, writing that \"Plato said God geometrizes continually\" (\"Convivialium disputationum\", liber 8,2). In modern times, the mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss adapted this quote, saying \"God arithmetizes\".\nJohannes Kepler (1571\u20131630) believed in the geometric underpinnings of the cosmos.\nNatural forms.\nAccording to Stephen Skinner, the study of sacred geometry has its roots in the study of nature, and the mathematical principles at work therein. Many forms observed in nature can be related to geometry; for example, the chambered nautilus grows at a constant rate and so its shell forms a logarithmic spiral to accommodate that growth without changing shape. Also, honeybees construct hexagonal cells to hold their honey. These and other correspondences are sometimes interpreted in terms of sacred geometry and considered to be further proof of the natural significance of geometric forms.\nRepresentations in art and architecture.\nGeometric ratios, and geometric figures were often employed in the designs of ancient Egyptian, ancient Indian, Greek and Roman architecture. Medieval European cathedrals also incorporated symbolic geometry. Indian and Himalayan spiritual communities often constructed temples and fortifications on design plans of mandala and yantra. Mandala Vaatikas or Sacred Gardens were designed using the same principles.\nMany of the sacred geometry principles of the human body and of ancient architecture were compiled into the Vitruvian Man drawing by Leonardo da Vinci. The latter drawing was itself based on the much older writings of the Roman architect Vitruvius.\nIn Buddhism.\nMandalas are made up of a compilation of geometric shapes. In Buddhism, it is made up of concentric circles and squares that are equally placed from the center. Located within the geometric configurations are deities or suggestions of the deity, such as in the form of a symbol. This is because Buddhists believe that deities can actually manifest inside the mandala. Mandalas can be created with a variety of mediums. Tibetan Buddhists create mandalas out of sand that are then ritually destroyed. In order to create the mandala, two lines are first drawn on a predetermined grid. The lines, known as Brahman lines, must overlap at the precisely calculated center of the grid. The mandala is then divided into thirteen equal parts not by a mathematical calculation, but through trial and error. Next, monks purify the grid to prepare it for the constructing of the deities before sand is finally added. Tibetan Buddhists believe that anyone who looks at the mandala will receive positive energy and be blessed. Due to the Buddhist belief in impermanence, the mandala is eventually dismantled and is ritualistically released into the world.\nIn Chinese spiritual traditions.\nOne of the cornerstones of Chinese folk religion is the relationship between man and nature. This is epitomized in feng shui, which are architectural principles outlining the design plans of buildings in order to optimize the harmony of man and nature through the movement of \"Chi\", or \"life-generating energy.\" In order to maximize the flow of \"Chi\" throughout a building, its design plan must utilize specific shapes. Rectangles and squares are considered to be the best shapes to use in feng shui design. This is because other shapes may obstruct the flow of \"Chi\" from one room to the next due to what are considered to be unnatural angles. Room layout is also an important element, as doors should be proportional to one another and located at appropriate positions throughout the house. Typically, doors are not situated across from one another because it may cause \"Chi\" to flow too fast from one room to the next.\nThe Forbidden City is an example of a building that uses sacred geometry through the principles of feng shui in its design plan. It is laid out in the shape of a rectangle that measures over half a mile long and about half a mile wide. Furthermore, the Forbidden City constructed its most important buildings on a central axis. The Hall of Supreme Harmony, which was the Emperor's throne room, is located at the midpoint or \"epicenter\" of the central axis. This was done intentionally, as it was meant to show that when the Emperor entered this room, he would be ceremonially transformed into the center of the universe.\nIn Islam.\nThe geometric designs in Islamic art are often built on combinations of repeated squares and circles, which may be overlapped and interlaced, as can arabesques (with which they are often combined), to form intricate and complex patterns, including a wide variety of tessellations. These may constitute the entire decoration, may form a framework for floral or calligraphic embellishments, or may retreat into the background around other motifs. The complexity and variety of patterns used evolved from simple stars and lozenges in the ninth century, through a variety of 6- to 13-point patterns by the 13th century, and finally to include also 14- and 16-point stars in the sixteenth century.\nGeometric patterns occur in a variety of forms in Islamic art and architecture including kilim carpets, Persian girih and Moroccan/Algerian zellige tilework, muqarnas decorative vaulting, jali pierced stone screens, ceramics, leather, stained glass, woodwork, and metalwork.\nIslamic geometric patterns are used in the Quran, Mosques and even in the calligraphies.\nIn Hinduism/Indic Religion.\nThe Agamas are a collection of Sanskrit, Tamil, and Grantha scriptures chiefly constituting the methods of temple construction and creation of idols, worship means of deities, philosophical doctrines, meditative practices, attainment of sixfold desires, and four kinds of yoga.\nElaborate rules are laid out in the Agamas for Shilpa (the art of sculpture) describing the quality requirements of such matters as the places where temples are to be built, the kinds of image to be installed, the materials from which they are to be made, their dimensions, proportions, air circulation, and lighting in the temple complex. The Manasara and Silpasara are works that deal with these rules. The rituals of daily worship at the temple also follow rules laid out in the Agamas.\nHindu temples.\nThe symbolic representation of the cosmic model is then projected onto Hindu temples using the \"Vastu Shastra\" principle of \"Sukha Darshan,\" which states that smaller parts of the temple should be self-similar and a replica of the whole. The repetition of these replication parts symbolizes the natural phenomena of fractal patterns found in nature. These patterns make up the exterior of Hindu temples. Each element and detail are proportional to each other, this occurrence is also known as the sacred geometry.\nIn Christianity.\nThe construction of Medieval European cathedrals was often based on geometries intended to make the viewer see the world through mathematics, and through this understanding, gain a better understanding of the divine. These churches frequently featured a Latin Cross floor-plan.\nIn the High Middle Ages, leading Christian philosophers explained the layout of the universe in terms of a microcosm analogy. In her book describing the divine visions she witnessed, Hildegard of Bingen explains that she saw an outstretched human figure located within a circular orb. When interpreted by theologians, the human figure was Christ and mankind showing the Earthly realm and the circumference of the circle was a representation of the universe. Some images also show above the universe a depiction of God. This is thought to later have inspired Da Vinci's \"Vitruvian Man\".\nDante uses circles to make up the nine layers of hell categorized in his book, \"The\" \"Divine Comedy\". \"Celestial spheres\" are also utilized to make up the nine layers of Paradise. He further creates a cosmic order of circular forms that stretches from Jerusalem in the Earthly realm up to God in Heaven. This cosmology is believed to have been inspired by the ancient astronomer Ptolemy.\nAt the beginning of the Renaissance in Europe, views shifted to favor simple and regular geometries. The circle in particular became a central and symbolic shape for the base of buildings, as it represented the perfection of nature and the centrality of man's place in the universe. The use of the circle and other simple and symmetrical geometric shapes was solidified as a staple of Renaissance sacred architecture in Leon Battista Alberti's architectural treatise, which described the ideal church in terms of spiritual geometry.\nUnanchored geometry.\nStephen Skinner criticizes the tendency of some writers to place a geometric diagram over virtually any image of a natural object or human created structure, find some lines intersecting the image and declare it based on sacred geometry. If the geometric diagram does not intersect major physical points in the image, the result is what Skinner calls \"unanchored geometry\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46755", "revid": "41163249", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46755", "title": "George VI", "text": "King of the United Kingdom from 1936 to 1952\nGeorge VI (Albert Frederick Arthur George; 14 December 1895 \u2013 6 February 1952) was King of the United Kingdom and the Dominions of the British Commonwealth from 11 December 1936 until his death in 1952. He was also the last Emperor of India from 1936 until the British Raj was dissolved in August 1947, and the first Head of the Commonwealth following the London Declaration of 1949.\nThe future George VI was born during the reign of his great-grandmother Queen Victoria; he was named Albert at birth after his late great-grandfather Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and was known as \"Bertie\" to his family and close friends. His father ascended the throne as George V in 1910. As the second son of the king, Albert was not expected to inherit the throne. He spent his early life in the shadow of his elder brother, Edward, the heir apparent. Albert attended naval college as a teenager and served in the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force during the First World War. In 1920, he was made Duke of York. He married Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon in 1923, and they had two daughters, Elizabeth and Margaret. In the mid-1920s, he engaged speech therapist Lionel Logue to treat his stutter, which he learned to manage to some degree. His elder brother ascended the throne as Edward VIII after their father died in 1936, but Edward abdicated later that year to marry the twice-divorced American socialite Wallis Simpson. As heir presumptive to Edward VIII, Albert became king, taking the regnal name George VI.\nIn September 1939, the British Empire and most Commonwealth countries\u2014but not Ireland\u2014declared war on Nazi Germany, following the invasion of Poland. War with the Kingdom of Italy and the Empire of Japan followed in 1940 and 1941, respectively. George VI was seen as sharing the hardships of the common people and his popularity soared. Buckingham Palace was bombed during the Blitz while the King and Queen were there, and his younger brother the Duke of Kent was killed on active service. George became known as a symbol of British determination to win the war. Britain and its allies were victorious in 1945, but the British Empire declined. Ireland had largely broken away, followed by the independence of India and Pakistan in 1947. George relinquished the title of Emperor of India in June 1948 and instead adopted the new title of Head of the Commonwealth. He was beset by smoking-related health problems in the later years of his reign and died at Sandringham House, aged 56, of a coronary thrombosis. He was succeeded by his elder daughter, Elizabeth II.\nEarly life.\nAlbert was born at York Cottage, on the Sandringham Estate in Norfolk, during the reign of his great-grandmother Queen Victoria. His father was Prince George, Duke of York (later King George V), the second and only surviving son of the Prince and Princess of Wales (later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra). His mother, the Duchess of York (later Queen Mary), was the eldest child and only daughter of Francis, Duke of Teck, and Princess Mary Adelaide, Duchess of Teck. His birthday, 14 December 1895, was the 34th anniversary of the death of his great-grandfather Albert, Prince Consort. Uncertain of how the Prince Consort's widow, Queen Victoria, would take the news of the birth, the Prince of Wales wrote to the Duke of York that the Queen had been \"rather distressed\". Two days later, he wrote again: \"I really think it would gratify her if you yourself proposed the name \"Albert\" to her.\"\nThe Queen was mollified by the proposal to name the new baby Albert, and wrote to the Duchess of York: \"I am all impatience to see the new one, born on such a sad day but rather more dear to me, especially as he will be called by that dear name which is a byword for all that is great and good.\" Consequently, he was baptised \"Albert Frederick Arthur George\" at St Mary Magdalene Church, Sandringham on 17 February 1896. Formally he was His Highness Prince Albert of York; within the royal family he was known informally as \"Bertie\". The Duchess of Teck did not like the first name her grandson had been given, and she wrote prophetically that she hoped the last name \"may supplant the less favoured one\". Albert was fourth in line to the throne at birth, after his grandfather, father and elder brother, Edward.\nAlbert was ill often and was described as \"easily frightened and somewhat prone to tears\". His parents were generally removed from their children's day-to-day upbringing, as was the norm in aristocratic families of that era. He had a stutter that lasted for many years. Although naturally left-handed, he was forced to write with his right hand, as was common practice at the time. He had chronic stomach problems as well as knock knees, for which he was forced to wear painful corrective splints.\nQueen Victoria died on 22 January 1901, and the Prince of Wales succeeded her as King Edward VII. Prince Albert moved up to third in line to the throne, after his father and elder brother.\nMilitary career and education.\nBeginning in 1909, Albert attended the Royal Naval College, Osborne, as a naval cadet. In 1911 he came bottom of the class in the final examination, but despite this he progressed to the Royal Naval College, Dartmouth. When his grandfather Edward VII died in 1910, his father became King George V. Prince Edward became Prince of Wales, with Albert second in line to the throne.\nAlbert spent the first six months of 1913 on the training ship in the West Indies and on the east coast of Canada. He was rated as a midshipman aboard on 15 September 1913. He spent three months in the Mediterranean, but never overcame his seasickness. Three weeks after the outbreak of World War I he was medically evacuated from the ship to Aberdeen, where his appendix was removed by John Marnoch. He was mentioned in dispatches for his actions as a turret officer aboard \"Collingwood\" in the Battle of Jutland (31 May \u2013 1 June 1916), the great naval battle of the war. He did not see further combat, largely because of ill health caused by a duodenal ulcer, for which he had an operation in November 1917.\nIn February 1918 Albert was appointed Officer in Charge of Boys at the Royal Naval Air Service's training establishment at Cranwell. With the establishment of the Royal Air Force Albert transferred from the Royal Navy to the Royal Air Force. He served as Officer Commanding Number 4 Squadron of the Boys' Wing at Cranwell until August 1918, before reporting for duty on the staff of the RAF's Cadet Brigade at St Leonards-on-Sea and then at Shorncliffe. He completed a fortnight's training and took command of a squadron on the Cadet Wing. He was the first member of the British royal family to be certified as a fully qualified pilot.\nAlbert wanted to serve on the Continent while the war was still in progress and welcomed a posting to General Trenchard's staff in France. On 23 October, he flew across the Channel to Autigny. For the closing weeks of the war, he served on the staff of the RAF's Independent Air Force at its headquarters in Nancy, France. Following the disbanding of the Independent Air Force in November 1918, he remained on the Continent for two months as an RAF staff officer until posted back to Britain. He accompanied King Albert I of Belgium on his triumphal re-entry into Brussels on 22 November. The prince qualified as an RAF pilot on 31 July 1919 and was promoted to squadron leader the following day.\nIn October 1919, Albert attended Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied history, economics and civics for a year, with the historian R. V. Laurence as his \"official mentor\". On 4 June 1920 his father created him Duke of York, Earl of Inverness and Baron Killarney. He began to take on more royal duties. He represented his father and toured coal mines, factories, and railyards. Through such visits he acquired the nickname of the \"Industrial Prince\". His stutter, and his embarrassment over it, together with a tendency to shyness, caused him to appear less confident in public than his older brother, Edward. However, he was physically active and enjoyed playing tennis. He played at Wimbledon in the Men's Doubles with Louis Greig in 1926, losing in the first round. He developed an interest in working conditions, and was president of the Industrial Welfare Society. His series of annual summer camps for boys between 1921 and 1939 brought together boys from different social backgrounds.\nMarriage.\nIn a time when royalty were expected to marry fellow royalty, it was unusual that Albert had a great deal of freedom in choosing a prospective wife. The King brought his son's infatuation with the already-married Australian socialite Lady Loughborough to an end in April 1920 by persuading him to stop seeing her, with the promise of the dukedom of York. That year, Albert met for the first time since childhood Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon, the youngest daughter of the Earl and Countess of Strathmore. He became determined to marry her. Elizabeth rejected his proposal twice, in 1921 and 1922, reportedly because she was reluctant to make the sacrifices necessary to become a member of the royal family. In the words of Lady Strathmore, Albert would be \"made or marred\" by his choice of wife. After a protracted courtship, Elizabeth agreed to marry him.\nAlbert and Elizabeth were married on 26 April 1923 in Westminster Abbey. Albert's marriage to someone not of royal birth was considered a modernising gesture. The newly formed British Broadcasting Company wished to record and broadcast the event on radio, but the Abbey Chapter vetoed the idea (although the Dean, Herbert Edward Ryle, was in favour).\nFrom December 1924 to April 1925, the Duke and Duchess toured Kenya, Uganda, and the Sudan, travelling via the Suez Canal and Aden. During the trip, they both went big-game hunting.\nBecause of his stutter, Albert dreaded public speaking. After his closing speech at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley on 31 October 1925, one which was an ordeal for both him and his listeners, he began to see Lionel Logue, an Australian-born speech therapist. The Duke and Logue practised breathing exercises, and the Duchess rehearsed with him patiently. Subsequently, he was able to speak with less hesitation. With his delivery improved, Albert opened the new Parliament House in Canberra, Australia, during a tour of the empire with his wife in 1927. Their journey by sea to Australia, New Zealand and Fiji took them via Jamaica, where Albert played doubles tennis partnered with a black man, Bertrand Clark, which was unusual at the time and taken locally as a display of equality between races.\nThe Duke and Duchess had two children, Elizabeth (called \"Lilibet\" by the family, later Elizabeth II) in 1926 and Margaret in 1930. The family lived at White Lodge, Richmond Park, and then at 145 Piccadilly, rather than one of the royal palaces. In 1931, the Canadian prime minister, R. B. Bennett, considered Albert for Governor General of Canada\u2014a proposal that King George V rejected on the advice of the Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs, J. H. Thomas.\nReign.\nReluctant king.\nKing George V had severe reservations about Prince Edward, saying \"After I am dead, the boy will ruin himself in twelve months\" and \"I pray God that my eldest son will never marry and that nothing will come between Bertie and Lilibet and the throne.\" On 20 January 1936, George V died and Edward ascended the throne as King Edward VIII. In the Vigil of the Princes, Prince Albert and his three brothers (the new king, Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, and Prince George, Duke of Kent) took a shift standing guard over their father's body as it lay in state, in a closed casket, in Westminster Hall.\nAs Edward was unmarried and had no children, Albert was the heir presumptive to the throne. Less than a year later, on 11 December 1936, Edward abdicated in order to marry Wallis Simpson, who was divorced from her first husband and divorcing her second. Edward had been advised by British prime minister Stanley Baldwin that he could not remain king and marry a divorced woman with two living ex-husbands. He abdicated and Albert, though he had been reluctant to accept the throne, became king. The day before the abdication, Albert went to London to see his mother, Queen Mary. He wrote in his diary, \"When I told her what had happened, I broke down and sobbed like a child.\"\nOn the day of Edward's abdication, the Oireachtas, the parliament of the Irish Free State, removed all direct mention of the monarch from the Irish constitution. The next day, it passed the External Relations Act, which gave the monarch limited authority (strictly on the advice of the government) to appoint diplomatic representatives for Ireland and to be involved in the making of foreign treaties. The two acts made the Irish Free State a republic in essence without removing its links to the Commonwealth.\nAcross Britain, gossip spread that Albert was physically and psychologically incapable of being king. No evidence has been found to support the contemporaneous rumour that the government considered bypassing him, his children and his brother Prince Henry, in favour of their younger brother Prince George, Duke of Kent. This seems to have been suggested on the grounds that Prince George was at that time the only brother with a son.\nEarly reign.\nAlbert assumed the regnal name \"George VI\" to emphasise continuity with his father and restore confidence in the monarchy. The beginning of George VI's reign was taken up by questions surrounding his predecessor and brother, whose titles, style and position were uncertain. He had been introduced as \"His Royal Highness Prince Edward\" for the abdication broadcast, but George VI felt that by abdicating and renouncing the succession, Edward had lost the right to bear royal titles, including \"Royal Highness\". In settling the issue, George's first act as king was to confer upon Edward the title \"Duke of Windsor\" with the style \"Royal Highness\", but the letters patent creating the dukedom prevented any wife or children from bearing royal styles. George VI was forced to buy from Edward the royal residences of Balmoral Castle and Sandringham House, as these were private properties and did not pass to him automatically. Three days after his accession, on his 41st birthday, he invested his wife, the new queen consort, with the Order of the Garter.\nGeorge VI's coronation at Westminster Abbey took place on 12 May 1937, the date previously intended for Edward's coronation. In a break with tradition, Queen Mary attended the ceremony in a show of support for her son. There was no Durbar held in Delhi for George VI, as had occurred for his father, as the cost would have been a burden to the Government of India. Rising Indian nationalism made the welcome that the royal party would have received likely to be muted at best, and a prolonged absence from Britain would have been undesirable in the tense period before the Second World War. Two overseas tours were undertaken, to France and to North America, both of which promised greater strategic advantages in the event of war.\nThe growing likelihood of war in Europe dominated the early reign of George VI. The King was constitutionally bound to support British prime minister Neville Chamberlain's appeasement of Hitler. When the King and Queen greeted Chamberlain on his return from negotiating the Munich Agreement in 1938, they invited him to appear on the balcony of Buckingham Palace with them. This public association of the monarchy with a politician was exceptional, as balcony appearances were traditionally restricted to the royal family. While broadly popular among the general public, Chamberlain's policy towards Hitler was the subject of some opposition in the House of Commons, which led historian and politician John Grigg to describe George's behaviour in associating himself so prominently with a politician as \"the most unconstitutional act by a British sovereign in the present century\".\nIn May and June 1939, the King and Queen toured Canada and the United States; it was the first visit of a reigning British monarch to North America, although George had been to Canada prior to his accession. From Ottawa, George and Elizabeth were accompanied by Canadian prime minister Mackenzie King, to present themselves in North America as King and Queen of Canada. Both Mackenzie King and the Canadian governor general, Lord Tweedsmuir, hoped that George's presence in Canada would demonstrate the principles of the Statute of Westminster 1931, which gave full sovereignty to the British Dominions. On 19 May, George personally accepted and approved the letter of credence of the new U.S. ambassador to Canada, Daniel Calhoun Roper; gave royal assent to nine parliamentary bills; and ratified two international treaties with the Great Seal of Canada. The official royal tour historian, Gustave Lanctot, wrote \"the Statute of Westminster had assumed full reality\" and George gave a speech emphasising \"the free and equal association of the nations of the Commonwealth\".\nThe trip was intended to soften the strong isolationist tendencies among the North American public with regard to the developing tensions in Europe. Although the aim of the tour was mainly political, to shore up Atlantic support for the United Kingdom in any future war, the King and Queen were enthusiastically received by the public. The fear that George would be compared unfavourably to his predecessor was dispelled. They visited the 1939 New York World's Fair and stayed with President Franklin D. Roosevelt at the White House and at his private estate at Hyde Park, New York. A strong bond of friendship was forged between Roosevelt and the royal couple during the tour, which had major significance in the relations between the United States and the United Kingdom through the ensuing war years.\nSecond World War.\nFollowing the German invasion of Poland in September 1939, the United Kingdom and the self-governing Dominions other than Ireland declared war on Nazi Germany. The King and Queen resolved to stay in London, despite German bombing raids. They officially stayed in Buckingham Palace throughout the war, although they usually spent nights at Windsor Castle. The first night of the Blitz on London, on 7 September 1940, killed about one thousand civilians, mostly in the East End. On 13 September, the couple narrowly avoided death when two German bombs exploded in a courtyard at Buckingham Palace while they were there. In defiance, the Queen declared: \"I am glad we have been bombed. It makes me feel we can look the East End in the face.\" The royal family were portrayed as sharing the same dangers and deprivations as the rest of the country. They were subject to British rationing restrictions, and the U.S. first lady Eleanor Roosevelt remarked on the rationed food served and the limited bathwater that was permitted during a stay at the unheated and boarded-up Palace. In August 1942, the King's brother, the Duke of Kent, was killed on active service.\nIn 1940, Winston Churchill replaced Neville Chamberlain as prime minister, though personally George would have preferred to appoint Lord Halifax. After the King's initial dismay over Churchill's appointment of Lord Beaverbrook to the Cabinet, he and Churchill developed \"the closest personal relationship in modern British history between a monarch and a Prime Minister\". Every Tuesday for four and a half years from September 1940, the two men met privately for lunch to discuss the war in secret and with frankness. George related much of what the two discussed in his diary, which is the only extant first-hand account of these conversations.\nThroughout the war, George and Elizabeth provided morale-boosting visits throughout the United Kingdom, visiting bomb sites, munitions factories, and troops. George visited military forces abroad in France in December 1939, North Africa and Malta in June 1943, Normandy in June 1944, southern Italy in July 1944, and the Low Countries in October 1944. Their high public profile and apparently indefatigable determination secured their place as symbols of national resistance. At a social function in 1944, the Chief of the Imperial General Staff, Field Marshal Alan Brooke, revealed that every time he met Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery, he thought Montgomery was after his job. George replied: \"You should worry, when I meet him, I always think he's after mine!\"\nIn 1945, crowds shouted \"We want the King!\" in front of Buckingham Palace during the Victory in Europe Day celebrations. In an echo of Chamberlain's appearance, the King invited Churchill to appear with the royal family on the balcony to public acclaim. In January 1946, George addressed the United Nations at its first assembly, which was held in London, and reaffirmed \"our faith in the equal rights of men and women and of nations great and small\".\nEmpire to Commonwealth.\nGeorge VI's reign saw the acceleration of the dissolution of the British Empire. The Statute of Westminster 1931 had already acknowledged the evolution of the Dominions into separate sovereign states. The process of transformation from an empire to a voluntary association of independent states, known as the Commonwealth, gathered pace after the Second World War. During the ministry of Clement Attlee, British India became the two independent Dominions of India and Pakistan in August 1947. George relinquished the title of Emperor of India, and became King of India and King of Pakistan instead. In late April 1949, the Commonwealth leaders issued the London Declaration, which laid the foundation of the modern Commonwealth and recognised George as Head of the Commonwealth. In January 1950, he ceased to be King of India when it became a republic. He remained King of Pakistan until his death. Other countries left the Commonwealth, such as Burma in January 1948, Palestine (divided between Israel and the Arab states) in May 1948 and the Republic of Ireland in 1949.\nIn 1947, George and his family toured southern Africa. The prime minister of the Union of South Africa, Jan Smuts, was facing an election and hoped to make political capital out of the visit. George was appalled, however, when instructed by the South African government to shake hands only with whites, and referred to his South African bodyguards as \"the Gestapo\". Despite the tour, Smuts lost the election the following year, and the new government instituted a strict policy of racial segregation.\nIllness and death.\nThe stress of the war had taken its toll on George's health, made worse by his heavy smoking, and subsequent development of lung cancer among other ailments, including arteriosclerosis and Buerger's disease. A planned tour of Australia and New Zealand was postponed after George developed an arterial blockage in his right leg, which threatened the loss of the leg and was treated with a right lumbar sympathectomy in March 1949. His elder daughter and heir presumptive, Elizabeth, took on more royal duties as her father's health deteriorated. The delayed tour was re-organised, with Princess Elizabeth and her husband, Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, taking the place of the King and Queen.\nGeorge was well enough to open the Festival of Britain in May 1951, but on 4 June it was announced that he would need immediate and complete rest for the next four weeks, despite the arrival of Haakon VII of Norway the following afternoon for an official visit. On 23 September 1951, his left lung was removed in a surgical operation performed by Clement Price Thomas after a malignant tumour was found. In October 1951, Elizabeth and Philip went on a month-long tour of Canada; the trip had been delayed for a week due to George's illness. At the State Opening of Parliament in November, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Simonds, read the King's speech from the throne. The King's Christmas broadcast of 1951 was recorded in sections, and then edited together.\nOn 31 January 1952, despite advice from those close to him, George went to London Airport to see Elizabeth and Philip off on their tour to Australia via Kenya. It was his last public appearance. Six days later, at 7:30\u00a0am on the morning of 6 February, he was found dead in bed at Sandringham House in Norfolk. He had died in the night from a coronary thrombosis at the age of 56. His daughter flew back to Britain from Kenya as Queen Elizabeth II.\nFrom 9 February George's coffin rested in St Mary Magdalene Church, Sandringham, before lying in state at Westminster Hall from 11 February. His funeral took place at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 15 February. He was interred initially in the Royal Vault until he was transferred to the King George VI Memorial Chapel inside St George's on 26 March 1969. In 2002, fifty years after his death, the remains of his widow, Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother, and the ashes of his younger daughter, Princess Margaret, who both died that year, were interred in the chapel alongside him. In 2022, the remains of Queen Elizabeth II and her husband, Prince Philip, were also interred in the chapel.\nLegacy.\nIn the words of Labour Member of Parliament (MP) George Hardie, the abdication crisis of 1936 did \"more for republicanism than fifty years of propaganda\". George VI wrote to his brother Edward that in the aftermath of the abdication he had reluctantly assumed \"a rocking throne\" and tried \"to make it steady again\". He became king at a point when public faith in the monarchy was at a low ebb. During his reign, his people endured the hardships of war, and imperial power was eroded. However, as a dutiful family man and by showing personal courage, he succeeded in restoring the popularity of the monarchy.\nThe George Cross and the George Medal were founded at the King's suggestion during the Second World War to recognise acts of exceptional civilian bravery. He bestowed the George Cross on the entire \"island fortress of Malta\" in 1943. He was posthumously awarded the Order of Liberation by the French government in 1960, one of only two people (the other being Churchill in 1958) to be awarded the medal after 1946.\nColin Firth won an Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance as George VI in the 2010 film \"The King's Speech\".\nTitles, honours and arms.\nAs Duke of York, Albert bore the royal arms of the United Kingdom differenced with a label of three points argent, the centre point bearing an anchor azure\u2014a difference earlier awarded to his father, George V, when he was Duke of York, and then later awarded to his grandson Andrew Mountbatten Windsor, when he bore the title Prince. As king he bore the royal arms undifferenced.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46756", "revid": "1805230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46756", "title": "The Paul Simon Songbook", "text": "The Paul Simon Songbook is the debut solo studio album by the American singer-songwriter Paul Simon, released in the UK in 1965 by CBS. Featuring Simon alone, it was recorded in London after he emigrated there, following the U.S. release and subsequent limited success of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's debut album \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\" (1964). \"Songbook\" features solo re-recordings of two songs from that album, as well as nine songs that would later be re-recorded by the duo for other studio albums. After a very brief release in the U.S. in 1969, \"Songbook\" was later made available there as part of the LP box set \"Paul Simon: Collected Works\" (1981). It was released on CD in 2004.\nBackground.\nAs of 1965, Paul Simon's only recordings available in Britain consisted of three singles released on various labels, two of which were rock and roll-inspired recordings with Art Garfunkel, under the name Tom &amp; Jerry. \nThe other single was \"He Was My Brother\" backed with \"Carlos Dominguez\", recorded by Simon under the pseudonym Paul Kane, inspired by his love for the film \"Citizen Kane\" (1941). \"Carlos Dominguez\" had initially been, unbeknownst to Simon, licensed out in London and recorded by popular UK artist Val Doonican. This resulted in a publishing deal for Simon in England, culminating with the release of the Paul Kane solo single there in May of 1964.\nAfter Simon &amp; Garfunkel's debut album, \"Wednesday Morning 3 A.M.\" (1964), had failed to achieve success in the U.S., Simon moved to London and performed in coffeehouses there, building up a following that eventually led to a performance at the BBC. \"Songbook\" was then recorded to satisfy demand in the UK for recordings of his music, since \"Wednesday Morning 3 A.M.\" had not been released there. Simon's deal with Columbia Records in America allowed him to record for the British equivalent, CBS. \nDuring 1965, Simon played in Paris, Haarlem, and Copenhagen, along with London and other locations in the UK. \nRecording.\nSimon recorded \"Songbook\" at Levy's Recording Studio, New Bond Street, London, over several dates in June 1965. The songs feature Simon alone, singing to his own acoustic guitar accompaniment. \nTwo songs on the album (\"The Sound of Silence\" and \"He Was My Brother\") were re-recordings of songs originally found on \"Wednesday Morning, 3 A.M.\" Nine of the other songs would subsequently be re-recorded by Simon &amp; Garfunkel and released on their albums \"Sounds of Silence\" (1965) and \"Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme\" (1966). \nThe lyrics to \"The Side of a Hill\" were later reworked and sung as counterpoint to \"Scarborough Fair\" on \"Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme\". The lyrics to both \"The Side of a Hill\" and \"Canticle\" are absent from Simon's 2008 book \"Lyrics 1964\u20132008\".\nArtwork and packaging.\nRegarding the songs, Simon's 1965 liner notes for the album state that \"there are some I would not write today\", but that they \"played an important role in the transition\".\nThe album cover shows Simon and his then-girlfriend, Kathy Chitty, sitting on \"narrow streets of cobblestone\" in London, the city Simon had adopted as his home, and holding wooden figurines. In the 1970s, the album art was altered: the picture of Simon and Chitty was flipped horizontally, and the red script-like lettering eliminated in favor of an album title in white block print at the top.\nRelease.\n\"The Paul Simon Songbook\" yielded the single \"I Am a Rock\" / \"Leaves That Are Green\".\nThe album was later issued in the U.S. by Columbia very briefly in 1969 but was recalled within a few days when Simon objected. It was re-released on LP in 1981 on the Columbia \"Collected Works\" boxed set. The mono version was released on CD in 2004 by Columbia/Legacy and features two bonus tracks: alternative versions of \"I Am a Rock\" and \"A Church Is Burning\".\nPersonnel.\nTechnical\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nPatrick Humphries, \"Paul Simon: Still Crazy After All These Years\" (New York: Doubleday, 1989). ."}
{"id": "46757", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46757", "title": "Black Narcissus", "text": "1947 British psychological drama film by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger\nBlack Narcissus is a 1947 British psychological drama film jointly written, directed and produced by Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, based on the 1939 novel by Rumer Godden. It stars Deborah Kerr, Sabu, David Farrar, and Flora Robson, and features Esmond Knight, Jean Simmons, and Kathleen Byron.\nSet during the final years of British colonial rule in India, the film depicts the growing tensions within a small convent of Anglican sisters who are trying to establish a school and hospital in the old harem of an Indian Raja at the top of an isolated mountain in the Himalayas. The nuns have trouble adapting to the harsh climate and antagonistic population. They come to rely on the help and advice of the Raja's British agent, a cynical Englishman whose attractiveness and panache become a source of temptation for the sisters.\n\"Black Narcissus\" received acclaim for its technical mastery, with the cinematographer, Jack Cardiff, winning an Academy Award for Best Cinematography and a Golden Globe Award for Best Cinematography, and Alfred Junge winning an Academy Award for Best Art Direction.\nAccording to film critic David Thomson, \"\"Black Narcissus\" is that rare thing, an erotic English film about the fantasies of nuns, startling whenever Kathleen Byron is involved\".\nPlot.\nGeneral Toda Rai, the Rajput ruler of a princely state in the Himalayas, invites an order of Anglican nuns to establish a school and hospital at Mopu, a former harem situated on a high cliff. The ambitious Sister Clodagh is appointed Sister Superior and is sent to Mopu with four other nuns: Sister Philippa for gardening; Sister Briony for the infirmary; Sister Blanche, better known as \"Sister Honey\", to teach lace-making; and the emotionally unstable Sister Ruth to teach English and maths. All five women are white Britons in an unfamiliar, colonial setting.\nMr Dean, the general's British agent, is deeply sceptical of the project, citing a variety of social and environmental difficulties. He predicts the nuns will leave as soon as the monsoon season ends. It is critical for Clodagh to manage the nuns' well-being, since the Congregation allows every nun to resign at the end of the year.\nThe sisters struggle to adapt to the local population. The native caretaker, Angu Ayah, dislikes sharing the palace with the nuns. The general's wealthy uncle, now a Hindu holy man, spends all his time meditating on a mountain within the monastery grounds, refusing to speak to anyone. The sisters agree to mentor Kanchi, a local girl with a reputation for erratic behaviour, but Ayah whips her for stealing.\nEach convent member starts to experience ill-health and/or emotional problems caused by their surroundings. Clodagh recalls a failed romance which prompted her to leave Britain and join the order. Ruth grows jealous of Clodagh. Philippa loses herself in the environment and plants the vegetable garden with flowers. Honey's attachment to the local children ends disastrously after she gives ineffective medication to a fatally ill baby. The nuns' failure to save the child's life angers the locals, who abandon the mission. Mr Dean encourages Clodagh to leave, but she insists on staying.\nThe sisters also struggle with their vows of chastity. They are constantly tempted by the old harem's erotic wall paintings. In addition, although the sisters planned to educate only girls, they feel compelled to make an exception for the general's boy heir, who needs tutoring in Western culture. He soon falls in love with Kanchi. Ruth grows obsessed with the carnally handsome Mr Dean and orders an alluring, modern dress to charm him one day. Although Clodagh is irked by Mr Dean's nonchalance and irreverence, she also finds herself increasingly attracted to him. Philippa requests a transfer to a new convent, complaining that to survive in the colonies, \"either you must live like Mr Dean, or like the holy man. Either ignore it or give yourself up to it.\"\nRuth resigns and announces her intent to go back to Britain. Clodagh visits Ruth to convince her to stay, as the convent is extremely shorthanded. Ruth, who has already changed out of her nun's habit into her new dress, defiantly puts on lipstick in front of Clodagh to signal her personal liberation. She escapes the convent and visits Mr Dean's house to declare her love, but he rebuffs her advances. Heartbroken, Ruth suffers a mental breakdown and returns to the mission, intent on killing Clodagh. When Clodagh rings the morning service bell, Ruth attempts to push her over the cliff edge. In the ensuing struggle, Ruth falls to her death.\nRuth's death is the last straw for the Congregation, which closes the mission. The remaining nuns leave just as the monsoon season begins, even earlier than Mr Dean had originally predicted. Mr Dean meets the caravan to say goodbye, when Clodagh gives him one final request which he accepts: to tend to Ruth's grave. Clodagh and Mr Dean clasp hands and share a meaningful look, but Clodagh gathers herself and continues on her way.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nDevelopment.\n\"Black Narcissus\" was adapted from Rumer Godden's 1939 novel of the same name. Michael Powell was introduced to the novel by actress Mary Morris, who had appeared in \"The Thief of Bagdad\" (1940) and an earlier film where Powell had collaborated with Pressburger, \"The Spy in Black\" (1939). Godden had adapted her novel for a stage production for Lee Strasberg in the United States, but allowed Pressburger to write his own screenplay adaptation with Powell.\nCasting.\nKathleen Byron was among the first to be cast in the film, in the role of the unstable Sister Ruth. Pressburger described Byron as having a \"dreamy voice and great eyes like a lynx\", which he felt appropriate for the mentally disturbed character. Deborah Kerr was cast in the role of the leading Sister Superior, Sister Clodagh. Pressburger chose Kerr for the role despite the reservations of Powell, who felt she was too young for the part. At one point, Powell considered Greta Garbo for the part. Kerr was paid \u00a316,000 for fifty-five days of work.\nDavid Farrar was cast as Mr Dean, the virile British agent who becomes the object of Sister Ruth's obsession. Farrar was paid \u00a34,500 for forty-five days of shooting. Flora Robson appears as Sister Philippa, a gardener in the convent.\nOf the three principal Indian roles, only the Young General was played by an ethnic Indian, Sabu; the roles of Kanchi, played by Jean Simmons, and the Old General, played by Esmond Knight, were performed by white actors in make-up. Kanchi, 17, is described by Godden as \"a basket of fruit, piled high and luscious and ready to eat. Though she looks shyly down, there is something steady and unabashed about her; the fruit is there to be eaten, she does not mean it to rot.\" Godden approved of Simmons's casting, remarking that she \"perfectly fulfilled my description\". The Indian extras were cast from workers at the docks in Rotherhithe.\nFilming.\nFilming of \"Black Narcissus\" began on 16 May 1946, and was completed on 22 August. The film was shot primarily at Pinewood Studios but some scenes were shot in Leonardslee Gardens, West Sussex, the home of an Indian army retiree, which had appropriate trees and plants for the Indian setting. While Powell at the time had been known for his love of location shooting, with \"Black Narcissus\" he became fascinated with the idea of filming in the studio as much as possible.\nThe film is known for making extensive use of matte paintings and large-scale landscape paintings (credited to W. Percy Day) to suggest the mountainous environment of the Himalayas, as well as some scale models for motion shots of the convent.\nAccording to Robert Horton, Powell set the climactic sequence, a murder attempt on the cliffs of the cloister, to a pre-existing musical track, staging it as though it were a piece of visual choreography. There was some personal, behind-the-scenes tension, as Kerr was the director's ex-lover and Byron his current one. \"It was a situation not uncommon in show business, I was told,\" Powell later wrote, \"but it was new to me.\"\nThe film was intended to end with an additional scene in which Sister Clodagh sobs and blames herself for the convent's failure to Mother Dorothea. Mother Dorothea touches and speaks to Sister Clodagh welcomingly as the latter's tears continue to fall. When they filmed the scene with the rainfall on the leaves in what was to have been the penultimate scene, Powell was so impressed with it that he decided to designate that as the last scene and to scrap the Mother Dorothea closing scene. It was filmed but it is not known whether it was printed.\nRelease.\nBox office.\n\"Black Narcissus\" had its world premiere at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 24 April 1947 attended by Queen Mary, before opening to the public there the following day and being shown in 20 key cities in the UK within 10 days. According to trade papers, the film was a \"notable box office attraction\" at British cinemas in 1947. \nIt premiered in the United States on 13 August 1947 in New York City at the Fulton Theatre.\nIn France, where it was released in 1949, the film sold 1,388,416 tickets. In Japan, it was the fifth top-grossing film of 1950, earning \u00a5 in theatrical rentals.\nLegion of Decency condemnation.\nIn the United States, the Catholic National Legion of Decency condemned the film as \"an affront to religion and religious life\" for characterising it as \"an escape for the abnormal, the neurotic and the frustrated\". The version of the film originally shown in the United States had scenes depicting flashbacks of Sister Clodagh's life before becoming a sister edited out at the behest of the Legion of Decency. The 10 cuts to the film, of about 900 feet of film, were supervised by Pressburger, who commented that the cuts were \"reasonable, fair and just\", and that he made them to further the film's distribution, as the only bookings it had while on the \"condemned\" list were in New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco. After the cuts were made, the Legion of Decency removed the film from the list, and further bookings were possible.\nCritical response.\n\"The Manchester Guardian\" described the film as possessing \"good acting and skilfully built-up atmosphere\" and praised the cinematography. Philip Scheuer of the \"Los Angeles Times\" gave the film high praise, deeming it an \"exquisite cinematic jewel\", continuing: \"I can't say how authentic \"Black Narcissus\" is, but the lotus land to which it carries us is uniquely unforgettable.\" Jane Corby of the \"Brooklyn Daily Eagle\" described the film as a \"peculiar recital of religious life\" and praised the cinematography, but felt that the \"mixed atmosphere of religious seclusion and romantic vagaries is very confusing\".\nThomas M. Pryor of \"The New York Times\" lauded the creative collaboration of Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger, the writer-director duo, for their notable artistic achievement in \"Black Narcissus\". Pryor particularly highlighted the groundbreaking use of Technicolor in the movie, noting its exceptional realism and its ability to create a riveting dramatic impact. He further commended the film's adept employment of miniature sets and process shots to authentically evoke the ambience of the Himalayan setting. Pryor found the presentation of the film's dramatic elements to be exceptionally well-executed and praised the overall performance of the cast as commendable. Nevertheless, Pryor observed a subtle undercurrent of detachment and cynicism in the portrayal of the nuns within the narrative, acknowledging that this aspect might prove disconcerting to certain viewers.\nWriting in \"The Nation\" in 1947, critic James Agee stated, \"It is all intended to be very \"psychological,\" \"atmospheric,\" \"rueful,\" and \"worldly wise.\" ... Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger were badly mistaken in trying to make a movie at all. There is some unusually good color photography, and as movie-making some of it is intelligent and powerful. But the pervasive attitude in and toward the picture makes it as a whole tedious and vulgar.\"\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 100% based on 39 reviews, with an average rating of 9/10. On Metacritic, the film has a score of 86 based on 15 reviews, indicating \"universal acclaim\". Reviewing the film in 2005, Peter Bradshaw of \"The Guardian\" gave it five out of five stars, praising its direction, performances, and production design, and calling it \"an all-time top 10 favourite of mine\". In another retrospective review, Tim Dirks of Filmsite called the film \"provocative, dazzling and rich-colored\".\nHome media.\nThe Criterion Collection, an American home media distribution company, released \"Black Narcissus\" on laserdisc in the early 1990s, and issued it on DVD in 2002. Noel Murray, writing for \"The A.V. Club\", deemed the 2002 DVD as a \"crackerjack release\", noting it was a direct copy of the old laserdisc.\nIn 2008, ITV, the corporate heir to the Rank Organisation's General Film Distributors, released a restored version of the film on Blu-ray in the United Kingdom. The Criterion Collection subsequently issued the restored version on DVD and Blu-ray on 20 July 2010. Network Distributing, under licence from ITV, released another Blu-ray edition in the United Kingdom in 2014.\nHistorical relevance.\n\"Black Narcissus\" was released only a few months before India achieved independence from Britain in August 1947. Film critic Dave Kehr has suggested that the final images of the film, as the sisters abandon the Himalayas and proceed down the mountain, could have been interpreted by British viewers in 1947 as \"a last farewell to their fading empire\"; he suggests that for the film-makers, it is not an image of defeat \"but of a respectful, rational retreat from something that England never owned nor understood\". The story in the film quite closely follows that of the book, which was published in 1939.\nLegacy.\n\"Black Narcissus\" achieved acclaim for its pioneering technical mastery and shocked audiences at the time of release with its vibrant colour and the themes of the film. Audiences gasped at some of the scenes, notably the shot of the pink flowers which, shown on the big screen, was a spectacle at the time. The film's lighting and techniques have had a profound impact on later film makers, notably Martin Scorsese who used the extreme close-ups of the sisters as the inspiration for the treatment of Tom Cruise's character around the pool table in \"The Color of Money\". Scorsese has said that the film, particularly in its last quarter, is one of the earliest erotic films. The film was one of his favourites as a boy and one of the greatest experiences he has had with film is viewing \"Black Narcissus\" projected on a massive screen at the Directors Guild in 1983. In Michael Powell's own view, this was the most erotic film he ever made. \"It is all done by suggestion, but eroticism is in every frame and image from beginning to end. It is a film full of wonderful performances and passion just below the surface, which finally, at the end of the film, erupts.\" The English film critic Peter Bradshaw, who put it on his list of the ten best films ever made, took Powell's statement further, and said that it was the most erotic film he had ever seen.\nIn \"The Great British Picture Show\", the writer George Perry stated, \"[Powell and Pressburger's] films looked better than they were\u00a0\u2013 the location photography in Technicolor by Jack Cardiff in \"Black Narcissus\" was a great deal better than the story and lifted the film above the threatening banality.\" In contrast, the critic Ian Christie wrote in the \"Radio Times\" in the 1980s that \"unusually for a British film from the emotionally frozen forties the melodrama works so well it almost seems as if Powell and Pressburger survived the slings and barbs of contemporary criticism to find their ideal audience in the 1980s\". Marina Warner, introducing the film on BBC2 (on a nun-themed film evening, with \"Th\u00e9r\u00e8se\"), called it a masterpiece.\nThe film's resonance with populations exploring previously stifled sexual desires and expression extends beyond its contemporary milieu of women in the post-war era. \"Black Narcissus\" also influenced the themes and aesthetic of the ground-breaking gay experimental film \"Pink Narcissus\", which portrays a series of pornographic vignettes in vivid colour as the fantasies of a prostitute between visits from his keeper. Although \"Pink Narcissus\" was lost in obscurity for some time, in recent years it has resurfaced as a cult classic, due in part to the vivid, fantastical aesthetic inspired by \"Black Narcissus\".\nThe look and cinematography of the 2013 Disney film \"Frozen\" was influenced by \"Black Narcissus\". While working on the look and nature of the film's cinematography, \"Frozen\" art director Michael Giaimo was greatly influenced by Jack Cardiff's work in \"Black Narcissus\".\nLucile Had\u017eihalilovi\u0107 cited \"Black Narcissus\" as one of the films that inspired her 2025 fantasy drama film \"The Ice Tower\", with the tension between the two women on the precipice and \"the madness that can possess a woman in an icy mountain landscape.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46758", "revid": "8212334", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46758", "title": "Edward Thomas (poet)", "text": "British poet and novelist (1878-1917)\nPhilip Edward Thomas (3 March 1878 \u2013 9 April 1917) was a British writer of English poetry and prose. He is sometimes considered a war poet, although few of his poems deal directly with his war experiences. He only started writing poetry at the age of 36, but by that time he had already been a prolific critic, biographer, nature writer and travel writer for two decades. In 1915, he enlisted in the British Army to fight in the First World War and was killed in action during the Battle of Arras in 1917, soon after he arrived in France.\nLife and career as a soldier.\nBackground and early life.\nEdward Thomas was the son of Mary Elizabeth Townsend and Philip Henry Thomas, a civil servant, author, preacher and local politician. He was born in Lambeth, an area of present-day south London, previously in Surrey. He was educated at Belleville School, Battersea Grammar School and St Paul's School, all in London.\nThomas's family were mostly Welsh. Of his six great-grandparents for whom information has been found, five were born in Wales, and one in Ilfracombe. All four of his grandparents had been born and brought up in Wales. Of these, his paternal grandparents lived in Tredegar. His grandmother, Rachel Phillips, had been born and brought up there, whilst his grandfather, Henry Thomas, who'd been born in Neath, worked there as a collier and then an engine fitter. Their son, Philip Henry, who was Edward Thomas's father, had been born in Tredegar and spent his early years there.\nThomas's maternal grandfather was Edward Thomas Townsend, the son of Margaret and Alderman William Townsend, a Newport merchant active in Liberal and Chartist politics. His maternal grandmother was Catherine Marendaz, from Margam, just outside Port Talbot, where her family had been tenant farmers since at least the late 1790s. Their daughter, Mary Elizabeth Townsend, married Philip Henry Thomas. Mary and Philip were Edward Thomas's parents.\nAlthough Edward Thomas's father, Philip Henry Thomas, had left Tredegar for Swindon (and then London) in his early teens, \u201cthe Welsh connection was \u2026 enduring.\u201d He continued throughout his life to visit his relatives in south Wales. His feelings for Wales were also manifest in other ways. There were frequent journeys to Merthyr to lecture on behalf of the Ethical Society, and even a visit in 1906 to a National Eisteddfod in north Wales. Philip Henry Thomas \u201ccultivated his Welsh connections assiduously,\u201d so much so that Edward Thomas and his brothers could even boast that their father knew Lloyd George.\nLike his father before him, Edward Thomas continued throughout his life to visit his many relatives and friends in Ammanford, Newport, Swansea and Pontardulais. Thomas also enjoyed a twenty-year friendship with a distant cousin, the teacher, theologian and poet, John Jenkins (Gwili), of the Hendy, just across the county border from Pontardulais. Gwili\u2019s elegy for Thomas describes the many walks they took together in the countryside around Pontardulais and Ammanford. Such was the family\u2019s connection to this part of Wales that three of Edward Thomas's brothers were sent to school at Watcyn Wyn\u2019s Academy in Ammanford, where Gwili had become headmaster in 1908.\nFrom Oxford to Adlestrop.\nBetween 1898 and 1900, Thomas was a history scholar at Lincoln College, Oxford. In June 1899, he married Helen Berenice Noble (1877\u20131967) in Fulham, while still an undergraduate, and determined to live his life by the pen. He then worked as a book reviewer, reviewing up to 15 books every week. He was already a seasoned writer by the outbreak of war, having published widely as a literary critic and biographer as well as writing about the countryside. He also wrote a novel, \"The Happy-Go-Lucky Morgans\" (1913), a \"book of delightful disorder\".\nThomas worked as literary critic for the \"Daily Chronicle\" in London and became a close friend of Welsh tramp poet W. H. Davies, whose career he almost single-handedly developed. From 1905 until 1906, Thomas lived with his wife Helen and their two children at Elses Farm near Sevenoaks, Kent. He rented a tiny cottage nearby to Davies, and nurtured his writing as best he could. On one occasion, Thomas arranged for the manufacture, by a local wheelwright, of a makeshift wooden leg for Davies.\nIn 1906 the family moved to Steep, East Hampshire, on the outskirts of the market town of Petersfield - attracted by the landscape, its links with London, and schooling at the innovative co-educational private school Bedales. They lived in and around Steep in three separate homes for ten years until 1916 when they moved to Essex following Thomas's enlistment. Their third child, Myfanwy, was born in August 1910.\nEven though Thomas thought that poetry was the highest form of literature and regularly reviewed it, he only became a poet himself at the end of 1914 when living at Steep, and initially published his poetry under the name Edward Eastaway. The American poet Robert Frost, who was living in England at the time, in particular encouraged Thomas (then more famous as a critic) to write poetry, and their friendship was so close that the two planned to reside side by side in the United States. Frost's most famous poem, \"The Road Not Taken\", was inspired by walks with Thomas and Thomas's indecisiveness about which route to take.\nBy August 1914, the village of Dymock in Gloucestershire had become the residence of a number of literary figures, including Lascelles Abercrombie, Wilfrid Gibson and Robert Frost. Edward Thomas was a visitor at this time.\nThomas immortalised the (now-abandoned) railway station at Adlestrop in a poem of that name after his train made a stop at the Cotswolds station on 24 June 1914, shortly before the outbreak of the First World War.\nWar service.\nThomas enlisted in the Artists Rifles in July 1915, despite being a mature married man who could have avoided enlisting. He was unintentionally influenced in this decision by his friend Frost, who had returned to the U.S. but sent Thomas an advance copy of \"The Road Not Taken\". The poem was intended by Frost as a gentle mocking of indecision, particularly the indecision that Thomas had shown on their many walks together; however, most took the poem more seriously than Frost intended, and Thomas similarly took it seriously and personally, and it provided the last straw in Thomas's decision to enlist.\nThomas's training was at a temporary army camp at High Beach in Epping Forest. Despite the squalid conditions in the camp, he enjoyed the forest and in the following year moved with his family to a nearby cottage. One of his last poems, \"Out in the dark\", was written at High Beach at Christmas 1916.\nThomas was promoted to corporal, and in November 1916 was commissioned into the Royal Garrison Artillery as a second lieutenant. He was killed in action soon after he arrived in France at Arras on Easter Monday, 9 April 1917. To spare the feelings of his widow Helen, she was told the fiction of a \"bloodless death\" i.e. that Thomas was killed by the concussive blast wave of one of the last shells fired as he stood to light his pipe and that there was no mark on his body. However, a letter from his commanding officer Franklin Lushington written in 1936 (and discovered many years later in an American archive) states that in reality the cause of Thomas's death was being \"shot clean through the chest\". W. H. Davies was devastated by the death and his commemorative poem \"Killed in Action (Edward Thomas)\" was included in Davies's 1918 collection \"Raptures\".\nThomas is buried in the Commonwealth War Graves Cemetery at Agny in France (Row C, Grave 43).\nPersonal life.\nThomas and his wife Helen had three children: a son, Merfyn, and daughters Bronwen and Myfanwy. After the war, Helen wrote about her courtship and early married life with Edward in the autobiography \"As it Was\" (1926); a second volume, \"World Without End\" was published in 1931. Myfanwy later said that the books had been written by her mother as a form of therapy to help lift herself from the deep depression into which she had fallen following Thomas's death.\nHelen's short memoir \"A Memory of W. H. Davies\" was published in 1973, after her own death. In 1988, Helen's writings were gathered into a book published under the title \"Under Storm's Wing\", which included \"As It Was\" and \"World Without End\" as well as a selection of other short works by Helen and her daughter Myfanwy and six letters sent by Robert Frost to her husband. Myfanwy Thomas, only six when her father died, produced her own memoir of Edward and Helen, \"One of These Fine Days\", in 1982.\nPoetry.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;poem&gt;\nIn Memoriam\nThe flowers left thick at nightfall in the wood\nThis Eastertide call into mind the men,\nNow far from home, who, with their sweethearts, should\nHave gathered them and will do never again.\n &lt;/poem&gt;\n\"- 6. IV. 15\". 1915\nThomas's poems are written in a colloquial style and frequently feature the English countryside. The short poem \"In Memoriam\" exemplifies how his poetry blends the themes of war and the countryside. On 11 November 1985, Thomas was among 16 Great War poets commemorated on a slate stone unveiled in Westminster Abbey's Poet's Corner. The inscription, written by fellow poet Wilfred Owen, reads: \"My subject is War, and the pity of War. The Poetry is in the pity.\" Thomas was described by British Poet Laureate Ted Hughes as \"the father of us all.\" Poet Laureate Andrew Motion has said that Thomas occupies \"a crucial place in the development of twentieth-century poetry\" for introducing a modern sensibility, later found in the work of such poets as W. H. Auden and Ted Hughes, to the poetic subjects of Victorian and Georgian poetry.\nAt least nineteen of his poems were set to music by the Gloucester composer Ivor Gurney.\nLegacy.\nCommemorations.\nThomas is commemorated in Poets' Corner, Westminster Abbey, London, by memorial windows in the churches at Steep and at Eastbury in Berkshire, a blue plaque at 14 Lansdowne Gardens in Stockwell, south London, where he was born and a London County Council plaque at 61 Shelgate Road SW11. The Edward Thomas Fellowship was founded in 1980 and aims to perpetuate the memory of Edward Thomas and foster interest in his life and works.\nA plaque is dedicated to him at 113 Cowley Road, Oxford, where he lodged before entering Lincoln College, as well as featuring on the memorial board in the Junior Common Room (JCR) of Lincoln College.\nEast Hampshire District Council have created a \"literary walk\" at Shoulder of Mutton Hill in Steep dedicated to Thomas, which includes a memorial stone erected in 1935. The inscription includes the final line from one of his essays: \"And I rose up and knew I was tired and I continued my journey.\"\nAs \"Philip Edward Thomas poet-soldier\" he is commemorated, alongside \"Reginald Townsend Thomas actor-soldier died 1918\", who is buried at the spot, and other family members, at the North East Surrey (Old Battersea) Cemetery.\nA Study Centre dedicated to Edward Thomas, featuring more than 1,800 books by or about him collected by the late Tim Wilton-Steer, has been opened in Petersfield Museum. Access to the Study Centre is available by prior appointment.\nWriting about Thomas.\nIn 1918 W. H. Davies published his poem \"Killed in Action (Edward Thomas)\" to mark the personal loss of his close friend and mentor. Many poems about Thomas by other poets can be found in the books \"Elected Friends: Poems For and About Edward Thomas\", (1997, Enitharmon Press) edited by Anne Harvey, and \"Branch-Lines: Edward Thomas and Contemporary Poetry\", (2007, Enitharmon Press) edited by Guy Cuthbertson and Lucy Newlyn. Eleanor Farjeon was a close friend of Thomas and after his death remained close to his wife. From her correspondence she constructed her 1958 memoir \"Edward Thomas: The Last Four Years\". Robert MacFarlane, in his 2012 book \"The Old Ways\", critiques Thomas and his poetry in the context of his own explorations of paths and walking as an analogue of human consciousness. The last years of Thomas's life are explored in \"A Conscious Englishman\", a 2013 biographical novel by Margaret Keeping, published by StreetBooks. Thomas is the subject of the biographical play \"The Dark Earth and the Light Sky\" by Nick Dear (2012).\nSculpture.\nIn December 2017 National Museum Cardiff displayed a sculptural installation by the Herefordshire artist Claire Malet depicting a holloway and incorporating a copy of Thomas's \"Collected Poems\", open at 'Roads':\nCrowding the solitude\nOf the loops over the downs,\nHushing the roar of towns\nAnd their brief multitude.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nDigital collections\nPhysical collections\nOther links"}
{"id": "46760", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46760", "title": "Terra Australis", "text": "Hypothetical continent\n (Latin for 'Southern Land') was a hypothetical continent first posited in antiquity and which appeared on maps between the 15th and 18th centuries. Its existence was not based on any survey or direct observation, but rather on the idea that continental land in the Northern Hemisphere should be balanced by land in the Southern Hemisphere. This theory of balancing land has been documented as early as the 5th century on maps by Macrobius, who used the term \" on his maps.\nNames.\nOther names for the hypothetical continent have included and (transl.\u2009the unknown land of the south), and (transl.\u2009the southern land not yet known). Other names were (transl.\u2009the southern Brazil), and (transl.\u2009the land of Magellan). Matthias Ringmann called it the (transl.\u2009antarctic land) in 1505, and Franciscus Monachus called it the \"Australis or\u0119\" (Austral country). In medieval times it was known as the Antipodes.\nThe French writer Guillaume Postel proposed the name \"Chasdia\", after Noah's grandson Cush, for the hypothetical continent on the basis of it having dark-skinned inhabitants (Cush's traditional descendants).\nChange of name.\nDuring the 18th century, today's Australia was not conflated with \"Terra Australis\", as it sometimes was in the 20th century. Captain Cook and his contemporaries knew that the sixth continent (today's Australia), which they called \"New Holland\", was entirely separate from the imagined (but still undiscovered) seventh continent (today's Antarctica).\nIn the 19th century, the colonial authorities in Sydney re-allocated the name \"Australia\" to New Holland and its centuries-old Dutch name eventually fell into disuse. Meanwhile, having lost its name of \"Australia\", the south polar continent was nameless for decades until \"Antarctica\" was coined in the 1890s.\nIn the early 19th century, British explorer Matthew Flinders popularized the naming of Australia after \"Terra Australis\", giving his rationale that there was \"no probability\" of finding any significant land mass anywhere more south than Australia.https://,&amp;hairsp;Introduction The continent that would come to be named Antarctica would be explored decades after Flinders' 1814 book on Australia, which he had titled \"A Voyage to Terra Australis\", and after his naming switch had gained popularity.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nIn the fourth century B.C. Aristotle hypothesized that the continents of the Northern Hemisphere must be balanced out by an unknown landmass in the Southern Hemisphere.\nPtolemy (2nd century AD) believed that the Indian Ocean was enclosed on the south by land, and that the lands of the Northern Hemisphere should be balanced by land in the south. Marcus Tullius Cicero used the term \"cingulus australis\" (\"southern zone\") in referring to the Antipodes in \"Somnium Scipionis\" (\"Dream of Scipio\"). The land (\"terra\" in Latin) in this zone was the \"Terra Australis\".\nLegends of \"Terra Australis Incognita\"\u2014an \"unknown land of the South\"\u2014date back to Roman times and before, and were commonplace in medieval geography, although not based on any documented knowledge of the continent. Ptolemy's maps, which became well known in Europe during the Renaissance, did not actually depict such a continent, but they did show an Africa which had no southern oceanic boundary (and which therefore might extend all the way to the South Pole), and also raised the possibility that the Indian Ocean was entirely enclosed by land. Christian thinkers did not discount the idea that there might be land beyond the southern seas, but the issue of whether it could be inhabited was controversial.\nThe first depiction of \"Terra Australis\" on a globe was probably on Johannes Sch\u00f6ner's lost 1523 globe on which Oronce Fine is thought to have based his 1531 double cordiform (heart-shaped) map of the world. On this landmass he wrote \"recently discovered but not yet completely explored\". The body of water beyond the tip of South America is called the \"Mare Magellanicum\", one of the first uses of navigator Ferdinand Magellan's name in such a context.\nSch\u00f6ner called the continent \"Brasiliae Australis\" in his 1533 tract, \"Opusculum geographicum\". In it, he explained: Brasilia Australis is an immense region toward Antarcticum, newly discovered but not yet fully surveyed, which extends as far as Melacha and somewhat beyond. The inhabitants of this region lead good, honest lives and are not Anthropophagi [cannibals] like other barbarian nations; they have no letters, nor do they have kings, but they venerate their elders and offer them obedience; they give the name Thomas to their children [after St Thomas the Apostle]; close to this region lies the great island of Zanzibar at 102.00 degrees and 27.30 degrees South.\nMapping the southern continent.\nMedieval period.\nDuring medieval times \"Terra Australis\" was known by a different name, that being the Antipodes. First widely introduced to medieval western Europe by Isidore of Seville in his famous book the \"Etymologiae\", the idea gained popularity across Europe, and most scholars did not question its existence, instead debating if it was habitable for other humans. It would later be included on some zonal Mappa mundi and intrigue medieval scholars for centuries.\n16th century.\nExplorers of the Age of Discovery, from the late 15th century on, proved that Africa was almost entirely surrounded by sea, and that the Indian Ocean was accessible from both west and east. These discoveries reduced the area where the continent could be found; however, many cartographers held to Aristotle's opinion. Scientists such as Gerardus Mercator (1569) and Alexander Dalrymple as late as 1767 argued for its existence, with such arguments as that there should be a large landmass in the south as a counterweight to the known landmasses in the Northern Hemisphere. As new lands were discovered, they were often assumed to be parts of the hypothetical continent.\nThe German cosmographer and mathematician Johannes Sch\u00f6ner (1477\u20131547) constructed a terrestrial globe in 1515, based on the world map and globe made by Martin Waldseem\u00fcller and his colleagues at St. Di\u00e9 in Lorraine in 1507. Where Sch\u00f6ner departs most conspicuously from Waldseem\u00fcller is in his globe's depiction of an Antarctic continent, called by him Brasilie Regio. His continent is based, however tenuously, on the report of an actual voyage: that of the Portuguese merchants Nuno Manuel and Crist\u00f3v\u00e3o de Haro to the River Plate, and related in the \"Newe Zeytung auss Presillg Landt\" (\"New Tidings from the Land of Brazil\") published in Augsburg in 1514. The \"Zeytung\" described the Portuguese voyagers passing through a strait between the southernmost point of America, or Brazil, and a land to the south west, referred to as \"vndtere Presill\" (or \"Brasilia inferior\").\nThis supposed \"strait\" was in fact the Rio de la Plata (or the San Matias Gulf). By \"vndtere Presill\", the Zeytung meant that part of Brazil in the lower latitudes, but Sch\u00f6ner mistook it to mean the land on the southern side of the \"strait\", in higher latitudes, and so gave to it the opposite meaning. On this slender foundation he constructed his circum-Antarctic continent to which, for the reasons that he does not explain, he gave an annular, or ring shape. In an accompanying explanatory treatise, \"Luculentissima quaedam terrae totius descriptio\" (\"A Most Lucid Description of All Lands\"), he explained:The Portuguese, thus, sailed around this region, the Brasilie Regio, and discovered the passage very similar to that of our Europe (where we reside) and situated laterally between east and west. From one side the land on the other is visible; and the cape of this region about away, much as if one were sailing eastward through the Straits of Gibraltar or Seville and Barbary or Morocco in Africa, as our Globe shows toward the Antarctic Pole. Further, the distance is only moderate from this Region of Brazil to Malacca, where St. Thomas was crowned with martyrdom.\nOn this scrap of information, united with the concept of the Antipodes inherited from Graeco-Roman antiquity, Sch\u00f6ner constructed his representation of the southern continent. His strait served as inspiration for Ferdinand Magellan's expedition to reach the Moluccas by a westward route.\nHe took Magellan's discovery of Tierra del Fuego in 1520 as further confirmation of its existence, and on his globes of 1523 and 1533 he described it as \"terra australis recenter inventa sed nondum plene cognita\" (\"Terra Australis, recently discovered but not yet fully known\"). It was taken up by his followers, the French cosmographer Oronce Fine in his world map of 1531, and the Flemish cartographers Gerardus Mercator in 1538 and Abraham Ortelius in 1570. Sch\u00f6ner's concepts influenced the Dieppe school of mapmakers, notably in their representation of Jave la Grande.\nIn 1539, the King of Spain, Charles V, created the Governorate of Terra Australis granted to Pedro Sancho de la Hoz, who in 1540 transferred the title to the conqueror Pedro de Valdivia and later was incorporated to Chile.\n\"Terra Australis\" was depicted on the mid-16th-century Dieppe maps, where its coastline appeared just south of the islands of the East Indies; it was often elaborately charted, with a wealth of fictitious detail. There was much interest in \"Terra Australis\" among Norman and Breton merchants at that time. In 1566 and 1570, Francisque and Andr\u00e9 d'Albaigne presented Gaspard de Coligny, Admiral of France, with projects for establishing relations with the Austral lands. Although the Admiral gave favourable consideration to these initiatives, they came to nought when Coligny was killed in 1572.\nGerardus Mercator believed in the existence of a large Southern continent on the basis of cosmographic reasoning, set out in the abstract of his \"Atlas or Cosmographic Studies in Five Books,\" as related by his biographer, Walter Ghim, who said that even though Mercator was not ignorant that the Austral continent still lay hidden and unknown, he believed it could be \"demonstrated and proved by solid reasons and arguments to yield in its geometric proportions, size and weight, and importance to neither of the other two, nor possibly to be lesser or smaller, otherwise the constitution of the world could not hold together at its centre\".\nThe Flemish geographer and cartographer, Cornelius Wytfliet, wrote concerning the \"Terra Australis\" in his 1597 book, \"Descriptionis Ptolemaicae Augmentum\": \nThe terra Australis is therefore the southernmost of all other lands, directly beneath the antarctic circle; extending beyond the tropic of Capricorn to the West, it ends almost at the equator itself, and separated by a narrow strait lies on the East opposite to New Guinea, only known so far by a few shores because after one voyage and another that route has been given up and unless sailors are forced and driven by stress of winds it is seldom visited. The terra Australis begins at two or three degrees below the equator and it is said by some to be of such magnitude that if at any time it is fully discovered they think it will be the fifth part of the world.\nAdjoining Guinea on the right are the numerous and vast Solomon Islands which lately became famous by the voyage of Alvarus Mendanius.\nJuan Fernandez, sailing from Chile in 1576, claimed he had discovered the Southern Continent. The \"Polus Antarcticus\" map of 1641 by Henricus Hondius, bears the inscription: \"\"Insulas esse a Nova Guinea usque ad Fretum Magellanicum affirmat Hernandus Galego, qui ad eas explorandas missus fuit a Rege Hispaniae Anno 1576\" (Hernando Gallego, who in the year 1576 was sent by the King of Spain to explore them, affirms that there are islands from New Guinea up to the Strait of Magellan)\".\n17th century.\nLu\u00eds Vaz de Torres, a Spanish navigator who commanded the \"San Pedro y San Pablo\", the \"San Pedrico\" and the tender or yacht, \"Los Tres Reyes Magos\" during the 1605\u20131606 expedition led by Pedro Fernandes de Queiros in quest of the Southern Continent, proved the existence of a passage south of New Guinea, now known as Torres Strait. Commenting on this in 1622, the Dutch cartographer and publisher of Queiros' eighth memorial, Hessel Gerritsz, noted on his \"Map of the Pacific Ocean:\" \"Those who sailed with the yacht of Pedro Fernando de Quiros in the neighbourhood of New Guinea to 10 degrees westward through many islands and shoals and over for as many as 40 days, estimated that Nova Guinea does not extend beyond 10 degrees to the south; if this be so, then the land from 9 to 14 degrees would be a separate land\".\nPedro Fernandes de Queir\u00f3s, another Portuguese navigator sailing for the Spanish Crown, saw a large island south of New Guinea in 1606, which he named La Austrialia del Espiritu Santo. He represented this to the King of Spain as the Terra Australis incognita. In his 10th Memorial (1610), Queir\u00f3s said: \"New Guinea is the top end of the Austral Land of which I treat [discuss], and that people, and customs, with all the rest referred to, resemble them\".\nDutch father and son Isaac and Jacob Le Maire established the Australische Compagnie (Australian Company) in 1615 to trade with \"Terra Australis\", which they called \"Australia\".\nThe Dutch expedition to Valdivia of 1643 intended to round Cape Horn sailing through Le Maire Strait but strong winds made it instead drift south and east. The small fleet led by Hendrik Brouwer managed to enter the Pacific ocean sailing south of the island disproving earlier beliefs that it was part of \"Terra Australis\".\nThe cartographic depictions of the southern continent in the 16th and early 17th centuries, as might be expected for a concept based on such abundant conjecture and minimal data, varied wildly from map to map; in general, the continent shrank as potential locations were reinterpreted. At its largest, the continent included Tierra del Fuego, separated from South America by a small strait; New Guinea; and what would come to be called Australia. In Ortelius's atlas \"Theatrum Orbis Terrarum\", published in 1570, \"Terra Australis\" extends north of the Tropic of Capricorn in the Pacific Ocean.\nAs long as it appeared on maps at all, the continent minimally included the unexplored lands around the South Pole, but generally much larger than the real Antarctica, spreading far north\u00a0\u2013 especially in the Pacific Ocean. New Zealand, first seen by the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman in 1642, was regarded by some as a part of the continent.\nA map with a \"Terra Australis\" stretching from New Guinea to the South Pole and beyond was included in the 1676 application by Vittorio Riccio, an Italian missionary in Manila, to be appointed Prefect Apostolic of \"Terra Australis\" in order to initiate missionary activity there. His appointment was approved in 1681 but he died in 1685.\n18th century.\nAlexander Dalrymple, the Examiner of Sea Journals for the British East India Company, whilst translating some Spanish documents captured in the Philippines in 1762, found de Torres's testimony. This discovery led Dalrymple to publish the \"Historical Collection of the Several Voyages and Discoveries in the South Pacific Ocean\" in 1770\u20131771. Dalrymple presented a beguiling tableau of the \"Terra Australis\", or Southern Continent:\nThe number of inhabitants in the Southern Continent is probably more than 50 millions, considering the extent, from the eastern part discovered by Juan Fernandez, to the western coast seen by Tasman, is about 100 deg. of longitude, which in the latitude of 40 deg. amounts to 4596 geographic, or 5323 stature miles [8567\u00a0km]. This is a greater extent than the whole civilized part of Asia, from Turkey to the eastern extremity of China. There is at present no trade from Europe thither, though the scraps from this table would be sufficient to maintain the power, dominion, and sovereignty of Britain, by employing all its manufacturers and ships. Whoever considers the Peruvian empire, where arts and industry flourished under one of the wisest systems of government, which was founded by a stranger, must have very sanguine expectations of the southern continent, from whence it is more than probable Mango Capac, the first Inca, was derived, and must be convinced that the country, from whence Mango Capac introduced the comforts of civilized life, cannot fail of amply rewarding the fortunate people who shall bestow letters instead of quippos (quipus), and iron in place of more awkward substitutes.\nDalrymple's claim of the existence of an unknown continent aroused widespread interest and prompted the British government in 1769 to order James Cook in HM Bark \"Endeavour\" to seek out the Southern Continent to the South and West of Tahiti, discovered in June 1767 by Samuel Wallis in and named by him King George Island. The London press reported in June 1768 that two ships would be sent to the newly discovered island and from there to \"attempt the Discovery of the Southern Continent\". A subsequent press report stated: \"We are informed, that the Island which Captain Wallis has discovered in the South-Sea, and named George's Land, is about fifteen hundred Leagues to the Westward and to Leeward of the Coast of Peru, and about five-and-thirty Leagues in circumference; that its principal and almost sole national Advantage is, its Situation for exploring the Terra Incognita of the Southern Hemisphere. The Endeavour, a North-Country Cat, is purchased by the Government, and commanded by a Lieutenant of the Navy; she is fitting out at Deptford for the South-Sea, thought to be intended for the newly-discovered Island\". The aims of the expedition were revealed in days following: \"To-morrow morning Mr. Banks, Dr. Solano [sic], with Mr. Green, the Astronomer, will set out for Deal, to embark on board the Endeavour, Capt. Cook, for the South Seas, under the direction of the Royal Society, to observe the Transit of Venus next summer, and to make discoveries to the South and West of Cape Horn\". The London \"Gazetteer\" was more explicit when it reported on 18 August 1768: \"The gentlemen, who are to sail in a few days for George's Land, the new discovered island in the Pacific ocean, with an intention to observe the Transit of Venus, are likewise, we are credibly informed, to attempt some new discoveries in that vast unknown tract, above the latitude 40\". The results of this first voyage of James Cook in respect of the quest for the Southern Continent were summed up by Cook himself. He wrote in his \"Journal\" on 31 March 1770 that the \"Endeavour\"'s voyage \"must be allowed to have set aside the most, if not all, the Arguments and proofs that have been advanced by different Authors to prove that there must be a Southern Continent; I mean to the Northward of 40 degrees South, for what may lie to the Southward of that Latitude I know not\".\nThe second voyage of James Cook aboard explored the South Pacific for the landmass between 1772 and 1775 whilst also testing Larcum Kendall's K1 chronometer as a method for measuring longitude.\nDecline of the idea.\nOver the centuries the idea of \"Terra Australis\" gradually lost its hold. In 1616, Jacob Le Maire and Willem Schouten's rounding of Cape Horn proved that Tierra del Fuego was a relatively small island, while in 1642 Abel Tasman's first Pacific voyage proved that Australia was not part of the mythical southern continent. Much later, James Cook circumnavigated and charted New Zealand in 1770, showing that even it could not be part of a large continent. On his second voyage he circumnavigated the globe at a very high southern latitude, at some places even crossing the Antarctic Circle, showing that any possible southern continent must lie well within the cold polar areas. There could be no extension into regions with a temperate climate, as had been thought before. In 1814, Matthew Flinders published the book \"A Voyage to Terra Australis.\" Flinders had concluded that the \"Terra Australis\" as hypothesized by Aristotle and Ptolemy did not exist, so he wanted the name applied to what he saw as the next best thing: \"Australia\" (later the country), replacing the former name for the continent, New Holland. He wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no probability, that any other detached body of land, of nearly equal extent, will ever be found in a more southern latitude; the name Terra Australis will, therefore, remain descriptive of the geographical importance of this country, and of its situation on the globe: it has antiquity to recommend it; and, having no reference to either of the two claiming nations, appears to be less objectionable than any other which could have been selected.\n...with the accompanying note at the bottom of the page:https://,&amp;hairsp;Introduction\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Had I permitted myself any innovation upon the original term, it would have been to convert it into AUSTRALIA; as being more agreeable to the ear, and an assimilation to the names of the other great portions of the earth.\nWith the discovery of Antarctica his conclusion would soon be revealed as a mistake, but by that time the name had stuck.\nThe Province of Beach.\nA land feature known as the \"Province of Beach\" or \"Boeach\" \u2013 from the Latin \"Provincia bo\u00ebach\" \u2013 appears to have resulted from mistranscriptions of a name in Marco Polo's \"Il Milione\" (Book III). Polo described his journey by sea from China to India by way of Champa (\"provincia ciamba\"; modern southern Vietnam), \"Java Major\", \"Locach\" (modern Lop Buri), and Sumatra (\"Java Minor\"). In Cantonese, Lavo (an early name of Lop Buri) was pronounced \"Lo-huk\" \u7f85\u659b and \"Locach\" was Marco Polo's transcription of this name. According to Polo, Locach was a kingdom where gold was \"so plentiful that no one who did not see it could believe it\". Polo's narrative describes the route southward from Champa toward Sumatra, but by a slip of the pen the name \"Java\" (which Polo did not himself visit) was substituted for \"Champa\" as the point of departure, thereby mis-locating Sumatra and Locach south of Java (rather than Champa). Consequently, some geographers believed that Sumatra and Locach were near, or extensions of, \"Terra Australis\".\nIn the German cursive script, \"Locach\" and \"Boeach\" look similar. A feature known as the \"Province of Beach\" or \"Boeach\" \u2013 from the Latin \"Provincia bo\u00ebach\" \u2013 appears on European maps as early as the 15th century. On a map of the world published in Florence in 1489 by Henricus Martellus, the Latin name \"provincia bo\u00ebach\" is given to a southern neighbour of Champa. In a 1532 edition of Marco Polo's \"Travels\", Locach was changed to \"Bo\u00ebach\", later shortened to \"Beach\".\nBy the mid-16th century, according to Henry Yule, the editor of a modern (1921) edition of Polo's \"Travels\", some geographers and cartographers followed the error in older editions of Polo that \"placed ... the land of \"Boeach\" (or Locac)\" south-east of Java and \"introduced in their maps a continent in that situation\". Gerard Mercator did just that on his 1541 globe, placing \"Beach provincia aurifera\" (\"Beach the gold-bearing province\") in the northernmost part of the \"Terra Australis\" in accordance with the faulty text of Marco Polo's \"Travels\". The landmass of Beach remained in this location on Mercator's world map of 1569, with the amplified description, quoting Marco Polo, \"Beach provincia aurifera quam pauci ex alienis regionibus adeunt propter gentis inhumanitatem\" (\"Beach the gold-bearing province, whither go few from other countries because of the inhumanity of its people\") with \"Lucach regnum\" shown somewhat to its south west. Following Mercator, Abraham Ortelius also showed and in these locations on his world map of 1571.\nThe 1596 map by Jan Huygen van Linschoten showed and , projecting from the map's southern edge as the northernmost parts of the \"Terra Australis\" long hypothesized by Europeans. An encounter by the Dutch vessel \"Eendracht\", commanded by Dirk Hartog, with Shark Bay, Western Australia in 1616, appeared to confirm that land existed where the maps showed \"Beach\"; Hartog named the wider landmass \"Eendrachtsland\", after his ship. In August 1642, the Council of the Dutch East India Company \u2013 evidently still relying on Linschoten's map \u2013 despatched Abel Tasman and Frans Jacobszoon Visscher on a voyage of exploration, of which one of the objects was to obtain knowledge of \"all the totally unknown provinces of Beach\".\nIn fiction.\nThe unexplored southern continent was a frequent subject of fantastic fiction in the 17th and 18th centuries in the imaginary voyages genre. Among the works which dealt with imaginary visits to the continent (which at the time was still believed to be real) were:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46761", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46761", "title": "County Antrim", "text": "Historic Northern Ireland county\nCounty Antrim (named after the town of Antrim, from Irish , meaning 'lone ridge') is one of the six counties of Northern Ireland, located within the historic province of Ulster. Adjoined to the north-east shore of Lough Neagh, the county covers an area of and has a population of 651,321, as of the 2021 census. County Antrim has a population density of 211 people per square kilometre or 546 people per square mile. It is also one of the thirty-two traditional counties of Ireland.\nThe Glens of Antrim offer isolated rugged landscapes, the Giant's Causeway is a unique landscape and a UNESCO World Heritage Site, Bushmills produces whiskey, and Portrush is a popular seaside resort and nightlife area. The majority of Belfast, the capital city of Northern Ireland, is in County Antrim, with the remainder being in County Down.\nAccording to the 2001, 2011, and 2021 censuses it is currently one of only two counties of the island of Ireland in which a plurality or majority of the population are from a Protestant background. The other is County Down to the south.\nGeography.\nA large portion of Antrim is hilly, especially in the east, where the highest elevations are attained. The range runs north and south, and, following this direction, the highest points are Knocklayd , Slieveanorra , Trostan , Slemish , Agnew's Hill and Divis . The inland slope is gradual, but on the northern shore the range terminates in abrupt and almost perpendicular declivities, and here, consequently, some of the finest coast scenery in the world is found, widely differing, with its unbroken lines of cliffs, from the indented coast-line of the west. The most remarkable cliffs are those formed of perpendicular basaltic columns, extending for many miles, and most strikingly displayed in Fair Head and the celebrated Giant's Causeway. From the eastern coast, the hills rise instantly but less abruptly, and the indentations are wider and deeper. On both coasts there are several resort towns, including Portrush (with well-known golf links), Portballintrae and Ballycastle; on the east Cushendun, Cushendall and Waterfoot on Red Bay, Carnlough and Glenarm, Larne on the Sea of Moyle, and Whitehead on Belfast Lough. All are somewhat exposed to the easterly winds prevalent in spring. The only island of size is the L-shaped Rathlin Island, off Ballycastle, in total length by maximum breadth, from the coast, and of similar basaltic and limestone formation to that of the mainland. It is partially arable and supports a small population. Islandmagee is a peninsula separating Larne Lough from the North Channel.\nThe valleys of the Bann and Lagan, with the intervening shores of Lough Neagh, form the fertile lowlands. These two rivers, both rising in County Down, are the only ones of importance. The latter flows to Belfast Lough, the former drains Lough Neagh, which is fed by a number of smaller streams. The fisheries of the Bann and Lough Neagh (especially for salmon and eels) are of value both commercially and to sportsmen, the small town of Toome, at the outflow of the river, being the centre. Immediately below this point lies Lough Beg, the \"Small Lake\", about lower than Lough Neagh.\nTransport.\nCounty Antrim has a number of air, rail, and sea links.\nAirports.\nNorthern Ireland's main airport, Belfast International Airport, at Aldergrove, is in County Antrim. Belfast International shares its runways with 38 Brigade Flying Station Aldergrove, which otherwise has its own facilities. It is the fifth-largest regional air cargo centre in the UK. There are regular services to Great Britain, Europe, and North America.\nThe region is also served by George Best Belfast City Airport, a mile east of Belfast city centre on the County Down side of the city, which was renamed in 2006 in honour of footballer George Best.\nRail.\nThe main Translink Northern Ireland Railways routes are the major line between Belfast, Antrim, Ballymena, Coleraine and Derry, Belfast to Carrickfergus and Larne, the port for Stranraer in Scotland and Coleraine to Portrush.\nSea.\nTwo of Northern Ireland's main ports are in County Antrim, Larne and Belfast.\nFerries sail from Larne Harbour to destinations including Cairnryan in Scotland.\nThe Port of Belfast is Northern Ireland's principal maritime gateway, serving the Northern Ireland economy and increasingly that of the Republic of Ireland. It is a major centre of industry and commerce and has become established as the focus of logistics activity for Northern Ireland. Around two-thirds of Northern Ireland's seaborne trade, and a quarter of that for Ireland as a whole, is handled at the port, which receives over 6,000 vessels each year.\nDemographics.\nAs of the 2021 census, County Antrim had a population of 651,321, making it the most populous county in Northern Ireland, and the second-largest county by population on the island of Ireland, second only to County Dublin.\nCommunity background and religion.\nA traditionally Protestant-majority county since the Plantation of Ulster by Scottish and English settlers, the 2021 census revealed that those of a Protestant and Other Christian community background were no longer a majority in Antrim, comprising 47.0% of the population, a sharp decline from 75.2% in 1861. This is largely attributable to the rapid increase of the Catholic population, particularly in the city of Belfast, where they now comprise a plurality of the population, and its surrounding metropolitan area, as well as immigration from other parts of the world following the end of The Troubles and increasing rates of irreligion.\nIrish language and Ulster Scots.\nIn the 2021 UK census in County Antrim:\nStatistics for 2009\u20132010 show 1,832 students attending the twelve (Irish language primary schools) and one (Irish language secondary school).\nAdministration.\nThe county was administered by Antrim County Council from 1899 until the abolition of county councils in Northern Ireland in 1973. The traditional county town is Antrim. More recently, Ballymena was the seat of county government. From 1973, Northern Ireland was split into districts, which were redrawn in 2015. County Antrim is part of the following districts:\nThe county contains within it the whole of five parliamentary constituencies:\nParts of the following five parliamentary constituencies are also in County Antrim:\nSettlements.\nCities.\nPlaces with official city status:\nSubdivisions.\nBaronies\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nParishes\nTownlands\nHistory.\nAt what date the county of Antrim was formed is not known, but it appears that a certain district bore this name before the reign of Edward II (early 14th century), and when the shiring of Ulster was undertaken by Sir John Perrot in the 16th century, Antrim and Down were already recognised divisions, in contradistinction to the remainder of the province. The earliest known inhabitants were Mesolithic hunter-gatherers of pre-Celtic origin. At the Mount Sandel Mesolithic site (in Coleraine along the east side of the river Bann) known human habitation there dates to around 7000 BC making it one of the earliest sites in Ireland. The names of the townlands or subdivisions, supposed to have been made in the 13th century, are all of Celtic derivation.\nIn ancient times, Antrim was inhabited by a Celtic people called the Darini. In the early Middle Ages, southern County Antrim was part of the Kingdom of Ulidia, ruled by the D\u00e1l Fiatach clans Keenan and MacDonlevy/McDunlavey; the north was part of D\u00e1l Riada, which stretched into what is now western Scotland over the Irish Sea. D\u00e1l Riada was ruled by the O'Lynch clan, who were vassals of the Ulidians. Besides the Ulidians and D\u00e1l Riada, there were the D\u00e1l nAraide of lower County Antrim, and the Cruthin, who were pre-Gaelic Celts and probably related to the Picts of Britain. Between the 8th and 11th centuries Antrim was exposed to the inroads of the Vikings.\nIn the late 12th century, Antrim became part of the Earldom of Ulster, conquered by Anglo-Norman invaders. A revival of Gaelic power followed the campaign of Edward Bruce in 1315, leaving Carrickfergus as the only significant English stronghold. In the late Middle Ages, Antrim was divided into three parts: northern Clandeboye, the Glynnes, and the Route. The Cambro-Norman MacQuillans were powerful in the Route.\nA branch of the O'Neills of Tirconnell (modern Tyrone) migrated to Clandeboye in the 14th century and ruled it for a time from their castle on Lough Neagh. Their family was called Clandeboye O'Neills. Donald Balloch, who succeeded his father John Mor Macdonald, Lord of Dunyvaig and the Glens, married the daughter of Conn O'Neill of the Clandeboye O'Neills sometime after the Battle of Inverlochy. In 1433, Alexander of Islay, Lord of the Isles, joined with his cousin, Donald Balloch, Conn O'Neill of the Clandeboye O'Neills, and Eoghan O'Neill, king of Tirowen (modern Tyrone), to defend against an attack on Antrim by the O'Donnells of Tirconnell. Alexander Macdonald led the attack that was successful, so that the O'Donnells became subject to the O'Neills of Tirowen. A Gallowglass sept, the MacDonnells (they were \"Macdonalds\" in Scotland), became the most powerful in the Glens in the 15th century.\nDuring the Tudor era (16th century), numerous adventurers from Britain attempted to colonise the region; many Scots settled in Antrim around this time. In 1588, the Antrim coast was the scene of one of the 24 wrecks of the Spanish Armada in Ireland. The Spanish vessel \"La Girona\" was wrecked off Lacana Point, Giant's Causeway in 1588 with the loss of nearly 1,300 lives.\nAntrim is divided into sixteen baronies. Lower Antrim, part of Lower Clandeboye, was settled by the sept O'Flynn/O'Lynn. Upper Antrim, part of Lower Clandeboye, was the home of the O'Keevans. Belfast was part of Lower Clandeboye and was held by the O'Neill-Clannaboys. Lower Belfast, Upper Belfast, and Carrickfergus were also part of Lower Clandeboye. Cary was part of the Glynnes; ruled originally by the O'Quinn sept, the MacDonnell galloglasses from Scotland took power here in the late Middle Ages, and some of the O'Haras also migrated from Connaught. Upper and Lower Dunluce were part of the Route and were ruled by the MacQuillans. Upper and Lower Glenarm was ruled by the O'Flynn/O'Lynn sept, considered part of the Glynns. In addition to that sept and that of O'Quinn, both of which were native, the Scottish Gallowglass septs of MacKeown, MacAlister, and MacGee are found there. Kilconway was originally O'Flynn/O'Lynn territory, but was held by the MacQuillans as part of the Route, and later by the gallowglass sept of MacNeill. Lower Massereene was part of Lower Clandeboye and was ruled by the O'Flynns and the O'Heircs. Upper Massereene was part of Lower Clandeboye, ruled by the O'Heircs. Upper and Lower Toome, part of the Route, were O'Flynn/O'Lynn territory. Misc was first ruled by the MacQuillans. Later, the Scottish Gallowglass MacDonnells and MacAlisters invaded. The MacDonnells were a branch of the Scottish Clan MacDonald; the MacAlisters traced their origin back to the Irish Colla Uais, eldest of the Three Collas.\nIslandmagee had, besides antiquarian remains, a notoriety as a home of witchcraft, and during the Irish Rebellion of 1641 was the scene of an act of reprisal (for the massacre of Protestants) against the Catholic population by the Scottish Covenanter soldiery of Carrickfergus.\nIn 1689, during the Williamite War in Ireland, County Antrim was a centre of Protestant resistance against the rule of the Catholic James II. During the developing crisis, James' garrison at Carrickfergus successfully repulsed an attempt by local Protestants to storm it. After the advance of the Irish Army under Richard Hamilton, all of County Antrim was brought under Jacobite control. Later in the year, a major expedition from England under Marshal Schomberg landed in Belfast Lough and successfully laid siege to Carrickfergus. Having captured most of the largest towns of the area, they then marched southwards towards Dundalk.\nHistoric monuments.\nThe antiquities of the county consist of cairns, mounts or forts, remains of ecclesiastical and military structures, and round towers.\nThere are three round towers: one at Antrim, one at Armoy, and one on Ram's Island in Lough Neagh, only that at Antrim being perfect. There are some remains of the ecclesiastic establishments at Bonamargy, where the earls of Antrim are buried, Kells, Glenarm, Glynn, Muckamore and Whiteabbey.\nThe castle at Carrickfergus, dating from the Norman invasion of Ireland, is one of the best preserved medieval structures in Ireland. There are, however, remains of other ancient castles, as Olderfleet, Cam's, Shane's, Glenarm, Garron Tower, Red Bay, and Dunluce Castle, notable for its dramatic location on a rocky outcrop.\nThe principal cairns are: one on Colin mountain, near Lisburn; one on Slieve True, near Carrickfergus; and two on Colinward. The cromlechs most worthy of notice are: one near Cairngrainey, to the north-east of the old road from Belfast to Templepatrick; the large cromlech at Mount Druid, near Ballintoy; and one at the northern extremity of Islandmagee. The mounts, forts, and entrenchments are very numerous.\nThe natural rock formations of Giant's Causeway on the Antrim coast are now designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site.\nSaint Patrick.\nSlemish, about east of Ballymena, is notable as being the scene of St Patrick's early life. According to tradition, Saint Patrick was a slave for seven years, near the hill of Slemish, until he escaped back to Great Britain.\nLinen.\nLinen manufacturing was previously an important industry in the county. At the time, Ireland produced a large amount of flax. Cotton-spinning by jennies was first introduced to Belfast by industrialists Robert Joy and Thomas M'Cabe in 1777; and twenty-three years later, it was estimated that more than 27,000 people were employed in the industry within of Belfast. Women were employed in the working of patterns on muslin.\nFlora and fauna.\nRecords of the seaweeds of County Antrim were brought together and published in 1907 by J. Adams who notes that the list contains 211 species. Batter's list, of 1902, contained 747 species in his catalogue of British marine algae.\nOf the freshwater algae there are 10 taxa in the Charophyta (Charales) recorded from County Antrim: \"Chara aspera\" var. \"aspera\"; \"Chara globularis\" var. \"globularis\"; \"Chara globularis\" var. \"virgata\" (K\u00fctz.) R.D.; \"Chara vulgaris\" var. \"vulgaris\"; \"Chara vulgaris\" var. \"contraria\" (A. Braun ex K\u00fctz.) J.A.Moore; \"Chara vulgaris\" var. \"longibracteata\" (K\u00fctz.) J. Groves &amp; Bullock-Webster; \"Chara vulgaris\" var. \"papillata\" Wallr. ex A. Braun; \"Nitella flexilis\" var. \"flexilis\"; \"Nitella translucens\" (Pers.) C.A. Ag. and \"Tolypella nidifica\" var. \"glomerata\" (Desv.) R.D. Wood.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46762", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46762", "title": "Alfred Marshall", "text": "British economist (1842\u20131924)\nAlfred Marshall (26 July 1842 \u2013 13 July 1924) was an English economist and one of the most influential economists of his time. His book \"Principles of Economics\" (1890) was the dominant economic textbook in England for many years, and brought the ideas of supply and demand, marginal utility, and costs of production into a coherent whole, popularizing the modern neoclassical approach which dominates microeconomics to this day. As a result, he is known as the father of scientific economics.\nLife and career.\nMarshall was born at Bermondsey in London, the second son of William Marshall (1812\u20131901), a clerk and cashier at the Bank of England, and Rebecca (1817\u20131878), daughter of butcher Thomas Oliver, from whom, on her mother's death, she inherited property. Marshall had two brothers and two sisters; a cousin was the economist Ralph Hawtrey. The Marshalls were a West Country clerical family; Marshall's great-great-grandfather was \"the Reverend William Marshall, half-legendary Herculean parson of Devonshire\", famous for \"twisting horseshoes with his hands\" to scare \"local blacksmiths into fearing that they blew their bellows for the devil\".\nWilliam Marshall was a devout strict Evangelical, \"author of an Evangelical epic in a sort of Anglo-Saxon language of his own invention which found some favour in its appropriate circles\" and of a tract titled \"Men's Rights and Women's Duties\". There are scholars who note that this strict upbringing wielded a strong influence on Marshall's work, such as how he favored the doctrines of philosophical idealism.\nMarshall grew up in Clapham and was educated at the Merchant Taylors' School and St John's College, Cambridge, where he demonstrated an aptitude in mathematics, achieving the rank of Second Wrangler in the 1865 Cambridge Mathematical Tripos. Marshall experienced a mental crisis that led him to abandon physics and switch to philosophy. He began with metaphysics, specifically \"the philosophical foundation of knowledge, especially in relation to theology\". Metaphysics led Marshall to ethics, specifically a Sidgwickian version of utilitarianism; ethics, in turn, led him to economics, because economics played an essential role in providing the preconditions for the improvement of the working class. He saw that the duty of economics was to improve material conditions, but such improvement would occur, Marshall believed, only in connection with social and political forces. His interest in Georgism, liberalism, socialism, trade unions, women's education, poverty and progress reflect the influence of his early social philosophy on his later activities and writings.\nMarshall was elected in 1865 to a fellowship at St John's College at Cambridge, and became lecturer in the moral sciences in 1868. He taught Mary Paley who was became a lecturer at the then embryonic Newnham College, Cambridge; their marriage in 1877 obliged Marshall to resign his position as a Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge. This coincided with his appointment as the first principal at University College, Bristol, which later became the University of Bristol, where he lectured political economy and economics, alongside his wife, until he resigned in 1881. He returned as Professor of Political Economy in 1882, leaving Bristol for good in 1883 when he was appointed a tutorial fellow at Balliol College, University of Oxford. In 1885 he was appointed professor of political economy at Cambridge University, where he remained until his retirement in 1908. Over the years he interacted with many British thinkers including Henry Sidgwick, W. K. Clifford, Benjamin Jowett, William Stanley Jevons, Francis Ysidro Edgeworth, John Neville Keynes and John Maynard Keynes. Marshall founded the Cambridge School which paid special attention to increasing returns, the theory of the firm, and welfare economics; after his retirement academic leadership of the Cambridge economists was taken up by Arthur Cecil Pigou and John Maynard Keynes.\nContributions to economics.\nMarshall desired to improve the mathematical rigour of economics and transform it into a more scientific profession. In the 1870s he wrote a small number of tracts on international trade and the problems of protectionism. In 1879, many of these works were compiled into a work entitled \"The Theory of Foreign Trade: The Pure Theory of Domestic Values\". In the same year (1879) he published \"The Economics of Industry\" with his wife Mary Paley Marshall.\nAlthough Marshall took economics to a more mathematically rigorous level, he did not want mathematics to overshadow economics and thus make it irrelevant to the layman. Accordingly, Marshall tailored the text of his books to laymen and put the mathematical content in the footnotes and appendices for the professionals. In a letter to A. L. Bowley, he laid out the following system: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(1) Use mathematics as shorthand language, rather than as an engine of inquiry. (2) Keep to them till you have done. (3) Translate into English. (4) Then illustrate by examples that are important in real life (5) Burn the mathematics. (6) If you can't succeed in 4, burn 3. This I do often.\"\nTogether, he and his wife completed \"Economics of Industry\" while at Bristol, and after publication it was adopted widely in England as an economic curriculum; its simple form stood upon sophisticated theoretical foundations. Marshall achieved a measure of fame from this work, and upon the death of William Jevons in 1882, Marshall became the leading British economist of the scientific school of his time.\nMarshall returned to Cambridge as Professor of Political Economy in 1884 on the death of Henry Fawcett. At Cambridge he endeavoured to create a new tripos for economics, a goal which he would achieve only in 1903. Until that time, economics was taught under the Historical and Moral Sciences Triposes which failed to provide Marshall the kind of energetic and specialised students he desired.\nAlong with Pigou and Hawtrey, Marshall developed the quantity theory of money or the income version of the money theory. In 1917, Marshall introduced the Cambridge version of the quantity theory of money and this was refined further by Pigou, Hawtrey, and Robertson. It became known as the Cambridge equation.\n\"Principles of Economics\" (1890).\nMarshall began his economic work, the \"Principles of Economics\", in 1881, and spent much of the next decade at work on the treatise. His plan for the work gradually extended to a two-volume compilation on the whole of economic thought. The first volume was published in 1890 to worldwide acclaim, establishing him as one of the leading economists of his time. The second volume, which was to address foreign trade, money, trade fluctuations, taxation, and collectivism, was never published.\n\"Principles of Economics\" established his worldwide reputation. It appeared in eight editions, starting at 750 pages and growing to 870 pages. It decisively shaped the teaching of economics in English-speaking countries. Its main technical contribution was a masterful analysis of the issues of elasticity, consumer surplus, increasing and diminishing returns, short and long terms, and marginal utility. Many of the ideas were original with Marshall; others were improved versions of the ideas by W. S. Jevons and others.\nIn a broader sense Marshall hoped to reconcile the classical and modern theories of value. John Stuart Mill had examined the relationship between the value of commodities and their production costs, on the theory that value depends on the effort expended in manufacture. Jevons and the marginal utility theorists had elaborated a theory of value based on the idea of maximising utility, holding that value depends on demand. Marshall's work used both these approaches, but he focused more on costs. He noted that, in the short run, supply cannot be changed and market value depends mainly on demand. In an intermediate time period, production can be expanded by existing facilities, such as buildings and machinery, but, since these do not require renewal within this intermediate period, their costs (called fixed, overhead, or supplementary costs) have little influence on the sale price of the product. Marshall pointed out that it is the prime or variable costs, which constantly recur, that influence the sale price most in this period. In a still longer period, machines and buildings wear out and have to be replaced, so that the sale price of the product must be high enough to cover such replacement costs. This classification of costs into fixed and variable and the emphasis given to the element of time probably represent one of Marshall's chief contributions to economic theory. He was committed to partial equilibrium models over general equilibrium on the grounds that the inherently dynamical nature of economics made the former more practically useful.\nMuch of the success of Marshall's teaching and \"Principles\" book derived from his effective use of diagrams, which were soon emulated by other teachers worldwide.\nAlfred Marshall was the first to develop the standard supply and demand graph demonstrating a number of fundamentals regarding supply and demand including the supply and demand curves, market equilibrium, the relationship between quantity and price in regards to supply and demand, the law of marginal utility, the law of diminishing returns, and the ideas of consumer and producer surpluses. This model is now used by economists in various forms using different variables to demonstrate several other economic principles. Marshall's model allowed a visual representation of complex economic fundamentals where before all the ideas and theories were only capable of being explained through words. These models are now critical throughout the study of economics because they allow a clear and concise representation of the fundamentals or theories being explained.\nTheoretical contributions.\nMarshall is considered to be one of the most influential economists of his time, largely shaping mainstream economic thought for the next fifty years, and being one of the founders of the school of neoclassical economics. Although his economics was advertised as extensions and refinements of the work of Adam Smith, Thomas Robert Malthus and John Stuart Mill, he extended economics away from its classical focus on the market economy and instead popularised it as a study of human behaviour. He downplayed the contributions of certain other economists to his work, such as L\u00e9on Walras, Vilfredo Pareto and Jules Dupuit, and only grudgingly acknowledged the influence of Stanley Jevons himself.\nMarshall was one of those who used utility analysis, but not as a theory of value. He used it as a part of the theory to explain demand curves and the principle of substitution. Marshall's scissors analysis \u2013 which combined demand and supply, that is, utility and cost of production, as if in the two blades of a pair of scissors \u2013 effectively removed the theory of value from the center of analysis and replaced it with the theory of price. While the term \"value\" continued to be used, for most people it was a synonym for \"price\". Prices no longer were thought to gravitate toward some ultimate and absolute basis of price; prices were existential, between the relationship of demand and supply.\nMarshall's influence on codifying economic thought is difficult to deny. He popularised the use of supply and demand functions as tools of price determination (previously discovered independently by Cournot); modern economists owe the linkage between price shifts and curve shifts to Marshall. Marshall was an important part of the \"marginalist revolution\"; the idea that consumers attempt to adjust consumption until marginal utility equals the price was another of his contributions. The price elasticity of demand was presented by Marshall as an extension of these ideas. Economic welfare, divided into producer surplus and consumer surplus, was contributed by Marshall, and indeed, the two are sometimes described eponymously as 'Marshallian surplus.' He used this idea of surplus to rigorously analyse the effect of taxes and price shifts on market welfare. Marshall also identified quasi-rents.\nMarshall's brief references to the social and cultural relations in the \"industrial districts\" of England were used as a starting point for late twentieth-century work in economic geography and institutional economics on clustering and learning organisations.\nGary Becker (1930\u20132014), the 1992 Nobel prize winner in economics, has mentioned that Milton Friedman and Alfred Marshall were the two greatest influences on his work.\nAnother contribution that Marshall made was differentiating concepts of internal and external economies of scale. That is that when costs of input factors of production go down, it is a positive externality for all the firms in the market place, outside the control of any of the firms.\nThe Marshallian industrial district.\nA concept based on a pattern of organisation that was common in late nineteenth-century Britain in which firms concentrating on the manufacture of certain products were geographically clustered. Comments made by Marshall in Book 4, Chapter 10 of \"Principles of Economics\" have been used by economists and economic geographers to discuss this phenomenon.\nThe two dominant characteristics of a Marshallian industrial district are high degrees of vertical and horizontal specialisation and a very heavy reliance on market mechanism for exchange. Firms tend to be small and to focus on a single function in the production chain. Firms located in industrial districts are highly competitive in the neoclassical sense, and in many cases there is little product differentiation. The major advantages of Marshallian industrial districts arise from simple propinquity of firms, which allows easier recruitment of skilled labour and rapid exchanges of commercial and technical information through informal channels. They illustrate competitive capitalism at its most efficient, with transaction costs reduced to a practical minimum, but they are feasible only when economies of scale are limited.\nLater career.\nMarshall served as president of the first day of the 1889 Co-operative Congress.\nOver the next two decades he worked to complete the second volume of his \"Principles,\" but his unyielding attention to detail and ambition for completeness prevented him from mastering the work's breadth. The work was never finished and many other, lesser works he had begun work on \u2013 a memorandum on trade policy for the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the 1890s, for instance \u2013 were left incomplete for the same reasons.\nHis health problems had gradually grown worse since the 1880s, and in 1908 he retired from the university. He hoped to continue work on his \"Principles\" but his health continued to deteriorate and the project had continued to grow with each further investigation. The outbreak of the First World War in 1914 prompted him to revise his examinations of the international economy and in 1919 he published \"Industry and Trade\" at the age of 77. This work was a more empirical treatise than the largely theoretical \"Principles\", and for that reason it failed to attract as much acclaim from theoretical economists. In 1923, he published \"Money, Credit, and Commerce,\" a broad amalgam of previous economic ideas, published and unpublished, stretching back a half-century.\nFinal years, death and legacy.\nFrom 1890 to 1924 he was the respected father of the economic profession and to most economists for the half-century after his death, the venerable grandfather. As a consequence in 1892, he was elected as an honorary member of the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society,\nHe had shied away from controversy during his life in a way that previous leaders of the profession had not, although his even-handedness drew great respect and even reverence from fellow economists, and his home at Balliol Croft in Cambridge had no shortage of distinguished guests. His students at Cambridge became leading figures in economics, including John Maynard Keynes and Arthur Cecil Pigou. His most important legacy was creating a respected, academic, scientifically founded profession for economists in the future that set the tone of the field for the remainder of the 20th century.\nMarshall died aged 81 at his home in Cambridge and is buried in the Ascension Parish Burial Ground. Keynes wrote an obituary for his former tutor which Joseph Schumpeter called \"the most brilliant life of a man of science I have ever read\".\nThe library of the Department of Economics at Cambridge University (The Marshall Library of Economics), the Economics society at Cambridge (The Marshall Society) as well as the University of Bristol Economics department are named after him. His archive is available for consultation by appointment at the Marshall Library of Economics.\nHis home, Balliol Croft, was renamed Marshall House in 1991 in his honour when it was bought by Lucy Cavendish College, Cambridge.\nAlfred Marshall's wife was Mary Paley, an economist who was one of the first women students at Cambridge and a lecturer at Newnham College. She continued to live in Balliol Croft until her death in 1944; her ashes were scattered in the garden. The couple had no children.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46763", "revid": "46469005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46763", "title": "Crimean War", "text": "Tenth conflict of the Russo-Turkish wars (1853\u20131856)\nThe Crimean War was fought between the Russian Empire and an alliance of the Ottoman Empire, the Second French Empire, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and the Kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont from October 1853 to February 1856. Geopolitical causes of the war included the \"Eastern question\" (the decline of the Ottoman Empire), expansion of Imperial Russia in the preceding Russo-Turkish wars, and the British and French preference to preserve the Ottoman Empire to maintain the balance of power in the Concert of Europe.\nThe war's proximate cause was a dispute between France and Russia over the rights of Catholic and Orthodox minorities in Palestine. After the Sublime Porte refused Tsar Nicholas I's demand that the Empire's Orthodox subjects be placed under his protection, Russian troops occupied the Danubian Principalities in July 1853. The Ottomans declared war on Russia in October. Fearing the growth of Russian influence and compelled by public outrage over the annihilation of the Ottoman squadron at Sinop, Britain and France joined the war on the Ottoman side in March 1854. The Russian advance was halted at Silistria in June.\nIn September 1854, after extended preparations, allied forces landed in Crimea in an attempt to capture Russia's main naval base in the Black Sea, Sevastopol. They scored an early victory at the Battle of the Alma. The Russians counterattacked in late October in what became the Battle of Balaclava and were repulsed, and a second counterattack at Inkerman ended in a stalemate. The front settled into the 11-month Siege of Sevastopol, involving brutal conditions for troops on both sides. Smaller military actions took place in the Caucasus (1853\u20131855), the White Sea (July\u2013August 1854) and the North Pacific (1854\u20131855). The Kingdom of Sardinia-Piedmont entered on the allies' side in 1855.\nSevastopol ultimately fell after a renewed French assault on the Malakoff redoubt in September 1855. Diplomatically isolated and facing the prospect of invasion from the west if the war continued, Russia sued for peace in March 1856. France and Britain welcomed the development due to the conflict's domestic unpopularity. The Treaty of Paris, signed on 30 March 1856, ended the war. It forbade Russia to base warships in the Black Sea. The Ottoman vassal states of Wallachia and Moldavia became largely independent. Christians in the Ottoman Empire gained a degree of official equality, and the Orthodox Church regained control of the Christian churches in dispute.\nThe Crimean War was one of the first conflicts in which military forces used modern technologies such as explosive naval shells, railways, and telegraphs. It was also one of the first to be documented extensively in written reports and in photographs. The war quickly symbolized logistical, medical and tactical failures and mismanagement. The reaction in Britain led to a demand for the professionalization of medicine, most famously achieved by Florence Nightingale, who gained worldwide attention for pioneering modern nursing while she treated the wounded.\nThe Crimean War also marked a turning point for the Russian Empire. It weakened the Imperial Russian Army, drained the treasury, and undermined its influence in Europe. The defeat forced Russia's educated elites to identify the country's fundamental problems. It became a catalyst for reforms of Russia's social institutions, including the emancipation reform of 1861, which abolished serfdom in Russia, and overhauls in the justice system, local self-government, education, and military service.\nEastern question.\nAs the Ottoman Empire steadily weakened during the 19th century, the Russian Empire stood poised to take advantage by expanding southward. In the 1850s, the British and the French Empires were allied with the Ottoman Empire and were determined to prevent that from happening. The historian A. J. P. Taylor argued that the war had resulted not from aggression, but from the interacting fears of the major players:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In some sense the Crimean War was predestined and had deep-seated causes. Neither Nicholas I nor Napoleon III nor the British government could retreat from the conflict for prestige once it was launched. Nicholas needed a subservient Turkey for the sake of Russian security; Napoleon needed success for the sake of his domestic position; the British government needed an independent Turkey for the security of the Eastern Mediterranean... Mutual fear, not mutual aggression, caused the Crimean War.\nBackground.\nWeakening of the Ottoman Empire: 1820\u20131840s.\nIn the early 1800s, the Ottoman Empire suffered a number of existential challenges. The Serbian Revolution in 1804 resulted in the autonomy of the first Balkan Christian nation under the empire. The Greek War of Independence, which began in early 1821, provided further evidence of the empire's internal and military weakness, and the commission of atrocities by Ottoman military forces (see Chios massacre) further undermined the empire. The disbandment of the centuries-old Janissary corps by Sultan Mahmud II on 15 June 1826 (Auspicious Incident) helped the empire in the longer term but deprived it of its existing standing army in the short term. In 1827, the Anglo-Franco-Russian fleet destroyed almost all of the Ottoman naval forces at the Battle of Navarino. In 1830, Greece became independent after ten years of war and the Russo-Turkish War (1828\u201329). The Treaty of Adrianople (1829) granted Russian and Western European commercial ships free passage through the Black Sea straits. Also, the Danubian Principalities (Moldavia and Wallachia) became territories under Russian protection.\nFrance took the opportunity to occupy Algeria, which had been under Ottoman rule, in 1830. In 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt, the most powerful vassal of the Ottoman Empire, declared independence. Ottoman forces were defeated in a number of battles, which forced Mahmud II to seek Russian military aid. A Russian army of 10,000 landed on the shores of the Bosphorus in 1833 and helped prevent the Egyptians from capturing Constantinople.\n\"The reasons for the Tsar's disquietude are not obscure. Not Turkey alone was threatened by the advance of Ibrahim. The rights secured to Russia by a succession of treaties were also directly jeopardized. The substitution of a virile Albanian dynasty at Constantinople in place of the effete Osmanlis was the last thing desired by the Power which wished, naturally enough, to command the gate into the Mediterranean\". Russia was satisfied with the weak government in Constantinople (Istanbul).\nAs a result, the Treaty of H\u00fcnk\u00e2r \u0130skelesi was signed and greatly benefited Russia. It provided for a military alliance between the Russian and the Ottoman Empires if one of them was attacked, and a secret additional clause allowed the Ottomans to opt out of sending troops but to close the Straits to foreign warships if Russia were under threat. Egypt remained nominally under Ottoman sovereignty but was \"de facto\" independent.\nIn 1838 in a situation similar to that of 1831, Muhammad Ali of Egypt was not happy about his lack of control and power in Syria, and he resumed military action. The Ottomans lost to the Egyptians at the Battle of Nezib on 24 June 1839 but were saved by Britain, Austria, Prussia and Russia, who signed a convention in London on 15 July 1840 that granted Muhammad Ali and his descendants the right to inherit power in Egypt in exchange for the removal of Egyptian forces from Syria and Lebanon. Moreover, Muhammad Ali had to admit a formal dependence on the Ottoman sultan. After Muhammad Ali refused to obey the requirements of the convention, the allied Anglo-Austrian fleet blockaded the Nile Delta, bombarded Beirut and captured Acre. Muhammad Ali then accepted the convention's conditions.\nOn 13 July 1841, after the expiry of the Treaty of H\u00fcnk\u00e2r \u0130skelesi, the London Straits Convention was signed under pressure from the European countries. The new treaty deprived Russia of its right to block warships from passing into the Black Sea in case of war. Thus, the way to the Black Sea was open for British and French warships during a possible Russo-Ottoman conflict.\nRussian historians tend to view that history as evidence that Russia lacked aggressive plans. The Russian historian V. N. Vinogradov writes: \"The signing of the documents was the result of deliberate decisions: instead of bilateral (none of the great powers recognized this Treaty of Unkiar Skelessi), the new Treaty of London was obligatory for all, it closed the Bosphorus and Dardanelles. In the absence of expansion plans, this was a sound decision\".\nIn 1838, Britain lost interest in crushing the Ottoman Empire. On the contrary, after the conclusion of the trade treaty of 1838 (see Treaty of Balta Liman), Britain received unlimited access to the markets of the Ottoman Empire. \"Britain imposed on the Porte a Tariff Convention which in effect transformed the Ottoman Empire into a virtual free-trade zone. \nTherefore its trade interests pushed it to protect the integrity of the Ottoman Empire. In the long term, the Ottoman Empire lost the opportunity to modernize and industrialize, but in the short term, it gained the opportunity to receive the support of European powers (primarily Britain) in opposing the desire of the conquered peoples for self-determination and Russia, which sought to crush its influence in the Balkans and Asia.\nPublicly, European politicians made broad promises to the Ottomans. Lord Palmerston, the British Foreign Secretary, said in 1839: \"All that we hear about the decay of the Turkish Empire, and its being a dead body or a sapless trunk, and so forth, is pure and unadulterated nonsense. Given 10 years of peace under European protection, coupled with internal reform, there seemed to him no reason why it should not become again a respectable Power\".\nOrlando Figes has claimed that \"The motives of the British in promoting liberal reforms were not just to secure the independence of the Ottoman Empire against Russia. They were also to promote the influence of Britain in Turkey\", also: \"to promote British free-trade interests (which may have sounded splendid but was arguably damaging to the Ottoman Empire)\".\n\"British exports to the Ottoman Empire, including Egypt and the Danubian principalities, increased nearly threefold from 1840 to 1851 (...) Thus it was very important, from the financial point of view, for Britain to prevent the Ottoman Empire from falling into other hands.\"\n\"From this moment (1838) the export of British manufactured goods to Turkey rose steeply. There was an elevenfold increase by 1850\".\nAssistance from Western European powers or Russia had twice saved the Ottoman Empire from destruction, but the Ottomans also lost their independence in foreign policy. Britain and France desired more than any other states to preserve the integrity of the Ottoman Empire because they did not want to see Russia gaining access to the Mediterranean Sea. Austria had the same fears.\nRussian expansionism.\nRussia, as a member of the Holy Alliance, had operated as the \"police of Europe\" to maintain the balance of power that had been established in the Congress of Vienna in 1815. Russia had assisted Austria's efforts in suppressing the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, and expected a free hand in settling its problems with the Ottoman Empire, the \"sick man of Europe\". However, Britain could not tolerate Russian dominance of Ottoman affairs, which would challenge its domination of the eastern Mediterranean.\nStarting with Peter the Great in the early 1700s, after centuries of Ottoman northward expansion and Crimean-Nogai raids, Russia began a southwards expansion across the sparsely populated \"Wild Fields\" toward the warm water ports of the Black Sea, which do not freeze over, unlike the handful of ports controlled by Russia in the north. The goal was to promote year-round trade and a year-round navy. Pursuit of that goal brought the emerging Russian state into conflict with the Ukrainian Cossacks and then the Tatars of the Crimean Khanate and Circassians.\n\"The plan to develop Russia as a southern power had begun in earnest in 1776, when Catherine placed Potemkin in charge of New Russia (Novorossiya), the sparsely populated territories newly conquered from the Ottomans on the Black Sea's northern coastline, and ordered him to colonize the area\". \nWhen Russia conquered those groups and gained possession of their territories, the Ottoman Empire lost its buffer zone against Russian expansion, and both empires came into direct conflict. The conflict with the Ottoman Empire also presented a religious issue of importance, as Russia saw itself as the protector of history of the Eastern Orthodox Church under the Ottoman Orthodox Christians, who were legally treated as second-class citizens. The Ottoman Reform Edict of 1856, promulgated after the war, largely reversed much of the second-class status, most notably the tax that only non-Muslims paid.\nBritain's immediate fear was Russia's expansion at the expense of the Ottoman Empire. The British desired to preserve Ottoman integrity and were concerned that Russia might make advances toward British India or move toward Scandinavia or Western Europe. A distraction (in the form of the Ottoman Empire) on the Russian southwest flank would mitigate that threat. The Royal Navy also wanted to forestall the threat of a powerful Imperial Russian Navy. Taylor stated the British perspective:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Crimean war was fought for the sake of Europe rather than for the Eastern question; it was fought against Russia, not in favour of Turkey... The British fought Russia out of resentment and supposed that her defeat would strengthen the European Balance of Power.\nBecause of \"British commercial and strategic interests in the Middle East and India\", the British joined the French, \"cement[ing] an alliance with Britain and... reassert[ing] its military power\". Among those who supported the British strategy were Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. In his articles for the \"New-York Tribune\" around 1853, Marx saw the Crimean War as a conflict between the democratic ideals of the west that started with the \"great movement of 1789\" against \"Russia and Absolutism\". He described the Ottoman Empire as a buffer against a pattern of expansionism by the Tsar. Marx and Engels also accused Lord Palmerston of playing along with the interests of Russia and being unserious in preparing for the conflict. Marx believed Palmerston to be bribed by Russia, and shared this belief with David Urquhart. Urquhart, for his part, was a British politician who was a major advocate for the Ottoman Empire.\nMikhail Pogodin, a professor of history at Moscow University, gave Nicholas I a summary of Russia's policy towards the Slavs in the war. Nicholas' answer was filled with grievances against the West. Nicholas shared Pogodin's sense that Russia's role as the protector of Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire was not understood and that Russia was unfairly treated by the West. Nicholas especially approved of the following passage:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;France takes Algeria from Turkey, and almost every year England annexes another Indian principality: none of this disturbs the balance of power; but when Russia occupies Moldavia and Wallachia, albeit only temporarily, that disturbs the balance of power. France occupies Rome and stays there several years during peacetime: that is nothing; but Russia only thinks of occupying Constantinople, and the peace of Europe is threatened. The English declare war on the Chinese, who have, it seems, offended them: no one has the right to intervene; but Russia is obliged to ask Europe for permission if it quarrels with its neighbour. England threatens Greece to support the false claims of a miserable Jew and burns its fleet: that is a lawful action; but Russia demands a treaty to protect millions of Christians, and that is deemed to strengthen its position in the East at the expense of the balance of power. We can expect nothing from the West but blind hatred and malice... (\"comment in the margin by Nicholas I\": 'This is the whole point').\u2014\u200a\nRussia was militarily weak, technologically backward and administratively incompetent. Despite its grand ambitions toward the south, it had not built its railway network in that direction, and its communications were poor. Its bureaucracy was riddled with graft, corruption and inefficiency and was unprepared for war. Its navy was weak and technologically backward. Its army, although very large, suffered from colonels who pocketed their men's pay, from poor morale, and from a technological deficit relative to Britain and France. By the war's end, the profound weaknesses of the Russian armed forces had become readily apparent, and the Russian leadership was determined to reform it.\nHowever, no matter how great the problems of Russia were, Russia believed those of the Ottomans were greater. \"In a one-to-one fight Nikolai (Tsar) had no doubt of beating the Ottoman armies and navy\". Russian foreign policy failed to understand the importance of Britain's trade interests and did not understand the changes in the situation after the conclusion of the Anglo-Ottoman Treaty in 1838 (see Treaty of Balta Liman). Russia attempted to \"honestly\" negotiate with the United Kingdom on the partition of the Ottoman Empire and made concessions in order to eliminate all objections from the United Kingdom.\n\"The Tsar Nicholas had always, as we have seen, been anxious to maintain a cordial understanding with England in regard to the Eastern Question, and early in the spring of 1853 he had a series of interviews with Sir George Hamilton Seymour, then British ambassador at St. Petersburg.\" Emperor Nicholas I assured that he did not intend to seize Constantinople and territories in the Balkans, he himself offered Britain to take over Egypt and Crete. Concessions at the conclusion of the London Straits Convention were made earlier in 1841. \"By signing the convention, the Russians had given up their privileged position in the Ottoman Empire and their control of the Straits, all in the hope of improving relations with Britain and isolating France\". But Britain after 1838 was interested in preserving the integrity of the Ottoman Empire and rejected all Russian proposals. \"The fall of the Ottoman Empire was not, however, a requirement of British policy in the East. A weak Ottoman state best suited British interests\".\nImmediate causes of war.\nFrench Emperor Napoleon III's ambition to restore France's grandeur initiated the immediate chain of events that led to France and Britain declaring war on Russia on 27 and 28 March 1854, respectively. He pursued Catholic support by asserting France's \"sovereign authority\" over the Christian population of Palestine, to the detriment of Russia (the sponsor of Eastern Orthodoxy). To achieve that, he in May 1851 appointed Charles, marquis de La Valette, a zealous leading member of the Catholic clericalists, as his ambassador to the Sublime Porte of the Ottoman Empire.\nRussia disputed that attempted change in authority. Referring to two previous treaties (one from 1757 and the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca from 1774), the Ottomans reversed their earlier decision, renounced the French treaty and declared that Russia was the protector of the Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire.\nNapoleon III responded with a show of force by sending the ship of the line \"Charlemagne\" to the Black Sea and thereby violated the London Straits Convention. The gunboat diplomacy show of force, together with money, induced Ottoman Sultan Abd\u00fclmecid I to accept a new treaty confirming France and the Catholic Church's supreme authority over Christian holy places, including the Church of the Nativity, which had been held by the Greek Orthodox Church.\nTsar Nicholas I then deployed his 4th and 5th Army Corps along the River Danube in Wallachia, as a direct threat to the Ottoman lands south of the river. He had Foreign Minister Count Karl Nesselrode undertake talks with the Ottomans. Nesselrode confided to Seymour:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"[The dispute over the holy places]\" had assumed a new character\u2014that the acts of injustice towards the Greek church which it had been desired to prevent had been perpetrated and consequently that now the object must be to find a remedy for these wrongs. The success of French negotiations at Constantinople was to be ascribed solely to intrigue and violence\u2014violence which had been supposed to be the ultima ratio of kings, being, it had been seen, the means which the present ruler of France was in the habit of employing in the first instance. \nThe agreement referred to by the French was in 1740. At present most historians (except for the new Russian Orthodox nationalists) accept that the question of the holy places was no more than a pretext for the Crimean War. As conflict emerged over the issue of the holy places, Nicholas I and Nesselrode began a diplomatic offensive, which they hoped would prevent either British or French interference in any conflict between Russia and the Ottomans and prevent both from forming an anti-Russian alliance.\nNicholas began courting Britain by means of conversations with Seymour in January and February 1853. Nicholas insisted that he no longer wished to expand the Russian Empire but that he had an obligation to the Christian communities in the Ottoman Empire.\nHe next dispatched a highly-abrasive diplomat, Prince Menshikov, on a special mission to the Ottoman Sublime Porte in February 1853. By previous treaties, the sultan had committed \"to protect the (Eastern Orthodox) Christian religion and its churches\". Menshikov demanded a Russian protectorate over all 12\u00a0million Orthodox Christians in the Ottoman Empire with control of the Orthodox Church's hierarchy. A compromise was reached regarding Orthodox access to the Holy Land, but the Sultan, strongly supported by the British ambassador, Stratford Canning, 1st Viscount Stratford de Redcliffe, rejected the most sweeping demands.\nRussian historian Vinogradov V.N. point out that Menshikov's demands did not go beyond the limits of previous treaties. \"The agreement was reached on the administration of church rites of both clergy in respected temples and, secondly, that the tsar rejected the idea of expanding his right of patronage and, in fact, insisted on confirming the terms of the Kucuk-Kaynardzhiy treaty of 1774, which allowed giving advice to the Sultan, but did not oblige them to accept\".\n\"By the early 1850s Stratford Canning had become far more than an ambassador or adviser to the Porte. The 'Great Elchi', or Great Ambassador, as he was known in Constantinople, had a direct influence on the policies of the Turkish government. (...) His presence was a source of deep resentment among the Sultan's ministers, who lived in terror of a personal visit from the dictatorial ambassador\".\nNicholas fumed at \"the infernal dictatorship of this Redcliffe\" whose name and political ascendancy at the Porte personified for him the whole Eastern Question, The British and the French sent in naval task forces to support the Ottomans, as Russia had prepared to seize the Danubian Principalities.\nAll the calculations of the Russian emperor turned out to be erroneous. Britain refused his proposals, it was not possible to prevent the Anglo-French rapprochement, Austria opposed his policy, the Ottoman Empire showed intransigence. On the contrary, a favourable situation was developing for Britain. Britain had great naval power and a powerful economy, but did not have a strong land army. The alliance with France, which had a strong land army, made it possible to strike at Russia. \"With the help of French infantry, it was possible to overturn Russia's positions with one blow\"\nFirst hostilities.\nIn February 1853, the British government of Prime Minister Lord Aberdeen reappointed Lord Stratford as British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. Having resigned the ambassadorship in January, he had been replaced by Colonel Rose as \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires\". Lord Stratford then turned around, sailed back to Constantinople, arriving there on 5 April 1853 and convinced the Sultan there to reject the Russian treaty proposal as compromising Ottoman independence. The Leader of the Opposition in the British House of Commons, Benjamin Disraeli, blamed Aberdeen's and Stratford's actions for making war inevitable, which started the process that would force the Aberdeen government to resign in January 1855 over the war.\nShortly after the Tsar had learned of the failure of Menshikov's diplomacy toward the end of June 1853, he sent armies under the commands of Field Marshal Ivan Paskevich and General Mikhail Gorchakov across the River Prut into the Ottoman-controlled Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia. Fewer than half of the 80,000 Russian soldiers who crossed the Prut in 1853 survived. By far, nearly all of the deaths would result from sickness, rather than action, since the Russian Army still suffered from medical services that ranged from bad to none.\nRussia had obtained recognition from the Ottoman Empire of the Tsar's role as special guardian of the Orthodox Christians in Moldavia and Wallachia. Russia now used the Sultan's failure to resolve the issue of the protection of the Christian sites in the Holy Land as a pretext for Russian occupation of those Danubian provinces. Nicholas believed that the European powers, especially Austria, would not object strongly to the annexation of a few neighbouring Ottoman provinces, especially since Russia had assisted Austria's efforts in suppressing the Hungarian Revolution in 1849.\nThe United Kingdom, hoping to maintain the Ottoman Empire as a bulwark against the expansion of Russian power in Asia, sent a fleet to the Dardanelles, where it joined a fleet sent by France.\nBattle of Sinop.\nThe European powers continued to pursue diplomatic avenues. The representatives of the four Great Powers (the United Kingdom, France, Austria and Prussia) met in Vienna, where they drafted a note, which they hoped would be acceptable to both the Russians and the Ottomans. The peace terms arrived at by the four powers at the Vienna Conference (1853) were delivered to the Russians by Austrian foreign minister Count Karl von Buol on 5 December 1853. The note met with the approval of Nicholas I, but Abd\u00fclmecid I rejected the proposal since he felt that the document's poor phrasing left it open to many different interpretations. The United Kingdom, France and Austria united in proposing amendments to mollify the Sultan, but the court of St. Petersburg ignored their suggestions. The United Kingdom and France then set aside the idea of continuing negotiations, but Austria and Prussia did not believe that the rejection of the proposed amendments justified the abandonment of the diplomatic process.\nOn 23 November, a small Russian naval force discovered the Ottoman fleet harboured in Sinop and began a blockade. Once the Russian blockade was reinforced, a squadron of 6 Russian ships of the line supported by 5 smaller warships, assaulted the harbour on 30 November 1853. During the Battle of Sinop, the Russian squadron destroyed a patrol squadron of 11 Ottoman warships\u2014mostly frigates\u2014while they were anchored in port under defence of the onshore artillery garrison. The Ottoman fleet suffered a crushing defeat. The Russian victory in the naval battle of Sinope was called \"the massacre of Sinope\". Although Russia and the Ottoman Empire were already at war, and there was no evidence of Russian atrocities, the phrase was used as propaganda in the West. The press in both United Kingdom and France used Sinop as the \"casus belli\" (\"cause of war\") to shape the public opinion in favour of war against Russia. By 28 March 1854, after Russia ignored an Anglo-French ultimatum to withdraw from the Danubian Principalities, the United Kingdom and France had both declared war.\nDardanelles.\nBritain was concerned about Russian activity and Sir John Burgoyne, a senior advisor to Lord Aberdeen, urged for the Dardanelles to be occupied and works of sufficient strength to be built to block any Russian move to capture Constantinople and gain access to the Mediterranean. The Corps of Royal Engineers sent men to the Dardanelles, and Burgoyne went to Paris and met with the British ambassador and the French emperor. Lord Cowley wrote on 8 February to Burgoyne, \"Your visit to Paris has produced a visible change in the Emperor's views, and he is making every preparation for a land expedition in case the last attempt at negotiation should break down\".\nBurgoyne and his team of engineers inspected and surveyed the Dardanelles area in February. They were fired on by Russian riflemen when they went to Varna. A team of sappers arrived in March, and major building works commenced on a seven-mile line of defence, which was designed to block the Gallipoli Peninsula. French sappers worked on half of the line, which was finished in May.\nPeace attempts.\nNicholas felt that because of Russian assistance in suppressing the Hungarian Revolution of 1848, Austria would side with him or at the very least remain neutral. Austria, however, felt threatened by the Russian troops in the Balkans. On 27 February 1854, the United Kingdom and France demanded the withdrawal of Russian forces from the principalities. Austria supported them and, without declaring war on Russia, refused to guarantee its neutrality. Russia's rejection of the ultimatum proved to be the justification used by Britain and France to enter the war.\nRussia soon withdrew its troops from the Danubian Principalities, which were then occupied by Austria for the duration of the war. That removed the original grounds for war, but the British and the French continued with hostilities. Determined to address the Eastern Question by putting an end to the Russian threat to the Ottomans, the allies in August 1854 proposed the \"Four Points\" for ending the conflict in addition to the Russian withdrawal:\nThose points, particularly the third, would require clarification through negotiations, which Russia refused. The allies, including Austria, therefore agreed that Britain and France should take further military action to prevent further Russian aggression against the Ottomans. Britain and France agreed on the invasion of Crimea as the first step.\nBattles.\nDanube campaign.\nThe Danube campaign opened when the Russians occupied the Danubian Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia in July 1853, which brought their forces to the north bank of the River Danube. In response, the Ottoman Empire also moved its forces up to the river, establishing strongholds at Vidin in the west and Silistra in the east, near the mouth of the Danube. The Ottoman move up the River Danube was also of concern to the Austrians, who moved forces into Transylvania in response. However, the Austrians had begun to fear the Russians more than the Ottomans. Indeed, like the British, the Austrians were now coming to see that an intact Ottoman Empire was necessary as a bulwark against the Russians. Accordingly, Austria resisted Russian diplomatic attempts to join the war but remained neutral during the Crimean War.\nAfter the Ottoman ultimatum in September 1853, forces under Ottoman General Omar Pasha crossed the Danube at Vidin and captured Calafat in October 1853. Simultaneously, in the east, the Ottomans crossed the Danube at Silistra and attacked the Russians at Olteni\u021ba. The resulting Battle of Olteni\u021ba was the first engagement since the declaration of war. The Russians counterattacked but were beaten back. On 31 December 1853, the Ottoman forces at Calafat moved against the Russian force at Chetatea or Cetate, a small village nine miles north of Calafat, and engaged it on 6 January 1854. The battle began when the Russians made a move to recapture Calafat. Most of the heavy fighting took place in and around Chetatea until the Russians were driven out of the village. Despite the setback at Chetatea, Russian forces on 28 January 1854 laid siege to Calafat. The siege would continue until May 1854 when it was lifted by the Russians. The Ottomans would also later beat the Russians in battle at Caracal.\nIn early 1854, the Russians again advanced by crossing the River Danube into the Turkish province of Dobruja. By April 1854, the Russians had reached the lines of Trajan's Wall, where they were finally halted. In the centre, the Russian forces crossed the Danube and laid siege to Silistra from 14 April with 60,000 troops. The defenders had 15,000 troops and supplies for three months. The siege was lifted on 23 June 1854. The British and the French could not then take the field for lack of equipment.\nIn the west, the Russians were dissuaded from attacking Vidin by the presence of the Austrian forces, which had swollen to 280,000 men. On 28 May 1854, a protocol of the Vienna Conference was signed by Austria and Russia. One of the aims of the Russian advance had been to encourage the Orthodox Christian Serbs and Bulgarians who were living under Ottoman rule to rebel. When the Russian troops crossed the River Prut into Moldavia, the Orthodox Christians showed no interest in rising up against the Ottomans. Adding to Nicholas I's worries was the concern that Austria would enter the war against the Russians and attack his armies on the western flank. Indeed, after attempting to mediate a peaceful settlement between Russia and the Ottomans, the Austrians entered the war on the side of the Ottomans with an attack against the Russians in the Danubian Principalities which threatened to cut off the Russian supply lines. Accordingly, the Russians were forced to raise the siege of Silistra on 23 June 1854 and to begin abandoning the principalities. The lifting of the siege reduced the threat of a Russian advance into Bulgaria.\nIn June 1854, the Allied expeditionary force landed at Varna, a city on the Black Sea's western coast, but made little advance from its base there. Karl Marx was noted to have quipped that \"there they are, the French doing nothing and the British helping them as fast as possible\". In July 1854, the Ottomans, under Omar Pasha, crossed the Danube into Wallachia and on 7 July 1854 engaged the Russians in the city of Giurgiu and conquered it. The capture of Giurgiu by the Ottomans immediately threatened Bucharest in Wallachia with capture by the same Ottoman army. On 26 July 1854, Nicholas I, responding to an Austrian ultimatum, ordered the withdrawal of Russian troops from the principalities. Also, in late July 1854, following up on the Russian retreat, the French staged an expedition against the Russian forces still in Dobruja, but it was a failure.\nBy then, the Russian withdrawal was complete, except for the fortress towns of northern Dobruja, and Russia's place in the principalities was taken by the Austrians as a neutral peacekeeping force. There was little further action on that front after late 1854, and in September, the allied force boarded ships at Varna to invade Crimea.\nBlack Sea theatre.\nThe naval operations of the Crimean War commenced with the dispatch in mid-1853 of the French and the British fleets to the Black Sea region, to support the Ottomans and to dissuade the Russians from encroachment. By June 1853, both fleets had been stationed at Besikas Bay, outside the Dardanelles. With the Russian occupation of the Danube Principalities in July 1853, they moved to the Bosphorus, and on 3 January 1854, they entered the Black Sea.\nMeanwhile, the Russian Black Sea Fleet operated against Ottoman coastal traffic between Constantinople and the Caucasus ports, and the Ottoman fleet sought to protect the supply line. The clash came on 30 November 1853, when a Russian fleet attacked an Ottoman force in the harbour at Sinop and destroyed it at the Battle of Sinop. The battle outraged British public opinion, which called for war. There was little additional naval action until March 1854, when after the declaration of war, the British frigate was fired on outside Odessa Harbour. In response an Anglo-French fleet bombarded the port and caused much damage to the town. To show support for the Ottomans after the Battle of Sinop, on 22 December 1853, the Anglo-French squadron entered the Black Sea and the steamship HMS \"Retribution\" approached the Port of Sevastopol. Its commander received an ultimatum not to allow any ships in the Black Sea.\nIn June, the fleets transported the Allied expeditionary forces to Varna to support the Ottoman operations on the Danube. In September they again transported the armies, this time to Crimea. The Russian fleet then declined to engage the allies but preferred to maintain a \"fleet in being\", a strategy that failed when Sevastopol, the main port and the base of most of the Black Sea fleet, came under siege. The Russians were reduced to scuttling their warships as blockships after they had stripped them of their guns and men to reinforce batteries on shore. During the siege, the Russians lost four 110- or 120-gun, three-decker ships of the line, twelve 84-gun two-deckers and four 60-gun frigates in the Black Sea, as well as a large number of smaller vessels. During the rest of the campaign, the allied fleets remained in control of the Black Sea and ensured that the various fronts were kept supplied.\nIn May 1855, the allies successfully invaded Kerch and operated against Taganrog in the Sea of Azov. In September, they moved against Russian installations in the Dnieper estuary by attacking Kinburn in the first use of ironclad ships in naval warfare.\nCrimean campaign.\nThe Russians evacuated Wallachia and Moldavia in late July 1854. Therefore, the immediate cause of war had now been withdrawn, and the war might have then ended. However, war fever among the public in both Britain and France had been whipped up by the press in both countries to the degree that politicians found it untenable to propose immediately ending the war. The coalition government of George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen, fell on 30 January 1855 on a no-confidence vote, as Parliament voted to appoint a committee to investigate the mismanagement of the war.\nFrench and British officers and engineers were sent on 20 July on \"Fury\", a wooden \"Bulldog\"-class paddle sloop, to survey the harbour of Sevastopol and the coast near it. They managed to get close to the harbour mouth to inspect the formidable batteries. Returning, they reported that they believed that 15,000\u201320,000 troops were encamped. Ships were prepared to transport horses, and siege equipment was both manufactured and imported.\nThe Crimean campaign opened in September 1854. In seven columns, 360 ships sailed, each steamer towing two sailing ships. Anchoring on 13 September in the bay of Yevpatoria, the town surrendered, and 500 marines landed to occupy it. The town and the bay would provide a fallback position in case of disaster. The ships then sailed east to make the landing of the allied expeditionary force on the sandy beaches of Kalamita Bay, on the south-west coast of Crimea. The landing surprised the Russians, as they had expected a landing at Katcha. The last-minute change proved that Russia had known the original campaign plan. There was no sign of the enemy and so all of the invading troops landed on 14 September 1854. It took another four days to land all of the stores, equipment, horses and artillery.\nThe landing took place north of Sevastopol and so the Russians had arrayed their army in expectation of a direct attack. The allies advanced and on the morning of 20 September came up to the River Alma and engaged the Russian Army. The Russian position was strong, but after three hours, the allied frontal attack had driven the Russians out of their dug-in positions with losses of 6,000 men. The Battle of the Alma resulted in 3,300 Allied losses. Failing to pursue the retreating forces was one of many strategic errors made during the war, and the Russians themselves noted that if the allies had pressed south that day, they would have easily captured Sevastopol.\nBelieving the northern approaches to the city too well defended, especially because of the presence of a large star fort and the city being on the south side of Sevastopol Bay, Sir John Burgoyne, the engineer advisor, recommended for the allies attack to Sevastopol from the south. The joint commanders, Raglan and Saint-Arnaud, agreed. On 25 September, the whole army began to march southeast and encircled the city from the south after it had established port facilities at Balaclava for the British and at Kamiesch () for the French. The Russians retreated into the city.\nThe Allied armies moved without problems to the south, and the heavy artillery was brought ashore with batteries and connecting trenches built. By 10 October, some batteries were ready, and by 17 October, when the bombardment commenced\u2014126 guns were firing, 53 of them French. The fleet meanwhile engaged the shore batteries. The British bombardment worked better than that of the French, who had smaller-calibre guns. The fleet suffered high casualties during the day. The British wanted to attack that afternoon, but the French wanted to defer the attack.\nA postponement was agreed, but on the next day, the French were still not ready. By 19 October the Russians had transferred some heavy guns to the southern defences and had outgunned the allies.\nReinforcements for the Russians gave them the courage to send out probing attacks. The Allied lines, beginning to suffer from cholera as early as September, were stretched. The French, on the west, had less to do than the British on the east, with their siege lines and the large nine-mile open wing back to their supply base on the south coast.\nBattle of Balaclava.\nA large Russian assault on the allied supply base to the southeast at Balaclava was rebuffed on 25 October 1854. The Battle of Balaclava is remembered in Britain for the actions of two British units. At the start of the battle, a large body of Russian cavalry charged the 93rd Highlanders, who were posted north of the village of Kadikoi. Commanding them was Sir Colin Campbell. Rather than \"form square\", the traditional method of repelling cavalry, Campbell took the risky decision to have his Highlanders form a single line two men deep. Campbell had seen the effectiveness of the new Mini\u00e9 rifles with which his troops were armed at the Battle of Alma, a month earlier, and he was confident that his men could beat back the Russians. His tactics succeeded. From up on the ridge to the west, the \"Times\" correspondent William Howard Russell saw the Highlanders as a \"thin red streak topped with steel\", a phrase which soon became the \"Thin Red Line\".\nSoon afterward, a Russian cavalry movement was countered by the Heavy Brigade, which charged and fought hand to hand until the Russians retreated. That caused a more widespread Russian retreat, including a number of their artillery units. After the local commanders had failed to take advantage of the retreat, Lord Raglan sent out orders to move up and to prevent the withdrawal of naval guns from the recently captured redoubts on the heights. Raglan could see those guns because of his position on the hill. In the valley, that view was obstructed, and the wrong guns were in sight to the left. The local commanders ignored the demands, which led to the British aide-de-camp, Captain Louis Nolan, personally delivering the quickly-written and confusing order to attack the artillery. When Lord Lucan questioned to which guns the order referred, the aide-de-camp pointed to the first Russian battery that he could see and allegedly said \"There is your enemy, there are your guns\", because of his obstructed view, which were wrong. Lucan then passed the order to the Earl of Cardigan, which resulted in the Charge of the Light Brigade.\nIn that charge, Cardigan formed up his unit and charged the length of the Valley of the Balaclava, under fire from Russian batteries in the hills. The charge of the Light Brigade caused 278 casualties of the 700-man unit. The Light Brigade was memorialised in the famous poem by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, \"The Charge of the Light Brigade\". Although traditionally, the charge of the Light Brigade was looked upon as a glorious but wasted sacrifice of good men and horses, recent historians believe that the charge of the Light Brigade succeeded in at least some of its objectives. The aim of any cavalry charge is to scatter the enemy's lines and frighten the enemy off the battlefield. The Charge of the Light Brigade so unnerved the Russian cavalry, which had been routed by the Charge of the Heavy Brigade, that the Russians were set to full-scale flight.\nThe shortage of men led to the failure of the British and the French to follow up on the Battle of Balaclava, which led directly to the much bloodier Battle of Inkerman. On 5 November 1854, the Russians attempted to raise the siege at Sevastopol with an attack against the allies, which resulted in another allied victory.\nWinter of 1854\u20131855.\nWinter weather and a deteriorating supply of troops and materiel on both sides led to a halt in ground operations. Sevastopol remained invested by the allies, whose armies were hemmed in by the Imperial Russian Army in the interior. On 14 November, the \"Balaklava Storm\", a major weather event, sank 30 allied transport ships, including , which was carrying a cargo of winter clothing.\nThe storm and the heavy traffic caused the road from the coast to the troops to disintegrate into a quagmire, which required engineers to devote most of their time to its repair, including by quarrying stone. A tramway was ordered and arrived in January with a civilian engineering crew, but it took until March before it had become sufficiently advanced to be of any appreciable value. An electrical telegraph was also ordered, but the frozen ground delayed its installation until March, when communications from the base port of Balaklava to the British HQ was established. The pipe-and-cable-laying plough failed because of the hard frozen soil, but nevertheless of cable were laid.\nThe troops suffered greatly from cold and sickness, and the shortage of fuel led them to start dismantling their defensive gabions and fascines. In February 1855, the Russians attacked the allied base at Eupatoria, where an Ottoman army had built up and was threatening Russian supply routes. The Russians were defeated at the Battle of Eupatoria, leading to a change in their command.\nThe strain of directing the war had taken its toll on the health of Tsar Nicholas. Full of remorse for the disasters that he had caused, he caught pneumonia and died on 2 March.\nSiege of Sevastopol.\nThe allies had had time to consider the problem, and the French were brought around to agree that the key to the defence was the Malakoff. Emphasis of the siege at Sevastopol shifted to the British left against the fortifications on Malakoff Hill. In March, there was fighting by the French over a new fort being built by the Russians at Mamelon, on a hill in front of the Malakoff. Several weeks of fighting resulted in little change in the front line, and the Mamelon remained in Russian hands.\nIn April 1855, the allies staged a second all-out bombardment, which led to an artillery duel with the Russian guns, but no ground assault followed.\nOn 24 May 1855, 60 ships, containing 7,000 French, 5,000 Turkish and 3,000 British troops, set off for a raid on the city of Kerch, east of Sevastopol, in an attempt to open another front in Crimea and to cut off Russian supplies. When the allies landed the force at Kerch, the plan was to outflank the Russian Army. The landings were successful, but the force made little progress thereafter.\nMany more artillery pieces had arrived and had been dug into batteries. The first general assault of Sevastopol took place on 18 June 1855. There is a legend that the assault was scheduled for that date in favour of Napoleon III in the 40th anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo, but the legend is not confirmed by historians. However, the appearance of such a legend is undoubtedly symptomatic since the war in France was understood as a certain revanche for the defeat of 1812.\nIn June, a third bombardment was followed after two days by a successful attack on the Mamelon, but a follow-up assault on the Malakoff failed with heavy losses. Meanwhile, the garrison commander, Admiral Pavel Nakhimov, fell on 30 June 1855, and Raglan died on 28 June. Losses in those battles were so great that by agreement of military opponents short-term truces for removal of corpses were signed (these truces were described in the work of Leo Tolstoy \"Sevastopol Sketches\"). The assault was beaten back with heavy casualties and in an undoubted victory for Russia. The Russian Siege of Sevastopol (panorama) depicts the moment of the assault of Sevastopol on 18 June 1855.\nIn August, the Russians again made an attack towards the base at Balaclava, which was defended by the French, newly arrived and Ottoman troops. The resulting Battle of the Chernaya was a defeat for the Russians, who suffered heavy casualties.\nFor months, each side had been building forward rifle pits and defensive positions, which resulted in many skirmishes. Artillery fire aimed to gain superiority over the enemy guns. The final assault was made on 5 September, when another French bombardment (the sixth) was followed by an assault by the French Army on 8 September and resulted in the French capture of the Malakoff fort. The Russians failed to retake it and their defences collapsed. Meanwhile, the British assaulted the Great Redan, a Russian defensive battlement just south of the city of Sevastopol, a position that had been attacked repeatedly for months. Whether the British captured the Redan remains in dispute: Russian historians recognise only the loss of the Malakhov Kurgan, a key point of defence, claiming that all other positions were retained. What is agreed is that the Russians abandoned the positions, blew up their powder magazines and retreated to the north. The city finally fell on 9 September 1855, after a 337-day-long siege.\nBoth sides were now exhausted, and no further military operations were launched in Crimea before the onset of winter. The main objective of the siege was the destruction of the Russian fleet and docks and took place over the winter. On 28 February, multiple mines blew up the five docks, the canal, and three locks.\nAzov campaign.\nIn early 1855, the allied Anglo-French commanders decided to send an Anglo-French naval squadron into the Azov Sea to undermine Russian communications and supplies to besieged Sevastopol. On 12 May 1855, Anglo-French warships entered the Kerch Strait and destroyed the coast battery of the Kamishevaya Bay. Once through the Kerch Strait, British and French warships struck at every vestige of Russian power along the coast of the Sea of Azov. Except for Rostov and Azov, no town, depot, building or fortification was immune from attack, and Russian naval power ceased to exist almost overnight. This Allied campaign led to a significant reduction in supplies flowing to the besieged Russian troops at Sevastopol.\nOn 21 May 1855, the gunboats and armed steamers attacked the seaport of Taganrog, the most important hub near Rostov-on-Don. The vast amounts of food, especially bread, wheat, barley and rye, that were amassed in the city after the outbreak of war were prevented from being exported.\nThe governor of Taganrog, Yegor Tolstoy, and Lieutenant-General Ivan Krasnov refused an allied ultimatum by responding, \"Russians never surrender their cities\". The Anglo-French squadron bombarded Taganrog for 6&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442\u00a0hours and landed 300 troops near the Old Stairway in the centre of Taganrog, but they were thrown back by Don Cossacks and a volunteer corps.\nIn July 1855, the allied squadron tried to go past Taganrog to Rostov-on-Don by entering the River Don through the Mius River. On 12 July 1855 HMS\u00a0\"Jasper\" grounded near Taganrog thanks to a fisherman who moved buoys into shallow water. The Cossacks captured the gunboat with all of its guns and blew it up. The third siege attempt was made 19\u201331 August 1855, but the city was already fortified, and the squadron could not approach close enough for landing operations. The allied fleet left the Gulf of Taganrog on 2 September 1855, with minor military operations along the Azov Sea coast continuing until late 1855.\nCaucasus theatre.\nAs in the previous wars, the Caucasus front was secondary to what happened in the west. Perhaps because of better communications, western events sometimes influenced the east. The main events were the second capture of Kars and a landing on the Georgian coast. Several commanders on both sides were either incompetent or unlucky, and few fought aggressively.\n1853: There were four main events. 1. In the north, the Ottomans captured the border fort of Saint Nicholas in a surprise night attack (27/28 October). They then pushed about 20,000 troops across the Choloki river border. Being outnumbered, the Russians abandoned Poti and Redoubt Kali and drew back to Marani. Both sides remained immobile for the next seven months. 2. In the centre the Ottomans moved north from Ardahan to within cannon-shot of Akhaltsike and awaited reinforcements (13 November), but the Russians routed them. The claimed losses were 4,000 Turks and 400 Russians. 3. In the south about 30,000 Turks slowly moved east to the main Russian concentration at Gyumri or Alexandropol (November). They crossed the border and set up artillery south of town. Prince Vakhtang Orbeliani tried to drive them off and found himself trapped. The Ottomans failed to press their advantage; the remaining Russians rescued Orbeliani and the Ottomans retired west. Orbeliani lost about 1,000 men from 5,000. The Russians now decided to advance. The Ottomans took up a strong position on the Kars road and attacked-only to be defeated in the Battle of Ba\u015fgedikler, losing 6,000 men, half their artillery and all of their supply train. The Russians lost 1,300, including Prince Orbeliani. This was Prince Ellico Orbeliani, whose wife was later kidnapped by Imam Shamil at Tsinandali. 4. At sea the Turks sent a fleet east, which was destroyed by Admiral Nakhimov at Sinope.\n1854: The British and French declared war on 28 March. Early in the year on 3 January, the Anglo-French fleet appeared in the Black Sea, and the Russians abandoned the Black Sea Defensive Line from Anapa south. Nikolay Muravyov, who replaced Vorontsov, fearing an Anglo-French landing in conjunction with Shamil, 3rd Imam of Dagestan and the Persians, recommended withdrawal north of the Caucasus. For that purpose, he was replaced by Aleksandr Baryatinsky. When the allies chose a land attack on Sevastopol, any plan for a landing in the east was abandoned.\nIn the north, Georgiy Evseevich Eristov pushed southwest, fought two battles, forced the Ottomans back to Batumi, retired behind the Cholok river and suspended action for the rest of the year (June). In the far south, Wrangel pushed west, fought a battle and occupied Bayazit. In the centre. the main forces stood at Kars and Gyumri. Both slowly approached along the Kars-Gyumri road and faced each other, neither side choosing to fight (June\u2013July). On 4 August, Russian scouts saw a movement which they thought was the start of a withdrawal, the Russians advanced and the Ottomans attacked first. They were defeated and lost 8,000 men to the Russian 3,000. Also, 10,000 irregulars deserted to their villages. Both sides withdrew to their former positions. About then, the Persians made a semi-secret agreement to remain neutral in exchange for the cancellation of the indemnity from the previous war.\n1855: Siege of Kars: Up to May 1855, Ottomans forces in the east were reduced from 120,000 to 75,000, mostly by disease. The local Armenian population kept Muravyov well-informed about the Ottomans at Kars and he judged they had about five months of supplies. He therefore decided to control the surrounding area with cavalry and starve them out. He started in May and by June was south and west of the town. A relieving force fell back and there was a possibility of taking Erzurum, but Muravyov chose not to. In late September he learned of the fall of Sevastopol and a Turkish landing at Batum. This led him to reverse policy and try a direct attack. It failed, the Russians losing 8,000 men and the Turks 1,500 (29 September). The blockade continued and Kars surrendered on 28 November.\n1855: Georgian coast: Omar Pasha, the Turkish commander at Crimea had long wanted to land in Georgia, but the western powers vetoed it. When they relented in August most of the campaigning season was lost. In 8 September Turks landed at Batum, but the main concentration was at Sukhum Kale. This required a 100-mile march south through a country with poor roads. In essence, it was a military demonstration in order to frighten the Russian command and force it to lift the siege of the fortress of Kars. \"All luck depended on whether Muravyov (the Russian commander) would be scared or not\". But the Russian command did not see a serious threat, the Siege of Kars was continued. The Russians planned to hold the line of the Ingur river which separates Abkhazia from Georgia proper. Omar crossed the Ingur on 7 November and then wasted a great deal of time, the Russians doing little. By 2 December he had reached the Tskhenistsqali, the rainy season had started, his camps were submerged in mud and there was no bread. Learning of the fall of Kars he withdrew to the Ingur. The Russians did nothing and he evacuated to Batum in February of the following year.\nBaltic theatre.\nThe first hostile armed action of the two Western allies against Russia was the appearance of the British and French fleets in the Baltic Sea. However, the Allies understood the large number of Russian forces in this region to protect the capital. Therefore, the actions of the Anglo-French troops in this area were aimed at keeping the Russian command on alert and preventing the dispatch of troops to strengthen the defense of the southern part of the country. As a result, small-scale attacks and measures were carried out to disrupt Russian merchant shipping.\nThe Baltic was a forgotten theatre of the Crimean War. Popularisation of events elsewhere overshadowed the significance of this theatre, which was close to Saint Petersburg, the Russian capital. In April 1854, an Anglo-French fleet entered the Baltic to attack the Russian naval base of Kronstadt and the Russian fleet that was stationed there. In August 1854, the combined British and French fleet returned to Kronstadt for another attempt. The outnumbered Russian Baltic Fleet confined its movements to the areas around its fortifications. At the same time, the British and French commanders Sir Charles Napier and Alexandre Ferdinand Parseval-Deschenes although they led the largest fleet assembled since the Napoleonic Wars, considered the Sveaborg fortress too well-defended to engage. Thus, shelling of the Russian batteries was limited to two attempts in 1854 and 1855, and initially, the attacking fleets limited their actions to blockading Russian trade in the Gulf of Finland. Naval attacks on other ports, such as the ones in the island of Hogland in the Gulf of Finland, proved more successful. Additionally, allies conducted raids on less fortified sections of the Finnish coast. These battles are known in Finland as the \u00c5land War.\nRussia depended on imports\u2014both for its domestic economy and for the supply of its military forces: the blockade forced Russia to rely on more expensive overland shipments from Prussia. The blockade seriously undermined the Russian export economy and helped shorten the war.\nThe burning of tar warehouses and ships led to international criticism, and in London the MP Thomas Milner Gibson demanded in the House of Commons that the First Lord of the Admiralty explain \"a system which carried on a great war by plundering and destroying the property of defenceless villagers\".\nIn fact, the operations in the Baltic sea were in the nature of binding forces. It was very important to divert Russian forces from the south or, more precisely, not to allow Nicholas to transfer to Crimea a huge army guarding the Baltic coast and the capital. This goal Anglo-French forces achieved. The Russian Army in Crimea was forced to act without superiority in forces.\nIn August 1854 a Franco-British naval force captured and destroyed the Russian Bomarsund fortress on \u00c5land Islands. In the August 1855, the Western Allied Baltic Fleet tried to destroy heavily defended Russian dockyards at Sveaborg outside Helsinki. More than 1,000 enemy guns tested the strength of the fortress for two days. Despite the shelling, the sailors of the 120-gun ship \"Rossiya\", led by Captain Viktor Poplonsky, defended the entrance to the harbour. The Allies fired over 20,000 shells but failed to defeat the Russian batteries. The British then built a massive new fleet of more than 350 gunboats and mortar vessels, which was known as the Great Armament, but the war ended before the attack was launched.\nPart of the Russian resistance was credited to the deployment of newly invented naval mines. Perhaps the most influential contributor to the development of naval mining was a Swede resident in Russia, the inventor and civil engineer Immanuel Nobel (the father of Alfred Nobel). Immanuel Nobel helped the Russian war effort by applying his knowledge of industrial explosives, such as nitroglycerin and gunpowder. An account given in 1860 by United States Army Major Richard Delafield dates modern naval mining to the Crimean War: \"Torpedo mines, if I may use this name given by Fulton to 'self-acting mines underwater', were among the novelties attempted by the Russians in their defences about Cronstadt and Sevastopol.\"\nFor the campaign of 1856, Britain and France planned an attack on the main base of the Russian Navy in the Baltic sea\u2014Kronstadt. The attack was to be carried out using armoured floating batteries. The use of the latter proved to be highly effective in the attack on Kinburn on the Black Sea in 1855. Undoubtedly, this threat contributed on the part of Russia the decision on the conclusion of peace on unfavourable terms.\nWhite Sea theatre.\nInitial British and subsequent Allied reconnaissance efforts all led to the unanimous conclusion that Archangel could not be successfully attacked because it could not even be reached by Allied warships. \nIn June 1854, a squadron of three British warships led by HMS\u00a0\"Miranda\" left the Baltic for the White Sea.\nAn attempt to find a deep-water fairway for the approach to Arkhangel was thwarted by Russian artillery fire.\n\"Ommanney and the two ships that accompanied him to the Solovetsky Islands were clearly surprised by the monastery\u2019s unexpected resistance\". An ultimatum was presented on the surrender of the fortress, it was rejected. \nOn July 19, 1854, artillery fire was conducted on the monastery for 6.5 hours. Hundreds of shots were fired. The fortress also responded with artillery fire. \u201cShot fell harmless on the massive outwork which encloses the Monastery\u201d. Concluding that there was nothing more to be done, Ommanney and his squadron left the anchorage soon.\nRussia's other northern centers, however, were not as fortunate. On August 20, 1854, British ships approached the town of Kola. \"In a scene repeated countless times over the next two years, a British ship\u2019s boat (...) approached the shore and, submitted conditional terms for the surrender of the Garrison\". And after \"red hot shot and explosive shells quickly and predictably combined with a \u201cfresh breeze\u201d to make Kola \u201cburn furiously\u201d, ill-armed garrison of 50 retired \nsoldiers, assisted by civilian volunteers, had no hope of defending the densely concentrated and irregularly spaced wooden houses, which were reduced \u201cto ashes\u201d during a daylong bombardment. Britain and France severely curtailed both local and international maritime trade throughout the region. \"British and French sources recounted learning from Russian ones, including Anton Pofkoff (or Pafkoff) of Kandalaksha, that the White Sea Districts and Kola were so ill-supplied that renewing a blockade in 1856 would probably result in these areas being \u201centirely deserted\u201d by their inhabitants.\nPacific theatre.\nMinor naval skirmishes also occurred in the Far East, where at Petropavlovsk on the Kamchatka Peninsula a British and French Allied squadron including under Rear Admiral David Price and a French force under Counter-Admiral Auguste Febvrier Despointes besieged a smaller Russian force under Rear Admiral Yevfimiy Putyatin. In September 1854, an Allied landing force was beaten back with heavy casualties, and the Allies withdrew. The victory at Petropavlovsk was for Russia in the words of the future Minister of War Dmitry Milyutin \"a ray of light among the dark clouds\". \n\"The French emperor was displeased. The emperor and his ministers were used to suffering losses (even more severe) in this war, but they were not used to defeat\". The following year, the Anglo-French fleet approached Petropavlovsk again, this time with twice the number of ships. The Russians escaped under the cover of snow in early 1855 after Allied reinforcements arrived in the region.\nThe Anglo-French forces in the Far East also made several small landings on Sakhalin and Urup, one of the Kuril Islands.\nPiedmontese involvement.\nCamillo di Cavour, under orders of Victor Emmanuel\u00a0II of Piedmont-Sardinia, sent an expeditionary corps of 15,000 soldiers, commanded by General Alfonso La Marmora, to side with French and British forces during the war. This was an attempt at gaining the favour of the French, especially when the issue of uniting Italy would become an important matter. The deployment of Italian troops to Crimea, and the gallantry shown by them in the Battle of the Chernaya (16 August 1855) and in the Siege of Sevastopol, allowed the Kingdom of Sardinia to be among the participants at the peace conference at the end of the war, where it could address the issue of the \"Risorgimento\" to other European powers.\nGreece.\nGreece played a peripheral role in the war. When Russia attacked the Ottoman Empire in 1853, King Otto of Greece saw an opportunity to expand north and south into Ottoman areas that had large Greek Christian majorities. Greece did not coordinate its plans with Russia, did not declare war, and received no outside military or financial support. Greece, an Orthodox nation, had considerable support in Russia, but the Russian government decided it was too dangerous to help Greece expand its holdings. When the Russians invaded the Principalities, the Ottoman forces were tied down so Greece invaded Thessaly and Epirus. To block further Greek moves, the British and French occupied the main Greek port at Piraeus from April 1854 to February 1857, and effectively neutralized the Greek Army. The Greeks, gambling on a Russian victory, incited the large-scale Epirus Revolt of 1854 as well as uprisings in Ottoman Crete. The insurrections were failures that were easily crushed by the Ottomans' allied Egyptian Army. Greece was not invited to the peace conference and made no gains out of the war. The frustrated Greek leadership blamed the King for failing to take advantage of the situation; his popularity plunged and he was forced to abdicate in 1862.\nIn addition, a 1,000-strong Greek Volunteer Legion was formed in the Danubian Principalities in 1854 and later fought at Sevastopol.\nKiev Cossack revolt.\nA peasant revolt that began in the Vasylkiv county of Kiev Governorate (province) in February 1855 spread across the whole Kiev and Chernigov governorates, with peasants refusing to participate in corv\u00e9e labour and other orders of the local authorities and, in some cases, attacking priests who were accused of hiding a decree about the liberation of the peasants.\nEnd of the war.\nBritish position.\nDissatisfaction with the conduct of the war was growing with the public in Britain and other countries and was worsened by reports of fiascos, especially the devastating losses of the Charge of the Light Brigade at the Battle of Balaclava. On Sunday, 21 January 1855, a \"snowball riot\" occurred in Trafalgar Square near St Martin-in-the-Fields in which 1,500 people gathered to protest against the war by pelting cabs and pedestrians with snowballs. When the police intervened, the snowballs were directed at the constables. The riot was finally put down by troops and police acting with truncheons. In Parliament, the Conservatives demanded an accounting of all soldiers, cavalry and sailors sent to Crimea and accurate figures as to the number of casualties sustained by all British armed forces in Crimea, especially concerning the Battle of Balaclava. When Parliament passed a bill to investigate by the vote of 305 to 148, Aberdeen said he had lost a vote of no confidence and resigned as prime minister on 30 January 1855. The veteran former Foreign Secretary Lord Palmerston became prime minister. Palmerston took a hard line and wanted to expand the war, foment unrest inside the Russian Empire and reduce the Russian threat to Europe permanently. Sweden\u2013Norway and Prussia were willing to join Britain and France, and Russia was isolated.\nPeace negotiations.\nFrance, which had sent far more soldiers to the war and suffered far more casualties than Britain had, wanted the war to end, as did Austria.\nNegotiations began in Paris in February 1856 and were surprisingly easy. France, under the leadership of Napoleon III, had no special interests in the Black Sea and so did not support the harsh British and Austrian proposals.\nPeace negotiations at the Congress of Paris resulted in the signing of the Treaty of Paris on 30 March 1856. In compliance with Article III, Russia restored to the Ottoman Empire the city and the citadel of Kars and \"all other parts of the Ottoman territory of which the Russian troop were in possession\". Russia returned the Southern Bessarabia to Moldavia. By Article IV, Britain, France, Sardinia and Ottoman Empire restored to Russia \"the towns and ports of Sevastopol, Balaklava, Kamish, Eupatoria, Kerch, Jenikale, Kinburn as well as all other territories occupied by the allied troops\". In conformity with Articles XI and XIII, the Tsar and the Sultan agreed not to establish any naval or military arsenal on the Black Sea coast. The Black Sea clauses weakened Russia, which no longer posed a naval threat to the Ottomans. The Principalities of Moldavia and Wallachia were nominally returned to the Ottoman Empire, and the Austrian Empire was forced to abandon its annexation and to end its occupation of them, but they in practice became independent. The Treaty of Paris admitted the Ottoman Empire to the Concert of Europe, and the great powers pledged to respect its independence and territorial integrity.\nAftermath in Russia.\nSome members of the Russian intelligentsia saw defeat as a pressure to modernise their society. Grand Duke Constantine, a son of the Tsar, remarked:\nLong-term effects.\nOrlando Figes points to the long-term damage Russia suffered:\n\"The demilitarization of the Black Sea was a major blow to Russia, which was no longer able to protect its vulnerable southern coastal frontier against the British or any other fleet... The destruction of the Russian Black Sea Fleet, Sevastopol and other naval docks was a humiliation. No compulsory disarmament had ever been imposed on a great power previously... The Allies did not really think that they were dealing with a European power in Russia. They regarded Russia as a semi-Asiatic state... In Russia itself, the Crimean defeat discredited the armed services and highlighted the need to modernize the country's defences, not just in the strictly military sense, but also through the building of railways, industrialization, sound finances and so on... The image many Russians had built up of their country\u2014the biggest, richest and most powerful in the world\u2014had suddenly been shattered. Russia's backwardness had been exposed... The Crimean disaster had exposed the shortcomings of every institution in Russia\u2014not just the corruption and incompetence of the military command, the technological backwardness of the army and navy, or the inadequate roads and lack of railways that accounted for the chronic problems of supply, but the poor condition and illiteracy of the serfs who made up the armed forces, the inability of the serf economy to sustain a state of war against industrial powers, and the failures of autocracy itself.\"\nSurprisingly, after the war, the Russian-French rapprochement came, which corresponded to the plans of both sides. France persuaded the Russians to support their claims to return to the territories before the Congress of Vienna, in exchange for ceasing to act as a guarantor of the Paris peace. Alexander II stated in response to his minister's remark: \"It would undoubtedly be more useful for our interests to have him among our allies if we could rely on him.\"\nThe Treaty of Paris stood until 1871, when Prussia defeated France in the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371. While Prussia and several other German states united to form a powerful German Empire in January 1871, the French deposed Emperor Napoleon III and proclaimed the French Third Republic (September 1870). During his reign, Napoleon, eager for the support of the United Kingdom, had opposed Russia over the Eastern Question. Russian interference in the Ottoman Empire did not in any significant manner threaten the interests of France (Kissinger uses Napoleon's pandering to journalists and public opinion on this subject\u2014at the expense of the true interests of France\u2014as an example of strategic frivolity), and France abandoned its opposition to Russia after the establishment of the republic. Encouraged by the new attitude of French diplomacy after the surrenders of the besieged French Army at Sedan and later Metz and supported by the German chancellor Otto von Bismarck, Russia in October 1870 renounced the Black Sea clauses of the treaty agreed to in 1856. As the United Kingdom with Austria-Hungary could not enforce the clauses, Russia once again established a fleet in the Black Sea.\nAfter being defeated in the Crimean War, Russia feared that Russian Alaska would be easily captured in any future war with the British; therefore, Alexander II opted to sell the territory to the United States.\nA Greek tortoise named Timothy was found on a Portuguese ship by Captain John Guy Courtenay-Everard on in 1854. Serving as a mascot throughout the war, when she died in 2004 this made her the last living veteran of the Crimean war.\nHistorian Norman Rich argues that the war was not an accident, but was sought out by the determination of the British and French not to allow Russia an honourable retreat. Both insisted on a military victory to enhance their prestige in European affairs when a non-violent peaceful political solution was available. The war then wrecked the Concert of Europe, which had long kept the peace.\nTurkish historian Candan Badem wrote, \"Victory in this war did not bring any significant material gain, not even a war indemnity. On the other hand, the Ottoman treasury was nearly bankrupted due to war expenses\". Badem adds that the Ottomans achieved no significant territorial gains, lost the right to a navy in the Black Sea, and failed to gain status as a great power. Further, the war gave impetus to the union of the Danubian principalities and ultimately to their independence.\nThe treaty punished the defeated Russia, but in the long run, Austria lost the most from the war despite having barely taken part in it. Having abandoned its alliance with Russia, Austria remained diplomatically isolated following the war, which contributed to its disastrous defeats in the 1859 Franco-Austrian War that resulted in the cession of Lombardy to the Kingdom of Sardinia and later in the loss of the Habsburg rule of Tuscany and Modena, which meant the end of Austrian influence in peninsular Italy. Furthermore, Russia did not do anything to assist its former ally, Austria, in the 1866 Austro-Prussian War, when Austria lost Venetia and, more importantly, its influence in most German-speaking lands. The status of Austria as a great power, with the unifications of Germany and Italy, now became very precarious. It had to compromise with Hungary; the two countries shared the Danubian Empire. With France now hostile to Germany and gravitating towards Russia, and with Russia competing with the newly renamed Austro-Hungarian Empire for an increased role in the Balkans at the expense of the Ottoman Empire, the foundations were in place for building the diplomatic alliances that would shape the First World War.\nThe Treaty's guarantees to preserve Ottoman territories were broken 21 years later when Russia, exploiting nationalist unrest in the Balkans and seeking to regain lost prestige, once again declared war on the Ottoman Empire on 24 April 1877. In this later Russo-Turkish War the states of Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro gained international recognition of their independence and Bulgaria achieved its autonomy from direct Ottoman rule. Russia took over Southern Bessarabia, lost in 1856. The regions of Batum and Kars, as well as those inhabited by Adjarians (Muslim Georgians) and Armenians, were also annexed to Russia in the Caucasus. At the same time, \"protectors\" of the Ottoman Empire Britain received Cyprus as a colonial possession, while Austria-Hungary occupied and annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1908. Finally, Ottoman rule in the Balkans ended after the First Balkan War of 1912, when the combined forces of the Balkan states defeated it.\nThe Crimean War marked the re-ascendancy of France to the position of pre-eminent power on the Continent, the continued decline of the Ottoman Empire and a period of crisis for Imperial Russia. As Fuller notes, \"Russia had been beaten on the Crimean Peninsula, and the military feared that it would inevitably be beaten again unless steps were taken to surmount its military weakness.\" To compensate for its defeat in the Crimean War, the Russian Empire then embarked in more intensive expansion in Asia, partially to restore national pride and partially to distract Britain on the world stage, intensifying the Great Game.\nThe war also marked the demise of the first phase of the Concert of Europe, the balance-of-power system that had dominated Europe since the Congress of Vienna in 1815 and had included France, Russia, Prussia, Austria and the United Kingdom. From 1854 to 1871, the Concert of Europe concept was weakened, leading to the crises that were the unifications of Germany and of Italy, before a resurgence of great power conferences.\nIn 1870, Prussia persuaded Russia to remain neutral in the Franco-Prussian war. Bismarck, having declared it impossible to keep 100\u00a0million Russians in a humiliated position without sovereign rights to their Black Sea coastline, supported Russia against the Treaty of Paris, and in return, Prussia achieved freedom of action against France in 1870\u201371 and inflicted a crushing defeat on it.\nAn envoy from India who visited the war front after arriving to Constantinople from a failed mission in England, Azimullah Khan observed exhaustion and fatigue in the British soldiers and set to exploit a perceived weak state of the British Empire upon his return which consequently planted the seeds for the Indian War of Independence.\nDebt.\nThe Crimean War marked the beginning of a prolonged period of debt dependence for the Ottoman Empire. In 1854 and 1855 the Ottoman government contracted its first large foreign loans\u2014\u00a33 million from Dent, Palmer &amp; Co. and \u00a35 million from the London Rothschilds\u2014at interest rates of 6 percent and 4 percent respectively, secured by the revenues from Egyptian taxes. Although these loans were considered relatively inexpensive and successfully financed the war effort, they established a precedent for external borrowing on European markets. During the following two decades, the Empire increasingly relied on foreign credit to cover budget deficits and to service earlier debts. By the 1870s, interest payments consumed a major share of state revenues, culminating in the suspension of payments in 1875 and the creation of the Ottoman Public Debt Administration in 1881. The financial legacy of the Crimean War thus extended far beyond the battlefield, entangling the Ottoman state in a cycle of dependency that limited its fiscal sovereignty for the remainder of its existence. The last of the Ottoman public debts were repaid by the Republic of Turkey in 1954, a full century after the first wartime loans were contracted.\nHistorical analysis.\nAccording to historian Shepard Clough, the war\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;was not the result of a calculated plan, nor even of hasty last-minute decisions made under stress. It was the consequence of more than two years of fatal blundering in slow-motion by inept statesmen who had months to reflect upon the actions they took. It arose from Napoleon's search for prestige; Nicholas's quest for control over the Straits; his na\u00efve miscalculation of the probable reactions of the European powers; the failure of those powers to make their positions clear; and the pressure of public opinion in Britain and Constantinople at crucial moments.\nThe view of \"diplomatic drift\" as the cause of the war was first popularised by A. W. Kinglake, who portrayed the British as victims of newspaper sensationalism and duplicitous French and Ottoman diplomacy.\nMore recently, historians Andrew Lambert and Winfried Baumgart have argued that Britain was following a geopolitical strategy in aiming to destroy the fledgling Russian Navy, which might challenge the Royal Navy for control of the seas, and that the war was also a joint European response to a century of Russian expansion not just southwards but also into Western Europe.\nCasualties.\nThe war undoubtedly became one of the bloodiest in the history of Europe at that time, but data on casualties vary greatly. The European states, Russia, France and Britain suffered the greatest losses. Sources agree on the definition of the losses of the last two, these are 95,615 dead on the part of France, 22,182 on the part of Britain and 2,166 dead Italians, Turkish losses range from 45,400 dead to 400,000. Data on losses among Russians also vary greatly. The minimum death toll is 73,125 dead, rising to 522,000. There are also data on 450,015 dead and killed. Historian Yevgeny Tarle described the war as a \"bloody massacre\".\nDocumentation.\nDocumentation of the war was provided by William Howard Russell, who wrote for \"The Times\" newspaper, and by Roger Fenton's photographs. News from war correspondents reached all of the nations involved in the war and kept the public citizenry of those nations better informed of the day-to-day events of the war than had been the case in any earlier war. The British public was very well informed on the day-to-day realities of the war. After the French extended the telegraph to the coast of the Black Sea in late 1854, news reached London in two days. When the British laid an underwater cable to Crimea in April 1855, news reached London in a few hours. The daily news reports energised public opinion, which brought down the Aberdeen government and carried Lord Palmerston into office as prime minister.\nLeo Tolstoy wrote a few short sketches on the Siege of Sevastopol, collected in \"Sevastopol Sketches\". The stories detail the lives of the Russian soldiers and citizens in Sevastopol during the siege. Because of this work, Tolstoy has been called the world's first war correspondent.\nCriticisms and reform.\nHistorian R. B. McCallum points out the war was enthusiastically supported by the British populace as it was happening, but the mood changed very dramatically afterwards. Pacifists and critics were unpopular but:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;in the end they won. Cobden and Bright were true to their principles of foreign policy, which laid down the absolute minimum of intervention in European affairs and a deep moral reprobation of war... When the first enthusiasm was passed, when the dead were mourned, the sufferings revealed, and the cost counted, when in 1870 Russia was able calmly to secure the revocation of the Treaty, which disarmed her in the Black Sea, the view became general of the war was stupid and unnecessary, and effected nothing... The Crimean war remained as a classic example... of how governments may plunge into war, how strong ambassadors may mislead weak prime ministers, how the public may be worked up into a facile fury, and how the achievements of the war may crumble to nothing. The Bright-Cobden criticism of the war was remembered and to a large extent accepted [especially by the Liberal Party]. Isolation from European entanglements seemed more than ever desirable.\nAs the memory of the \"Charge of the Light Brigade\" demonstrates, the war became an iconic symbol of logistical, medical and tactical failures and mismanagement. Public opinion in Britain was outraged at the logistical and command failures of the war; the newspapers demanded drastic reforms, and parliamentary investigations demonstrated the multiple failures of the army. The reform campaign was not well organised, and the traditional aristocratic leadership of the army pulled itself together, and blocked all serious reforms. No one was punished. The outbreak of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 shifted attention to the heroic defence of British interest by the army, and further talk of reform went nowhere. The demand for professionalisation was achieved by Florence Nightingale, who gained worldwide attention for pioneering and publicising modern nursing while treating the wounded. Another nurse, a Jamaican named Mary Seacole, also made an impact providing care for wounded and dying soldiers. \"The Times\" war correspondent William Howard Russell spoke highly of Seacole's skill as a healer, writing \"A more tender or skilful hand about a wound or a broken limb could not be found among our best surgeons.\"\nOutstanding achievements in battlefield surgery were done during the war of 1853\u201356. \"Nikolai Pirogov, who pioneered the system of field surgery that other nations came to only in the First World War\".\nThe Crimean War also saw the first tactical use of railways and other modern inventions, such as the electric telegraph, with the first \"live\" war reporting by Russell. Some credit Russell with prompting the resignation of the sitting British government through his reporting of the lacklustre condition of British forces deployed in Crimea. Additionally, the telegraph reduced the independence of British overseas possessions from their commanders in London due to such rapid communications. Newspaper readership informed public opinion in the United Kingdom and France as never before.\nThe Crimean War was a contributing factor in the Russian abolition of serfdom in 1861: Tsar Alexander\u00a0II (Nicholas I's son and successor) saw the military defeat of the Russian serf-army by free troops from Britain and France as proof of the need for emancipation. The Crimean War also led to the realisation by the Russian government of its technological inferiority, in military practices as well as weapons. Alexander also initiated the Great Reforms, which were aimed at strengthening and modernising the Russian state in the light of weaknesses revealed by the war.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistoriography and memory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nContemporary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46764", "revid": "38759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46764", "title": "Artiodactyl", "text": "Order of mammals\nArtiodactyls are placental mammals belonging to the order Artiodactyla ( ; from grc \" \"\u1f04\u03c1\u03c4\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2\" \u00e1rtios\"\u00a0'even' and \" \"\u03b4\u03ac\u03ba\u03c4\u03c5\u03bb\u03bf\u03c2\" d\u00e1ktylos\"\u00a0'finger, toe'). Typically, they are ungulates which bear weight equally on two (an even number) of their five toes (the third and fourth, often in the form of a hoof). The other three toes are either present, absent, vestigial, or pointing posteriorly. By contrast, most perissodactyls bear weight on an odd number of the five toes. Another difference between the two orders is that many artiodactyls (except for Suina) digest plant cellulose in one or more stomach chambers rather than in their intestine (as perissodactyls do). Molecular biology, along with new fossil discoveries, has found that cetaceans (whales, dolphins, and porpoises) fall within this taxonomic branch, being most closely related to hippopotamuses. Some modern taxonomists thus apply the name Cetartiodactyla () to this group, while others opt to include cetaceans within the existing name of Artiodactyla. Some researchers use \"even-toed ungulates\" to exclude cetaceans and only include terrestrial artiodactyls, making the term paraphyletic in nature.\nThe roughly 270 land-based even-toed ungulate species include pigs, peccaries, hippopotamuses, antelopes, deer, giraffes, camels, llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats and cattle. Many are herbivores, but suids are omnivorous, and cetaceans are entirely carnivorous. Artiodactyls are also known by many extinct groups such as anoplotheres, cainotheriids, merycoidodonts, entelodonts, anthracotheres, basilosaurids, and palaeomerycids. Many artiodactyls are of great dietary, economic, and cultural importance to humans.\nEvolutionary history.\nThe oldest fossils of even-toed ungulates date back to the early Eocene (about 53 million years ago). Since these findings almost simultaneously appeared in Europe, Asia, and North America, it is very difficult to accurately determine the origin of artiodactyls. The earliest artiodactyls did not significantly affect ungulate locomotor disparity in North America, which suggests that artiodactyls did not outcompete more basal ungulates through competitive exclusion. The oldest artidactyl fossils are classified as belonging to the family Diacodexeidae; their best-known and best-preserved member is \"Diacodexis\". These were small animals, some as small as a hare, with a slim build, lanky legs, and a long tail. Their hind legs were much longer than their front legs. The early to middle Eocene saw the emergence of the ancestors of most of today's mammals.\nTwo formerly widespread, but now extinct, families of even-toed ungulates were Entelodontidae and Anthracotheriidae. Entelodonts existed from the middle Eocene to the early Miocene in Eurasia and North America. They had a stocky body with short legs and a massive head, which was characterized by two humps on the lower jaw bone. Anthracotheres had a large, porcine (pig-like) build, with short legs and an elongated muzzle. This group appeared in the middle Eocene up until the Pliocene, and spread throughout Eurasia, Africa, and North America. Anthracotheres are thought to be the ancestors of hippos, and, likewise, probably led a similar aquatic lifestyle. Hippopotamuses appeared in the late Miocene and occupied Africa and Asia, but never got to the Americas.\nThe camels (Tylopoda) were, during large parts of the Cenozoic, limited to North America; early forms like Cainotheriidae occupied Europe. Among the North American camels were groups like the stocky, short-legged Merycoidodontidae. They first appeared in the late Eocene and developed a great diversity of species in North America. Only in the late Miocene or early Pliocene did they migrate from North America into Eurasia. The North American species became extinct around 10,000 years ago.\nSuina (including pigs) have been around since the Eocene. In the late Eocene or the Oligocene, two families stayed in Eurasia and Africa; the peccaries, which became extinct in the Old World, exist today only in the Americas.\nSouth America was settled by terrestrial even-toed ungulates only in the Pliocene, after the land bridge at the Isthmus of Panama formed some three million years ago. With only the peccaries, lamoids (or llamas), and various species of capreoline deer, South America has than other continents, except Australia, which has no (terrestrial) native species.\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nThe classification of artiodactyls was hotly debated because ocean-dwelling cetaceans evolved from land-dwelling even-toed ungulates. Some semiaquatic even-toed ungulates (hippopotamuses) are more closely related to ocean-dwelling cetaceans than to other even-toed ungulates.\nPhylogenetic classification only recognizes monophyletic taxa; that is, groups that descend from a common ancestor and include all of its descendants. To address this problem, the traditional order Artiodactyla and infraorder Cetacea are sometimes subsumed into the more inclusive Cetartiodactyla taxon. An alternative approach is to include both land-dwelling even-toed ungulates and ocean-dwelling cetaceans in a revised Artiodactyla taxon.\nClassification.\nOrder Artiodactyla/Clade Cetartiodactyla\nResearch history.\nIn the 1990s, biological systematics used not only morphology and fossils to classify organisms, but also molecular biology. Molecular biology involves sequencing an organism's DNA and RNA and comparing the sequence with that of other living beings; the more similar they are, the more closely they are related. Comparison of even-toed ungulate and cetaceans genetic material has shown that the closest living relatives of whales and hippopotamuses is the paraphyletic group Artiodactyla.\nDan Graur and Desmond Higgins were among the first to come to this conclusion, and included a paper published in 1994. However, they did not recognize hippopotamuses and classified the ruminants as the sister group of cetaceans. Subsequent studies established the close relationship between hippopotamuses and cetaceans; these studies were based on casein genes, SINEs, fibrinogen sequences, cytochrome and rRNA sequences, IRBP (and vWF) gene sequences, adrenergic receptors, and apolipoproteins.\nIn 2001, the fossil limbs of a \"Pakicetus\" (amphibioid cetacean the size of a wolf) and \"Ichthyolestes\" (an early whale the size of a fox) were found in Pakistan. They were both archaeocetes (\"ancient whales\") from about 48 million years ago (in the Eocene). These findings showed that archaeocetes were more terrestrial than previously thought, and that the special construction of the talus (ankle bone) with a double-rolled joint surface, previously thought to be unique to even-toed ungulates, were also in early cetaceans. The mesonychians, another type of ungulate, did not show this special construction of the talus, and thus was concluded to not have the same ancestors as cetaceans.\nThe oldest cetaceans date back to the early Eocene (53 million years ago), whereas the oldest known hippopotamus dates back only to the Miocene (15 million years ago). The hippopotamids are descended from the anthracotheres, a family of semiaquatic and terrestrial artiodactyls that appeared in the late Eocene, and are thought to have resembled small- or narrow-headed hippos. Research is therefore focused on anthracotheres (family Anthracotheriidae); one dating from the Eocene to Miocene was declared to be \"hippo-like\" upon discovery in the 19th century. A study from 2005 showed that the anthracotheres and hippopotamuses had very similar skulls, but differed in the adaptations of their teeth. It was nevertheless believed that cetaceans and anthracothereres descended from a common ancestor, and that hippopotamuses developed from anthracotheres. A study published in 2015 confirmed this, but also revealed that hippopotamuses were derived from older anthracotherians. The newly introduced genus \"Epirigenys\" from Eastern Africa is thus the sister group of hippos.\nHistorical classification of Artiodactyla.\nLinnaeus postulated a close relationship between camels and ruminants as early as the mid-1700s. Henri de Blainville recognized the similar anatomy of the limbs of pigs and hippos, and British zoologist Richard Owen coined the term \"even-toed ungulates\" and the scientific name \"Artiodactyla\" in 1848.\nInternal morphology (mainly the stomach and the molars) were used for classification. Suines (including pigs) and hippopotamuses have molars with well-developed roots and a simple stomach that digests food. Thus, they were grouped together as non-ruminants (porcine). All other even-toed ungulates have molars with a selenodont construction (crescent-shaped cusps) and have the ability to ruminate, which requires regurgitating food and re-chewing it. Differences in stomach construction indicated that rumination evolved independently between tylopods and ruminants; therefore, tylopods were excluded from Ruminantia.\nThe taxonomy that was widely accepted by the end of the 20th century was:\nHistorical classification of Cetacea.\nModern cetaceans are highly adapted sea creatures which, morphologically, have little in common with land mammals; they are similar to other marine mammals, such as seals and sea cows, due to convergent evolution. However, they evolved from originally terrestrial mammals. The most likely ancestors were long thought to be mesonychians; large, carnivorous animals from the early Cenozoic (Paleocene and Eocene), which had hooves instead of claws on their feet. Their molars were adapted to a carnivorous diet, resembling the teeth in modern toothed whales, and, unlike other mammals, had a uniform construction.\nThe then suspected relations were as follows:\nInner systematics.\nMolecular findings and morphological indications suggest that artiodactyls, as traditionally defined, are paraphyletic with respect to cetaceans. Cetaceans are deeply nested within the former; the two groups together form a monophyletic taxon, for which the name Cetartiodactyla is sometimes used. Modern nomenclature divides Artiodactyla (or Cetartiodactyla) in four subordinate taxa, camelids (Tylopoda), pigs and peccaries (Suina), ruminants (Ruminantia), and hippos plus cetaceans (Whippomorpha).\nThe presumed lineages within Artiodactyla can be represented in the following cladogram:\nThe four summarized Artiodactyla taxa are divided into ten extant families:\nAlthough deer, musk deer, and pronghorns have traditionally been summarized as cervids (Cervioidea), molecular studies provide different, and inconsistent, results, so the question of phylogenetic systematics of infraorder Pecora (the horned ruminants) for the time being, is not yet answered.\nAnatomy.\nApart from cetaceans, artiodactyls are generally quadrupeds. Two major body types are known: suinids and hippopotamuses are characterized by a stocky body, short legs, and a large head; camels and ruminants, though, have a more slender build and lanky legs. Size varies considerably; the smallest member, the mouse deer, often reaches a body length of only and a weight of . The largest member, the hippopotamus, can grow up to in length and weigh , and the giraffe can grow to be tall and in body length. All even-toed ungulates display some form of sexual dimorphism: the males are consistently larger and heavier than the females. In the majority of deer species, only the males grow antlers, and the horns of bovines are usually small or not present in females. Male Indian antelopes have a much darker coat than females. In cetaceans the two forelimbs have evolved into flippers, and the hind legs lost to external view; the largest cetaceans, up to long, are considerably larger than any other artiodactyls.\nAlmost all even-toed ungulates have fur, with the exception being the nearly hairless hippopotamus. Fur varies in length and coloration depending on the habitat. Species in cooler regions can shed their coat in summer. Camouflaged coats come in colors of yellow, gray, brown, or black tones. Cetaceans are largely hairless, apart from a few small facial whiskers.\nLimbs.\nEven-toed ungulates bear their name because they have an even number of toes (two or four). In some peccaries, the hind legs have a reduction in the number of toes to three. The central axis of the leg is between the third and fourth toe. The first toe is missing in modern artiodactyls, and can only be found in now-extinct genera. The second and fifth toes are adapted differently between species:\nWhen camels have only two toes present, the claws are transformed into nails (while both are made of keratin, claws are curved and pointed while nails are flat and blunt). These claws consist of three parts: the plate (top and sides), the sole (bottom), and the bale (rear). In general, the claws of the forelegs are wider and blunter than those of the hind legs, and they are farther apart. Aside from camels, all even-toed ungulates put just the tip of the foremost phalanx on the ground.\nIn even-toed ungulates, the bones of the stylopodium (upper arm or thigh bone) and zygopodiums (tibia and fibula) are usually elongated. The muscles of the limbs are predominantly localized, which ensures that artiodactyls often have very slender legs. A clavicle is never present, and the scapula is very agile and swings back and forth for added mobility when running. The special construction of the legs causes the legs to be unable to rotate, which allows for greater stability when running at high speeds. In addition, many smaller artiodactyls have a very flexible body, contributing to their speed by increasing their stride length.\nHead.\nMany even-toed ungulates have a relatively large head. The skull is elongated and rather narrow; the frontal bone is enlarged near the back and displaces the parietal bone, which forms only part of the side of the cranium (especially in ruminants).\nHorns and antlers.\nFour families of even-toed ungulates have cranial appendages. These Pecora (with the exception of the musk deer), have one of four types of cranial appendages: true horns, antlers, ossicones, or pronghorns.\n\"True horns\" have a bone core that is covered in a permanent sheath of keratin, and are found only in the bovids. \"Antlers\" are bony structures that are shed and replaced each year; they are found in deer (members of the family Cervidae). They grow from a permanent outgrowth of the frontal bone called the pedicle and can be branched, as in the white-tailed deer (\"Odocoileus virginianus\"), or palmate, as in the moose (\"Alces alces\"). \"Ossicones\" are permanent bone structures that fuse to the frontal or parietal bones during an animal's life and are found only in the Giraffidae. \"Pronghorns\", while similar to horns in that they have keratinous sheaths covering permanent bone cores, are deciduous.\nAll these cranial appendages can serve for posturing, battling for mating privilege, and for defense. In almost all cases, they are sexually dimorphic, and are often found only on the males. One exception is the species \"Rangifer tarandus\", known as reindeer in Europe or caribou in North America, where both sexes can grow antlers yearly, though the females' antlers are typically smaller and not always present.\nTeeth.\nThere are two trends in terms of teeth within Artiodactyla. The Suina and hippopotamuses have a relatively large number of teeth (with some pigs having 44); their dentition is more adapted to a squeezing mastication, which is characteristic of omnivores. Camels and ruminants have fewer teeth; there is often a yawning diastema, a designated gap in the teeth where the molars are aligned for crushing plant matter.\nThe incisors are often reduced in ruminants, and are completely absent in the upper jaw. The canines are enlarged and tusk-like in the Suina, and are used for digging in the ground and for defense. In ruminants, the males' upper canines are enlarged and used as a weapon in certain species (mouse deer, musk deer, water deer); species with frontal weapons are usually missing the upper canines. The lower canines of ruminants resemble the incisors, so that these animals have eight uniform teeth in the frontal part of the lower jaw.\nThe molars of porcine have only a few bumps. In contrast, camels and ruminants have bumps that are crescent-shaped cusps (selenodont).\nSenses.\nArtiodactyls have a well-developed sense of smell and sense of hearing. Unlike many other mammals, they have a poor sense of sight, and find moving objects much easier to see than stationary ones. Similar to many other prey animals, their eyes are on the sides of the head, giving them an almost panoramic view.\nDigestive system.\nThe ruminants (Ruminantia) ruminate their food, regurgitating and re-chewing it. Ruminants' mouths often have additional salivary glands, and the oral mucosa is often heavily calloused to avoid injury from hard plant parts and to allow easier transport of roughly chewed food. Their stomachs are divided into three to four sections: the rumen, the reticulum, the omasum, and the abomasum. After the food is ingested, it is mixed with saliva in the rumen and reticulum and separates into layers of solid versus liquid material. The solids lump together to form a bolus (also known as the cud); this is regurgitated by reticular contractions while the glottis is closed. When the bolus enters the mouth, the fluid is squeezed out with the tongue and re-swallowed. The bolus is chewed slowly to completely mix it with saliva and to break it down. Ingested food passes to the \"fermentation chamber\" (rumen and reticulum), where it is kept in continual motion by rhythmic contractions. Cellulytic microbes (bacteria, protozoa, and fungi) produce cellulase, which is needed to break down the cellulose found in plant material. This form of digestion has two advantages: plants that are indigestible to other species can be digested and used, and the duration of the actual food consumption shortened; the animal spends only a short time out in the open with its head to the ground; rumination can take place later, in a sheltered area.\nTylopoda (camels, llamas, and alpacas) and chevrotains have three-chambered stomachs, while the rest of Ruminantia have four-chambered stomachs. The handicap of a heavy digestive system has increased selective pressure towards limbs that allow the animal to quickly escape predators. Most species within Suina have a simple two-chambered stomach that allows for an omnivorous diet. The babirusa, however, is a herbivore, and has extra maxillary teeth to allow for proper mastication of plant material. Most of the fermentation occurs with the help of cellulolytic microorganisms within the caecum of the large intestine. Peccaries have a complex stomach that contains four compartments. Their fore stomach has fermentation carried out by microbes and has high levels of volatile fatty acid; it has been proposed that their complex fore-stomach is a means to slow digestive passage and increase digestive efficiency. Hippopotamuses have three-chambered stomachs and do not ruminate. They consume around of grass and other plant matter each night. They may cover distances up to to obtain food, which they digest with the help of microbes that produce cellulase. Their closest living relatives, the whales, are obligate carnivores.\nUnlike other even-toed ungulates, pigs have a simple sack-shaped stomach. Some artiodactyls, such as white-tailed deer, lack a gall bladder.\nGenitourinary system.\nThe penises of even-toed ungulates have an S-shape at rest and lie in a pocket under the skin on the belly. The corpora cavernosa are only slightly developed; and an erection mainly causes this curvature to extend, which leads to an extension, but not a thickening, of the penis. Cetaceans have similar penises. In some even-toed ungulates, the penis contains a structure called the \"urethral process\" or \"penile vermiform appendix\".\nThe testicles are located in the scrotum and thus outside the abdominal cavity. The ovaries of many females descend as the testicles descend of many male mammals, and are close to the pelvic inlet at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. The uterus has two horns (uterus bicornis).\nOther.\nThe number of mammary glands is variable and correlates, as in all mammals, with litter size. Pigs, which have the largest litter size of all even-toed ungulates, have two rows of teats lined from the armpit to the groin area. In most cases, however, even-toed ungulates have only one or two pairs of teats. In some species these form an udder in the groin region.\nSecretory glands in the skin are present in virtually all species and can be located in different places, such as in the eyes, behind the horns, the neck, or back, on the feet, or in the anal region.\nArtiodactyls have a carotid rete heat exchange that enables them, unlike perissodactyls which lack one, to regulate their brain temperature independently of their bodies. It has been argued that its presence explains the greater success of artiodactyls compared to perissodactyls in being able to adapt to diverse environments from the Arctic Circle to deserts and tropical savannahs.\nLifestyle.\nDistribution and habitat.\nArtiodactyls are native to almost all parts of the world, with the exception of Oceania and Antarctica. Humans have introduced different artiodactyls worldwide as hunting animals. Artiodactyls inhabit almost every habitat, from tropical rainforests and steppes to deserts and high mountain regions. The greatest biodiversity prevails in open habitats such as grasslands and open forests.\nSocial behavior.\nThe social behavior of even-toed ungulates varies from species to species. Generally, there is a tendency to merge into larger groups, but some live alone or in pairs. Species living in groups often have a hierarchy, both among males and females. Some species also live in harem groups, with one male, several females, and their common offspring. In other species, the females and juveniles stay together, while males are solitary or live in bachelor groups and seek out females only during mating season.\nMany artiodactyls are territorial and mark their territory, for example, with glandular secretions or urine. In addition to year-round sedentary species, there are animals that migrate seasonally.\nThere are diurnal, crepuscular, and nocturnal artiodactyls. Some species' pattern of wakefulness varies with season or habitat.\nReproduction and life expectancy.\nGenerally, even-toed ungulates tend to have long gestation periods, smaller litter sizes, and more highly developed newborns. As with many other mammals, species in temperate or polar regions have a fixed mating season, while those in tropical areas breed year-round. They carry out polygynous mating behavior, meaning a male mates with several females and suppresses all competition.\nThe length of the gestation period varies from four to five months for pigs, deer, and musk deer; six to ten months for hippos, deer, and bovines; ten to thirteen months with camels; and fourteen to fifteen months with giraffes. Most deliver one or two babies, but some pigs can deliver up to ten.\nThe newborns are precocial (born relatively mature) and come with open eyes and are hairy (with the exception of the hairless hippos). Juvenile deer and pigs have striped or spotted coats; the pattern disappears as they grow older. The juveniles of some species spend their first weeks with their mother in a safe location, where others may be running and following the herd within a few hours or days.\nLife expectancy is typically twenty to thirty years; as in many mammals, smaller species often have a shorter lifespan than larger species. The artiodactyls with the longest lifespans are the hippos, cows, and camels, which can live 40 to 50 years.\nPredators and parasites.\nArtiodactyls have different natural predators depending on their size and habitat. There are several carnivores that prey on them, including large cats (lions, tigers, and relatives) and bears. Other predators are crocodiles, wolves and dogs, large raptors, and for small species and young animals, large snakes. For cetaceans, possible predators include sharks, polar bears, and other cetaceans; in the latter is the orca, the top predator of the oceans.\nParasites include nematodes, botflies, fleas, lice, or flukes, but they have debilitating effects only when the infestation is severe.\nInteractions with humans.\nDomestication.\nArtiodactyls have been hunted by primitive humans for various reasons: for meat or fur, as well as to use their bones and teeth as weapons or tools. Their domestication began around 8000 BCE. To date, humans have domesticated goats, sheep, cattle, camels, llamas, alpacas, and pigs. Initially, livestock was used primarily for food, but they began being used for work activities around 3000 BCE. Clear evidence exists of antelope being used for food 2 million years ago in the Olduvai Gorge, part of the Great Rift Valley. Cro-Magnons relied heavily on reindeer for food, skins, tools, and weapons; with dropping temperatures and increased reindeer numbers at the end of the Pleistocene, they became the prey of choice. Reindeer remains accounted for 94% of bones and teeth found in a cave above the river C\u00e9ou that was inhabited around 12,500 years ago. In general, most even-toed ungulates can be consumed as a kosher meat, with the principal exception of Suina (pigs, etc.) and hippopotamids, which are even-toed but do not chew the cud, and of Cetacea, which, for the purpose of rabbinic law, are considered to be scaleless fish, and thus not kosher.\nToday, artiodactyls are kept primarily for their meat, milk, and wool, fur, or hide for clothing. Domestic cattle, the water buffalo, the yak, and camels are used for work, as rides, or as pack animals.\nThreats.\nThe endangerment level of each even-toed ungulate is different. Some species are synanthropic (such as the wild boar) and have spread into areas that they are not indigenous to, either having been brought in as farm animals or having run away as people's pets. Some artiodactyls also benefit from the fact that their predators (e.g., the Tasmanian tiger) were severely decimated by ranchers, who saw them as competition.\nConversely, many artiodactyls have declined significantly in numbers, and some have even gone extinct, largely due to over-hunting, and, more recently, habitat destruction. Extinct species include several gazelles, the aurochs, the Malagasy hippopotamus, the bluebuck, and Schomburgk's deer. Two species, the scimitar-horned oryx and P\u00e8re David's deer, are extinct in the wild. 14 species are considered critically endangered, including the addax, the kouprey, the wild Bactrian camel, Przewalski's gazelle, the saiga, and the pygmy hog. 24 species are considered endangered.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46765", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46765", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois Quesnay", "text": "French physician, Physiocratic economist, and orientalist (1694\u20131774)\nFran\u00e7ois Quesnay (; ; 4 June 1694 \u2013 16 December 1774) was a French economist and physician of the Physiocratic school. He is known for publishing the \"Tableau \u00e9conomique\" (Economic Table) in 1758, which provided the foundations of the ideas of the Physiocrats. This was perhaps the first work attempting to describe the workings of the economy in an analytical way, and as such can be viewed as one of the first important contributions to economic thought. His \"Le Despotisme de la Chine\", written in 1767, describes Chinese politics and society, and his own political support for enlightened despotism.\nLife.\nQuesnay was born at M\u00e9r\u00e9 near Versailles, the son of an advocate and small landed proprietor. Apprenticed at the age of sixteen to a surgeon, he soon went to Paris, studied medicine and surgery there, and, having qualified as a master-surgeon, settled down to practice at Mantes. In 1737 he was appointed perpetual secretary of the academy of surgery founded by Fran\u00e7ois Gigot de la Peyronie, and became surgeon in ordinary to King Louis XV. In 1744 he graduated as a doctor of medicine; he became the physician in ordinary to the king, and afterwards his first consulting physician, and was installed in the Palace of Versailles. His apartments were on the \"entresol\", whence the R\u00e9unions de l'entresol received their name. Louis XV esteemed Quesnay highly, and used to call him his thinker. When he ennobled him he gave him for arms three flowers of the pansy (derived from \"pens\u00e9e\", in French meaning \"thought\"), with the Latin motto \"Propter cogitationem mentis\".\nHe now devoted himself principally to economic studies, taking no part in the court intrigues which were perpetually going on around him. Around 1750 he became acquainted with Jacques C.M.V. de Gournay (1712\u20131759), who was also an earnest inquirer in the economic field; and round these two distinguished men was gradually formed the philosophic sect of the \u00c9conomistes, or, as for distinction's sake they were afterwards called, the Physiocrates. The most remarkable men in this group of disciples were the elder Mirabeau (author of \"L'Ami des hommes\", 1756\u201360, and \"Philosophie rurale\", 1763), Nicolas Baudeau (\"Introduction a la philosophie \u00e9conomique\", 1771), Guillaume-Fran\u00e7ois Le Trosne (\"De l'ordre social\", 1777), Andr\u00e9 Morellet (best known by his controversy with Galiani on the freedom of the grain trade during the Flour War), Lemercier de La Rivi\u00e8re, and du Pont de Nemours. Adam Smith, during his stay on the continent with the young Duke of Buccleuch in 1764\u20131766, spent some time in Paris, where he made the acquaintance of Quesnay and some of his followers; he paid a high tribute to their scientific services in his \"Wealth of Nations\".\nIn 1717, Quesnay married Jeanne-Cath\u00e9rine Dauphin, and had a son and a daughter; his grandson by the former was a member of the first Legislative Assembly. He died on 16 December 1774, having lived long enough to see his great pupil, Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune, in office as minister of finance.\nWorks.\nHis economic writings are collected in the 2nd vol. of the \"Principaux \u00e9conomistes\", published by Guillaumin, Paris, with preface and notes by Eug\u00e8ne Daire; also his \"Oeuvres \u00e9conomiques et philosophiques\" were collected with an introduction and note by August Oncken (Frankfort, 1888); a facsimile reprint of the \"Tableau \u00e9conomique\", from the original MS., was published by the British Economic Association (London, 1895). His other writings were the article \"\u00c9vidence\" in the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\", and \"Recherches sur l'\u00e9vidence des v\u00e9rites geometriques\", with a \"Projet de nouveaux \u00e9l\u00e9ments de g\u00e9ometrie\", 1773. Quesnay's Eloge was pronounced in the Academy of Sciences by Grandjean de Fouchy (see the Recueil of that Academy, 1774, p.\u00a0134). See also F.J. Marmontel, \"M\u00e9moires\"; \"M\u00e9moires de Mme. du Hausset\"; H. Higgs, \"The Physiocrats\" (London, 1897).\nEconomics.\nIn 1758 he published the \"Tableau \u00e9conomique\" (Economic Table), which provided the foundations of the ideas of the Physiocrats. This was perhaps the first work to attempt to describe the workings of the economy in an analytical way, and as such can be viewed as one of the first important contributions to economic thought.\nThe publications in which Quesnay expounded his system were the following: two articles, on \"Fermiers\" (Farmers) and on \"Grains\", in the \"Encyclop\u00e9die\" of Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1756, 1757); a discourse on the law of nature in the \"Physiocratie\" of Dupont de Nemours (1768); \"Maximes g\u00e9n\u00e9rales de gouvernement economique d'un royaume agricole\" (1758), and the simultaneously published \"Tableau \u00e9conomique avec son explication, ou extrait des \u00e9conomies royales de Sully\" (with the celebrated motto, \"Pauvres paysans, pauvre royaume; pauvre royaume, pauvre roi\"); \"Dialogue sur le commerce et les travaux des artisans\"; and other minor pieces.\nThe \"Tableau \u00e9conomique\", though on account of its dryness and abstract form it met with little general favor, may be considered the principal manifesto of the school. It was regarded by the followers of Quesnay as entitled to a place amongst the foremost products of human wisdom, and is named by the elder Mirabeau, in a passage quoted by Adam Smith, as one of the three great inventions which have contributed most to the stability of political societies, the other two being those of writing and of money. Its object was to exhibit by means of certain formulas the way in which the products of agriculture, which is the only source of wealth, would in a state of perfect liberty be distributed among the several classes of the community (namely, the productive classes of the proprietors and cultivators of land, and the unproductive class composed of manufacturers and merchants), and to represent by other formulas the modes of distribution which take place under systems of Governmental restraint and regulation, with the evil results arising to the whole society from different degrees of such violations of the natural order. It follows from Quesnay's theoretic views that the one thing deserving the solicitude of the practical economist and the statesman is the increase of the net product; and he infers also what Smith afterwards affirmed, on not quite the same ground, that the interest of the landowner is strictly and indissolubly connected with the general interest of the society. A small edition de luxe of this work, with other pieces, was printed in 1758 in the Palace of Versailles under the king's immediate supervision, some of the sheets, it is said, having been pulled by the royal hand. Already in 1767 the book had disappeared from circulation, and no copy of it is now procurable; but, the substance of it has been preserved in the \"Ami des hommes\" of Mirabeau, and the \"Physiocratie\" of Dupont de Nemours.\nOrientalism and China.\nQuesnay is known for his writings on Chinese politics and society. His book \"Le Despotisme de la Chine\", written in 1767, describes his views of the Chinese imperial system. He was supportive of the meritocratic concept of giving scholars political power, without the cumbersome aristocracy that characterized French politics, and the importance of agriculture to the welfare of a nation. Gregory Blue writes that Quesnay \"praised China as a constitutional despotism and openly advocated the adoption of Chinese institutions, including a standardized system of taxation and universal education.\" Blue speculates that this may have influenced the 1793 establishment of the Permanent Settlement in Bengal by the British Empire. Quesnay's interests in Orientalism has also been a source of criticism. Carol Blum, in her book \"Strength in Numbers\" on 18th century France, labels Quesnay an \"apologist for Oriental despotism.\"\nBecause of his admiration of Confucianism, Quesnay's followers bestowed him with the title \"Confucius of Europe.\" Quesnay's infatuation for Chinese culture, as described by Jesuits, led him to persuade the son of Louis XV to mirror the \"plowing of sacred land\" by the Chinese emperor to symbolize the link between government and agriculture.\nOn Taxation.\nQuesnay acknowledged three economic classes in France: the \"proprietary\" class consisting of only landowners, the \"productive\" class of agricultural workers, and the \"sterile\" class of merchants. Quesnay saw no benefit to the sterile class and believed the productive to be all important. Quesnay viewed France's agriculture as backward and unproductive compared to Britain during the time he was residing in the Palace of Versailles. Despite residing in the Palace, Quesnay believed agriculture was the heart of the economy and of special importance to him. Quesnay argued that taxes placed on cultivators are only harmful to society as these taxes will reduce the incentive for agricultural production. Taxing proprietors (property holders) does not destroy the means of production meaning there is no decline in output. Quesnay wanted proprietors to bear the full burden of the tax in the country as taxing cultivators is a negative consequence for everyone. Removing incentive from cultivators reduces agricultural production and the agricultural surplus Quesnay believed to be the heart of the economy. Quesnay also opposed indirect taxes in contrast to direct taxes. These \"indirect taxes\" are placed on the French public by proprietors whose greed demands immunity from taxation. Direct taxes on proprietors has no impact on reproduction and economic decline. Reducing indirect taxes and increasing direct taxes gives the French a surplus of agriculture and the funding the country needs. However, this opinion was not very popular among the wealthy of which Quesnay spent time regularly with. He spent some of his time fearing for his life in the Palace.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46766", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46766", "title": "Even-toed ungulate", "text": ""}
{"id": "46767", "revid": "4899266", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46767", "title": "Perissodactyls", "text": ""}
{"id": "46769", "revid": "47946748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46769", "title": "L\u00e9on Walras", "text": "French mathematical economist (1834\u20131910)\nMarie-Esprit-L\u00e9on Walras (; 16 December 1834 \u2013 5 January 1910) was a French mathematical economist and Georgist. He formulated the marginal theory of value (independently of William Stanley Jevons and Carl Menger) and pioneered the development of general equilibrium theory. Walras is best known for his book \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments d'\u00e9conomie politique pure\", a work that has contributed greatly to the mathematization of economics through the concept of general equilibrium.\nFor Walras, exchanges only take place after a Walrasian \"t\u00e2tonnement\" (French for \"trial and error\"), guided by the auctioneer, has made it possible to reach market equilibrium. It was the general equilibrium obtained from a single hypothesis, rarity, that led Joseph Schumpeter to consider him \"the greatest of all economists\". The notion of general equilibrium was very quickly adopted by major economists such as Vilfredo Pareto, Knut Wicksell and Gustav Cassel. John Hicks and Paul Samuelson used the Walrasian contribution in the elaboration of the neoclassical synthesis. For their part, Kenneth Arrow and G\u00e9rard Debreu, from the perspective of a logician and a mathematician, determined the conditions necessary for equilibrium.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiography.\nWalras was the son of a French school administrator Auguste Walras. His father was not a professional economist, yet his economic thinking had a profound effect on his son. He found the value of goods by setting their scarcity relative to human wants.\nWalras enrolled in the \u00c9cole des Mines de Paris, but grew tired of engineering. He worked as a bank manager, journalist, romantic novelist and railway clerk before turning to economics. Walras received an appointment as the professor of political economy at the University of Lausanne.\nWalras also inherited his father's interest in social reform. Much like the Fabians, Walras called for the nationalization of land, believing that land's productivity would always increase and that rents from that land would be sufficient to support the nation without taxes. He also asserted that all other taxes (i.e. on goods, labor, capital) eventually realize effects exactly identical to a consumption tax, so they can hurt the economy (unlike a land tax).\nAnother of Walras's influences was Augustin Cournot, a former schoolmate of his father. Through Cournot, Walras came under the influence of rationalism and was introduced to the use of mathematics in economics. He later motivated his use of mathematics with the analogy that the pure theory of economics is \"a physico-mathematical science like mechanics\" and argued that the way economics proceeds is rigorously identical to the one of rational and celestial mechanics.\nAs Professor of Political Economy at the University of Lausanne, Walras is credited with founding the Lausanne school of economics, along with his successor Vilfredo Pareto.\nBecause most of Walras's publications were only available in French, many economists were unfamiliar with his work. This changed in 1954 with the publication of William Jaff\u00e9's English translation of Walras's \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments d'\u00e9conomie politique pure\". Walras's work was also too mathematically complex for many contemporary readers of his time. On the other hand, it has a great insight into the market process under idealized conditions so it has been far more read in the modern era.\nAlthough Walras came to be regarded as one of the three leaders of the marginalist revolution,\nhe was not familiar with the two other leading figures of marginalism, William Stanley Jevons and Carl Menger, and developed his theories independently. \"Elements\" has Walras disagreeing with Jevons on the applicability, while the findings adopted by Carl Menger, he says, are completely in alignment with the ideas present in the book (even though expressed non-mathematically).\nMain ideas.\nWalras's law.\nWalras's law implies that the sum of the values of excess demands across all markets must equal zero, whether or not the economy is in a general equilibrium. This implies that if positive excess demand exists in one market, negative excess demand must exist in some other market. Thus, if all markets but one are in equilibrium, then that last market must also be in equilibrium.\nGeneral equilibrium theory.\nIn 1874 and 1877 Walras published the work that led him to be considered the father of the general equilibrium theory, \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments d'\u00e9conomie politique pure\" [see next section for bibliographical details].\nHis main goal was to solve a problem presented by A. A. Cournot: Does a general equilibrium exist? Though it had been demonstrated that prices would equate supply and demand to clear individual markets (\"partial equilibrium\"), it was unclear that an equilibrium existed for all markets simultaneously (\"general equilibrium\").\nWhile teaching at the Lausanne Academy, Walras began constructing a mathematical model that assumes a \"regime of perfectly free competition\", in which productive factors, products, and prices automatically adjust in equilibrium. Walras began with the theory of exchange in 1873 and proceeded to map out his theories of production, capitalization and money in his first edition.\nHis theory of exchange began with an expansion of Cournot's demand curve to include more than two commodities, also realizing the value of the quantity sold must equal the quantity purchased thus the ratio of prices must be equal to the inverse ratio of quantities. Walras then drew a supply curve from the demand curve and set equilibrium prices at the intersection. His model could now determine prices of commodities but only the relative price. In order to deduce the absolute price, Walras could choose one price to serve as the \"numeraire\", such that all other prices are measured in units of this commodity. Using the numeraire, he determined that marginal utility [\"raret\u00e9\"] divided by the price must be equal for all commodities.\nThen he argued that, because each individual consumer consumes as much value as the value of that individual's stock of goods, the value of total sales equals the value of total purchase. That is, Walras's law holds.\nWalras then expanded the theory to include production with the assumption of an existence of fixed coefficients in said production making possible a generalization that the marginal productivity of the factors of production varied with the amount of input, making factor substitution possible.\nWalras constructed his basic theory of general equilibrium by beginning with simple equations and then increasing the complexity in the next equations. He began with a two-person bartering system, then moved on to the derivation of downward-sloping consumer demands. Next he moved on to exchanges involving multiple parties, and finally ended with credit and money.\nWalras wrote down four sets of equations:\nThere are four sets of variables to solve for:\nTo simplify matters, Walras added one further equation (the Walras's law equation), requiring that all the money received must be spent, one way or the other.\nBy Walras's law, any particular market must be in equilibrium if all other markets in an economy are also in equilibrium, because the excess market demands sum to zero. Thus, in an economy with n markets, it is sufficient to solve n-1 simultaneous equations for market clearing. Taking one good as the num\u00e9raire in terms of which prices are specified, the economy has n-1 unknown prices that can be determined by the n-1 simultaneous equations, he thus concluded that the general equilibrium exists.\nThough this argument works when all equations are linear, it does not hold when the equations are nonlinear. It is easy to construct a pair of equations in two variables with no solutions. A more rigorous version of the argument was developed independently by Lionel McKenzie and the pair Kenneth Arrow and G\u00e9rard Debreu in the 1950s.\nWalrasian auction.\nThe Walrasian auction is a type of simultaneous auction where each agent calculates its demand for the good at every possible price and submits this to an auctioneer. The price is then set so that the total demand across all agents equals the total amount of the good. Thus, a Walrasian auction perfectly matches the supply and the demand. Walras suggests that equilibrium will be achieved through a process of \"t\u00e2tonnement\" (French for \"trial and error\"), a form of incremental hill climbing.\nEconomic value definition of utility.\nL\u00e9on Walras provides a definition of economic utility based on economic value as opposed to an ethical theory of value:\nI state that things are useful as soon as they may serve whatever usage, as soon as they match whatever need and allow its fulfillment. Thus, there is here no point to deal with 'nuances' by way of which one classes, in the language of everyday conversation, utility beside what is pleasant and between the necessary and the superfluous. Necessary, useful, pleasant and superfluous, all of this is, for us, more or less useful. There is here as well no need to take into account the morality or immorality of the need that the useful things matches and permits to fulfill. Whether a substance is searched for by a doctor to heal an ill person, or by an assassin to poison his family, this is an important question from other points of view, albeit totally indifferent from ours. The substance is useful, for us, in both cases, and may well be more useful in the second case than in the first one.\nIn economic theories of value, the term \"value\" is unrelated to any notions of value used in ethics, they are homonyms.\nLegacy.\nIn 1941 George Stigler wrote about Walras: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no general history of economic thought in English which devotes more than passing reference to his work. ... This sort of empty fame in English-speaking countries is of course attributable in large part to Walras's use of his mother tongue, French, and his depressing array of mathematical formulas. What caused the re-appraisal of Walras's consideration in the US, was the influx of German-speaking scientists \u2013 the German version of his \"Th\u00e9orie Math\u00e9matique de la Richesse Sociale\" was published in 1881.\nAccording to Schumpeter:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Walras is ... greatest of all economists. His system of economic equilibrium, uniting, as it does, the quality of 'revolutionary' creativeness with the quality of classic synthesis, is the only work by an economist that will stand comparison with the achievements of theoretical physics.\nMajor works.\n\"\u00c9l\u00e9ments d'\u00c9conomie Politique Pure\".\nThe \"\u00c9l\u00e9ments\" of 1874/1877 are the work by which L\u00e9on Walras is best known. The full title is\nThe half title page uses only the title ('\u00c9l\u00e9ments d'\u00c9conomie Politique Pure') whereas inside the body (e.g. p.\u00a01 and the contents page) the subtitle ('Th\u00e9orie de la richesse sociale') is used as if it were the title.\nPlan of work.\nThe work was issued in two instalments (\"fascicules\") in separate years. It was intended as the first of three parts of a systematic treatise as follows:\nWorks with titles echoing those proposed for Parts II and III were published in 1898 and 1896. They are included in the list of other works below.\nDerived work.\nThe 'Th\u00e9orie Math\u00e9matique de la Richesse Sociale' included in the list of other works (below) is described by the National Library of Australia as 'a series of lectures and articles that together summarize the mathematical elements of the author's \"\u00c9lements\"\u00a0'.\nEnglish Translations.\nWalker and van Daal describe Jaff\u00e9's translation of the word \"crieur\" as 'a momentous error that has misled generations of readers'.\nOnline and facsimile editions.\nBoth of these are made from the \"first\" edition and are defective in respect of illustrations. The original figures were included as folding plates (presumably at the end of each \"fascicule\"). The online edition contains only Figs. 3, 4, 10, and 12 whereas the facsimile contains only Figs. 5 and 6.\nNote.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46770", "revid": "50056326", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46770", "title": "Fixed-wing aircraft", "text": "Heavier-than-air aircraft with fixed wings generating aerodynamic lift\nA fixed-wing aircraft is a heavier-than-air aircraft, such as an airplane, which is capable of flight using aerodynamic lift. Fixed-wing aircraft are distinct from rotary-wing aircraft (in which a rotor mounted on a spinning shaft generates lift), and ornithopters (in which the wings oscillate to generate lift). The wings of a fixed-wing aircraft are not necessarily rigid; kites, hang gliders, variable-sweep wing aircraft, and airplanes that use wing morphing are all classified as fixed wing.\nGliding fixed-wing aircraft, including free-flying gliders and tethered kites, can use moving air to gain altitude. Powered fixed-wing aircraft (airplanes) that gain forward thrust from an engine include powered paragliders, powered hang gliders and ground effect vehicles. Most fixed-wing aircraft are operated by a pilot, but some are unmanned or controlled remotely or are completely autonomous (no remote pilot).\nHistory.\nKites.\nKites were used approximately 2,800 years ago in China, where kite building materials were available. Leaf kites may have been flown earlier in what is now Sulawesi, based on their interpretation of cave paintings on nearby Muna Island. By at least 549 AD paper kites were flying, as recorded that year, a paper kite was used as a message for a rescue mission. Ancient and medieval Chinese sources report kites used for measuring distances, testing the wind, lifting men, signaling, and communication for military operations.\nKite stories were brought to Europe by Marco Polo towards the end of the 13th century, and kites were brought back by sailors from Japan and Malaysia in the 16th and 17th centuries. Although initially regarded as curiosities, by the 18th and 19th centuries kites were used for scientific research.\nGliders and powered devices.\nAround 400 BC in Greece, Archytas was reputed to have designed and built the first self-propelled flying device, shaped like a bird and propelled by a jet of what was probably steam, said to have flown some . This machine may have been suspended during its flight.\nOne of the earliest attempts with gliders was by 11th-century monk Eilmer of Malmesbury, which failed. A 17th-century account states that 9th-century poet Abbas Ibn Firnas made a similar attempt, though no earlier sources record this event.\nIn 1799, Sir George Cayley laid out the concept of the modern airplane as a fixed-wing machine with systems for lift, propulsion, and control. Cayley was building and flying models of fixed-wing aircraft as early as 1803, and built a successful passenger-carrying glider in 1853. In 1856, Frenchman Jean-Marie Le Bris made the first powered flight, had his glider L'Albatros artificiel towed by a horse along a beach. In 1884, American John J. Montgomery made controlled flights in a glider as a part of a series of gliders he built between 1883 and 1886. Other aviators who made similar flights at that time were Otto Lilienthal, Percy Pilcher, and prot\u00e9g\u00e9s of Octave Chanute.\nIn the 1890s, Lawrence Hargrave conducted research on wing structures and developed a box kite that lifted the weight of a man. His designs were widely adopted. He also developed a type of rotary aircraft engine, but did not create a powered fixed-wing aircraft.\nPowered flight.\nSir Hiram Maxim built a craft that weighed 3.5 tons, with a 110-foot (34-meter) wingspan powered by two 360-horsepower (270-kW) steam engines driving two propellers. In 1894, his machine was tested with overhead rails to prevent it from rising. The test showed that it had enough lift to take off. The craft was uncontrollable, and Maxim abandoned work on it.\nThe Wright brothers' flights in 1903 with their \"Flyer I\" are recognized by the \"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration A\u00e9ronautique Internationale\" (FAI), the standard setting and record-keeping body for aeronautics, as \"the first sustained and controlled heavier-than-air powered flight\". By 1905, the Wright Flyer III was capable of fully controllable, stable flight for substantial periods.\nIn 1906, Brazilian inventor Alberto Santos Dumont designed, built and piloted an aircraft that set the first world record recognized by the A\u00e9ro-Club de France by flying the 14 bis in less than 22 seconds. The flight was certified by the FAI.\nThe Bleriot VIII design of 1908 was an early aircraft design that had the modern monoplane tractor configuration. It had movable tail surfaces controlling both yaw and pitch, a form of roll control supplied either by wing warping or by ailerons and controlled by its pilot with a joystick and rudder bar. It was an important predecessor of his later Bleriot XI Channel-crossing aircraft of the summer of 1909.\nWorld War I.\nWorld War I served initiated the use of aircraft as weapons and observation platforms. The earliest known aerial victory with a synchronized machine gun-armed fighter aircraft occurred in 1915, flown by German Luftstreitkr\u00e4fte Lieutenant Kurt Wintgens. Fighter aces appeared; the greatest (by number of air victories) was Manfred von Richthofen.\nAlcock and Brown crossed the Atlantic non-stop for the first time in 1919. The first commercial flights traveled between the United States and Canada in 1919.\nInterwar aviation; the \"Golden Age\".\nThe so-called Golden Age of Aviation occurred between the two World Wars, during which updated interpretations of earlier breakthroughs. Innovations include Hugo Junkers' all-metal air frames in 1915 leading to multi-engine aircraft of up to 60+ meter wingspan sizes by the early 1930s, adoption of the mostly air-cooled radial engine as a practical aircraft power plant alongside V-12 liquid-cooled aviation engines, and longer and longer flights \u2013 as with a Vickers Vimy in 1919, followed months later by the U.S. Navy's NC-4 transatlantic flight; culminating in May 1927 with Charles Lindbergh's solo trans-Atlantic flight in the Spirit of St. Louis spurring ever-longer flight attempts.\nWorld War II.\nAirplanes had a presence in the major battles of World War II. They were an essential component of military strategies, such as the German Blitzkrieg or the American and Japanese aircraft carrier campaigns of the Pacific.\nMilitary gliders were developed and used in several campaigns, but were limited by the high casualty rate encountered. The Focke-Achgelis Fa 330 \"Bachstelze\" (Wagtail) rotor kite of 1942 was notable for its use by German U-boats.\nBefore and during the war, British and German designers worked on jet engines. The first jet aircraft to fly, in 1939, was the German Heinkel He 178. In 1943, the first operational jet fighter, the Messerschmitt Me 262, went into service with the German Luftwaffe. Later in the war the British Gloster Meteor entered service, but never saw action \u2013 top air speeds for that era went as high as , with the early July 1944 unofficial record flight of the German Me 163B V18 rocket fighter prototype.\nPostwar.\nIn October 1947, the Bell X-1 was the first aircraft to exceed the speed of sound, flown by Chuck Yeager.\nIn 1948\u201349, aircraft transported supplies during the Berlin Blockade. New aircraft types, such as the B-52, were produced during the Cold War.\nThe first jet airliner, the de Havilland Comet, was introduced in 1952, followed by the Soviet Tupolev Tu-104 in 1956. The Boeing 707, the first widely successful commercial jet, was in commercial service for more than 50 years, from 1958 to 2010. The Boeing 747 was the world's largest passenger aircraft from 1970 until it was surpassed by the Airbus A380 in 2005. The most successful aircraft is the Douglas DC-3 and its military version, the C-47, a medium sized twin engine passenger or transport aircraft that has been in service since 1936 and is still used throughout the world. Some of the hundreds of versions found other purposes, like the AC-47, a Vietnam War era gunship, which is still used in the Colombian Air Force.\nTypes.\nAirplane/aeroplane.\nAn airplane (spelled aeroplane in British English and shortened to plane) is a powered fixed-wing aircraft propelled by thrust from a jet engine or propeller. Planes come in many sizes, shapes, and wing configurations. Uses include recreation, transportation of goods and people, military, and research.\nSeaplane.\nA seaplane (hydroplane) is capable of taking off and landing (alighting) on water. Seaplanes that can also operate from dry land are a subclass called amphibian aircraft. Seaplanes and amphibians divide into two categories: float planes and flying boats.\nPowered gliders.\nMany forms of glider may include a small power plant. These include:\nGround effect vehicle.\nA ground effect vehicle (GEV) flies close to the terrain, making use of the ground effect \u2013 the interaction between the wings and the surface. Some GEVs are able to fly higher out of ground effect (OGE) when required \u2013 these are classed as powered fixed-wing aircraft.\nGlider.\nA glider is a heavier-than-air craft whose free flight does not require an engine. A sailplane is a fixed-wing glider designed for soaring \u2013 gaining height using updrafts of air and to fly for long periods.\nGliders are mainly used for recreation but have found use for purposes such as aerodynamics research, warfare and spacecraft recovery.\nMotor gliders are equipped with a limited propulsion system for takeoff, or to extend flight duration.\nAs is the case with planes, gliders come in diverse forms with varied wings, aerodynamic efficiency, pilot location, and controls. \nLarge gliders are most commonly born aloft by a tow-plane or by a winch. Military gliders have been used in combat to deliver troops and equipment, while specialized gliders have been used in atmospheric and aerodynamic research. Rocket-powered aircraft and spaceplanes have made unpowered landings similar to a glider.\nGliders and sailplanes that are used for the sport of gliding have high aerodynamic efficiency. The highest lift-to-drag ratio is 70:1, though 50:1 is common. After take-off, further altitude can be gained through the skillful exploitation of rising air. Flights of thousands of kilometers at average speeds over 200\u00a0km/h have been achieved.\nOne small-scale example of a glider is the paper airplane. An ordinary sheet of paper can be folded into an aerodynamic shape fairly easily; its low mass relative to its surface area reduces the required lift for flight, allowing it to glide some distance.\nGliders and sailplanes share many design elements and aerodynamic principles with powered aircraft. For example, the Horten H.IV was a tailless flying wing glider, and the delta-winged Space Shuttle orbiter glided during its descent phase. Many gliders adopt similar control surfaces and instruments as airplanes.\nTypes.\nThe main application of modern glider aircraft is sport and recreation.\nSailplane.\nGliders were developed in the 1920s for recreational purposes. As pilots began to understand how to use rising air, sailplane gliders were developed with a high lift-to-drag ratio. These allowed the craft to glide to the next source of \"lift\", increasing their range. This gave rise to the popular sport of gliding.\nEarly gliders were built mainly of wood and metal, later replaced by composite materials incorporating glass, carbon or aramid fibers. To minimize drag, these types have a streamlined fuselage and long narrow wings incorporating a high aspect ratio. Single-seat and two-seat gliders are available.\nInitially, training was done by short \"hops\" in primary gliders, which have no cockpit and minimal instruments. Since shortly after World War II, training is done in two-seat dual control gliders, but high-performance two-seaters can make long flights. Originally skids were used for landing, later replaced by wheels, often retractable. Gliders known as motor gliders are designed for unpowered flight, but can deploy piston, rotary, jet or electric engines. Gliders are classified by the FAI for competitions into glider competition classes mainly on the basis of wingspan and flaps.\nA class of ultralight sailplanes, including some known as microlift gliders and some known as airchairs, has been defined by the FAI based on weight. They are light enough to be transported easily, and can be flown without licensing in some countries. Ultralight gliders have performance similar to hang gliders, but offer some crash safety as the pilot can strap into an upright seat within a deform-able structure. Landing is usually on one or two wheels which distinguishes these craft from hang gliders. Most are built by individual designers and hobbyists.\nMilitary gliders.\nMilitary gliders were used during World War II for carrying troops (glider infantry) and heavy equipment to combat zones. The gliders were towed into the air and most of the way to their target by transport planes, e.g. C-47 Dakota, or by one-time bombers that had been relegated to secondary activities, e.g. Short Stirling. The advantage over paratroopers were that heavy equipment could be landed and that troops were quickly assembled rather than dispersed over a parachute drop zone. The gliders were treated as disposable, constructed from inexpensive materials such as wood, though a few were re-used. By the time of the Korean War, transport aircraft had become larger and more efficient so that even light tanks could be dropped by parachute, obsoleting gliders.\nResearch gliders.\nEven after the development of powered aircraft, gliders continued to be used for aviation research. The NASA Paresev Rogallo flexible wing was developed to investigate alternative methods of recovering spacecraft. Although this application was abandoned, publicity inspired hobbyists to adapt the flexible-wing airfoil for hang gliders.\nInitial research into many types of fixed-wing craft, including flying wings and lifting bodies was also carried out using unpowered prototypes.\nHang glider.\nA hang glider is a glider aircraft in which the pilot is suspended in a harness suspended from the air frame, and exercises control by shifting body weight in opposition to a control frame. Hang gliders are typically made of an aluminum alloy or composite-framed fabric wing. Pilots can soar for hours, gain thousands of meters of altitude in thermal updrafts, perform aerobatics, and glide cross-country for hundreds of kilometers.\nParaglider.\nA paraglider is a lightweight, free-flying, foot-launched glider with no rigid body. The pilot is suspended in a harness below a hollow fabric wing whose shape is formed by its suspension lines. Air entering vents in the front of the wing and the aerodynamic forces of the air flowing over the outside power the craft. Paragliding is most often a recreational activity.\nUnmanned gliders.\nA paper plane is a toy aircraft (usually a glider) made out of paper or paperboard.\nModel glider aircraft are models of aircraft using lightweight materials such as polystyrene and balsa wood. Designs range from simple glider aircraft to accurate scale models, some of which can be very large.\nGlide bombs are bombs with aerodynamic surfaces to allow a gliding flight path rather than a ballistic one. This enables stand-off aircraft to attack a target from a distance.\nKite.\nA kite is a tethered aircraft held aloft by wind that blows over its wing(s). High pressure below the wing deflects the airflow downwards. This deflection generates horizontal drag in the direction of the wind. The resultant force vector from the lift and drag force components is opposed by the tension of the tether.\nKites are mostly flown for recreational purposes, but have many other uses. Early pioneers such as the Wright brothers and J.W. Dunne sometimes flew an aircraft as a kite in order to confirm its flight characteristics, before adding an engine and flight controls.\nApplications.\nMilitary.\nKites have been used for signaling, for delivery of munitions, and for observation, by lifting an observer above the field of battle, and by using kite aerial photography.\nScience and meteorology.\nKites have been used for scientific purposes, such as Benjamin Franklin's famous experiment proving that lightning is electricity. Kites were the precursors to the traditional aircraft, and were instrumental in the development of early flying craft. Alexander Graham Bell experimented with large man-lifting kites, as did the Wright brothers and Lawrence Hargrave. Kites had a historical role in lifting scientific instruments to measure atmospheric conditions for weather forecasting.\nRadio aerials and light beacons.\nKites can be used to carry radio antennas. This method was used for the reception station of the first transatlantic transmission by Marconi. Captive balloons may be more convenient for such experiments, because kite-carried antennas require strong wind, which may be not always available with heavy equipment and a ground conductor.\nKites can be used to carry light sources such as light sticks or battery-powered lights.\nKite traction.\nKites can be used to pull people and vehicles downwind. Efficient foil-type kites such as power kites can also be used to sail upwind under the same principles as used by other sailing craft, provided that lateral forces on the ground or in the water are redirected as with the keels, center boards, wheels and ice blades of traditional sailing craft. In the last two decades, kite sailing sports have become popular, such as kite buggying, kite landboarding, kite boating and kite surfing. Snow kiting is also popular.\nKite sailing opens several possibilities not available in traditional sailing:\nPower generation.\nResearch and development projects investigate kites for harnessing high altitude wind currents for electricity generation.\nCultural uses.\nKite festivals are a popular form of entertainment throughout the world. They include local events, traditional festivals and major international festivals.\nCharacteristics.\nAir frame.\nThe structural element of a fixed-wing aircraft is the air frame. It varies according to the aircraft's type, purpose, and technology. Early airframes were made of wood with fabric wing surfaces, When engines became available for powered flight, their mounts were made of metal. As speeds increased metal became more common until by the end of World War II, all-metal (and glass) aircraft were common. In modern times, composite materials became more common.\nTypical structural elements include:\nWings.\nThe wings of a fixed-wing aircraft are static planes extending to either side of the aircraft. When the aircraft travels forwards, air flows over the wings that are shaped to create lift.\nStructure.\nKites and some lightweight gliders and airplanes have flexible wing surfaces that are stretched across a frame and made rigid by the lift forces exerted by the airflow over them. Larger aircraft have rigid wing surfaces.\nWhether flexible or rigid, most wings have a strong frame to give them shape and to transfer lift from the wing surface to the rest of the aircraft. The main structural elements are one or more spars running from root to tip, and ribs running from the leading (front) to the trailing (rear) edge.\nEarly airplane engines had little power and light weight was critical. Also, early airfoil sections were thin, and could not support a strong frame. Until the 1930s, most wings were so fragile that external bracing struts and wires were added. As engine power increased, wings could be made heavy and strong enough that bracing was unnecessary. Such an unbraced wing is called a cantilever wing.\nConfiguration.\nThe number and shape of wings vary widely. Some designs blend the wing with the fuselage, while left and right wings separated by the fuselage are more common. \nOccasionally more wings have been used, such as the three-winged triplane from World War I. Four-winged quadruplanes and other multiplane designs have had little success.\nMost planes are monoplanes, with one or two parallel wings. Biplanes and triplanes stack one wing above the other. Tandem wings place one wing behind the other, possibly joined at the tips. When the available engine power increased during the 1920s and 1930s and bracing was no longer needed, the unbraced or cantilever monoplane became the most common form.\nThe planform is the shape when seen from above/below. To be aerodynamically efficient, wings are straight with a long span, but a short chord (high aspect ratio). To be structurally efficient, and hence lightweight, wingspan must be as small as possible, but offer enough area to provide lift.\nTo travel at transonic speeds, variable geometry wings change orientation, angling backward to reduce drag from supersonic shock waves. The variable-sweep wing transforms between an efficient straight configuration for takeoff and landing, to a low-drag swept configuration for high-speed flight. Other forms of variable planform have been flown, but none have gone beyond the research stage. The swept wing is a straight wing swept backward or forwards.\nThe delta wing is a triangular shape that serves various purposes. As a flexible Rogallo wing, it allows a stable shape under aerodynamic forces, and is often used for kites and other ultralight craft. It is supersonic capable, combining high strength with low drag.\nWings are typically hollow, also serving as fuel tanks. They are equipped with flaps, which allow the wing to increase/decrease drag/lift, for take-off and landing, and acting in opposition, to change direction.\nFuselage.\nThe fuselage is typically long and thin, usually with tapered or rounded ends to make its shape aerodynamically smooth. Most fixed-wing aircraft have a single fuselage. Others may have multiple fuselages, or the fuselage may be fitted with booms on either side of the tail to allow the extreme rear of the fuselage to be utilized.\nThe fuselage typically carries the flight crew, passengers, cargo, and sometimes fuel and engine(s). Gliders typically omit fuel and engines, although some variations such as motor gliders and rocket gliders have them for temporary or optional use.\nPilots of manned commercial fixed-wing aircraft control them from inside a cockpit within the fuselage, typically located at the front/top, equipped with controls, windows, and instruments, separated from passengers by a secure door. In small aircraft, the passengers typically sit behind the pilot(s) in the cabin, Occasionally, a passenger may sit beside or in front of the pilot. Larger passenger aircraft have a separate passenger cabin or occasionally cabins that are physically separated from the cockpit.\nAircraft often have two or more pilots, with one in overall command (the \"pilot\") and one or more \"co-pilots\". On larger aircraft a navigator is typically also seated in the cockpit as well. Some military or specialized aircraft may have other flight crew members in the cockpit as well.\nWings vs. bodies.\nFlying wing.\nA flying wing is a tailless aircraft that has no distinct fuselage, housing the crew, payload, and equipment inside.\nThe flying wing configuration was studied extensively in the 1930s and 1940s, notably by Jack Northrop and Cheston L. Eshelman in the United States, and Alexander Lippisch and the Horten brothers in Germany. After the war, numerous experimental designs were based on the flying wing concept. General interest continued into the 1950s, but designs did not offer a great advantage in range and presented technical problems. The flying wing is most practical for designs in the slow-to-medium speed range, and drew continual interest as a tactical airlifter design.\nInterest in flying wings reemerged in the 1980s due to their potentially low radar cross-sections. Stealth technology relies on shapes that reflect radar waves only in certain directions, thus making it harder to detect. This approach eventually led to the Northrop B-2 Spirit stealth bomber (pictured). The flying wing's aerodynamics are not the primary concern. Computer-controlled fly-by-wire systems compensated for many of the aerodynamic drawbacks, enabling an efficient and stable long-range aircraft.\nBlended wing body.\nBlended wing body aircraft have a flattened airfoil-shaped body, which produces most of the lift to keep itself aloft, and distinct and separate wing structures, though the wings are blended with the body.\nBlended wing bodied aircraft incorporate design features from both fuselage and flying wing designs. The purported advantages of the blended wing body approach are efficient, high-lift wings and a wide, airfoil-shaped body. This enables the entire craft to contribute to lift generation with potentially increased fuel economy.\nLifting body.\nA lifting body is a configuration in which the body produces lift. In contrast to a flying wing, which is a wing with minimal or no conventional fuselage, a lifting body can be thought of as a fuselage with little or no conventional wing. Whereas a flying wing seeks to maximize cruise efficiency at subsonic speeds by eliminating non-lifting surfaces, lifting bodies generally minimize the drag and structure of a wing for subsonic, supersonic, and hypersonic flight, or, spacecraft re-entry. All of these flight regimes pose challenges for flight stability.\nLifting bodies were a major area of research in the 1960s and 1970s as a means to build small and lightweight crewed spacecraft. The US built lifting body rocket planes to test the concept, as well as several rocket-launched re-entry vehicles. Interest waned as the US Air Force lost interest in the crewed mission, and major development ended during the Space Shuttle design process when it became clear that highly shaped fuselages made it difficult to fit fuel tanks.\nEmpennage and foreplane.\nThe classic airfoil section wing is unstable in flight. Flexible-wing planes often rely on an anchor line or the weight of a pilot hanging beneath to maintain the correct attitude. Some free-flying types use an adapted airfoil that is stable, or other mechanisms including electronic artificial stability.\nIn order to achieve trim, stability, and control, most fixed-wing types have an empennage comprising a fin and rudder that act horizontally, and a tailplane and elevator that act vertically. This is so common that it is known as the conventional layout. Sometimes two or more fins are spaced out along the tailplane.\nSome types have a horizontal \"canard\" foreplane ahead of the main wing, instead of behind it. This foreplane may contribute to the trim, stability or control of the aircraft, or to several of these.\nAircraft controls.\nKite control.\nKites are controlled by one or more tethers.\nFree-flying aircraft controls.\nGliders and airplanes have sophisticated control systems, especially if they are piloted.\nThe controls allow the pilot to direct the aircraft in the air and on the ground. Typically these are:\nOther common controls include:\nA craft may have two pilot seats with dual controls, allowing two to take turns. \nThe control system may allow full or partial automation, such as an autopilot, a wing leveler, or a flight management system. An unmanned aircraft has no pilot and is controlled remotely or via gyroscopes, computers/sensors or other forms of autonomous control.\nCockpit instrumentation.\nOn manned fixed-wing aircraft, instruments provide information to the pilots, including flight, engines, navigation, communications, and other aircraft systems that may be installed.\nThe six basic instruments, sometimes referred to as the six pack, are:\nOther cockpit instruments include:\nSome or all of these instruments may appear on a computer display and be operated with touches, ala a phone.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46771", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46771", "title": "Agricultural", "text": ""}
{"id": "46772", "revid": "45022693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46772", "title": "Lake Van", "text": "Large salt lake in eastern Turkey\nLake Van (; ; ) is the largest lake in Turkey. It lies in the Eastern Anatolia region of Turkey in the provinces of Van and Bitlis, in the Armenian highlands. It is a saline soda lake, receiving water from many small streams that descend from the surrounding mountains. It is one of the world's few endorheic lakes (a lake having no outlet) of size greater than and has 38% of the country's surface water (including rivers). A volcanic eruption blocked its original outlet in prehistoric times. It is situated at above sea level. Despite the high altitude and winter averages below , high salinity usually prevents it from freezing; the shallow northern section can freeze, but rarely.\nHydrology and chemistry.\nLake Van is across at its widest point. It averages deep. Its greatest known depth is . The surface lies above sea level and the shore length is . It covers and contains (has a volume of) .\nThe western portion of the lake is deepest, with a large basin deeper than lying northeast of Tatvan and south of Ahlat. The eastern arms of the lake are shallower. The Van-Ahtamar portion shelves gradually, with a maximum depth of about on its northwest side where it joins the rest of the lake. The Erci\u015f arm is much shallower, mostly less than , with a maximum depth of about .\nThe lake water is strongly alkaline (pH 9.7\u20139.8) and rich in sodium carbonate and other salts. Some is extracted in salt evaporation ponds alongside, used in or as detergents.\nGeology.\n Akdo\u011fan\n Ha\u00e7l\u0131\nNazik\n Nemrut\n Er\u00e7ek&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nBatm\u0131\u015f&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nAyg\u0131r&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\n Turna&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nKaz&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nAh\u0131r&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nSodal\u0131&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nH\u0131d\u0131rmente\u015f&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nS\u00fcphan&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nAkg\u00f6l&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\n G\u00f6velek&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\nAtar&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;\n Lakes near Lake Van.\nLake Van is primarily a tectonic lake, formed more than 600,000 years ago by the gradual subsidence of a large block of the Earth's crust due to movement on several major faults that run through this portion of Eastern Anatolia. The lake's southern margin demarcates: a metamorphic rock zone of the Bitlis Massif and volcanic strata of the Neogene and Quaternary periods. The deep, western portion of the lake is an antidome basin in a tectonic depression. This was formed by normal and strike-slip faulting and thrusting.\nThe lake's proximity to the Karl\u0131ova triple junction has led to molten fluids of the Earth's mantle accumulating in the strata beneath, still driving gradual change. Dominating the lake's northern shore is the stratovolcano Mount S\u00fcphan. The broad crater of a second, dormant volcano, Mount Nemrut, is close to the western tip of the lake. There is hydrothermal activity throughout the region.\nFor much of its history, until the Pleistocene, Lake Van has had an outlet towards the southwest (into the Murat River and eventually into the Euphrates river). However, the level of this threshold has varied over time, as the lake has been blocked by successive lava flows from Nemrut volcano westward towards the Mu\u015f Plain. This threshold has then been lowered at times by erosion.\nBathymetry.\nThe first acoustic survey of Lake Van was performed in 1974.\nKempe and Degens later identified three physiographic provinces comprising the lake: \nThe deepest part of the lake is the Tatvan basin, which is almost completely bounded by faults.\nPrehistoric lake levels.\nLand terraces (remnant dry, upper banks from previous shorelines) above the present shore have long been recognized. On a visit in 1898, geologist Felix Oswald noted three raised beaches at 5, 15, and 30 m (15, 50 and 100\u00a0ft) above the lake then, as well as recently drowned trees. Research in the past century has identified many similar terraces, and the lake's level has fluctuated significantly during that time.\nIn 1989 and 1990, an international team of geologists led by Stephan Kempe from the University of Hamburg retrieved ten sediment cores from depths up to . Although these cores only penetrated the first few meters of sediment, they provided sufficient varves to give proxy climate data for up to 14,570 years BP.\nThe PALEOVAN project has studied in detail the paleolimnology, paleoclimatology, and sedimentology of Lake Van over the last 600,000 years by using seismic reflection and continuous cores recovered from deep borings. These techniques along with investigation of the chronology and sedimentology of associated onshore terraces have been used to reconstruct past climatic, volcanic, and tectonic activity since the formation of Lake Van about 600,000 years ago when a single pull-apart basin was separated into Van and Mus basins by the eruptions of the Nemrut Volcano which also blocked Lake Van's outlet.\nThe PALEOVAN project found that the lake level of Lake Van has varied by as much as during the past 600,000 years. During this period of time, five major lowstands of lake level occurred circa 600, 365\u2013340, 290\u2013230, 150\u2013130, and 30\u201314 ka BP. Between 600 and 230 ka BP, the lake varied dramatically, by hundreds of meters. The occurrence of major lowstands of Lake Van during glacial periods suggest regional paleoclimate, i.e. greatly reduced precipitation, was the dominant cause for the dramatic changes in lake level of Lake Van. However, volcanic and tectonic forcing factors may have contributed to lake level changes as well.\nOver the last 90,000 years, significant variations in the lake level of Lake Van have been inferred based on the presence of lowstand deltas and onlap sequences in seismic reflection profiles; the analysis of data extracted PALEOVAN cores; and studies of coastal terraces of differing elevations. First, a major lowstand of below modern lake level occurred between 71 and 59 ka BP as inferred from the presence of lowstand deltas and onlap sequences in seismic reflection profiles. Between 60 and 34 ka BP., the lake level of Lake Van was in general lower than the modern lake level with highstands at 57, 53, 46 and 35 ka BP. About 34 ka BP, a dramatic rise in lake level to about above the present lake level occurred as indicated by the formation of terraces circa above present-day lake level and the presence of onlapping seismic onlap sequences. This rapid rise in lake level was likely either the result of increased melt water delivery or the deposition of a large quantities of tephra and lahars (Nemrut Formation) created during a caldera forming eruption of Mount Nemrut. Two terraces dated at 26 to 24.5 and 21 to 20 ka BP reaching above the present lake level and the occurrence of lowstand deltas and onlap sequences in the seismic reflection profiles indicate high lake levels during the end of Last Glacial period (30 to 15 ka BP). These two terraces were likely deposited during the interstadial events. Between 16 and 15 ka BP, the complete desiccation of Lake Van dropped lake levels to m below modern levels. By the B\u00f8llinge-Aller\u00f8d period (14.7 to 12.8 ka BP), lake levels were possibly similar to or little lower than the modern lake level. During the Younger Dryas cold period lake levels dropped to lower than the modern level. The early Holocene was characterized by variable lake levels above and below modern with amplitudes of a few tens of meters. These variations in lake levels during the Holocene are indicated by the presence of early to middle Holocene terraces near river mouths,\nRecent lake level change.\nSimilar but smaller fluctuations have been seen recently. The level of the lake rose by at least during the 1990s, drowning much agricultural land, and (after a brief period of stability and then retreat) seems to be rising again. The level rose approximately in the 10 years immediately prior to 2004. But in the early 2020s it fell.\nClimate.\nLake Van is in the highest and largest region of Turkey, which has a Mediterranean-influenced humid continental climate. Average temperatures in July are between 22 and 25\u00a0\u00b0C, and in January between \u22123\u00a0\u00b0C and \u221212\u00a0\u00b0C. On some cold winter nights the temperature has reached \u221230\u00a0\u00b0C.\nThe lake, particularly on its urban townscape shore, tempers the climate in the city of Van, where the average temperature in July is 22.5\u00a0\u00b0C, and in January \u22123.5\u00a0\u00b0C. The average annual rainfall in the basin ranges from 400 to 700\u00a0mm.\nEcology.\nPrior to 2018, the only fish known to live in the brackish water of Lake Van was \"Alburnus tarichi\" or Pearl Mullet (), a Cyprinid fish related to chub and dace, which is caught during the spring floods. In May and June, these fish migrate from the lake to less alkaline water, spawning either near the mouths of the rivers feeding the lake or in the rivers themselves. After spawning season it returns to the lake. In 2018, a new species of fish, which is deemed as \"Oxynoemacheilus ercisianus\", has been discovered inside a microbialite.\n103 species of phytoplankton have been recorded in the lake including cyanobacteria, flagellates, diatoms, green algae, and brown algae. 36 species of zooplankton have also been recorded including Rotatoria, Cladocera, and Copepoda in the lake.\nIn 1991, researchers reported the discovery of tall microbialites in the lake. These are solid towers on the lake bed formed by coccoid cyanobacteria (\"Pleurocapsa\" group), which create mats of aragonite that combine with calcite precipitating out of the lake water.\nThe region hosts the rare Van cat breed of cat, having \u2013 among other things \u2013 an unusual fascination with water. The lake is mainly surrounded by fruit orchards and grain fields, interspersed by some non-agricultural trees.\nMonster myth.\nAccording to legend, the lake hosts the mysterious Lake Van Monster that lurks below the surface, long with brown scaly skin, an elongated reptilian head and flippers. Apart from some inconclusive amateur photographs and videos, there has never been any evidence of it. The claimed profile resembles an extinct mosasaurus or basilosaurus.\nHistory.\nTushpa, the capital of Urartu, near the shores, on the site of what became medieval Van's castle, west of present-day Van city. The ruins of the medieval city of Van are still visible below the southern slopes of the rock on which Van Castle stands.\nIn 2017, archaeologists from Van Y\u00fcz\u00fcnc\u00fc Yil University and a team of independent divers who were exploring Lake Van reported the discovery of a large underwater fortress spanning roughly one kilometer. The team estimates that this fortress was constructed during the Urartian period, based on their visual assessments. The archaeologists believe that the fortress, along with other parts of the ancient city that surrounded it at the time, had slowly become submerged over the millennia by the gradually rising lake.\nArmenian kingdoms.\nThe lake was the centre of the kingdom of Urartu from about 1000 BC, afterwards of the Satrapy of Armenia, Kingdom of Greater Armenia, and the Armenian Kingdom of Vaspurakan.\nAlong with Lake Sevan in today's Armenia and Lake Urmia in today's Iran, Van was one of the three great lakes of the Armenian Kingdom, referred to as \"the seas of Armenia\" (in ancient Assyrian sources: \"t\u00e2mtu \u0161a m\u00e2t Nairi\" (Upper Sea of Nairi), the Lower Sea being Lake Urmia). Over time, the lake was known by various Armenian names, including .\nEastern Roman Empire.\nBy the 11th century the lake was on the border between the Eastern Roman Empire, with its capital at Constantinople, and the Turko-Persian Seljuk Empire, with its capital at Isfahan. In the uneasy peace between the two empires, local Armenian-Byzantine landowners employed Turcoman gazis and Byzantine akritai for protection. The Greek-speaking Byzantines called the lake \"Thospitis limne\" ().\nIn the second half of the 11th century Emperor Romanus IV Diogenes launched a campaign to re-conquer Armenia and head off growing Seljuk control. Diogenes and his large army crossed the Euphrates and confronted a much smaller Seljuk force led by Alp Arslan at the Battle of Manzikert, north of Lake Van on 26 August 1071. Despite their greater numbers, the cumbersome Byzantine force was defeated by the more mobile Turkish horsemen and Diogenes was captured.\nSeljuk Empire.\nAlp Arslan divided the conquered eastern portions of the Byzantine empire among his Turcoman generals, with each ruled as a hereditary beylik, under overall sovereignty of the Seljuq Empire. Alp Arslan gave the region around Lake Van to his commander S\u00f6kmen el-Kutb\u00ee, who set up his capital at Ahlat on the western side of the lake. The dynasty of Shah-Armens, also known as \"S\u00f6kmenler\", ruled this area from 1085 to 1192.\nThe Ahlatshahs were succeeded by the Ayyubid dynasty.\nOttoman Empire.\nFollowing the disintegration of the Seljuq-ruled Sultanate of Rum, Lake Van and its surroundings were conquered by the Ilkhanate Mongols, and later switched hands between the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Iran until Sultan Selim I took control for good.\nReports of the Lake Van Monster surfaced in the late 1800s and gained popularity. A news article was published by \"Saadet Gazetesi\" issue number 1323, dated 28 Shaban 1306 Hijri year, corresponding to 29 April 1889 during the reign of Sultan Abdul Hamid II.\nArchitecture.\nNear the Van Fortress and the southern shore, on Akdamar Island lies the 10th century Cathedral of the Holy Cross, Aghtamar (, Surb Khach), which served as a royal church to the kingdom of Vaspurakan. The ruins of Armenian monasteries also exist on the other three islands of Lake Van: Lim, Arter, and Ktuts. The area around Lake Van was also the home to a large number of Armenian monasteries, among the most prominent of these being the 10th century Narekavank and the 11th century Varagavank, the former now destroyed.\nThe Ahlatshahs left a large number of historic headstones in and around the town of Ahlat. Local administrators are currently trying to have the tombstones included in UNESCO's World Heritage List, where they are currently listed tentatively.\nTransportation.\nThe railway connecting Turkey and Iran was built in the 1970s, sponsored by CENTO. It uses a train ferry (ferry for decanted passengers) across between the cities Tatvan and Van, rather than building tracks around rugged terrain. This limits passenger capacity. In May 2008, talks started between Turkey and Iran to replace the ferry with a double-track electrified railway.\nIn December 2015, the new generation of train ferries operated by the Turkish State Railways, the largest of their kind in Turkey, entered service in Lake Van.\nFerit Melen Airport abuts Van. Turkish Airlines, AnadoluJet, Pegasus Airlines, and SunExpress are the airlines which have regular flights.\nSports.\nLake Van occasionally hosts several water sports, sailing, and inshore powerboat racing events, such as the UIM World Offshore 225 Championship's IOC Van Grand Prix, and the Van Lake Festival.\nIslands and nearby lakes.\nIslands.\nThe four main islands in Lake Van are Ad\u0131r, Akdamar, \u00c7arpanak, and Ku\u015f islands. Ad\u0131r Island is the biggest Island in Lake Van.\nEach island has Armenian religious structures: Lim Monastery (Ad\u0131r Island), Holy Cross Cathedral (Akdamar Island), Ktuts Monastery (\u00c7arpanak Island) and a small monastery on Ku\u015f Island.\nNearby Lakes.\nLarge lakes near Lake Van are Lake Er\u00e7ek (16\u00a0km), Lake Turna (23\u00a0km), Lake Nemrut (12\u00a0km), Lake Nazik (16\u00a0km), Lake Batm\u0131\u015f (10\u00a0km), Lake Ayg\u0131r (5\u00a0km) and Lake S\u00fcphan (18\u00a0km). Lake Er\u00e7ek is by far the biggest, with an area of 106.2 square kilometres (41.0 sq mi), and is the second biggest Van Province.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46773", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46773", "title": "19th century Russian Revolutionary Movements", "text": ""}
{"id": "46774", "revid": "8262820", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46774", "title": "Malagasy", "text": "Malagasy may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "46776", "revid": "12931721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46776", "title": "Fanorona", "text": "Board game from Madagascar\nFanorona () is a strategy board game for two players. The game is indigenous to Madagascar.\nRules.\nFanorona has three standard versions: Fanoron-Telo, Fanoron-Dimy, and Fanoron-Sivy. The difference between these variants is the size of board. Fanoron-Telo is played on a 3\u00d73 board and the difficulty can be compared to the game of Tic-tac-toe. Fanoron-Dimy is played on a 5\u00d75 board and Fanoron-Sivy is played on a 9\u00d75 board\u2014Sivy being the most popular. The Sivy board consists of lines and intersections that create a grid with 5 rows and 9 columns subdivided diagonally to form part of the tetrakis square tiling of the plane. A line represents the path where a stone can move during the game. There are weak and strong intersections. At a weak intersection, it is only possible to move a stone horizontally and vertically, while on a strong intersection, it is also possible to move a stone diagonally. A stone can only move from one intersection to an adjacent intersection. Black and white pieces, twenty-two each, are arranged on all points except the center. The objective of the game is to capture all the opponents pieces. The game is a draw if neither player succeeds in this. \nPlayers alternate turns, starting with White.\nHistory.\nFanorona is very popular in Madagascar. According to one version of a popular legend, an astrologer had advised King Ralambo to choose his successor by, while his sons were away from the capital, feigning sickness and urging their return; his kingdom would be given to the first son who returned home to him. When the king's messenger reached Ralambo's elder son Prince Andriantompokoindrindra, he was playing fanorona and trying to win a \"telo noho dimy\" (3 against 5) situation, one that is infamously difficult to resolve. As a result, his younger brother Prince Andrianjaka was the first to arrive and inherited the throne.\nFanorona inspired Christian Freeling's draughts variant Bushka, which in turn inspired the game Dameo.\nAnalysis.\nUsing 10,000 games with Alpha-beta pruning players, the game-tree complexity and state-space complexity can be computed. Fanorona has a game-tree complexity of ~1046 and a state-space complexity of ~1021.\nIn 2007, the game of Fanorona and smaller variants were solved weakly as a draw under perfect play. Both the moves f2-e3A and d3-e3A lead to a draw.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46779", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46779", "title": "Human-powered transport", "text": "Transport of goods and/or people only using human muscles\nHuman-powered transport is the transport of person(s) and/or goods (freight) using human muscle power. Unlike animal-powered transport, human-powered transport has existed since time immemorial in the form of walking, running and swimming, as well as small vehicles such as litters, rickshaws, wheelchairs and wheelbarrows. Modern technology has allowed mechanical advantage devices and machines to enhance human-power.\nAlthough motorization has increased speed and load capacity, many forms of human-powered transport remain popular for reasons of cost, convenience, leisure, physical exercise and environmentalism. Human-powered transport is sometimes the only type available, especially in underdeveloped or inaccessible regions.\nModes.\nHuman-powered vehicles (HPVs).\nLand vehicles.\nSkateboards have the advantage of being so small and light that users can easily carry them when not skating.\nThe most efficient and most popular human-powered land vehicle is the bicycle. Compared to the much more common upright bicycle, the recumbent bicycle may be faster on level ground or down hills due to better aerodynamics while having similar power transfer efficiency.\nThe velomobile has potential to be useful in colder and wetter climates due to increased protection offered against the environment. Cargo bikes are used to transport cargo. Cycle rickshaws can be used as taxicabs.\nIn 2016, AeroVelo cyclist Todd Reichert achieved the human-powered speed record of with a velomobile at Battle Mountain, Nevada.\nDutch cyclist Fred Rompelberg set a speed record at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah on October 3, 1995, while cycling in the wake of a motor dragster pace-car. The wake of the pace-car reduced the aerodynamic drag against which Rompelberg pedalled to almost zero.\nGreg Kolodziejzyk set two world records recognized by both the International Human Powered Vehicle Association and Guinness (TM) World Records on July 17, 2006, on a race track in Eureka, California. The first record is for the most distance traveled in 24 hours by human power , and the second for the world's fastest time trial (23 hours, 2 minutes).\nBoth records were broken on August 6, 2010, by Christian von Ascheberg who drove in 19 hours, 27 minutes and managed to go in 24 hours with his Milan SL Velomobile. In the same race he also raised the 12-hour record to , which is an average of .\nIn 1969, artists in a small Northern California town began the Kinetic sculpture race which has grown to a , three-day all terrain, human-powered sculpture race and county wide event. It is held every year on the last weekend in May.\nThe Shweeb system is a proposed transit network using recumbent bicycle technology to power pods suspended from monorails. A test built in Rotorua, New Zealand is open to the public as a leisure attraction. In September 2010 the system was chosen to receive funding from Google as part of project 10100. There are no active proposals for its implementation.\nAircraft.\nFixed wing.\nThe \"Pedaliante\" flew short distances fully under human power in 1936, but the distances were not significant enough to win the prize of the Italian competition for which it was built. The flights were deemed to be a result of the pilot's significant strength and endurance, and not attainable by a typical human. Additional attempts were made in 1937 and 1938 using a catapult system, launching the plane to a height of . With the catapult launch, the plane successfully traveled the distance outlined by the competition, but was declined the prize due to the takeoff method.\nThe first officially authenticated regularly feasible take-off and landing of a human-powered aircraft (one capable of powered takeoffs, unlike a glider) was made on 9 November 1961 by Derek Piggott in Southampton University's Man Powered Aircraft (SUMPAC).\nPerhaps the best-known human-powered plane is the Gossamer Albatross, which flew across the English Channel in 1979.\nThe current distance and duration record recognized by the FAI, a straight distance of in 3 hours and 54 minutes, was achieved on 23 April 1988 from Heraklion on Crete to Santorini in a MIT Daedalus 88 piloted by Greek cyclist Kanellos Kanellopoulos.\nThe current speed record recognized by the FAI is held by Musculair 2, built by G\u00fcnther Rochelt, which was flown at by Holger Rochelt in 1985.\nHelicopters.\nThe first officially observed human-powered helicopter to have left the ground was the Da Vinci III in 1989. It was designed and built by students at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in California, USA. It flew for 7.1 seconds and reached a height of . The second was the Yuri I in 1994, designed and built by students at Nihon University in Japan. It flew for 19.46 seconds and reached an altitude of . On 13 June 2013, the AeroVelo Atlas was the first to complete a flight that lasted 64 seconds and reached an altitude of 3.3 meters, thus winning the Sikorsky Prize.\nAirships and balloons.\nFrench inventors have built man-powered airships and balloons. Solar balloons and solar airships are new types of balloons and airships. Because lift is supplied through buoyancy, human power can be devoted to thrust.\nWatercraft.\nHuman-powered watercraft include prehistoric, historic and well-known traditional and sporting craft such as canoes, rowing boats and galleys. The term \"human-powered boat\" is often used for more modern craft using propellers and water wheels for propulsion. These can be more efficient than paddles or oars and especially allow the use of the leg muscles which are generally stronger than arm muscles, even for non-athletes. Competitive rowing boats use sliding seats to engage the legs for propulsion with an oar for this reason, but require considerable skill to use efficiently. In addition, there is little skill required for forward propulsion while looking forwards and craft such as pedalos are popular at resorts.\nHydrofoils.\nHydrofoils have less water resistance at the highest speeds attainable by humans and are thus usually faster than displacement boats on short courses. The world speed record on water was set 27 October 1991 by MIT professor Mark Drela who pedalled a human-powered hydrofoil, \"Decavitator\", to over a 100-meter course in Boston, Massachusetts, US.\nSubmarines.\nIn 1989, the first human-powered International Submarine Race (ISR) was held in Florida with 17 craft. Since then nine more races have been held. The races themselves have been moved from the waters of Florida to the David Taylor Model Basin at the Carderock Division of the Naval Surface Warfare Center in Bethesda, Maryland, and are held biennially. At the 9th ISR in 2007 (in which 23 submarines participated) several new records were set: A single-person craft, Omer5 achieved a record speed of breaking the Omer team's previous record of set by Omer 4 in 2004. Also Omer 6 snatched up a record for non-propeller driven craft with a speed of .\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46780", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46780", "title": "Iolanthe", "text": "1882 comic opera by Gilbert &amp; Sullivan\nIolanthe; or, The Peer and the Peri () is a comic opera with music by Arthur Sullivan and libretto by W. S. Gilbert, first performed in 1882. It is one of the Savoy operas and is the seventh of fourteen operatic collaborations by Gilbert and Sullivan. In the opera, the fairy Iolanthe has been banished from fairyland because she married a mortal; this is forbidden by fairy law. Her son, Strephon, is an Arcadian shepherd who wants to marry Phyllis, a Ward of Chancery. All the members of the House of Peers also want to marry Phyllis. When Phyllis sees Strephon hugging a young woman (not knowing that it is his mother \u2013 immortal fairies all appear young), she assumes the worst and sets off a climactic confrontation between the peers and the fairies. The opera satirises many aspects of British government, law and society. The confrontation between the fairies and the peers is a version of one of Gilbert's favourite themes: a tranquil civilisation of women is disrupted by a male-dominated world through the discovery of mortal love.\n\"Iolanthe\" opened in London on 25 November 1882, at the Savoy Theatre to a warm reception, and ran for 398 performances, the fourth consecutive hit by Gilbert and Sullivan. It was the first work to premiere at the Savoy (although \"Patience\" had transferred to the theatre in 1881) and was the first new theatre production in the world to be illuminated entirely with electric lights, permitting some special effects that had not been possible in the era of gas lighting. The opera opened simultaneously in New York, and touring companies were sent around the UK and US to play the piece. The first Australasian touring production followed in 1885, and the opera was revived in London beginning in 1901. The D'Oyly Carte Opera Company toured the opera nearly continuously in repertory from 1891 until 1982, and made several recordings of the opera over that period. Numerous other professional and amateur productions have been given of this enduring work, and various other recordings have been issued.\nBackground.\nW. S. Gilbert presented his basic idea for a new opera to Arthur Sullivan in October 1881. Gilbert's earliest ideas for the story of \"Iolanthe\" originated in his \"Bab Ballad\", \"The Fairy Curate\": \"Once a fairy / Light and airy / Married with a mortal\". The fairy marries a \"prosaic\" attorney and bears him a son. After her son grows up, she visits him on Earth, but she is mistaken for his lover, since fairies perpetually appear young and beautiful. Sullivan found the premise funny, and Gilbert set to work on fleshing out the story. By December, he had written some lyrics for Sullivan to look at, but he struggled with the plot for several months, whereas he had dashed off earlier operas in a matter of weeks. During these months, Sullivan took an extended trip to Egypt, Italy and elsewhere. Upon his return to London in April 1882, he moved into a new home; in May, his beloved mother died rather suddenly. By the end of July 1882, Gilbert had supplied Sullivan with lyrics to several of the songs, and Sullivan began work setting them to music. Over the next two months, Sullivan met Gilbert to discuss the libretto as more lyrics were completed. Music rehearsals began in September, and staging began in October, scheduled around performances of Gilbert and Sullivan's previous opera, \"Patience\", which had transferred to the Savoy Theatre a year earlier. Sullivan was still composing more numbers for the opera until 20 October, with a few modifications continuing into early November. Uncharacteristically, Sullivan composed the overture himself, instead of assigning it to an assistant. Two casts rehearsed simultaneously, as the opera was to open on the same night in London and New York City, a historic first for any play.\nGilbert had targeted the aristocracy and political officials for satiric treatment in earlier works. In this opera, the House of Lords is lampooned as a bastion of the ineffective, privileged and dim-witted, whose only qualification to govern is noble birth. The political party system, the law and other institutions also come in for a dose of satire. Throughout \"Iolanthe\", however, both author and composer managed to couch the criticism among such bouncy, amiable absurdities and \"splendid pageantry\" that it is all received as good humour, with Prime Minister Gladstone complimenting the opera's good taste. In fact, Gilbert later refused to allow quotes from the piece to be used as part of the campaign to diminish the powers of the House of Lords.\nAlthough titled \"Iolanthe\" all along in Gilbert's plot book, for a time the piece was advertised as \"Perola\" and rehearsed under that name. According to an often-repeated myth, Gilbert and Sullivan did not change the name to \"Iolanthe\" until just before the premi\u00e8re. In fact, however, the title was advertised as \"Iolanthe\" as early as 13 November 1882 \u2013 eleven days before the opening \u2013 so the cast had at least that much time to learn the name. It is also clear that Sullivan's musical setting was written to match the cadence of the word \"Iolanthe\", and could only accommodate the word \"Perola\" by preceding it (awkwardly) with \"O\", \"Come\" or \"Ah\". Henry Irving had produced a W. G. Wills adaptation of \"King Ren\u00e9's Daughter\" in London in 1880, under the name \"Iolanthe\", and in October 1882 Gilbert asked his producer, Richard D'Oyly Carte, to request Irving's permission to use the name. It is not known whether Irving replied.\n\"Iolanthe\" premiered only three days after \"Patience\" closed at the Savoy. The Savoy Theatre, opened only a year earlier, was a state-of-the-art facility, the first theatre in the world to be lit entirely by electricity. \"Patience\" had transferred to the Savoy from the Opera Comique, upon the theatre's opening, but \"Iolanthe\" was the first show to premiere at the theatre. New lighting technologies made such special effects as sparkling fairy wands possible for the first time. The principal fairies' heads were also lit by wreaths of small illuminated stars attached to a battery. The audience that attended the opening night in London included Captain (later Captain Sir) Eyre Massey Shaw, head of the Metropolitan Fire Brigade, whom the Fairy Queen apostrophises in the second act (\"Oh, Captain Shaw / Type of true love kept under / Could thy brigade with cold cascade / Quench my great love, I wonder?\"). On the first night Alice Barnett, as the Queen of the Fairies, sang the verses directly to Captain Shaw, who was sitting in the centre of the stalls.\nThe opera's premiere was received by an enthusiastic audience and earned critical praise, although there was general agreement that the second act needed some trimming. \"Iolanthe\" became the fourth consecutive major success for Gilbert, Sullivan and their producer, Richard D'Oyly Carte, following \"H.M.S. Pinafore\" (1878), \"The Pirates of Penzance\" (1879) and \"Patience\" (1881). Increasingly viewing his work with Gilbert as frivolous, beneath his skills and repetitious, Sullivan had intended to resign from the partnership with Gilbert and Carte after \"Iolanthe\", but on the day of its premiere, he received a letter from his broker, Edward Hall, notifying him that Hall had lost all his money, including \u00a37,000 of Sullivan's investments, the bulk of his fortune. Sullivan's lifestyle was not inexpensive, and he was helping to support his late brother's large family, as well as his mistress, Fanny Ronalds, and her family. He soon concluded that the only certain way to restore his financial security was to continue writing Savoy operas. On 8 February 1883, he signed a new five-year creative partnership agreement with Gilbert and Carte; Gilbert was already at work on their next piece, \"Princess Ida\". On 22 May 1883, Sullivan was knighted by Queen Victoria for his \"services ... rendered to the promotion of the art of music\" in Britain.\nSynopsis.\nAct I\nThe beloved fairy Iolanthe, who arranged the fairies' songs and dances, committed the capital crime (under fairy law) of marrying a mortal man. The Queen of the fairies commuted Iolanthe's sentence of death to banishment for life on the condition that she left her husband and never communicated with him again. After the passage of 25 years, the fairies, still missing Iolanthe deeply, plead with their Queen to pardon Iolanthe and to restore her place in fairyland (\"Tripping hither, tripping thither\").\nSummoned by the Fairy Queen (\"Iolanthe! From thy dark exile thou art summoned\"), Iolanthe rises from the frog-infested stream that has been her home in exile. The Queen, unable to bear punishing her any longer, pardons Iolanthe, who is warmly greeted by the other fairies. Iolanthe tells her sisters that she has a son, Strephon, noting that he's a fairy down to the waist, but his legs are mortal. The fairies laugh that Iolanthe appears too young to have a grown son, as one of the advantages of a fairy's immortality is that they never grow old. Strephon, a handsome Arcadian shepherd, arrives and meets his aunts (\"Good-morrow, good mother\"). He tells Iolanthe of his love for the Lord Chancellor's ward of court, the beautiful Phyllis, who does not know of Strephon's mixed origin. Strephon is despondent, however, as the Lord Chancellor has forbidden them to marry, partly because he feels that a shepherd is unsuitable for Phyllis, but partly because the Lord Chancellor wishes to marry Phyllis himself. In fact, so do half the members of Britain's House of Lords. The Fairy Queen promises her assistance (\"Fare thee well, attractive stranger\"). Soon Phyllis arrives, and she and Strephon share a moment of tenderness as they plan their future and possible elopement (\"Good-morrow, good lover\"; \"None shall part us from each other\").\nA cadre of the peers of the realm arrive in noisy splendour (\"Loudly let the trumpet bray\") with the Lord Chancellor (\"The law is the true embodiment\"). They are all smitten with Phyllis, and they have appealed to the Lord Chancellor to decide who will have her hand. The Lord Chancellor hesitates to act upon his own regard for Phyllis due to his position as her guardian. The Lords send for Phyllis to choose one of their number, but she will not marry any of them, as virtue is found only in a \"lowly\" cottage (\"My well-loved Lord\" and \"Nay, tempt me not\"). The peers beg her not to scorn them simply because of their \"blue blood\" (\"Spurn not the nobly born\" and \"My lords, it may not be\"). Strephon approaches the Lord Chancellor, pleading that Nature bids him marry Phyllis. But the Lord Chancellor wryly notes that Strephon has not presented sufficient evidence that Nature has interested herself in the matter. He refuses his consent to the marriage between Strephon and Phyllis (\"When I went to the Bar\").\nDisappointed, Strephon calls on Iolanthe for help. She appears and promises to support her son. Spying on the two, the peers \u2013 led by the brainless and stuffy Earls Tolloller and Mountararat \u2013 together with Phyllis, see Iolanthe and Strephon in a warm embrace. All three jump to the obvious conclusion, since the centuries-old Iolanthe appears to be a girl of seventeen (\"When darkly looms the day\"). The peers scoff at the seemingly absurd claim that Iolanthe is Strephon's mother as Strephon pleads: \"She is, has been, my mother from my birth!\" Phyllis angrily rejects Strephon for his supposed infidelity and declares that she will marry either Lord Tolloller or Lord Mountararat (\"...and I don't care which!\"). Strephon then calls for help from the fairies, who appear but are mistaken by the peers for a girls' school on an outing. Offended, the Fairy Queen pronounces a magical \"sentence\" upon the peers: Strephon shall not only become a member of parliament but will also have the power to pass any bill he proposes (\"With Strephon for your foe, no doubt\").\nAct II\nPrivate Willis, on night guard duty, marches outside the Palace of Westminster and muses on political life (\"When all night long a chap remains\"). The fairies arrive and tease the peers about Strephon's parliamentary success; he is advancing a bill to open the peerage to competitive examination (\"Strephon's a member of Parliament\"). The peers ask the fairies to stop Strephon's mischief, stating that the House of Peers is not susceptible of any improvement (\"When Britain really ruled the waves\"). Although the fairies say that they cannot stop Strephon, they have become strongly attracted to the peers (\"In vain to us you plead\"). The fairy Queen is dismayed by this. Pointing to Private Willis of the First Grenadier Guards, who is still on duty, the Queen claims that she is able to subdue her response to the effects of his manly beauty (\"Oh, foolish fay\").\nPhyllis cannot decide whether she ought to marry Tolloller or Mountararat, and so she leaves the choice up to them. Tolloller tells Mountararat that his family's tradition would require the two Earls to duel to the death if the latter were to claim Phyllis. The two decide that their friendship is more important than love and renounce their claims to her (\"Though p'r'aps I may incur thy blame\"). The Lord Chancellor arrives dressed for bed and describes a nightmare caused by his unrequited love for Phyllis (\"Love, unrequited, robs me of my rest\"). The two peers try to cheer him up and urge him to make another effort to persuade himself to award Phyllis to ... himself (\"If you go in you're sure to win\").\nStrephon now leads both parties in Parliament, but he is miserable at losing Phyllis. He sees Phyllis and reveals to her that his mother is a fairy, which accounts for her apparent youth (\"If we're weak enough to tarry\"). Phyllis and Strephon ask Iolanthe to plead with the Lord Chancellor to allow their marriage, for \"none can resist your fairy eloquence.\" This is impossible, she replies, for the Lord Chancellor is her husband. He believes Iolanthe to have died childless, and she is bound not to \"undeceive\" him, under penalty of death. However, to save Strephon from losing his love, Iolanthe resolves to present his case to the Lord Chancellor while veiled (\"My lord, a suppliant at your feet\").\nAlthough the Lord Chancellor is moved by her appeal, which evokes the memory of his wife, he declares that he himself will marry Phyllis. Desperate, Iolanthe unveils, ignoring the warnings of the unseen Fairies, revealing that she is his long-lost wife, and Strephon is his son. The Lord Chancellor is amazed to see her alive, but Iolanthe has again broken fairy law, and the Fairy Queen is now left with no choice but to punish Iolanthe with death (\"It may not be ... Once again thy vow is broken\"). As she prepares to execute Iolanthe, the Queen learns that the rest of the fairies have chosen husbands from among the peers, thus also incurring death sentences \u2013 but the Queen blanches at the prospect of slaughtering all of them. The Lord Chancellor suggests a solution: change the law by inserting a single word: \"every fairy shall die who doesn't marry a mortal.\" The Fairy Queen cheerfully agrees and, to save her life, the dutiful soldier, Private Willis, agrees to marry her. Seeing no reason to stay in the mortal realm if peers are to be recruited \"from persons of intelligence\", the peers join the fairy ranks and \"away [they] go to fairyland\" (\"Soon as we may, off and away\").\nMusical numbers.\nAct I\nAct II\nMusical and textual analysis.\nAt the time they wrote \"Iolanthe\", both Gilbert and Sullivan were in their peak creative years, and \"Iolanthe\", their seventh work together, drew the best from both composer and author. Sullivan's biographer, Arthur Jacobs, wrote: \"[Sullivan] had composed a brilliant new score (his most subtle yet) to a scintillating libretto. ... \"Iolanthe\" is the work in which Sullivan's operetta style takes a definite step forward, and metamorphosis of musical themes is its characteristic new feature. ... By recurrence and metamorphosis of themes Sullivan made the score more fluid\". Sullivan's overture was superior in structure and orchestration to those that his assistants had constructed for the earlier operas. Much of his \"fairy\" music pays deliberate homage to the incidental music written by Felix Mendelssohn for an 1842 production of Shakespeare's \"A Midsummer Night's Dream\". Richard Wagner's \"Ring\" cycle premiered in London earlier in 1882. The music for the fairies reflects Wagner's style, and the score uses leitmotifs, including a distinctive four-note theme associated with the character of Iolanthe. The Fairy Queen's music parodies that of Wagnerian heroines such as Br\u00fcnnhilde. The score is wider in range of emotion and style, with innovative use of pizzicato strings, clever and varied underscoring of patter, the tender, sentimental eleventh-hour number for the title character, apt matching of the music to the absurd comedy of the lyrics, and a sustained first act finale with a series of dramatic situations that ends with the confrontation between the fairies and peers.\nGilbert, too, was influenced by earlier works, including \"The Mountain Sylph\" by John Barnett. Two characters in \"Iolanthe\", Strephon and Phyllis, are described as \"Arcadian\" shepherds. Arcadia was a legendary site of rural perfection, first described by the Ancient Greeks, that was a popular setting for writers of the 19th century. Gilbert had written an earlier work called \"Happy Arcadia\". He had also created several \"fairy comedies\" at the Haymarket Theatre in the early 1870s. These plays, influenced by the fairy work of James Planch\u00e9, are founded upon the idea of self-revelation by characters under the influence of some magic or some supernatural interference. Several of \"Iolanthe's\" themes are continued from \"Patience\", including the battle between the sexes and the satire on legal and political themes. \"Iolanthe\" is one of several of Gilbert's works, including among others \"The Wicked World\", \"Broken Hearts\", \"Fallen Fairies\" and \"Princess Ida\", where the introduction of males into a tranquil world of women brings \"mortal love\" that wreaks havoc with the status quo.\nGilbert's absurdist style is on full display in \"Iolanthe\". For example, all the members of the House of Lords are in love with Phyllis, a ward of the Lord Chancellor. Gilbert satirically sets up the fantastical fairies as the agents of common sense in contrast with the nonsensical peers, who should be sober parliamentarians, while the most poetically romantic of the fairies, the \"Arcadian\" shepherd, Strephon, is chosen to lead both houses of Parliament. One of Gilbert's biographers, Andrew Crowther wrote: \"The things that make [the opera] memorable as a work of art [include] the peers entering in the full pomp of their formal robes, magnificent and ridiculous.\" Among many pot-shots that Gilbert takes at lawyers in this opera, the Lord Chancellor sings that, as a young lawyer, he decided to \"work on a new and original plan\" similar to the practice in other professions, that diligence, honesty, honour and merit should lead to promotion. Gilbert uses the \"fairy law\" as a proxy for mortal law, in which an \"equity draughtsman\" can, with \"the insertion of a single word\", change the entire meaning of the law. Crowther notes: \"All kinds of tone ... mingle in this opera: whimsy, fantasy, romance, wit and political satire.\"\nProductions.\n\"Iolanthe\" had a successful initial run in London of 398 performances, spanning the holiday seasons of both 1882 and 1883. Gilbert designed the costumes himself, and sets were by the Drury Lane designer Henry Emden. In an unprecedented first for any play, the New York premiere was given on the same date \u2013 25 November 1882, with the composer's assistant, Alfred Cellier, conducting there. In Australia, \"Iolanthe\" was first seen on 9 May 1885 at the Theatre Royal, Melbourne, produced by J. C. Williamson.\nIn the British provinces, \"Iolanthe\" played \u2013 either by itself, or in repertory \u2013 continuously from February 1882 through 1885, then not again until late 1891. From then on, it was always present in the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company's touring repertory, being included in some part of every season until the company's closure in 1982. Most of the costumes were redesigned by Percy Anderson in 1915 and by George Sheringham in 1932, and Peter Goffin designed new sets in 1957 and some new costumes in 1960. After its original production, \"Iolanthe\" was not revived in London until 1901, making it the first of the operas to be revived after the composer's death the year before. It was also included in two Savoy repertory seasons, in 1907 and 1908\u201309.\n\"Iolanthe\" was the first Gilbert and Sullivan opera performed professionally in Britain by a non-D'Oyly Carte company. It was produced by the Sadler's Wells Opera (now English National Opera) in January 1962, immediately after the Gilbert copyrights expired. It was well received and was successfully revived for many seasons by Sadler's Wells until 1978. Michael Heyland restaged \"Iolanthe\" for D'Oyly Carte in 1977, the year of Queen Elizabeth's Silver Jubilee, with silver-themed designs. \"Iolanthe\" has remained one of the most popular of the Gilbert and Sullivan works. Thousands of professional and amateur productions of the opera have been given throughout the English-speaking world, and the opera continues to be performed regularly today. The Internet Broadway Database lists 20 productions of the opera on Broadway alone.\nThe following table shows the history of the D'Oyly Carte productions in Gilbert's lifetime (not including touring companies):\nHistorical casting.\nThe following tables show the casts of the principal original productions and D'Oyly Carte Opera Company touring repertory at various times through to the company's 1982 closure:\nSelected recordings.\nOf the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company recordings of this opera, the 1930 and 1960 recordings have been the best received, and the latter includes the dialogue. The revived D'Oyly Carte's 1991 recording contains Strephon's cut number \"Fold Your Flapping Wings\" as a bonus track.\nOn video are the 1982 Brent Walker production and more recent performances from the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival.\nCultural influence.\nWhen Margaret Thatcher was elected as Prime Minister, the press joked about the line from the opera, \"This comes of women interfering in politics!\" Lord Falconer, who served as Tony Blair's second Lord Chancellor, was reportedly influenced by \"Iolanthe\" in his moves to reform or disband the office.\nWilliam H. Rehnquist, former Chief Justice of the United States, was an avid Gilbert and Sullivan fan and was inspired by the costume of the Lord Chancellor, in a production of \"Iolanthe\", to add four golden stripes to the sleeves of his judicial robes. The next Chief Justice, John G. Roberts Jr., did not retain the ornamentation. In 1980, while an Associate Justice, Rehnquist, in his dissenting opinion in the case of \"Richmond Newspapers, Inc. v. Virginia\", compares these words of the Lord Chancellor to the \"flavor from the various opinions supporting the judgment in this case\": \"The Law is the true embodiment/Of everything that's excellent,/It has no kind of fault or flaw,/And I, My Lords, embody the Law.\"\n\"The Ratepayers' Iolanthe\" was a 1984 musical adapted by Ned Sherrin and Alistair Beaton. Sherrin directed and won a Laurence Olivier Award for Outstanding Achievement in a Musical for the musical's \"conception\".\nThe science fiction writer Isaac Asimov was a Gilbert and Sullivan fan. His Foundation Trilogy was conceived after his reading \"Iolanthe\" started a train of thought about military empires. Also, in \"Runaround\", a story in Asimov's \"I, Robot\", a robot, while in a state similar to drunkenness, sings snippets of Gilbert and Sullivan songs, including \"The Nightmare Song\" from \"Iolanthe\". In Michael Chabon's 2004 novel \"The Final Solution\", Bruno the parrot sings bits from \"Iolanthe\". The eponymous hero of David Nobbs' \"The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin\" has \"Iolanthe\" as a middle name, allegedly due to his being born during a performance of the opera. An illustrated booklet, \"A Parody on Iolanthe\", was written and published by D. Dalziel in 1883 and concerns the Chicago &amp; Alton Railway.\nIn his 1974 album \"Todd\", Todd Rundgren performs the \"Lord Chancellor's Nightmare Song\" (\"When you're lying awake...\").\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46781", "revid": "5230548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46781", "title": "Optical astronomy", "text": ""}
{"id": "46784", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46784", "title": "Daniel Bernoulli", "text": "Swiss mathematician and physicist (1700\u20131782)\nDaniel Bernoulli ( ; ; 8 February\u00a0[O.S. 29 January]\u00a01700 \u2013 27 March 1782) was a Swiss mathematician and physicist and was one of the many prominent mathematicians in the Bernoulli family from Basel. He is particularly remembered for his applications of mathematics to mechanics, especially fluid mechanics, and for his pioneering work in probability and statistics. His name is commemorated in the Bernoulli's principle, a particular example of the conservation of energy, which describes the mathematics of the mechanism underlying the operation of two important technologies of the 20th century: the carburetor and the aeroplane wing.\nEarly life.\nDaniel Bernoulli was born in Groningen, in the Netherlands, into a family of distinguished mathematicians. The Bernoulli family came originally from Antwerp, at that time in the Spanish Netherlands, but emigrated to escape the Spanish persecution of the Protestants. After a brief period in Frankfurt the family moved to Basel, in Switzerland.\nDaniel was the son of Johann Bernoulli (one of the early developers of calculus) and a nephew of Jacob Bernoulli (an early researcher in probability theory and the discoverer of the mathematical constant e). He had two brothers, Niklaus and Johann II. Daniel Bernoulli was described by W. W. Rouse Ball as \"by far the ablest of the younger Bernoullis\".\nHe is said to have had a bad relationship with his father. Both of them entered and tied for first place in a scientific contest at the University of Paris. Johann banned Daniel from his house, allegedly being unable to bear the \"shame\" of Daniel being considered his equal. Johann allegedly plagiarized key ideas from Daniel's book \"Hydrodynamica\" in his book \"Hydraulica\" and backdated them to before \"Hydrodynamica\". Daniel's attempts at reconciliation with his father were unsuccessful.\nWhen he was in school, Johann encouraged Daniel to study business citing poor financial compensation for mathematicians. Daniel initially refused but later relented and studied both business and medicine at his father's behest under the condition that his father would teach him mathematics privately. Daniel studied medicine at Basel, Heidelberg, and Strasbourg, and earned a PhD in anatomy and botany in 1721.\nHe was a contemporary and close friend of Leonhard Euler. He went to St. Petersburg in 1724 as professor of mathematics, but was very unhappy there. A temporary illness together with the censorship by the Russian Orthodox Church and disagreements over his salary gave him an excuse for leaving St. Petersburg in 1733. He returned to the University of Basel, where he successively held the chairs of medicine, metaphysics, and natural philosophy until his death.\nIn May 1750 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.\nMathematical work.\nHis earliest mathematical work was the \"Exercitationes\" (\"Mathematical Exercises\"), published in 1724 with the help of Goldbach. Two years later he pointed out for the first time the frequent desirability of resolving a compound motion into motions of translation and motion of rotation. In 1729, he published a polynomial root-finding algorithm which became known as Bernoulli's method. His chief work is \"Hydrodynamica\", published in 1738. It resembles Joseph Louis Lagrange's \"M\u00e9canique Analytique\" in being arranged so that all the results are consequences of a single principle, namely, the conservation of vis viva, an early version of the conservation of energy. This was followed by a memoir on the theory of the tides, to which, conjointly with the memoirs by Euler and Colin Maclaurin, a prize was awarded by the French Academy: these three memoirs contain all that was done on this subject between the publication of Isaac Newton's \"Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica\" and the investigations of Pierre-Simon Laplace. Bernoulli also wrote a large number of papers on various mechanical questions, especially on problems connected with vibrating strings, and the solutions given by Brook Taylor and by Jean le Rond d'Alembert.\nEconomics and statistics.\nIn his 1738 book \"Specimen theoriae novae de mensura sortis (Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of Risk)\", Bernoulli offered a solution to the St. Petersburg paradox as the basis of the economic theory of risk aversion, risk premium, and utility. Bernoulli often noticed that when making decisions that involved some uncertainty, people did not always try to maximize their possible monetary gain, but rather tried to maximize \"utility\", an economic term encompassing their personal satisfaction and benefit. Bernoulli realized that for humans, there is a direct relationship between money gained and utility, but that it diminishes as the money gained increases. For example, to a person whose income is $10,000 per year, an additional $100 in income will provide more utility than it would to a person whose income is $50,000 per year.\nOne of the earliest attempts to analyze a statistical problem involving censored data was Bernoulli's 1766 analysis of smallpox morbidity and mortality data to demonstrate the efficacy of inoculation.\nPhysics.\nIn \"Hydrodynamica\" (1738) he laid the basis for the kinetic theory of gases, and applied the idea to explain Boyle's law.\nHe worked with Euler on elasticity and the development of the Euler\u2013Bernoulli beam equation. Bernoulli's principle is of critical use in hydrodynamics.\nAccording to L\u00e9on Brillouin, the principle of superposition was first stated by Daniel Bernoulli in 1753: \"The general motion of a vibrating system is given by a superposition of its proper vibrations.\"\nLegacy.\nIn 2002, Bernoulli was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air &amp; Space Museum.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46788", "revid": "133598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46788", "title": "PzH 2000 howitzer", "text": ""}
{"id": "46789", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46789", "title": "Jean-Baptiste Say", "text": "French economist and businessman (1767\u20131832)\nJean-Baptiste Say (; 5 January 1767 \u2013 15 November 1832) was a liberal French economist and businessman who argued in favor of competition, free trade and lifting restraints on business. He is best known for Say's law\u2014also known as the law of markets\u2014which he popularized, although scholars disagree as to whether it was Say who first articulated the theory. Moreover, he was one of the first economists to study entrepreneurship and conceptualized entrepreneurs as organizers and leaders of the economy. He was also closely involved in the development of the \u00c9cole sp\u00e9ciale de commerce et d'industrie (ESCP), historically the first business school to be established.\nEarly life.\nSay was born in Lyon. His father Jean-Etienne Say was born to a Protestant family which had moved from N\u00eemes to Geneva for some time in consequence of the revocation of the Edict of Nantes. Say was intended to follow a commercial career and in 1785 was sent with his brother Horace to complete his education in England. He lodged for a time in Croydon and afterwards (following a return visit to France) in Fulham. During the latter period, he was employed successively by two London-based firms of sugar merchants, James Baillie &amp; Co and Samuel and William Hibbert. At the end of 1786, he accompanied Samuel Hibbert on a voyage to France which ended in December with Hibbert's death in Nantes. Say returned to Paris, where he found employment in the office of a life assurance company directed by \u00c9tienne Clavi\u00e8re. His brother Louis Auguste (1774\u20131840) also became an economist.\nWritings, teaching and entrepreneurship.\nSay's first literary attempt was a pamphlet on the liberty of the press, published in 1789. He later worked under Mirabeau on the \"Courrier de Provence\". In 1792, he took part as a volunteer in the campaign of Champagne. In 1793, he assumed in keeping with French Revolutionary fashion the pseudonym Atticus and became secretary to \u00c9tienne Clavi\u00e8re, the then finance minister.\nFrom 1794 to 1800, he edited a periodical, entitled \"La Decade philosophique, litteraire, et politique\", in which he expounded the doctrines of Adam Smith. He had by this time established his reputation as a publicist and when the consular government was established in 1799 he was selected as one of the 100 members of the Tribunat, resigning the editorship of the \"Decade\". In 1798, Say published \"Olbie, ou essai sur les moyens de r\u00e9former les m\u0153urs d'une nation\". In 1803, he published his principal work, the \"Trait\u00e9 d'\u00e9conomie politique ou simple exposition de la mani\u00e8re dont se forment, se distribuent et se composent les richesses\". Having proved unwilling to compromise his convictions in the interests of Napoleon, Say was removed from the office of tribune in 1804. He turned to industrial activities and after having familiarised himself with the processes of cotton manufacture he established a spinning-mill at Auchy-l\u00e8s-Hesdin in the Pas de Calais which employed some 400\u2013500 people, mainly women and children. He devoted his leisure time to revising his economic treatise which had been out of print for some time, but the system of state censorship in place prevented him from republishing it.\nIn 1814, Say availed himself (to use his own words) of the relative liberty arising from the entrance of the allied powers into France to bring out a second edition of the work dedicated to the emperor Alexander I of Russia, who had professed himself his pupil. In the same year, the French government sent him to study the economic condition of the United Kingdom. The results of his observations appeared in a tract, \"De l'Angleterre et des Anglais\". A third edition of the \"Trait\u00e9\" appeared in 1817.\nA chair of industrial economy was established for him in 1819 at the Conservatoire des Arts et M\u00e9tiers. In 1825, he became a member of the improvement council of the \"\u00c9cole sp\u00e9ciale de commerce et d'industrie\", later renamed \u00c9cole Sup\u00e9rieure de Commerce de Paris, now ESCP Business School, one of the first business schools in the world. In 1831, he was made professor of political economy at the Coll\u00e8ge de France. In 1828\u20131830, he published his \"Cours complet d'\u00e9conomie politique pratique\".\nSay's law.\nSay is well known for Say's law, or the law of markets, often controversially summarised as:\nSay's law is instead uncontroversially summarized as:\nThe exact phrase \"supply creates its own demand\" was coined by John Maynard Keynes, who criticized it as in the former two, equating all four of these statements to mean the same thing. Some economists, including some advocates of Say's law who dispute this characterization as a misrepresentation, have disputed his interpretation, claiming that Say's law can actually be summarized more accurately as \"production precedes consumption\" and that Say was claiming that in order to consume one must produce something of value so that one can trade this (either in the form of money or barter) in order to consume later.\nSimilar sentiments through different wordings appear in the work of John Stuart Mill (1848) and his father James Mill (1808). The Scottish classical economist James Mill restates Say's law in 1808, writing that \"production of commodities creates, and is the one and universal cause which creates a market for the commodities produced\".\nIn Say's language, \"products are paid for with products\" (1803, p.\u00a0153) or \"a glut can take place only when there are too many means of production applied to one kind of product and not enough to another\" (1803, pp.\u00a0178\u2013179). Explaining his point at length, he wrote the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is worthwhile to remark that a product is no sooner created than it, from that instant, affords a market for other products to the full extent of its own value. When the producer has put the finishing hand to his product, he is most anxious to sell it immediately, lest its value should diminish in his hands. Nor is he less anxious to dispose of the money he may get for it; for the value of money is also perishable. But the only way of getting rid of money is in the purchase of some product or other. Thus the mere circumstance of creation of one product immediately opens a vent for other products.\nSay also wrote that it is not the abundance of money, but the abundance of other products in general that facilitates sales:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Money performs but a momentary function in this double exchange; and when the transaction is finally closed, it will always be found, that one kind of commodity has been exchanged for another.\nSay's law may also have been culled from Ecclesiastes 5:11 \u2013 \"When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their eyes?\" (KJV). Say's law has been considered by John Kenneth Galbraith as \"the most distinguished example of the stability of economic ideas, including when they are wrong\".\nSay's law emerged during the early period of the Industrial Revolution, at a time when the economic phenomena of increased output merged with England's cyclical inability to maintain both sales and unemployment. This led many to believe that there was a limit to the growth of production, and there may come a point when there is no means of purchasing all output generated. Say's law of markets deals with the fact that production of commodities causes income to be paid to suppliers of the components of capital, labor, and land used in producing these goods and services. The sale price of these commodities is the sum of the payments of wages, rents, and profit. Income generated during production of a commodity equals the value of that commodity. Therefore, an increase in the supply of output will result in an increase in the income necessary to generate demand for those products.\nTheory of entrepreneurship.\nIn the \"Treatise\", his main economic work, Say stated that any production process required effort, knowledge and the \"application\" of the entrepreneur. According to him, entrepreneurs are intermediaries in the production process who combine productive agents such as land, capital and labor in order to meet the demand of consumers. As a result, they play a central role in the economy and fulfil a coordinating role.\nBesides studying large-scale entrepreneurs, Say looked at people working for themselves:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When a workman carries on an enterprise on his own account, as the knife grinder in the streets, he is both workman and entrepreneur.\nSay also thought about which qualities are essential for successful entrepreneurs and highlighted the quality of judgement. To his mind, entrepreneurs have to continuously assess market needs and the means which could meet them, which requires an \"unerring market sense\".\nAs he emphasized the coordinating function of entrepreneurs, Say viewed entrepreneurial income primarily as high wages that are paid in compensation for the skills and expert knowledge of entrepreneurs. He did so by making a distinction between the enterprise function and the supply-of-capital-function which allowed him to look at the earnings of the entrepreneur on the one hand and the remuneration of capital on the other hand. This clearly differentiates his theory from that of Joseph Schumpeter, who described entrepreneurial rent as short-term profits that compensate for high risk (Schumpeterian rent). Say also touched upon risk and uncertainty as well as innovation when discussing entrepreneurship, although he never deeply investigated their relationships. However, Say stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[In any enterprise activity] there is an abundance of obstacles to be surmounted, of anxieties to be repressed, of misfortunes to be repaired, and of expedients to be devised [...] [and] there is always a degree of risk attending such undertakings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Sometimes a manufacturer discovers a process, calculated either to introduce a new product, to increase the beauty of an old one, or to produce with greater economy.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1793, Say married Mlle Deloche, daughter of a former lawyer.\nHonours.\nIn 1826, Say was elected a foreign member of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.\nLater years and death.\nIn his later years, Say became subject to attacks of nervous apoplexy. He lost his wife in January 1830 and from that time his health declined. When the revolution of that year broke out, Say was named a member of the council-general of the department of the Seine, but he found it necessary to resign.\nSay died in Paris on 15 November 1832 and was buried in the P\u00e8re Lachaise Cemetery.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "46790", "revid": "46992329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46790", "title": "Desert varnish", "text": "Orange-to-black rock coating in arid environments\nDesert varnish or rock varnish is an orange-yellow to black coating found on exposed rock surfaces in arid environments. Desert varnish is approximately one micrometer thick and exhibits nanometer-scale layering. Rock rust and desert patina are other terms which are also used for the condition, but less often.\nFormation.\nDesert varnish forms only on physically stable rock surfaces that are no longer subject to frequent precipitation, fracturing or wind abrasion. The varnish is primarily composed of particles of clay along with oxides of iron and manganese. There is also a host of trace elements and almost always some organic matter. The color of the varnish varies from shades of brown to black.\nIt has been suggested that desert varnish should be investigated as a potential candidate for a \"shadow biosphere\". However, a 2008 microscopy study posited that desert varnish has already been reproduced with chemistry not involving life in the lab, and that the main component is actually silica and not clay as previously thought. The study notes that desert varnish is an excellent fossilizer for microbes and indicator of water. Desert varnish appears to have been observed by rovers on Mars, and if examined may contain fossilized life from Mars's wet period.\nComposition.\nOriginally scientists thought that the varnish was made from substances drawn out of the rocks it coats. Microscopic and microchemical observations, however, show that a major part of varnish is clay, which could only arrive by wind. Clay, then, acts as a substrate to catch additional substances that chemically react together when the rock reaches high temperatures in the desert sun. Wetting by dew is also important in the process.\nAn important characteristic of black desert varnish is that it has an unusually high concentration of manganese. Manganese is relatively rare in the Earth's crust, making up only 0.12% of its weight. In black desert varnish, however, manganese is 50 to 60 times more abundant. One proposal for a mechanism of desert varnish formation is that it is caused by manganese-oxidizing microbes (mixotrophs) which are common in environments poor in organic nutrients. A micro-environment pH above 7.5 is inhospitable for manganese-concentrating microbes. In such conditions, orange varnishes develop, poor in manganese (Mn) but rich in iron (Fe). An alternative hypothesis for Mn/Fe fluctuation has been proposed that considers Mn-rich and Fe-rich varnishes to be related to humid and arid climates, respectively.\nEven though it contains high concentrations of iron and manganese, there are no significant modern uses of desert varnish. However, some Native American peoples created petroglyphs by scraping or chipping away the dark varnish to expose the lighter rock beneath.\nDesert varnish often obscures the identity of the underlying rock, and different rocks have varying abilities to accept and retain varnish. Limestones, for example, typically do not have varnish because they are too water-soluble and therefore do not provide a stable surface for varnish to form. Shiny, dense and black varnishes form on basalt, fine quartzites and metamorphosed shales due to these rocks' relatively high resistance to weathering.\nIts presence has been cited as a key factor in the preservation of a large number of petroglyphs dating back to the Iron Age and earlier in areas such as the Wadi Saham in the United Arab Emirates.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "46792", "revid": "1169106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46792", "title": "National park (United States)", "text": ""}
