{"id": "53350", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53350", "title": "Place Charles de Gaulle", "text": "Public square in Paris, France\nThe Place Charles de Gaulle (), historically known as the Place de l'\u00c9toile (), is a large road junction in Paris, France, the meeting point of twelve straight avenues (hence its historic name, which translates as \"Square of the Star\") including the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. It was renamed in 1970, following the death of former President Charles de Gaulle. It is still often referred to by its original name; the nearby M\u00e9tro and RER station retains the designation Charles de Gaulle\u2013\u00c9toile. Paris's \"Axe historique\" (\"historical axis\") cuts through the Arc de Triomphe, which stands at the centre of the Place Charles de Gaulle.\nHistory.\nThe original name of the area was the \"Butte Chaillot\" (\"Chaillot Mound\", named after the locality). At the time, it was the point of convergence of several hunting trails. The Marquis de Marigny constructed monumental roadworks, completed in 1777, on the mound when he was establishing the plantations along the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. The junction included paving of the road in the form of a star, as it still exists today and became known as the Place de l'\u00c9toile.\nIn 1787, the Wall of the \"Ferme g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\" (\"Mur des Fermiers g\u00e9n\u00e9raux\"), and the two toll houses of the \"Barri\u00e8re de l'\u00c9toile\" (also known as the \"Barri\u00e8re de Neuilly\") were built to the design of Claude Nicolas Ledoux for the collection of the octroi tax at the entrance to Paris. They were located on either side of the Place de l'\u00c9toile until their demolition after 1859.\nBetween 1806 and 1836, the Arc de Triomphe de l'\u00c9toile was built to the design of Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Chalgrin. It was originally commissioned by Emperor Napoleon I during the First French Empire and inaugurated three decades later by King Louis Philippe I under the July Monarchy.\nThe avenues radiating from the Place de l'\u00c9toile were created during the Second French Empire of Emperor Napoleon III as part of Haussmann's renovation of Paris. The square was completely redesigned with avenues de Bezons (now Wagram), Jos\u00e9phine (now Marceau), Kl\u00e9ber, de Saint-Cloud (now Victor-Hugo), Essling (now Carnot), Prince-J\u00e9r\u00f4me (now Mac-Mahon and Niel) forming with the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es and other existing avenues a star around the Arc de Triomphe.\nIn 1864, the circular street surrounding the Place de l'\u00c9toile was named Rue de Presbourg (south of the \"Axe historique\") and Rue de Tilsitt (north of the \"Axe historique\"), after the diplomatic successes of Napoleon which led to the signing of the Treaty of Presbourg in 1805 and the Treaties of Tilsit in 1807.\nSince 1921, beneath the Arc de Triomphe lies the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier. After the death of President Charles de Gaulle in 1970, the Place de l'\u00c9toile was renamed the Place Charles de Gaulle.\nDescription.\nMap.\nThe Place Charles de Gaulle has a diameter of , giving it an area of approximately . It is the second largest square in Paris, after the Place de la Concorde (8.64 hectares). At the centre of the square stands the Arc de Triomphe, which is accessible via a pedestrian underpass, to avoid the confluence of vehicular traffic from the juncture of twelve radiating avenues.\nAvenues.\nThe twelve avenues, clockwise from the north, are the following:\nAxes.\nThe Place Charles de Gaulle is symmetrical and thus has six axes:\nArrondissements.\nThe Place Charles de Gaulle (as well as the Arc de Triomphe) is split between the 8th, 16th and 17th arrondissements of Paris. The 8th arrondissement encompasses the area between Avenue de Wagram and Avenue Marceau (to the east). The 16th arrondissement encompasses the area between Avenue Marceau and Avenue de la Grande Arm\u00e9e (to the south and west). The 17th arrondissement encompasses the area between Avenue de la Grande Arm\u00e9e and Avenue de Wagram (to the north).\nLiterature.\n\"La Place de l'\u00c9toile\" is the title of a novel by French writer Patrick Modiano.\n\"Located near the M\u00e9tro station: Charles de Gaulle\u2013\u00c9toile.\"\nTransportation.\nThe Place Charles de Gaulle is served by M\u00e9tro and RER services. Line 1, as well as RER A, run under the Avenue de la Grande Arm\u00e9e and Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es and stop at the station. The station is also served by Line 2 and serves as the western terminus of Line 6.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53351", "revid": "50782481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53351", "title": "Satellite constellation", "text": "Group of artificial satellites working together as a system\nA satellite constellation is a group of artificial satellites working together as a system. Unlike a single satellite, a constellation can provide permanent global or near-global coverage, such that at any time everywhere on Earth at least one satellite is visible. Satellites are typically placed in sets of complementary orbital planes and connect to globally distributed ground stations. They may also use inter-satellite communication.\nOther satellite groups.\nSatellite constellations should not be confused with:\nOverview.\nSatellites in medium Earth orbit (MEO) and low Earth orbit (LEO) are often deployed in satellite constellations, because the coverage area provided by a single satellite only covers a small area that moves as the satellite travels at the high angular velocity needed to maintain its orbit. Many MEO or LEO satellites are needed to maintain continuous coverage over an area. This contrasts with geostationary satellites, where a single satellite, at a much higher altitude and moving at the same angular velocity as the rotation of the Earth's surface, provides permanent coverage over a large area.\nFor some applications, in particular digital connectivity, the lower altitude of MEO and LEO satellite constellations provide advantages over a geostationary satellite, with lower path losses (reducing power requirements and costs) and latency. The propagation delay for a round-trip internet protocol transmission via a geostationary satellite can be over 600ms, but as low as 125ms for a MEO satellite or 30ms for a LEO system.\nExamples of satellite constellations include the Global Positioning System (GPS), Galileo and GLONASS constellations for navigation and geodesy in MEO, the Iridium and Globalstar satellite telephony services and Orbcomm messaging service in LEO, the Disaster Monitoring Constellation and RapidEye for remote sensing in Sun-synchronous LEO, Russian Molniya and Tundra communications constellations in highly elliptic orbit, and satellite broadband constellations, under construction from Starlink and OneWeb in LEO, and operational from O3b in MEO.\nDesign.\nWalker Constellation.\nThere are a large number of constellations that may satisfy a particular mission. Usually constellations are designed so that the satellites have similar orbits, eccentricity and inclination so that any perturbations affect each satellite in approximately the same way. In this way, the geometry can be preserved without excessive station-keeping thereby reducing the fuel usage and hence increasing the life of the satellites. Another consideration is that the phasing of each satellite in an orbital plane maintains sufficient separation to avoid collisions or interference at orbit plane intersections.\nA class of circular orbit geometries that has become popular is the Walker Delta Pattern constellation.\nThis has an associated notation to describe it which was proposed by John Walker. His notation is:\n i: t/p/f\nwhere:\nFor example, the Galileo navigation system is a Walker Delta 56\u00b0:24/3/1 constellation. This means there are 24 satellites in 3 planes inclined at 56 degrees, spanning the 360 degrees around the equator. The \"1\" defines the phasing between the planes, and how they are spaced. The Walker Delta is also known as the Ballard rosette, after A. H. Ballard's similar earlier work. Ballard's notation is (t,p,m) where m is a multiple of the fractional offset between planes.\nAnother popular constellation type is the near-polar Walker Star, which is used by Iridium. Here, the satellites are in near-polar circular orbits across approximately 180 degrees, travelling north on one side of the Earth, and south on the other. The active satellites in the full Iridium constellation form a Walker Star of 86.4\u00b0:66/6/2, i.e. the phasing repeats every two planes. Walker uses similar notation for stars and deltas, which can be confusing.\nThese sets of circular orbits at constant altitude are sometimes referred to as orbital shells.\nOrbital shell.\nIn spaceflight, an orbital shell is a set of artificial satellites in circular orbits at a certain fixed altitude. In the design of satellite constellations, an orbital shell usually refers to a collection of circular orbits with the same altitude and, oftentimes, orbital inclination, \ndistributed evenly in celestial longitude (and mean anomaly). \nFor a sufficiently high inclination and altitude the orbital shell covers the entire orbited body. In other cases the coverage extends up to a certain maximum latitude.\nSeveral existing satellite constellations typically use a single orbital shell. New large megaconstellations have been proposed that consist of multiple orbital shells.\nList of satellite constellations.\nCommunications satellite constellations.\nInternet access.\nOther Internet access systems are proposed or currently being developed:\nSome systems were proposed but never realized:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nSatellite constellation simulation tools:\nMore information:"}
{"id": "53352", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53352", "title": "Eero Saarinen", "text": "American architect (1910\u20131961)\nEero Saarinen (, ; August 20, 1910 \u2013 September 1, 1961) was a Finnish-American architect and industrial designer. Saarinen's work includes the General Motors Technical Center; the Dulles International Airport Main Terminal; the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport; the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center; the Gateway Arch; and the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center. During his career, Saarinen was elected a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects and served on the National Institute of Arts and Letters.\nBorn in Hvittr\u00e4sk, Finland, he was the son of Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen, and immigrated to the United States as a teenager. Saarinen grew up in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, studying at the Cranbrook Academy of Art, where his father taught. Saarinen became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1940, a year after marrying the sculptor Lilian Swann, with whom he had two children. After divorcing Swann in 1954, Saarinen married Aline Bernstein Louchheim. In 1961, Saarinen died while undergoing an operation for a brain tumor.\nEarly life and education.\nEero Saarinen was born in Hvittr\u00e4sk, Finland (then an autonomous state in the Russian Empire) on August 20, 1910, to Finnish architect Eliel Saarinen and his second wife, Louise, on his father's 37th birthday. They migrated to the United States in 1923, when Eero was thirteen. He grew up in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, where his father taught and was dean of the Cranbrook Academy of Art, and he took courses in sculpture and furniture design there. He had a close relationship with fellow students, designers Charles and Ray Eames, and became good friends with architect Florence Knoll (n\u00e9e Schust).\nSaarinen began studies in sculpture at the Acad\u00e9mie de la Grande Chaumi\u00e8re in Paris, France, in September 1929. He then went on to study at the Yale School of Architecture, completing his studies in 1934. He subsequently toured Europe and North Africa for two years, as well as working for a time in Helsinki in the office of architect Jarl Eklund, where he supervised the remodeling of the Swedish Theatre (1936). That same year, he returned to the United States to work in his father's architectural practice.\nCareer.\nAfter his tour of Europe and North Africa, Saarinen returned to Cranbrook to work for his father and teach at the academy. His father's firm, Saarinen, Swanson and Associates, was headed by Eliel Saarinen and Robert Swanson from the late 1930s until Eliel's death in 1950 and headquartered in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan until 1961 when the practice was moved to Hamden, Connecticut.\nWhile still working for his father, Saarinen first gained recognition for his design capabilities for a chair he designed together with Charles Eames, which received first place in the Organic Design in Home Furnishings competition in 1940. The Tulip chair, like all other Saarinen chairs, was taken into production by the Knoll furniture company, founded by Hans Knoll, who married Saarinen family friend Florence (Schust) Knoll. Further attention came also while Saarinen was still working for his father when he took first prize in the 1948 competition for the design of the Gateway Arch National Park (then known as the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial) in St. Louis. The memorial was not completed until the 1960s. The competition award was mistakenly addressed to his father because both he and his father had entered the competition separately. \nDuring his long association with Knoll he designed many important pieces of furniture, including the Grasshopper lounge chair and ottoman (1946), the Womb chair and ottoman (1948), the Womb settee (1950), side and arm chairs (1948\u20131950), and his most famous Tulip or Pedestal group (1956), which featured side and arm chairs, dining, coffee and side tables, as well as a stool. All of these designs were highly successful except for the Grasshopper lounge chair, which, although in production through 1965, was not a big success.\nOne of Saarinen's earliest works to receive international acclaim is the Crow Island School in Winnetka, Illinois (1940). The first major work by Saarinen, in collaboration with his father, was the General Motors Technical Center in Warren, Michigan, which follows the rationalist design Miesian style, incorporating steel and glass but with the addition of accent of panels in two shades of blue. The GM Technical Center was constructed in 1956, with Saarinen using models, which allowed him to share his ideas with others and gather input from other professionals.\nWith the success of this project, Saarinen was then invited by other major American corporations such as John Deere, IBM/IBM Rochester, and CBS to design their new headquarters or other major corporate buildings. Despite the overall rational design philosophy, the interiors usually contained dramatic sweeping staircases as well as furniture designed by Saarinen, such as the Pedestal series. In the 1950s, he began to receive more commissions from American universities for campus designs and individual buildings. These include Birch Hall at Antioch College, the Noyes dormitory at Vassar and Hill College House at the University of Pennsylvania as well as the Ingalls ice rink, Ezra Stiles and Morse Colleges at Yale University, Concordia Senior College in Fort Wayne, Indiana, the MIT Chapel and Kresge Auditorium at MIT, and the University of Chicago Law School building and grounds.\nSaarinen served on the jury for the Sydney Opera House commission in 1957 and was crucial in the selection of the now internationally known design by J\u00f8rn Utzon. A jury which did not include Saarinen had discarded Utzon's design in the first round; Saarinen reviewed the discarded designs, recognized a quality in Utzon's design, and ultimately assured the commission of Utzon.\nAfter his father's death in July 1950, Saarinen founded his own architect's office, Eero Saarinen and Associates. He was the principal partner from 1950 until his death. The firm carried out many of its most important works, including the Bell Labs Holmdel Complex in Holmdel Township, New Jersey; the Gateway Arch in St. Louis, Missouri; the Miller House in Columbus, Indiana; the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport, which he worked on with Charles J. Parise; the Dulles International Airport Main Terminal; and the new East Air Terminal of the old Athens airport in Greece, which opened in 1967. Many of these projects use catenary curves in their structural designs.\nIn 1949 and 1950, Saarinen was hired by the then-new Brandeis University to create a master plan for the campus. Saarinen's plan \"A Foundation for Learning: Planning the Campus of Brandeis University\" (1949; second edition 1951), developed with Matthew Nowicki, called for a central academic complex surrounded by residential quadrangles along a peripheral road. The plan was never built but was useful in attracting donors. Saarinen did build a few residential structures on the campus, including Ridgewood Quadrangle (1950), Sherman Student Center (1952) and Shapiro Dormitory at Hamilton Quadrangle (1952). These have all been either demolished or extensively remodeled.\nOne of his best known thin-shell concrete structures is the Kresge Auditorium at MIT. Another thin-shell structure is Ingalls Rink at Yale University, which has suspension cables connected to a single concrete backbone and is nicknamed \"the whale\". His most famous work is the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport, which represents the culmination of his previous designs and his genius for expressing the ultimate purpose of each building, what he called the \"style for the job\". In 2019, the terminal was transformed into the TWA Hotel and features furniture designed by Saarinen.\nIn 1960, Saarinen was hired to design the CBS Building in New York City. It was the only skyscraper he would ever design.\nSaarinen designed the Kleinhans Music Hall in Buffalo, New York, together with his father, Eliel Saarinen. He also designed the former Embassy of the United States in London, which opened in 1960, and the former Embassy of the United States in Oslo.\nSaarinen worked with his father, mother, and sister designing elements of the Cranbrook campus in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, including the Cranbrook School, Kingswood School, the Cranbrook Art Academy, and the Cranbrook Science Institute. Eero Saarinen's leaded-glass designs are a prominent feature of these buildings throughout the campus.\nNon-architectural activities.\nSaarinen was recruited by Donal McLaughlin, an architectural school friend from his Yale days, to join the military service in the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). Saarinen was assigned to draw illustrations for bomb disassembly manuals and to provide designs for the Situation Room in the White House. Saarinen worked full-time for the OSS until 1944.329\nHonors and awards.\nEero Saarinen was elected a Fellow of the American Institute of Architects in 1952. He was elected a member of the National Institute of Arts and Letters in 1954. In 1962, he was posthumously awarded a gold medal by the American Institute of Architects.\nIn 1940, he received two first prizes together with Charles Eames in the furniture design competition of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City. In 1948, he won the first prize in the Jefferson National Monument competition. The Boston Arts festival in 1953 gave him their Grand Architectural Award. He received the First Honor award of the American Institute of Architects twice, in 1955 and 1956, and their gold medal in 1962. In 1965 he took first prize in US Embassy competition in London.\nPersonal life.\nSaarinen became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1940.\nIn 1939, Saarinen married the sculptor Lilian Swann. They had two children, Eric and Susan Saarinen. Their marriage ended in divorce in 1954. That same year, Saarinen married Aline Bernstein Louchheim, an art critic at \"The New York Times.\" Saarinen met Louchheim when she came to Detroit to interview him for his contributions to the recently completed General Motors Technical Center. Saarinen and Louchheim had one son together, whom they named Eames after Saarinen's collaborator Charles Eames. In addition to their respective contributions to architecture, design, and criticism, Eero and Aline Saarinen are remembered for their affectionate and detailed personal papers, held at the Archives of American Art.\nDeath.\nSaarinen died on September 1, 1961, at the age of 51 while undergoing an operation in Ann Arbor, Michigan for a brain tumor. He was overseeing the completion of a new music building for the University of Michigan School of Music, Theatre &amp; Dance.\nLegacy.\nBy the 21st century, Saarinen was considered one of the masters of American 20th-century architecture. During that time, his work was the subject of a major exhibition and several books. This is partly because Roche-Dinkeloo, the successor to Saarinen's firm, donated its Saarinen archives to Yale University, but also because Saarinen's oeuvre can be said to fit in with present-day concerns about pluralism of styles. He was criticized in his own time\u2014most vociferously by Yale's Vincent Scully\u2014for having no identifiable style; one explanation for this is that Saarinen's vision was adapted to each individual client and project, which were never exactly the same. Scully also criticized him for designing buildings that were \"packages\", with \"no connection with human use . . . at once cruelly inhuman and trivial, as if they had been designed by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.\"\nThe papers of Aline and Eero Saarinen, from 1906 to 1977, were donated in 1973 to the Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution (by Charles Alan, Aline Saarinen's brother and executor of her estate). In 2006, the bulk of these primary source documents on the couple were digitized and posted online on the Archives' website.\nThe Eero Saarinen collection at the Canadian Centre for Architecture documents eight built projects, including the old Athens airport in Greece, the former US Embassy Chanceries in Oslo, Norway and London, England, corporate projects for John Deere, CBS, and IBM, and the North Christian Church in Columbus, Indiana.\nAn exhibition of Saarinen's work, \"Eero Saarinen: Shaping the Future\", was organized by the Finnish Cultural Institute in New York in collaboration with Yale School of Architecture, the National Building Museum, and the Museum of Finnish Architecture. The exhibition toured in Europe and the United States from 2006 to 2010, including a stint at the National Building Museum in Washington, DC. The exhibition was accompanied by the book \"Eero Saarinen: Shaping the Future\".\nIn 2016, \"Eero Saarinen: The Architect Who Saw the Future\", a film about Saarinen co-produced by his son Eric Saarinen, premiered on the \"American Masters\" series on PBS."}
{"id": "53353", "revid": "41013672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53353", "title": "Gateway Arch", "text": "US National Historic Landmark in St. Louis, Missouri\nThe Gateway Arch is a monument in St. Louis, Missouri, United States. Clad in stainless steel and built in the form of a weighted catenary arch, it is the world's tallest arch and Missouri's tallest accessible structure. Some sources consider it the tallest human-made monument in the Western Hemisphere. Built as a monument to the westward expansion of the United States and officially dedicated to \"the American people\", the Arch, commonly referred to as \"The Gateway to the West\", is a National Historic Landmark in Gateway Arch National Park and has become a popular tourist destination, as well as an internationally recognized symbol of St. Louis.\nThe Arch was designed by the Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen in 1947. Construction began on February 12, 1963, and was completed on October 28, 1965, at an overall cost of $13\u00a0million (equivalent to $ in 2024). The monument opened to the public on June 10, 1967.\nIt is located at the 1764 site of the founding of St. Louis on the west bank of the Mississippi River.\nHistorical background.\nInception and funding (1933\u20131935).\nAround late 1933, civic leader Luther Ely Smith, returning to St. Louis from the George Rogers Clark National Historical Park in Vincennes, Indiana, saw the St. Louis riverfront area and envisioned that building a memorial there would both revive the riverfront and stimulate the economy. He communicated his idea to mayor Bernard Dickmann, who on December 15, 1933, raised it in a meeting with city leaders. They sanctioned the proposal, and the nonprofit Jefferson National Expansion Memorial Association JNEMA for short, was formed. Smith was appointed chairman and Dickmann vice chairman. The association's goal was to create:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A suitable and permanent public memorial to the men who made possible the western territorial expansion of the United States, particularly President Jefferson, his aides Livingston and Monroe, the great explorers, Lewis and Clark, and the hardy hunters, trappers, frontiersmen and pioneers who contributed to the territorial expansion and development of these United States, and thereby to bring before the public of this and future generations the history of our development and induce familiarity with the patriotic accomplishments of these great builders of our country.\nMany locals did not approve of depleting public funds for the cause. Smith's daughter SaLees related that when \"people would tell him we needed more practical things\", he would respond that \"spiritual things\" were equally important.\nThe association expected that $30\u00a0million would be needed to undertake the construction of such a monument (about $ in 2024 dollars). It called upon the federal government to foot three-quarters of the bill ($22.5\u00a0million).\nThe suggestion to renew the riverfront was not original, as previous projects were attempted but lacked popularity. The Jefferson memorial idea emerged amid the economic disarray of the Great Depression and promised new jobs. The project was expected to create 5,000 jobs for three to four years. Committee members began to raise public awareness by organizing fundraisers and writing pamphlets. They also engaged Congress by planning budgets and preparing bills, in addition to researching ownership of the land they had chosen, \"approximately one-half mile in length\u00a0 ... from Third Street east to the present elevated railroad.\" In January 1934, Senator Bennett Champ Clark and Representative John Cochran introduced to Congress an appropriation bill seeking $30\u00a0million for the memorial, but the bill failed to garner support due to the large amount of money solicited. In March of the same year, joint resolutions proposed the establishment of a federal commission to develop the memorial. Although the proposal aimed for only authorization, the bill incurred opposition because people suspected that JNEMA would later seek appropriation. On March 28 the Senate bill was reported out, and on April 5 it was turned over to the House Library Committee, which later reported favorably on the bills. On June 8, both the Senate and House bills were passed. On June 15, President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the bill into law, instituting the United States Territorial Expansion Memorial Commission. The commission comprised 15 members, chosen by Roosevelt, the House, the Senate, and JNEMA. It first convened on December 19 in St. Louis, where members examined the project and its planned location.\nMeanwhile, in December, the JNEMA discussed organizing an architectural competition to determine the design of the monument. Local architect Louis LaBeaume had drawn up competition guidelines by January 1935. On April 13, 1935, the commission certified JNEMA's project proposals, including memorial perimeters, the \"historical significance\" of the memorial, the competition, and the $30\u00a0million budget. Between February and April, the Missouri State Legislature passed an act allowing the use of bonds to facilitate the project. On April 15, then Governor Guy B. Park signed it into law. Dickmann and Smith applied for funding from two New Deal agencies\u2014the Public Works Administration (headed by Harold Ickes) and the Works Progress Administration (headed by Harry Hopkins). On August 7, both Ickes and Hopkins assented to the funding requests, each promising $10 million, and said that the National Park Service (NPS) would manage the memorial. A local bond issue election granting $7.5\u00a0million (about $ in 2024 dollars) for the memorial's development was held on September 10 and passed.\nOn December 21, President Roosevelt signed Executive Order 7253 to approve the memorial, allocating the 82-acre area as the first National Historic Site. The order also appropriated $3.3\u00a0million through the WPA and $3.45\u00a0million through the PWA ($6.75 million in total). The motivation of the project was two-fold\u2014commemorating westward expansion and creating jobs. Some taxpayers began to file suits to block the construction of the monument, which they called a \"boondoggle\".\nInitial planning (1936\u20131939).\nUsing the 1935 grant of $6.75\u00a0million and $2.25\u00a0million in city bonds, the NPS acquired the historic buildings within the historic site\u2014through condemnation rather than purchase\u2014and demolished them. By September 1938, condemnation was complete. The condemnation was subject to many legal disputes which culminated on January 27, 1939, when the United States Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that condemnation was valid. A total of $6.2\u00a0million was distributed to land owners on June 14. Demolition commenced on October 9, 1939, when Dickmann extracted three bricks from a vacant warehouse.\nLed by Paul Peters, adversaries of the memorial delivered to Congress a leaflet titled \"Public Necessity or Just Plain Pork\". The JNEMA's lawyer, Bon Geaslin, believed that the flyers did not taint the project, but motivated members of Congress to find out more about the same. Although Representative John Cochran wanted to ask Congress to approve more funds, Geaslin believed the association should \"keep a low profile, maintaining its current position during this session of Congress\". He advised the association to \"get a good strong editorial in one of the papers to the effect that a small group of tenants ... is soliciting funds [to fight] the proposed improvement, and stating that these efforts do not represent the consensus of opinion in St. Louis ... , and pointing out that such obstructions should be condemned\".\nCongress's reduction in spending made it impossible for the allocated funds to be obtained. NPS responded that the city would reduce its contribution if the federal government did. It also asserted that the funds were sanctioned by an executive order, but superintendent John Nagle pointed out that what \"one Executive Order does, another can undo\". In March 1936, Representative Cochran commented during a House meeting that he \"would not vote for any measure providing for building the memorial or allotting funds to it\". Geaslin found Cochran's statements to be a greater hindrance to the project than Paul Peters' opposition, for Congress might have Cochran's opinions as representative of public opinion.\nPeters and other opponents asked Roosevelt to rescind Executive Order 7253 and to redirect the money to the American Red Cross. Smith impugned their motives, accusing them of being \"opposed to anything that is ever advanced in behalf of the city.\" In February 1936, an editorial written by Paul W. Ward in \"The Nation\" denounced the project. Smith was infuriated, fearing the impact of attacks from a prestigious magazine, and wanted \"to jump on it strong with hammer and tongs\". William Allen White, a renowned newspaper editor, advised Smith not to fret.\nBecause the Mississippi River played an essential role in establishing St. Louis's identity as the gateway to the west, it was felt that a memorial commemorating it should be near the river. Railroad tracks that had been constructed in the 1930s on the levee obstructed views of the riverfront from the memorial site. When Ickes declared that the railway must be removed before he would allocate funds for the memorial, President of the St. Louis Board of Public Service Baxter Brown suggested that \"a new tunnel ... conceal the relocated tracks and re-grading of the site to elevate it over the tunnel. These modifications would eliminate the elevated and surface tracks and open up the views to the river.\" Although rejected by NPS architect Charles Peterson, Brown's proposal formed the basis for the ultimate settlement.\nBy May 1942, demolition was complete. The Old Cathedral and the Old Rock House, because of their historical significance, were the only buildings retained within the historic site. The Old Rock House was later dismantled in 1959 with the intention of reassembling it at a new location, but pieces of the building went missing. Part of the house has been reconstructed in the basement of the Old Courthouse.\nDesign competition (1945\u20131948).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n... [T]he steel monument one sees today\u2014carbon steel on the interior, stainless steel on the exterior, and concrete in-filling, with an equilateral-triangle-shaped section that tapers from 54 to 17 feet at the top, and the concept of a skin that is also structure\u2014is in essence [Saarinen's] competition design.\n\u2014\"Eero Saarinen: Shaping the Future\", 2006\nIn November 1944, Smith discussed with Newton Drury, the National Park Service Director, the design of the memorial, asserting that the memorial should be \"transcending in spiritual and aesthetic values\", best represented by \"one central feature: a single shaft, a building, an arch, or something else that would symbolize American culture and civilization.\"\nThe idea of an architectural competition to determine the design of the memorial was favored at the JNEMA's inaugural meeting. They planned to award cash for the best design. In January 1945, the JNEMA officially announced a two-stage design competition that would cost $225,000 to organize. Smith and the JNEMA struggled to raise the funds, garnering only a third of the required total by June 1945. Then mayor Aloys Kaufmann feared that the lack of public support would lead officials to abandon hope in the project. The passage of a year brought little success, and Smith frantically underwrote the remaining $40,000 in May 1946. By June, Smith found others to assume portions of his underwriting, with $17,000 remaining under his sponsorship. In February 1947, the underwriters were compensated, and the fund stood at over $231,199.\nLocal architect Louis LaBeaume prepared a set of specifications for the design, and architect George Howe was chosen to coordinate the competition. On May 30, 1947, the contest officially opened. The seven-member jury that would judge the designs comprised Charles Nagel Jr., Richard Neutra, Roland Wank, William Wurster, LaBeaume, Fiske Kimball, and S. Herbert Hare. The competition comprised two stages\u2014the first to narrow down the designers to five and the second to single out one architect and his design. The design intended to include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(a) an architectural memorial or memorials to Jefferson; dealing (b) with preservation of the site of Old St. Louis\u2014landscaping, provision of an open-air campfire theater, reerection or reproduction of a few typical old buildings, provision of a Museum interpreting the Westward movement; (c) a living memorial to Jefferson's 'vision of greater opportunities for men of all races and creeds;' (d) recreational facilities, both sides of the river; and (e) parking facilities, access, relocation of railroads, placement of an interstate highway.\nThe team included Eero Saarinen as designer, J. Henderson Barr as associate designer, and Dan Kiley as landscape architect, as well as Lily Swann Saarinen as sculptor and Alexander Girard as painter. In the first stage of the competition, Carl Milles advised Saarinen to change the bases of each leg to triangles instead of squares. Saarinen said that he \"worked at first with mathematical shapes, but finally adjusted it according to the eye.\" At submission, Saarinen's plans laid out the arch at tall and wide from center to center of the triangle bases.\nOn September 1, 1947, submissions for the first stage were received by the jury. The submissions were labeled by numbers only, and the names of the designers were kept anonymous. Upon four days of deliberation, the jury narrowed down the 172 submissions, which included Saarinen's father Eliel, to five finalists, and announced the corresponding numbers to the media on September 27. Eero Saarinen's design (#144) was among the finalists, and comments written on it included \"relevant, beautiful, perhaps inspired would be the right word\" (Roland Wank) and \"an abstract form peculiarly happy in its symbolism\" (Charles Nagel). Hare questioned the feasibility of the design but appreciated the thoughtfulness behind it. Local St. Louis architect Harris Armstrong was also one of the finalists. The secretary who sent out the telegrams informing finalists of their advancement mistakenly sent one to Eliel rather than Eero. The family celebrated with champagne, and two hours later, a competition representative called to correct the mistake. Eliel \"'broke out a second bottle of champagne' to toast his son.\" They proceeded to the second stage, and each was given a $10,069 prize (about $ in 2024 dollars). Saarinen changed the height of the arch from 580 feet to and wrote that the arch symbolized \"the gateway to the West, the national expansion, and whatnot.\" He wanted the landscape surrounding the arch to \"be so densely covered with trees that it will be a forest-like park, a green retreat from the tension of the downtown city,\" according to \"The New York Times\" architectural critic Aline Bernstein Louchheim. The deadline for the second stage arrived on February 10, 1948, and on February 18, the jury chose Saarinen's design unanimously, praising its \"profoundly evocative and truly monumental expression.\" The following day, during a formal dinner at Statler Hotel that the finalists and the media attended, Wurster pronounced Saarinen the winner of the competition and awarded the checks\u2014$40,000 to his team and $50,000 to Saarinen. The competition was the first major architectural design that Saarinen developed unaided by his father.\nOn May 25, the United States Territorial Expansion Memorial Commission endorsed the design. Later, in June, the NPS approved the proposal. Representative H. R. Gross, however, opposed the allocation of federal funds for the arch's development.\nThe design drew varied responses. In a February 29, 1948, \"The New York Times\" article, Louchheim praised the arch's design as \"a modern monument, fitting, beautiful and impressive.\" Some local residents likened it to a \"stupendous hairpin and a stainless steel hitching post.\" The most aggressive criticism emerged from Gilmore D. Clarke, whose February 26, 1948, letter compared Saarinen's arch to an arch imagined by fascist Benito Mussolini, rendering the arch a fascist symbol. This allegation of plagiarism ignited fierce debates among architects about its validity. Douglas Haskell from New York wrote that \"The use of a common form is not plagiarism ... [T]his particular accusation amounts to the filthiest smear that has been attempted by a man highly placed in the architectural profession in our generation.\" Wurster and the jury refuted the charges, arguing that \"the arch form was not inherently fascist but was indeed part of the entire history of architecture.\" Saarinen considered the opposition absurd, asserting, \"It's just preposterous to think that a basic form, based on a completely natural figure, should have any ideological connection.\"\nBy January 1951, Saarinen created 21 \"drawings, including profiles of the Arch, scale drawings of the museums and restaurants, various parking proposals, the effect of the levee-tunnel railroad plan on the Arch footings, the Arch foundations, the Third Street Expressway, and the internal and external structure of the Arch.\" Fred Severud made calculations for the arch's structure.\nRailroad agreement (1949\u20131958).\nSeveral proposals were offered for moving the railroad tracks, including:\nOn July 7, 1949, in Mayor Joseph Darst's office, city officials chose the Levee-Tunnel plan, rousing JNEMA members who held that the decision had been pressed through when Smith was away on vacation. Darst notified Secretary of the Interior Julius Krug of the city's selection. Krug planned to meet with Smith and JNEMA but canceled the meeting and resigned on November 11. His successor, Oscar L. Chapman, rescheduled the meeting for December 5 in Washington with delegates from the city government, JNEMA, railroad officials, and Federal government. A day after the conference, they ratified a memorandum of understanding about the plan: \"The five tracks on the levee would be replaced by three tracks, one owned by the Missouri Pacific Railroad (MPR) and two by the Terminal Railroad Association of St. Louis (TRRA) proceeding through a tunnel not longer than 3,000 feet. The tunnel would be approximately fifty feet west of the current elevated line.\" It would also have an overhead clearance of , lower than the regular requirement of . Chapman approved the document on December 22, 1949, and JNEMA garnered the approval of the Missouri Public Service Commission on August 7, 1952.\nEfforts to appropriate congressional funds began in January 1950 but were delayed until 1953 by the Korean War's depletion of federal funds.\nIn August 1953, Secretary of the Interior Fred A. Seaton declared that the Department of the Interior and the railroads should finalize the agreement on the new route. In October, NPS and the TRRA decided that the TRRA would employ a surveyor endorsed by Spotts \"to survey, design, estimate, and report on\" the expenses of shifting the tracks. They chose Alfred Benesch and Associates, which released its final report on May 3, 1957. The firm estimated that the two proposals would cost more than expected: more than $11\u00a0million and $14\u00a0million, respectively. NPS director Conrad Wirth enjoined Saarinen to make small modifications to the design. In October, Saarinen redrafted the plans, suggesting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[the placement of] the five sets of railroad tracks into a shortened tunnel 100 feet west of the trestle, with the tracks being lowered sixteen feet. This did not mean that the memorial would be cut off from the river, however, for Saarinen provided a tunnel to be placed over the railroad where a \"grand staircase\" rose from the levee to the Arch. At the north and south ends of the park, 150-foot tunnels spanned the tracks, and led to the overlook museum, restaurant, and stairways down to the levee. Saarinen designed a subterranean visitor center the length of the distance between the legs, to include two theaters and an entrance by inward-sloping ramps.\nOn November 29, involved interests signed another memorandum of understanding approving Saarinen's rework; implementing it would cost about $5.053\u00a0million. On March 10, 1959, mayor Raymond Tucker proposed that they drop \"the tunnel idea in favor of open cuts roofed with concrete slabs,\" which would cost $2.684\u00a0million, $1.5\u00a0million less than the cost of the approved plan. On May 12, 1958, Tucker, TRRA president Armstrong Chinn, and Missouri Pacific Railroad president Russell Dearmont entered a written agreement: \"The TRRA would place $500,000 in escrow for the project, and the city [would] sell $980,000 of the 1935 bonds to match the Federal contribution.\" Director Wirth and Secretary Seaton approved the plan on June 2.\nIn July 1953, Representative Leonor Sullivan introduced H.R. 6549, a bill authorizing the allocation of no more than $5\u00a0million to build the arch. After much negotiation, both houses of Congress approved the bill in May 1954, and on May 18, 1954, President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed the bill into law as Public Law 361. Congress could not afford to appropriate the funds in 1955, so association president William Crowdus resorted to asking the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations for $10\u00a0million. The foundations denied the request because their function as private foundations did not include funding national memorials. In 1956, Congress appropriated $2.64\u00a0million to be used to move the railroad tracks. The remainder of the authorized appropriation was requested via six congressional bills, introduced on July 1, 1958, that revised Public Law 361 to encompass the cost of the entire memorial, increasing federal funds by $12.25\u00a0million. A month later the Department of the Interior and the Bureau of the Budget endorsed the bill, and both houses of Congress unanimously passed the bill. Eisenhower signed it into law on September 7. The NPS held off on appropriating the additional funds, as it planned to use the already-appropriated funds to initiate the railroad work.\nFinal preparations (1959\u20131968).\nSaarinen and city functionaries collaborated to zone buildings near the arch. In April 1959, real estate developer Lewis Kitchen decided to construct two 40-level edifices across from the arch. In July, after the plan was condemned for its potential obstruction of the arch, Kitchen discussed the issue with officials. A decision was delayed for several months because Saarinen had yet to designate the arch's height, projected between . By October, Mayor Tucker and Director Wirth resolved to restrict the height of buildings opposite the arch to (about 27 levels), and the city stated that plans for buildings opposite the arch would require its endorsement. Kitchen then decreased the height of his buildings, while Saarinen increased that of the arch.\nMoving the railroad tracks was the first stage of the project. On May 6, 1959, after an official conference, the Public Service Commission called for ventilation to accompany the tunnel's construction, which entailed \"placing 3,000 feet of dual tracks into a tunnel 105 feet west of the elevated railroad, along with filling, grading, and trestle work.\" Eight bids for the work were reviewed on June 8 in the Old Courthouse, and the MacDonald Construction Co. of St. Louis won with a bid of $2,426,115, less than NPS's estimate of the cost. At 10:30\u00a0a.m. on June 23, 1959, the groundbreaking ceremony occurred; Tucker spaded the first portion of earth. Wirth and Dickmann delivered speeches.\nThe NPS acquired the $500,000 in escrow and transferred it to MacDonald to begin building the new tracks. In August, demolition of the Old Rock House was complete, with workers beginning to excavate the tunnel. In November, they began shaping the tunnel's walls with concrete. Twenty-nine percent of the construction was completed by March and 95% by November. On November 17, trains began to use the new tracks. June 1962 was the projected date of fruition.\nOn May 16, 1959, the Senate appropriations subcommittee received from St. Louis legislators a request for $2.4911\u00a0million, of which it granted only $133,000. Wirth recommended that they reseek the funds in January 1960.\nOn March 10, 1959, Regional Director Howard Baker received $888,000 as the city's first subsidy for the project. On December 1, 1961, $23,003,150 in total had been authorized, with $19,657,483 already appropriated\u2014$3,345,667 remained not yet appropriated.\nConstruction.\nThe bidding date, originally December 20, 1961, was postponed to January 22, 1962, to clarify the details of the arch construction. About 50 companies that had requested the construction requirements received bidding invitations. Extending from $11,923,163 to $12,765,078, all four bids exceeded the engineer estimate of $8,067,000. Wirth had a committee led by George Hartzog determine the validity of the bids in light of the government's conditions. Following a meeting with the bidders, the committee affirmed the bids' reasonableness, and Wirth awarded the lowest bidder, MacDonald Construction Co. of St. Louis, the contract for the construction of the arch and the visitor center. On March 14, 1962, he signed the contract and received from Tucker $2.5 million, the city's subsidy for the phase. MacDonald reduced its bid $500,000 to $11,442,418. The Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel Company served as the subcontractor for the shell of the arch.\nIn 1959 and 1960, ground was broken, and in 1961, the foundation of the structure was laid. Construction of the arch itself began on February 12, 1963, as the first steel triangle on the south leg was eased into place. These steel triangles, which narrowed as they rose to the top, were raised into place by a group of cranes and derricks. The arch was assembled of 142 prefabricated stainless steel sections. Once in place, each section had its double-walled skin filled with concrete, prestressed with 252 tension bars. In order to keep the partially completed legs steady, a scissors truss was placed between them at , later removed as the derricks were taken down. The whole endeavor was expected to be completed by fall 1964, in observance of St. Louis's bicentennial.\nContractor MacDonald Construction Co. arranged a tower for spectators and provided recorded accounts of the undertaking. In 1963, a million people went to observe the progress, and by 1964, local radio stations began to broadcast when large slabs of steel were to be raised into place. \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\" photographer Art Witman documented the construction for the newspaper's Sunday supplement \"Pictures\", his longest and most noted assignment. He visited the construction site frequently from 1963 to 1967, recording every stage of progress. With assistant Renyold Ferguson, he crawled along the catwalks with the construction workers up to above the ground. He was the only news photographer on permanent assignment at the construction, with complete access. He primarily worked with slide film but also used the only Panox camera in St. Louis to create panoramic photographs covering 140 degrees. Witman's pictures of the construction are now housed in the State Historical Society of Missouri.\nThe project manager of MacDonald Construction Co., Stan Wolf, said that a 62-story building was easier to build than the arch: \"In a building, everything is straight up, one thing on top of another. In this arch, everything is curved.\"\nDelays and lawsuits.\nAlthough an actuarial firm predicted thirteen workers would die while building the arch, no workers were killed during the monument's construction. However, construction of the arch was still often delayed by safety checks, funding uncertainties, and legal disputes.\nCivil rights activists regarded the construction of the arch as a token of racial discrimination. On July 14, 1964, during the workers' lunchtime, civil rights protesters Percy Green and Richard Daly, both members of Congress of Racial Equality, climbed up the north leg of the arch to \"expose the fact that federal funds were being used to build a national monument that was racially discriminating against black contractors and skilled black workers.\" As the pair disregarded demands to get off, protesters on the ground demanded that at least 10% of the skilled jobs belong to African Americans. Four hours later, Green and Daly dismounted from the arch to charges of \"trespassing, peace disturbance, and resisting arrest.\" This incident \"inter alia\" spurred the United States Department of Justice to file the first pattern or practice case against AFL\u2013CIO under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, on February 4, 1966, but the department later called off the charges. The 1966 lawsuit was an attempt by the Office of Federal Contract Compliance (OFCC) to desegregate building-trade unions nationwide. Many technical building unions had little or no African-American representation into the mid-1960s. During Lyndon Johnson's presidency, the federal government recognized the need for more integration in all levels of society and started enforcing equal employment opportunity through federally funded job contracts.\nIn 1964, the Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel Company of Warren, Pennsylvania, sued MacDonald for $665,317 for tax concerns. In 1965, NPS requested that Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel remove the prominent letters \"P-D-M\" (its initials) from a creeper derrick used for construction, contending that it was promotional and violated federal law with regards to advertising on national monuments. Although Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel initially refused to pursue what it considered a precarious venture, the company relented after discovering that leaving the initials would cost $225,000 and after that, $42,000 per month, and the NPS dropped its lawsuit.\nOn October 26, 1965, the International Association of Ironworkers delayed work to ascertain that the arch was safe. After NPS director Kenneth Chapman gave his word that conditions were \"perfectly safe,\" construction resumed on October 27. After the discovery of 16 defects, the tram was also delayed from running. The Bi-State Development Agency assessed that it suffered losses of $2,000 for each day the trains were stagnant.\nOn January 7, 1966, members of AFL\u2013CIO deserted their work on the visitor center, refusing to work with plumbers affiliated with Congress of Industrial Unions (CIU), which represented black plumbers. A representative of AFL\u2013CIO said, \"This policy has nothing to do with race. Our experience is that these CIU members have in the past worked for substandard wages.\" CIU applied to the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) for an injunction that required the AFL\u2013CIO laborers to return to work. On February 7, Judge John Keating Regan ruled that AFL\u2013CIO workers had participated in a secondary boycott. By February 11, AFL\u2013CIO resumed work on the arch, and an AFL\u2013CIO contractor declared that ten African Americans were apprenticed for arch labor. The standstill in work lasted a month.\nTopping out and dedication.\nPresident Lyndon B. Johnson and Mayor Alfonso J. Cervantes decided on a date for the topping-out ceremony, but the arch had not been completed by then. The ceremony date was reset to October 17, 1965; workers strained to meet the deadline, taking double shifts, but by October 17, the arch was still not complete. The chairman of the ceremony anticipated the ceremony to be held on October 30, a Saturday, to allow 1,500 schoolchildren, whose signatures were to be placed in a time capsule, to attend. Ultimately, PDM set the ceremony date to October 28.\nThe time capsule, containing the signatures of 762,000 students and others, was welded into the keystone before the final piece was set in place. On October 28, the arch was topped out as then Vice President Hubert Humphrey observed from a helicopter. A Catholic priest and a rabbi prayed over the keystone, a , triangular section. It was slated to be inserted at 10:00\u00a0a.m. local time but was done 30 minutes early because thermal expansion had constricted the gap at the top by . To mitigate this, workers used fire hoses to spray water on the surface of the south leg to cool it down and make it contract. The keystone was inserted in 13 minutes with only remaining. For the next section, a hydraulic jack had to pry apart the legs . The last section was left only . By noon, the keystone was secured. Some filmmakers, in hope that the two legs would not meet, had chronicled every phase of construction.\nThe Gateway Arch was expected to open to the public by 1964, but in 1967 the public relations agency stopped forecasting the opening date. The arch's visitor center opened on June 10, 1967, and the tram began operating on July 24.\nThe arch was dedicated by Humphrey on May 25, 1968. He declared that the arch was \"a soaring curve in the sky that links the rich heritage of yesterday with the richer future of tomorrow\" and brings a \"new purpose\" and a \"new sense of urgency to wipe out every slum.\" \"Whatever is shoddy, whatever is ugly, whatever is waste, whatever is false, will be measured and condemned\" in comparison to the Gateway Arch. About 250,000 people were expected to attend, but rain canceled the outdoor activities. The ceremony had to be transferred into the visitor center. After the dedication, Humphrey crouched beneath an exit as he waited for the rain to subside so he could walk to his vehicle.\nAfter completion.\nThe project did not provide 5,000 jobs as expected\u2014as of June 1964, workers numbered fewer than 100. The project did, however, incentivize other riverfront restoration efforts, totaling $150\u00a0million. Building projects included a 50,000-seat sports stadium, a 30-story hotel, several office towers, four parking garages, and an apartment complex. The idea of a Disneyland amusement park that included \"synthetic riverboat attractions\" was considered but later abandoned. The developers hoped to use the arch as a commercial catalyst, attracting visitors who would use their services. One estimate found that since the 1960s, the arch has incited almost $503 million worth of construction.\nIn June 1976, the memorial was finalized by federal allocations\u2014\"the statue of Thomas Jefferson was unveiled, the Museum of Westward Expansion was previewed, a theater under the Arch was dedicated in honor of Mayor Raymond Tucker and the catenary-like curving staircases from the Arch down to the levee were built.\"\nCharacteristics.\nPhysical characteristics.\nBoth the width and height of the arch are . The arch is the tallest memorial in the United States and the tallest stainless steel monument in the world.\nThe cross-sections of the arch's legs are equilateral triangles, narrowing from per side at the bases to per side at the top. Each wall consists of a stainless steel skin covering a sandwich of two carbon-steel walls with reinforced concrete in the middle from ground level to , with carbon steel to the peak. The arch is hollow to accommodate a unique tram system that takes visitors to an observation deck at the top.\nThe structural load is supported by a stressed-skin design. Each leg is embedded in of concrete thick and deep. of the foundation is in bedrock. The arch is resistant to earthquakes and is designed to sway up to in either direction, while withstanding winds up to . The structure weighs , of which concrete composes ; structural steel interior, ; and the thick grade 304 stainless steel panels that cover the exterior of the arch, . This amount of stainless steel is the most used in any one project in history.\nMathematical elements.\nThe geometric form of the structure was set by mathematical equations provided to Saarinen by the German-American engineer Hannskarl Bandel. Bruce Detmers and other architects expressed the geometric form in blueprints with this equation:\nformula_1,\nwith the constants\nformula_2\nformula_3\nwhere \"fc\" = is the maximum height of centroid, \"Qb\" = is the maximum cross sectional area of arch at base, \"Qt\" = is the minimum cross sectional area of arch at top, and \"L\" = is the half width of centroid at the base. The triangular cross sectional area varies linearly with the vertical height of its centroid.\nThis hyperbolic cosine function describes the shape of a catenary. A chain that supports only its own weight forms a catenary; the chain is purely in tension. Likewise, an inverted catenary arch that supports only its own weight is purely in compression, with no shear. The catenary arch is the stablest of all arches since the thrust passes through the legs and is absorbed in the foundations, instead of forcing the legs apart. The Gateway Arch itself is not a common catenary, but a more general curve of the form \"y\"=\"A\"cosh (\"Bx\"). This makes it an \"inverted weighted catenary.\" Saarinen chose a weighted catenary over a normal catenary curve because it looked less pointed and less steep. In 1959, he caused some confusion about the actual shape of the arch when he wrote, \"This arch is not a true parabola, as is often stated. Instead it is a catenary curve\u2014the curve of a hanging chain\u2014a curve in which the forces of thrust are continuously kept within the center of the legs of the arch.\" William V. Thayer, a professor of mathematics at St. Louis Community College, later wrote to the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\" calling attention to the fact that the structure was a weighted catenary.\nLighting.\nThe first proposal to illuminate the arch at night was announced on May 18, 1966, but the plan never came to fruition. In July 1998, funding for an arch lighting system was approved by St. Louis's Gateway Foundation, which agreed to take responsibility for the cost of the equipment, its installation, and its upkeep. In January 1999, MSNBC arranged a temporary lighting system for the arch so the monument could be used as the background for a visit by Pope John Paul II. Since November 2001, the arch has been bathed in white light between 10\u00a0p.m. and 1\u00a0a.m. via a system of floodlights. Designed by Randy Burkett, it comprises 44 lighting fixtures situated in four pits just below ground level.\nOn October 5, 2004, the US Senate, at the pressing of both of Missouri's US Senators, Jim Talent and Kit Bond, approved a bill permitting the illumination in pink of the arch in honor of breast cancer awareness month. Both Estee Lauder and May Department Store Co. had championed the cause. One employee said that the arch would be a \"beacon\u00a0 ... for the importance of prevention and finding a cure.\" While the National Park Service took issue with the plan due to the precedent it would set for prospective uses of the arch, it yielded due to a realization that it and Congress were \"on the same team\" and because the illumination was legally obligatory; on October 25, the plan was carried out. The previous time the arch was illuminated for promotional purposes was on September 12, 1995, under the management of local companies Fleishman-Hillard and Technical Productions when a rainbow spectrum was shone on the arch to publicize the debut of Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus's \"Wizard of Oz on Ice\" at the Kiel Center.\nPublic access.\nIn April 1965, three million tourists were expected to visit the arch annually after completion; 619,763 tourists visited the top of the arch in its first year open. On January 15, 1969, a visitor from Nashville, Tennessee, became the one-millionth person to reach the observation area; the ten-millionth person ascended to the top on August 24, 1979. In 1974, the arch was ranked fourth on a list of \"most-visited man-made attraction[s]\". In 2010, the Gateway Arch had over four million visitors, of which around one million traveled to the top. In 2022, an estimated 1.62 million people visited the Arch.\nAs the Arch is run by the National Park Service, it is subject to closure when the US federal government shuts down due to lapses in appropriations.\nVisitor center.\nThe underground visitor center for the arch was designed as part of the National Park Service's Mission 66 program. The center is located directly below the arch, between its legs. Although construction on the visitor center began at the same time as construction for the arch itself, it did not conclude until 1976 because of insufficient funding; however, the center opened with several exhibits on June 10, 1967. Access to the visitor center is provided through ramps adjacent to each leg of the arch.\nThe center houses offices, mechanical rooms, and waiting areas for the arch trams, as well as its main attractions: the Museum of Westward Expansion and two theaters displaying films about the arch. The older theater opened in May 1972; the newer theater, called the Odyssey Theatre, was constructed in the 1990s and features a four-story-tall screen. Its construction required the expansion of the underground complex, and workers had to excavate solid rock while keeping the disruption to a minimum so the museum could remain open. The museum houses several hundred exhibits about the United States' westward expansion in the 19th century and opened on August 10, 1977.\nAs part of the CityArchRiver project, the visitor center and museum underwent a $176 million expansion and renovation that was completed in July 2018. The renovation includes a 46,000-square-foot underground addition featuring interactive story galleries, video walls, a fountain and a cafe.\nObservation area.\nNear the top of the Arch, passengers exit the tram compartment and climb a slight grade to enter the observation area. This arched deck, which is over long and wide, can hold up to about 160 people, equivalent to the number of people from four trams. Sixteen windows per side, each measuring , offer views up to away.\nModes of ascent.\nThere are three modes of transportation up the arch: two sets of 1,076-step emergency stairs (one per leg), a 12-passenger elevator to the height, and a tram in each leg.\nEach tram is a chain of eight cylindrical, five-seat compartments with glass doors. As each tram has a capacity of 40 passengers and there are two trams, 80 passengers can be transported at one time, with trams departing from the ground every 10 minutes. The compartments (capsules) rotate like Ferris-wheel cars as they ascend and descend the arch on rails. This fashion of movement gave rise to the idea of the tram as \"half-Ferris wheel and half-elevator.\" The trip to the top takes four minutes, and the trip down takes three minutes.\nBecause of a lack of funds in March 1962, the NPS did not accept bids for the arch's internal train system and considered discarding the idea. In May 1962, the Bi-State Development Agency proposed that it issue revenue bonds to obtain the required funds. The Department of the Interior and Bi-State entered into an agreement where Bi-State would construct and operate the tram. Bi-State would have to raise $1,977,750 for the construction of the tram system. It retired the bonds by setting a $1 riding fee to the top.\nBi-State put in $3.3\u00a0million revenue bonds and has operated the tram system since. The tram in the north leg entered operation in June 1967, but visitors were forced to endure three-hour-long waits until April 21, 1976, when a reservation system was put in place. The south tram was completed by March 1968. Commemorative pins were awarded to the first 100,000 passengers. As of 2007, the trams have traveled , conveying more than 25\u00a0million passengers.\nIncidents.\nOn July 8, 1970, a six-year-old boy, his mother, and two of her friends were trapped in a tram in the arch's south leg after the monument closed. According to the boy's mother, the group went up the arch around 9:30\u00a0p.m. CDT, but when the tram reached the de-boarding area, its doors did not open. The tram then reportedly traveled up to a storage area above the ground, and the power was switched off. One person was able to pry open the tram door and the four managed to reach a security guard for help after being trapped for about 45 minutes.\nOn July 21, 2007, a broken cable forced the south tram to be shut down, leaving only the north tram in service until repairs were completed in March 2008. Around 200 tourists were stuck inside the arch for about three hours. The incident occurred while visitors in the arch were watching a fireworks display, and no one was seriously injured in the event, though two people received medical treatment. Almost immediately after the tram returned to service in 2008, however, it was closed again for new repairs after an electrical switch broke. The incident, which occurred on March 14, was billed as a \"bad coincidence.\"\nOn the morning of February 9, 2011, a National Park Service worker was injured while performing repairs on the south tram. The 55-year-old was working on the tram's electrical system when he was trapped between it and the arch wall for around 30 seconds, until being saved by other workers. Emergency officials treated the injured NPS employee at the arch's top before taking him to Saint Louis University Hospital in a serious condition.\nOn March 24, 2011, around one hundred visitors were stranded in the observation area for 45 minutes after the doors of the south tram refused to close; no one was hurt. The tourists were safely brought down the arch in the north tram, which had been closed that week so officials could upgrade it with a new computer system. The National Park Service later attributed the malfunction to a computer glitch associated with the new system, which had already been implemented with the south tram.\nAround 2:15\u00a0p.m. local time on June 16, 2011, the arch's north tram stalled due to a power outage. No one was seriously injured in the incident, but one visitor lost consciousness after suffering a panic attack, and a park ranger was taken away with minor injuries.\nStunts and accidents.\nOn June 16, 1965, the Federal Aviation Administration cautioned that aviators who flew through the arch would be fined and their licenses revoked. At least ten pilots have disobeyed this order, beginning on June 22, 1966.\nIn 1973, Nikki Caplan was granted an FAA exception to fly a hot air balloon between the arch's legs as part of the Great Forest Park Balloon Race. During the flight, on which the St. Louis park director was a passenger, the balloon hit the arch and plummeted 70 feet before recovering.\nIn 1976, a US Army exhibition skydiving team was permitted to fly through the arch as part of Fourth of July festivities, and since then, numerous skydiving exhibition teams have legally jumped onto the Arch grounds, after having flown their parachutes through the legs of the Arch.\nThe arch has been a target of various stunt performers, and while such feats are generally forbidden, several people have parachuted to or from the arch regardless. In June 1980, the National Park Service declined a request by television producers to have a performer jump from the arch; a similar appeal by stuntman Dan Koko was also turned away in February 1986. Koko, who was a stunt double for \"Superman\", wanted to perform the leap during Fourth of July celebrations.\nOn November 22, 1980, at about 8:45\u00a0a.m. CST, 33-year-old Kenneth Swyers of Overland, Missouri, parachuted onto the top of the arch. He had planned to release his main parachute and then jump off the arch using his reserve parachute to perform a base jump, but he instead fell to his death. Swyers was reportedly blown to the top of the arch by the wind and was unable to save himself when his reserve parachute failed to deploy. The Federal Aviation Administration said the jump was unauthorized. On December 27, 1980, St. Louis television station KTVI reported receiving calls from supposed witnesses of another stunt landing, reportedly as an act of homage to Swyers. Authorities later declared the jump a hoax; arch officials said they did not witness any such jump, and photos provided by the alleged parachutist were unclear.\nOn September 14, 1992, 25-year-old John C. Vincent of Harvey, Louisiana, climbed to the top of the Gateway Arch using suction cups and proceeded to parachute back to the ground. He was later charged with two misdemeanors: climbing a national monument and parachuting in a national park. Two St. Louis residents, Ronald Carroll and Robert Weinzetl, were found with a wireless communication headset, a video camera, and a still camera with a telephoto lens. They were also charged with two misdemeanors: disorderly conduct and commercial photography in a national park. Vincent accepted a guilty plea deal in which he testified against Carroll and Weinzetl; while Carroll was found guilty of both misdemeanor charges, the charges against Weinzetl were dropped by federal prosecutors.\nSecurity.\nTwo years after the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing, a little over $1\u00a0million was granted to institute a counterterrorism program. Park officials were trained to note the activity of tourists, and inconspicuous electronic detection devices were installed. After the September 11 attacks in 2001, security efforts became more prominent and security checkpoints moved to the entrance of the visitor center. At the checkpoints, visitors are screened by magnetometers and x-ray equipment, devices which have been in place since 1997.\nThe Arch also became one of several US monuments placed under restricted airspace during 2002 Fourth of July celebrations. In 2003, , , movable Jersey barriers were installed to impede terrorist attacks on the arch. Later that year, it was announced that these walls were to be replaced by concrete posts encased in metal to be more harmonious with the steel color of the arch. The movable bollards can be manipulated from the park's dispatch center, which has also been upgraded.\nIn 2006, arch officials hired a \"physical security specialist,\" replacing a law enforcement officer. The responsibilities of the specialist include risk assessment, testing the park's security system, increasing security awareness of other employees, and working with other government agencies to improve the arch's security procedures.\nSymbolism and culture.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Gateway Arch packs a significant symbolic wallop just by standing there. But the Arch has a mission greater than being visually affecting. Its shape and monumental size suggest movement through time and space, and invite inquiry into the complex, fascinating story of our national expansion.\n \u2014Robert W. Duffy of the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\", October 4, 2003\nBuilt as a monument to the westward expansion of the United States, the arch typifies \"the pioneer spirit of the men and women who won the West, and those of a latter day to strive on other frontiers.\" The arch has become the iconic image of St. Louis, appearing in many parts of city culture. In 1968, three years after the monument's opening, the St. Louis phone directory contained 65 corporations with \"Gateway\" in their title and 17 with \"Arch\". Arches also appeared over gas stations and drive-in restaurants. In the 1970s, a local sports team adopted the name \"Fighting Arches\"; St. Louis Community College would later (when consolidating all athletic programs under a single banner) name its sports teams \"Archers\". Robert S. Chandler, an NPS superintendent, said, \"Most [visitors] are awed by the size and scale of the Arch, but they don't understand what it's all about ... Too many people see it as just a symbol of the city of St. Louis.\"\nThe arch has also appeared as a symbol of the State of Missouri. On November 22, 2002, at the Missouri State Capitol, Lori Hauser Holden, wife of then Governor Bob Holden, uncovered the winning design for a Missouri coin design competition as part of the Fifty States Commemorative Coin Program. Designed by watercolorist Paul Jackson, the coin portrays \"three members of the Lewis and Clark Expedition paddling a boat on the Missouri River upon returning to St. Louis\" with the arch as the backdrop. Holden said that the arch was \"a symbol for the entire state ... Four million visitors each year see the Arch. [The coin] will help make it even more loved worldwide.\" A special license plate designed by Arnold Worldwide featured the arch, labeled with \"Gateway to the West.\" Profits earned from selling the plates would fund the museum and other educational components of the arch.\nLouchheim wrote that although the arch \"has a simplicity which should guarantee timeliness\", it is entirely modern as well because of the innovative design and its scientific considerations. In \"The Dallas Morning News\", architectural critic David Dillon opined that the arch exists not as a functional edifice but as a symbol of \"boundless American optimism\". He articulates the arch's multiple \"moods\"\u2014\"reflective in sunlight, soft and pewterish in mist; crisp as a line drawing one moment, chimerical the next\"\u2014as a way the arch has \"paid for itself many times over in wonder\".\nSome have questioned whether St. Louis really was\u2014as Saarinen said\u2014the \"Gateway to the West\". Kansas City-born \"deadline poet\" Calvin Trillin wrote,\nI know you're thinking that there are considerable differences between T.S. Eliot and me. Yes, it is true that he was from St. Louis, which started calling itself the Gateway to the West after Eero Saarinen's Gateway Arch was erected, and I'm from Kansas City, where people think of St. Louis not as the Gateway to the West but as the Exit from the East.\nWith renovations in the 2010s of the visitor center, the message of the arch has been more inclusive in its historic perspective, highlighting the impact of colonialism and particularly Manifest Destiny of American frontierism on the environment, land and people of First Americans, as well as Native Mexicans. Furthermore exhibiting the urban history of the site and the struggle of its people, as well as of its construction workers for more rights, during the civil rights movement era.\nIts futuristic style has been seen as a symbol for the automobile age and the surrounding automobile centric urban and interstate infrastructure, promising a technological future of a new accessible frontier. This outlook has seen continuation, lending the Gateway Arch's iconic shape and meaning to the name and logo of the future Lunar Gateway, with its purpose as a gateway to the Moon and Mars.\nAwards and recognitions.\nIn 1966, the arch was given a Special Award for Excellence from the American Institute of Steel Construction for being \"an outstanding achievement in technology and aesthetics.\" On February 9, 1967, the arch received the Outstanding Civil Engineering Achievement Award of 1967 from the American Society of Civil Engineers. The arch was once among \"Travel + Leisure\"'s unofficial rankings for the most-visited attraction in the world, after Lenin's Tomb, Disney World, Disneyland, and the Eiffel Tower. On February 22, 1990, the arch received the American Institute of Architects' (AIA) Twenty-Five Year Award for its \"enduring significance that has withstood the test of time.\" It was declared \"a symbolic bridge between East and West, past and future, engineering and art\" that \"embodies the boundless optimism of a growing nation.\" In 2007, the arch was ranked fourteenth on the AIA's \"America's Favorite Architecture\" list.\nMaintenance.\nThe first act of vandalism was committed in June 1968: the vandals etched their names on various parts of the arch. In all, $10,000 was spent that year to repair damage from vandalism. The arch was first targeted by graffiti artists on March 5, 1969.\nIn 2010, signs of corrosion were reported at the upper regions of the stainless steel surface. Carbon steel in the north leg has been rusting, possibly a result of water accumulation, a side effect of leaky welds in an environment that often causes rain to enter the skin of the structure. Maintenance workers use mops and a temporary setup of water containers to ease the problem. According to NPS documents, the corrosion and rust pose no safety concerns.\nA more comprehensive study of the corrosion had been suggested as early as 2006 by architectural specialists studying the Arch, and reiterated in a 2010 Historic Structure Report. In September 2010, the NPS granted Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc. a contract for a structural study that would \"gather data about the condition of the Arch to enable experts to develop and implement the right long-term solutions.\"\nStain samples were taken from the west face of the Arch on October 21, 2014, to determine the best way to clean it. The cleaning will cost about $340,000.\nIn 1984, structural engineer Tibor Szegezdy told \"Smithsonian Magazine\" that the Arch could stand \"considerably less than a thousand years\" before collapsing in a wind storm.\nBrickline Greenway.\nThe Brickline Greenway Project is a major public-private partnership that aims to connect Forest Park and the Washington University in St. Louis Danforth Campus to the Gateway Arch grounds. Among the partners leading this project are Great Rivers Greenway, the Arch to Park Collaborative, St. Louis City, and Washington University in St. Louis. The Brickline Greenway was known as the Chouteau Greenway prior to March 10, 2020.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53354", "revid": "19073392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53354", "title": "Saint Louis Arch", "text": ""}
{"id": "53355", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53355", "title": "Gary Condit", "text": "American politician (born 1948)\nGary Adrian Condit (born April 21, 1948) is an American former politician from California. A Democrat, Condit represented California's 18th congressional district in the United States House of Representatives from 1989 to 2003. He gained significant national attention after the May 2001 disappearance of Chandra Levy, an intern with the Federal Bureau of Prisons. Condit and Levy were having an affair, and she was subsequently found to have been murdered.\nEarly life.\nGary Condit was born in Salina, Oklahoma, on April 21, 1948, the son of Velma Jean (Tidwell) Condit (1929\u20132017) and Adrian Burl Condit (1927\u20132021), a Baptist minister. He was raised and educated in Oklahoma, and graduated from Tulsa's Nathan Hale High School. During the summers of his high school years, Condit worked as a roustabout in Oklahoma's oil fields. In 1967, at age 18, he married his high school sweetheart, Carolyn Berry. An investigation by journalists in 2001 revealed that Condit had provided an inaccurate birth date when applying for his marriage license. At the time, Oklahoma required males under age 21 to have parental consent to marry; by claiming to have been born in 1942 rather than 1948, Condit evaded this requirement.\nIn 1967, when Condit's father became pastor of a Baptist church near Modesto, his family relocated there. Condit began attendance at Modesto Junior College and received an Associate of Arts degree in 1970. In 1972, he received a B.A. degree from California State University, Stanislaus. While attending college and at the start of his career, Condit worked at a variety of jobs, including one at a tomato cannery, one at a factory that made munitions during the Vietnam War, and one in the paint department of a Montgomery Ward department store.\nPolitical career.\nCondit served on the Ceres City Council from 1972 to 1976. In 1975 and 1976, he served as mayor, becoming the youngest mayor in the city's history at the age of 25. Condit served on the Stanislaus County Board of Supervisors from 1976 to 1982 and was elected to the California State Assembly in 1982.\nCalifornia State Assembly.\nIn 1988, Condit was a member of the \"Gang of Five\"\u00a0\u2013 with Charles M. Calderon of Whittier, Gerald R. Eaves of Rialto, Rusty Areias of Los Banos and Steve Peace of Chula Vista\u00a0\u2013 that failed to unseat Willie Brown as Speaker of the State Assembly by making a deal with Republicans. Peace co-wrote and produced the 1988 film \"Return of the Killer Tomatoes\", in which Condit appeared in an uncredited non-speaking cameo during a fight sequence.\nU.S. House of Representatives.\nCondit was elected to Congress in 1989 in a special election after the resignation of House Democratic Whip Tony Coelho. He was elected to a full term in 1990, and reelected five more times without serious difficulty (Condit had no Republican challenger during the general elections of 1992 and 1998). His most important committee assignment was as a senior member on the House Intelligence Committee in the months and years prior to the September 11 attacks. Like most Democrats from the Central Valley, Condit was somewhat more conservative than other Democrats from California. Being a Blue Dog Democrat, Condit voted against President Bill Clinton more frequently than other members of his party in the chamber. Condit took several populist progressive positions such as opposing NAFTA despite intense lobbying from his own district's wine industry and President Clinton himself, voted against the landmark repeal of Glass-Steagall protections, and against the Iraq War and intervention in Kosovo. In the aftermath of Kosovo, Condit was a persistent force in compelling the prosecution of Slobodan Milo\u0161evic.\nIn 1998, during the Monica Lewinsky scandal, Condit publicly demanded that Clinton \"come clean\" on his relationship with the young woman; a video of this demand was aired almost daily during Condit's own scandal involving a relationship with Bureau of Prisons intern Chandra Levy. Following the September 11, 2001 attacks, interest in the Levy case declined. Condit kept his seat on the Intelligence Committee, retained his security clearance, and was one of a small number of members of Congress who were cleared to see the most sensitive information on the 9/11 attacks. On December 7, 2001, Condit announced he would run for re-election. He lost the Democratic primary election in March 2002 to his former aide, then-Assemblyman Dennis Cardoza, and left Congress at the end of his term in January 2003. Condit's most notable vote in his last months in office was the resolution to expel Congressman James Traficant after his conviction on corruption charges. In the 420\u20131 vote on July 24, 2002, Condit was the sole \"nay\".\nLevy scandal.\nIn 2001, Condit became the subject of national news coverage after the disappearance of Chandra Levy, a young woman working as a Washington, D.C., intern, originally from Condit's district. Police questioned Condit twice, and both times he denied having an extramarital affair with her; however, Levy's aunt eventually went public with conversations she had with her about their relationship. Police questioned Condit a third time, and he confessed to the affair. When the affair began, Condit was 53 and Levy was 23. While Condit was not named as an official suspect in the disappearance, Levy's family suspected that he was withholding important information. His reputation suffered from the contrast between his \"pro-family\" politics, his adultery with a woman younger than his daughter, and his attempts to mislead the police regarding his affair. In July, two months after Levy vanished, Condit agreed to let investigators search his apartment; hours before the search, police said he was spotted throwing a gift box he had received from another woman into a dumpster in a Washington suburb. This followed news reports that Condit had had an affair with a flight attendant.\nIn an August 2001 televised interview with Connie Chung, Condit acknowledged that he had had a five-month relationship with Levy but did not say whether the relationship was sexual. Condit also admitted that, \"in 34 years of marriage, he had not been 'a perfect man' and had made his \"'fair share of mistakes'\". Condit denied having killed Levy and denied having any information on her disappearance. \nLevy's remains were not found during the extensive search that followed her disappearance. On May 22, 2002, they were discovered accidentally in a secluded area of Rock Creek Park in Washington, D.C. Levy's death was declared a homicide. In late 2002, Condit sued writer Dominick Dunne of \"Vanity Fair\" for $11 million, claiming that Dunne defamed him by suggesting he ordered Levy killed in 2001. Condit's attorney said that the libel lawsuit was based on comments Dunne repeated on national radio and television programs in December 2001, where he suggested Condit frequented Middle Eastern embassies for sexual activity with prostitutes and that, during those times, he made it clear that he wanted someone to get rid of Levy. Condit's attorney said that Dunne's comments \"conveyed that Gary Condit was involved in her kidnapping and in her murder, that friends of Gary Condit had her kidnapped, put in an airplane and dropped in the Atlantic Ocean.\" Dunne paid an undisclosed amount to settle that lawsuit in March 2005. Dunne said he had been \"completely hoodwinked\" by an unreliable informant. Subsequently, Condit sued Dunne again, charging him with \"revivifying\" the slander in an appearance on CNN's \"Larry King Live\" in November 2005. In July 2008 a federal judge dismissed the second lawsuit filed against Dunne.\nIn July 2006, Condit sued the \"Sonoran News\", a free weekly newspaper, for defamation of character after the publication wrote \"that Condit was the 'main focus in the Chandra Levy case in 2001, after lying to investigators about his affair with Levy.'\" The case was dismissed in July 2007 when the judge ruled that Condit had not proved the statement was false, or that the paper had published it with malice. Years later, Condit publicly denied ever having an affair with Chandra Levy. Police continued the murder investigation, and in March 2009, a warrant was issued for the arrest of Ingmar Guandique, an undocumented immigrant from El Salvador who had already been convicted and imprisoned for two other attacks on women in Rock Creek Park. He was subsequently indicted for Levy's murder. On November 22, 2010, Guandique was found guilty of first-degree murder, and was sentenced in February 2011 to 60 years in prison. Condit's lawyer Bert Fields said, \"It's a complete vindication but that comes a little late. Who gives him his career back?\" On June 4, 2015, D.C. Superior Court Judge Gerald Fisher granted a motion for the retrial of Guandique after it was revealed that the sole witness against him, a jailhouse informant named Armando Morales, had lied about prior jailhouse testimony. Prosecutors dropped all charges against Guandique on July 28, 2016, after an associate of Morales came forward with secret recordings in which he admitted to falsifying testimony about the murder of Levy. Levy's death therefore remains unsolved.\nBusiness career.\nAfter his departure from office, Condit moved to Arizona and operated two Baskin-Robbins ice cream stores with his wife and son. When the franchise failed, Condit was ordered to pay the company $98,000 in a breach of contract proceeding. In 2012, he was reported to be serving as president of the Phoenix Institute of Desert Agriculture, which listed its status as \"Dissolved\" in the last corporate filing as of June 4, 2015. Condit later returned to California, where he became a registered lobbyist with the J. Blonien law firm of Sacramento.\nFamily.\nInvolvement in local politics.\nIn 2012, Condit's son, Chad, announced his intention to run for the House of Representatives as an independent in California's redrawn 10th congressional district. He lost in the top-two election against incumbent Republican Jeff Denham and Democratic challenger Jos\u00e9 M. Hern\u00e1ndez. In 2022, Chad ran for the State Assembly to represent the 22nd Assembly district. Chad finished in 3rd place in the jungle primary and did not advance to the general election. After his loss, Chad worked on Marie Alvarado-Gil's campaign for State Senate, and became her chief of staff after she won her election. In December 2023, he was fired from his position, and later sued Alvarado-Gil alleging sexual harassment.\nCondit's daughter, Cadee Condit Gray, was previously married to Adam Gray, a congressman representing California's 13th congressional district since 2025. Gray also served as a California State Assembly member representing the 21st district (2012\u20132022). In 2020, Condit's nephew Buck was elected to the Stanislaus County Board of Supervisors for district 1, defeating Modesto City Councilman Bill Zoslocki 58.77% to 41.23%. Earlier in 2018, Condit's grandson, Channce Condit, ran unopposed for a seat on the Ceres City Council. In 2020, Channce was elected to the Stanislaus County Board of Supervisors after he defeated Tom Hallinan 60% to 40%, joining his father's cousin, Buck, on the board.\nIn 2015, another grandson of Condit, Couper Condit, was appointed to the Ceres planning commission but was denied reappointment in 2020 by the council. Couper Condit won a seat on the Ceres City Council later in 2020 by defeating incumbent Michael \"Mike\" Kline by a 38.19% to 23.52% margin, with two other competitors falling short. After serving for 10 months on the Ceres City Council, Couper Condit resigned with no explanation. Couper Condit has also worked as the district director for Assemblymember Heath Flora.\nIn 2023, another grandson of Condit, Gary M. Condit (named after his grandfather), was appointed to the Ceres Planning Commission. Gary M. Condit ran for Ceres mayor in 2024 but lost the race to the incumbent mayor, Javier Lopez, by a little under 5%. His wife, Destiny Suarez, worked at the office of State Senator Marie Alvarado-Gil, but quit about eight months after her father in-law, Chad Condit, was fired from the same workplace.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53356", "revid": "50785151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53356", "title": "Goffredo Mameli", "text": "Italian poet and writer (1827\u20131849)\nGoffredo Mameli ( ; 5 September 1827 \u2013 6 July 1849) was an Italian patriot, poet and writer who was a notable figure in the Risorgimento. He is also the author of the lyrics of \"Il Canto degli Italiani\"\u2014the national anthem of Italy.\nBiography.\nThe son of an aristocratic Sardinian admiral, Mameli was from Genoa where he was born, and where his father was in command of the fleet of the Kingdom of Sardinia. At the age of seven he was sent to Sardinia, to his grandfather's place, to escape the risk of cholera, but soon came back to Genoa to complete his studies.\nThe achievements of Mameli's very short life are concentrated in only two years, during which time he played major parts in insurrectional movements and the Risorgimento.\nIn 1847 Mameli joined the \"Societ\u00e0 Entelema\", a cultural movement that soon would have turned to a political movement, and here he became interested in the theories of Giuseppe Mazzini.\nMameli is mostly known as the author of the lyrics of the Italian national anthem, \"Il Canto degli Italiani\" (music by Michele Novaro), better known in Italy as \"Inno di Mameli\" (Mameli's Hymn). These lyrics were used for the first time in November 1847, celebrating King Charles Albert of Sardinia in his visit to Genoa after his first reforms. Mameli's lyrics to a \"hymn of the people\" \u2014\"Suona la tromba\"\u2014 were set by Giuseppe Verdi the following year.\nMameli was deeply involved in nationalist movements and some more \"spectacular\" actions are remembered, such as his exposition of the \"Tricolore\" (current Italian flag, then prohibited) to celebrate the expulsion of Austrians in 1846. Yet, he was with Nino Bixio (Garibaldi's later major supporter and friend) in a committee for public health, already on a clear Mazzinian position. In March 1848, hearing of the insurrection in Milan, Mameli organised an expedition with 300 other patriots, joined Bixio's troops that were already on site, and entered the town. He was then admitted to Garibaldi's irregular army (really the volunteer brigade of general Torres), as a captain, and met Mazzini.\nBack in Genoa, he worked more on a literary side, wrote several hymns and other compositions, he became the director of the newspaper \"Diario del Popolo\" (\"People's Daily\"), and promoted a press campaign for a war against Austria. In December 1848 Mameli reached Rome, where Pellegrino Rossi had been murdered, helping in the clandestine works for declaration (9 February 1849) of the Roman Republic. Mameli then went to Florence where he proposed the creation of a common state between Tuscany and Latium.\nIn April 1849 he was again in Genoa, with Bixio, where a popular insurrection was strongly opposed by General Alberto La Marmora. Mameli soon left again for Rome, where the French had come to support the Papacy (Pope Pius IX had actually escaped from the town) and took active part in the combat.\nDeath.\nDuring the siege of Rome, he was an aide of Giuseppe Garibaldi, who fought in Palestrina (9 May) and in Velletri (19 May). In particular he fought in the defense of the Villa del Vascello on the Janiculum hill. He was wounded in the left leg by the French during the last assault of 3 June at Villa Corsini, occupied by the French.\nMameli suffered from gangrene, which doctor Pietro Maestri observed after four days. After a consultation with Maestri and other doctors, it was decided to amputate the leg, performed by surgeon Paolo Maria Raffaello Baroni. Despite this, the infection gradually increased to the point of causing death by sepsis, on 6 July 1849, at the age of 21, in the hospice of Trinit\u00e0 dei Pellegrini.\nHe was originally buried at Campo Verano in Rome, however, his remains were moved to the Mausoleo Ossario del Gianicolo in 1941.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53357", "revid": "36464267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53357", "title": "AMC Gremlin", "text": "Subcompact car produced by American Motors Corporation\nThe AMC Gremlin, also called American Motors Gremlin, is a subcompact car introduced in 1970, manufactured and marketed in a single, two-door body style (1970\u20131978) by American Motors Corporation (AMC), as well as in Mexico (1974\u20131983) by AMC's Veh\u00edculos Automotores Mexicanos (VAM) subsidiary.\nUsing a shortened Hornet platform and bodywork with a pronounced kammback tail, the Gremlin was classified as an economy car and competed with the Chevrolet Vega and Ford Pinto, introduced that same year, as well as imported cars including the Volkswagen Beetle and Toyota Corolla. The small domestic automaker marketed the Gremlin as \"the first American-built import.\"\nThe Gremlin reached a total production of 671,475 over a single generation. It was superseded for 1979 by a restyled and revised variant, the AMC Spirit, which continued to be produced through 1983. This was long after the retirement of the Ford Pinto that suffered from stories about exploding gas tanks, as well as the Chevrolet Vega with its rusting bodies, durability problems and its aluminum engine.\nHistory.\nOrigin and design.\nThe idea for the Gremlin began in 1966 when design chief at American Motors, Dick Teague, and stylist Bob Nixon discussed the possibility of a shortened version of AMC's compact car. On an airline flight, Teague's solution, which he said he sketched on an air sickness bag, was to truncate the tail of a Javelin. Bob Nixon joined AMC as a 23-year-old and did the first formal design sketches in 1967 for the car that was to be the Gremlin.\nFord and General Motors were to launch new subcompact cars for 1971, but AMC did not have the financial resources to compete with an entirely new design. Teague's idea of using the pony car Javelin resulted in the AMX-GT concept, first shown at the New York International Auto Show in April 1968. This version did not go into production, but the AMX name was used from 1968 through 1970 on a shortened, two-seat sports car built from the Javelin.\nInstead, Bob Nixon, AMC's future Chief of Design, designed the new subcompact based on the automaker's Hornet model, a compact car. The design reduced the wheelbase from and the overall length from , making the Gremlin two inches (50\u00a0mm) longer than the Volkswagen Beetle and shorter than the Ford Pinto and Chevrolet Vega.\nCapitalizing on AMC's advantage as a small car producer, the Gremlin was introduced on April 1, 1970. The April 6, 1970, cover of \"Newsweek\" magazine featured a red Gremlin for its article, \"Detroit Fights Back: The Gremlin\". The car was available as a \"base\" two-passenger version with no rear seat and a fixed rear window, at a suggested retail price of $1,879, and as a four-seat hatchback with an opening rear window, at $1,959 (US$ in 2024 dollars).\nFrom the front of the car to the B-pillars, the Gremlin was essentially the same as the AMC Hornet. Although it was only fractionally longer than the contemporary Volkswagen Beetle, \"Time\" said the length of its hood over the front-mounted engine made \"the difference seem considerably more\", adding that the car \"resembles a sawed-off station wagon, with a long, low hood and swept-up rear, and is faintly reminiscent of the original Studebaker Avanti.\" As with the Volkswagen, the Gremlin's styling set it apart from other cars. \"Time\" said, \"like some other cars of less than standard size, the back seat is designed for small children only.\" The Gremlin's wider stance gave it \"a stable, quiet and relatively comfortable ride\u2014for the two front passengers\", for whom, by small-car standards, there was more than average interior width, seat room, and legroom. The six cubic feet of luggage space behind the back seat was less than in the rear-engined Volkswagen Beetle, but with the seat folded the cargo area tripled to .\nThe upright design of the tail, which enlarged interior space, was aerodynamically efficient. Later, European and Japanese manufacturers similarly created different body styles on one compact car chassis by extending or curtailing the trunk (e.g. Volkswagen's Jetta and Golf models).\nMarketing.\nDesigned and named by Teague to look either \"cute or controversial - depending on one's viewpoint ... for many, it seemed perfect for the free-thinking early 1970s.\" American Motors executives apparently felt confident enough to not worry that the Gremlin name might have negative connotations. \"Time\" magazine noted two definitions for gremlin: \"Defined by Webster's as 'a small gnome held to be responsible for malfunction of equipment.' American Motors' definition: 'a pal to its friends and an ogre to its enemies.'\" The car's cartoon-inspired mascot was marketed for product differentiation and was intended to be memorable to consumers. The Gremlin's hatchback design was also needed to make the car stand out in the competitive marketplace, and according to Teague: \"Nobody would have paid it any attention if it had looked like one of the Big Three\" automobiles.\nAMC promoted the Gremlin as \"America's first subcompact\". This description overlooks the Nash Metropolitan and the earlier Crosley. The Metropolitan\u2014a subcompact-sized captive import, American-conceived and American-designed for the American market, and built in the UK with a British engine\u2014has a claim to be \"America's first subcompact.\"\nAMC marketed the Gremlin as \"cute and different,\" a strategy successful in attracting more than 60 percent of purchasers under the age of 35.\nAnnual changes (1970\u20131978).\n1970.\nThe Gremlin debuted in April 1970 with AMC's I6, a seven main bearing design which produced as standard equipment, with AMC's I6 - producing - as an option. AMC said the Gremlin offered \"the best gas mileage of any production car made in America\". According to the auto editors of \"Consumer Guide\", it had \"an unusually long option list for the era\" so owners could have luxury and conveniences typically found in more expensive cars, and these options \"came with a much higher profit margin\" for the automaker.\nAs the first of the new domestic subcompact cars, \"the Gremlin has been the most talked-about car since its introduction.\" Sales for the abbreviated model year were 25,300.\n\"Popular Science\" assigned its editor to the equivalent of one year of driving by conducting a cross-country road test of a brand new Gremlin, and reported after driving it \"without a single problem is an enviable record\" and that \"we were all impressed with the quality of this vehicle.\" A nationwide survey based on owners driving their 1970 AMC Gremlins over conducted by \"Popular Mechanics\" concluded that the unique styling attracted many buyers, but economy topped their likes.\n1971.\nFor the 1971 model year the \"X\" appearance/equipment trim package was introduced as a $300 option on the 4-passenger model and \"proved extremely popular.\" It included body side tape stripes, body color front fascia, slotted road wheels with D70x14 Goodyear Polyglas tires, blackout grille insert, bucket seats, and \"X\" decals.\nThe 2-passenger Gremlin version entered into its second and final season. The I6 engine that was optional for 1970 became standard, while a longer-stroke version became the option. Compression ratios dropped from 8.5:1 to 8:1 for 1971, resulting in (gross) from the and (gross) from the \n1971 Gremlin prices increased slightly (up by $20 to $1,899 for the base model), and sales for this first full model year rose to 53,480.\n1972.\nAmong many other changes was an available V8 engine. It was \"the muscle car formula of stuffing a big motor in a small car.\" Engine ratings were downgraded to more accurate Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) net\u00a0hp figures, bringing the engine to , the to and the 304 V8 to . Even with the lower engine output ratings across the industry, \"the V8 Gremlin was a poor-man's Corvette, able to spin its rear tires at will and outrun some larger, more expensive pony cars\" and it was \"the only real performance car available under $2,200.\"\nThe base two-seater model was discontinued, having sold 3,017 units in 18 months. Gremlins also switched from non-synchronized 1st gear manual transmissions to full synchromesh, and the Borg-Warner-sourced automatic transmission was replaced by the Chrysler-designed TorqueFlite. Other minor technical upgrades improved the car's reliability and durability. The Gremlin X package continued to be popular, while optional features now included an AM/FM radio, fabric sunroof, tilt steering wheel, inside hood release, trailer towing package for up to with a Class 1 hitch, as well as manual or power-assisted front disk brakes.\nAmerican Motors introduced the automobile industry's first 12-month or bumper-to-bumper warranty, called the \"Buyer Protection Plan\". Its foundation was an emphasis on quality and durability, improved production by reducing the number of models and increasing the level of standard equipment. The new warranty included an innovative promise to customers that AMC would repair anything wrong with the car (except for tires). Owners were provided with a toll-free number to the company, as well as a free loaner car if a warranty repair took overnight. Numerous production and product improvements would result in fewer warranty claims, better public relations, and greater customer satisfaction and loyalty.\nModel year 1972 sales totaled 61,717, a 15% gain over the previous year.\n1973.\nFor the 1973 model year, AMC strengthened bumpers able to withstand a impact in the front and a impact in the rear, without any damage to the engine, lights, and safety equipment according to new mandates by the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). Optional was a Levi's interior trim package, which included spun nylon upholstery made to look like denim (fire safety regulations prohibited the use of real cotton denim). Details included removable map pockets, burnished copper denim rivets, and red Levi's logo tabs. Rear-seat legroom was increased. The X package received a new tape-striping pattern that kicked up over the Gremlin's rear-wheel flares.\nSales improved to 122,844 units, nearly 30% more than in 1972. A 1973 Gremlin purchased by \"Consumer Reports\" was top-rated in a group of six subcompact models tested for the June issue. That car had relatively few sample defects and proved reliable over a long-term test.\n1974.\nThe Arab Oil Embargo of October 1973 came just as the 1974 model year began. AMC improved the Gremlin's back seat. A deeper front fascia made the car appear longer. A larger front bumper was mounted on self-restoring telescoping gas and oil cylinders. Unlike most other designs, the Gremlin did not use a filler panel between the bumper and body. A stronger rear bumper was set lower\u2014front and rear passenger car bumpers were now required by NHTSA to have uniform heights, take angle impacts, and sustain impacts with no damage. The rear fascia was modified slightly to blend with the design changes. The Gremlin X stripe pattern was given a \"hockey stick\" look for 1974: the stripes followed the window line as it tapered aft, and swept up now to include four diagonal lines on the wide C-pillar. A new typeface for nameplates was used by AMC for 1974, including on the Gremlin. With the car's 1974 model year extended into November to delay the need to install catalytic converters required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 2004 regulations starting with 1975 models, AMC sold 171,128 1974 Gremlins, an increase of nearly 40% over 1973 and 130% over 1971.\n1975.\nChanges for the 1975 model year Gremlins included standard electronic ignition developed by Prestolite. All U.S. market Gremlins featured catalytic converters that required the use of unleaded regular-grade fuel. \"Unleaded Fuel Only\" warnings were placed by the fuel filler and on the fuel gauge. Gremlins with I6 engines and manual transmissions gained a new option, the electrically operated overdrive from Laycock de Normanville. The 0.714:1 \"J-type\" unit was controlled by a pushbutton at the end of the turn signal stalk. When turned on, the unit engaged automatically at speeds above and dropped out at . An accelerator pedal kick-down switch provided faster passing when needed. Steel-belted radial tires were now standard on Gremlins with the X package.\nAmerican Motors was promoting its economical models covered by the comprehensive \"Buyer Protection Plan\" warranty, as well as preparing for the launch of the Pacer The automaker was planning to spend half of the entire 1975 advertising budget on the new Pacer. Marketing for the Gremlin included tie-ins with a \"Home Value Days\" supplement designed to promote 18,500 hardware stores in \"Popular Science\" and \"The Reader's Digest\" as well as with Colgate-Palmolive's campaign using Willie Mays to \"Help Young America\" in \"Jet\" and \"Ebony\".\nThe U.S. subcompacts were compared to the new, front-wheel-drive Volkswagen Rabbit that replaced the aging Beetle. \"Popular Science\" road tests showed the Gremlin to be the fastest and quietest of all, but had the lowest fuel efficiency with an average EPA rating of , compared to the Chevrolet Vega's , Ford Pinto's , and the Rabbit's . The Gremlin had an I6 engine and a three-speed transmission (in contrast to the I4 engines and four-speed transmissions in the other cars) and weighed over more than the VW Rabbit.\nStruggling under stagflation and an , all the domestic subcompact cars' sales slumped compared to the industry's record-breaking 1973 model year. In total, AMC sold 56,011 Gremlins in the (albeit shortened) 1975 model year, a 67% drop. The success of the innovative Pacer launched in mid-February 1975 \"severely cut\" the sales of both the Gremlin and Hornet models.\n1976.\nChanges were greater for 1976. Oval headlight bezels replaced the previous circular items. The grille shape became a stretched hexagon and included in its insert two opposing loops stacked atop each other and housing new rounded parking/turn signal lights. A new \"Custom\" trim line debuted, featuring a striped interior trim called \"Potomac\", as well as a spare tire cover and other minor details. The A models were given another new striping scheme: the hockey stick-style stripe of the previous year adding a secondary extension that ran from the door handle straight back. The X package was now available only on Custom models. Due to flagging sales, the V8 engine option (now downgraded to ) was cancelled at midyear, after only 826 installations. (A total of 40,994 Gremlins were equipped with the V8 engine from 1972 until 1976.) A 4-speed manual transmission was made available at midyear. Sales tapered slightly to 52,941 - a decline of 5.5%. The Overdrive option continued to be available until midyear when Laycock de Normanville entered receivership. American Motors attempted to purchase the British manufacturer but could not acquire the funding in time.\n1977.\n1977 changes included redesigned sheet metal for the first time in the Gremlin's now 8-year history: revised hood, shorter front fenders, new bumpers, taller glass tailgate, enlarged taillights, and rear license plate now covering the fuel filler. The front end was shortened by four inches (102\u00a0mm) with all-new sheet metal and a crosshatch grille insert. Parking lights reverted to rectangular, and headlights were recessed into square bezels with rounded corners. The new hood had a small \"power bulge\" at the front. The base model now included carpeting, as well as rocker panel and wheel lip moldings. The \"Custom\" model was available with a list price of $2,998. The X package returned as a $189 option, with a new striping pattern that ran straight back from the front fenders and crested upward over the rear wheels. Front disc brakes became standard.\nAt the start of the model year, the Gremlin was available with either the standard or optional six-cylinder engines. Both had increased power from updated cylinder heads and two-barrel carburetors. In addition, AMC offered a carbureted four-cylinder engine: a Volkswagen/Audi inline-four, also used in fuel-injected form in the Porsche 924. It gave better fuel economy but less power than the standard six-cylinder engines, and reduced the Gremlin's weight by , allowing it to achieve an EPA rating of in the city, and on the highway. It was reserved for the Custom version of the Gremlin because the expense of acquiring the rights to the engine meant that AMC could not afford to make it standard equipment. Of 46,171 Gremlins built for 1977 (13% less than in 1976), 7,558 had the new 2.0\u00a0L engine.\n1978.\nIn its final year of 1978, the Gremlin received a number of changes, but customers on a tighter budget could still get a standard six-cylinder base model Gremlin for under US$3,400. A new \"Custom\" model featured either the four- or six-cylinder engine with a standard four-speed manual transmission and new vinyl bucket seats, wheel lip moldings, and other trim upgrades. Inside the Gremlin there was a revised instrument panel borrowed from the then-new 1978 Concord. The dashboard had high-level ventilation HVAC, radio switchgear within easier reach, and a flat, full-width top. The X's tape striping pattern was revised to match the 1978 Concord Sport package design, with the stripe at the lower body side and curving over the wheel lip.\nAt mid-season, a GT package became available with a front spoiler and flared wheel openings as on the 1978 AMX. The GT added an aluminum overlay to the instrument panel, was powered by the I6 as standard, and had a unique striping scheme: a wide tape stripe, outlined by a narrow one, ran back from the front fenders and widened aft of the rear quarter windows. The package also included body-color fender flares and front air dam, as well as body-color bumpers, all of which combined to give the GT a modern, aggressive look. Fewer than 3,000 Gremlin GTs were built.\nThe Gremlin's body shape had not changed appreciably in its nine years of production, and other more advanced subcompacts, lighter in weight, with more doors, better interiors, and front-wheel drive, had appeared on the market. Gremlin sales for the final year fell 52% to 22,104 units. By the time production ceased, a total of 671,475 Gremlins had been built.\nThe updated AMC Spirit replaced the Gremlin for the 1979 model year, basically \"a Gremlin with conventional styling ... Lovable, sturdy cars are hard to kill.\"\nPerformance.\nThe Gremlin was faster than other subcompacts of the time. \"Motor Trend\" magazine recorded zero to 60\u00a0mph (0 to 97\u00a0km/h) in 12.6 seconds with the engine. The Ford Pinto and the VW Beetle were in the 18-second range. Fuel economy was to with the small six, compared with the 35-plus mpg economy of the VW Beetle.\nAlthough front-heaviness was generally thought to compromise the handling, Tom McCahill wrote in \"Mechanix Illustrated\" that the Gremlin was \"fast and easy\", with a comparatively stiff ride because of the shortened rear springs. He ran a 232-engined Gremlin with automatic transmission from zero to 60\u00a0mph (0 to 97\u00a0km/h) in 11.9\u00a0seconds, saw on the Daytona Speedway straightaway, and summarized: \"On a dollar for dollar basis, I rate the Gremlin the best American buy of the year\".\n\"Car and Driver\" magazine also recorded 0 to 60\u00a0mph in 11.9 seconds with a 232-powered Gremlin.\n\"Automobile Quarterly\"'s article \"A Critical Look at the 1973 American Cars\" summarized that the basic \"Gremlin offers outstanding performance for an economy car and excellent fuel mileage.\"\nWhen \"Popular Mechanics\" magazine tested the car with the Audi four-cylinder engine introduced in 1977, they said its acceleration with a four-speed manual felt \"amazingly strong\", with 0\u201360\u00a0mph and quarter-mile times one second slower than with the 232 cubic inch straight-six (16 vs. 15, and 21 vs. 20 seconds respectively). The smaller engine produced EPA mileage of highway and city.\nThe Gremlin's body was heavier and stronger than its domestic or imported rivals. The engines were also more powerful than the Gremlin's main domestic and imported competition. The powertrains were smoother and more reliable, and the car had fewer recalls. Its chief import rival was the Volkswagen Beetle, which did not handle as well. The same overall size as the Gremlin, it was packaged marginally better. Gremlin designer Richard Teague commented in \"Motor Trend\" that to compare the Beetle (whose basic design originated in the late 1930s) to the Gremlin in profile and body design was like \"comparing a Ford GT40 to the Hindenburg\".\nThe Gremlin holds the \"distinction of offering one of the widest engine ranges of all time\u2014from two liters to five liters.\"\nRandall 401-XR.\nRandall AMC dealership in Mesa, Arizona, received AMC's endorsement to build V8 powered Gremlins. The cars started out as models from the factory and after Randall's modifications would turn in 13.90 second passes at in the quarter mile, for $2,995. Known as the Randall 401-XR (X for Gremlin X, R for Randall), a total of twenty cars were built for the street and one for the strip during 1972, 1973, and 1974. In 2012, the Randalls built a 22nd Continuation Plum 1974 Gremlin 401XR, originally intending to build a few, but completed only one. \"Car Craft\" magazine tested one with some modifications and achieved in 12.22 seconds in the quarter while still remaining a \"totally streetable, daily-driver\". In 1972, \"Super Stock and Drag Illustrated\" magazine had a \"Special Gremlin\" issue. One of the many venues where Randall's 1972 Gremlin 401XR Super Stock car was at the 1972 Winternationals.\nCompetition.\nThe AMC Gremlin saw action on numerous auto racing venues, including endurance, as well as oval and road racing. Due to their inherent inexpensiveness, strength, and simplicity to modify them for higher performance, many AMC Gremlins were used in drag racing.\nIn the International Motor Sports Association (IMSA) RS series for compact sedans, Raleigh, North Carolina's \"Team Highball\", run by Amos Johnson and Bunny Johnson, was the AMC factory-backed team, with Amos Johnson, Whit Diggett, and later, Dennis Shaw driving. The torque of their 6-cylinder Gremlins gave a big advantage on the faster tracks like the Daytona International Speedway, where they were often more than a match for the BMW 2002, Alfa Romeo GTV, Datsun 510, Ford Pinto, Mercury Capri, and Opel Manta. Johnson was the series 1973 co-champion, while independent driver George Alderman took the 1974 title.\nStarting in 1970, Wally Booth headed AMC's Pro Stock drag racing efforts. He and other drivers campaigned Gremlins painted in the hash red, white, and blue pattern that AMC had adopted as its corporate race livery. Dick Arons built the engines. The team \"transformed the brand's staid grocery-getter reputation from the ground up into that of a genuine performance powerhouse\". Wally Booth \"was one of the Edelbrock crew's favorite racers\".\nThe rule changes for the 1972 Pro Stock season opened drag racing for smaller cars fitted with small-block engines and AMC was committed to fielding the Gremlin. The first car Booth built was a Gremlin body-in-white, but it was wrecked in a towing accident. In preparation for the 1973 racing season, Booth built a tube chassis Gremlin with the former Penske Racing fabricator, Ron Fournier, but switched to a Hornet body Pro Stock body after realizing that the Gremlin's aerodynamics were limiting top speed during testing at the Milan Dragway in Michigan.\nThe automaker's involvement in drag racing led to coordination in the development of the Gremlin 401XR. Grant and Mike Randall owners of Randall Rambler/AMC, built a 1972 Gremlin 401XR Drag Car, that they raced at the ARHA Winter Nationals 1972. The Randalls also wrote a high-Performance AMC Engine Tuning guide as well as the \"Randall Rambler &amp; Jeep Speed Bible.\"\nThree factory Pro-Stock 1972 Gremlin drag racers were campaigned around the nation. One was driven by Rich LaMont and sponsored by radio station 99 WIBG in Philadelphia, PA. This car has been restored with a AMC V8 with 4-speed manual transmission and it still runs the quarter-mile at around 8.75 seconds achieving over .\nAt the 2006 World Power Wheelstanding Championships (not a race, but a \"wheelie\" contest), Brian Ambrosini's specially modified 1974 Gremlin took second place. The car gets all four of its wheels off the ground by its modified AMC V8 producing and achieving average quarter-mile e.t. in the low 8s with a trap speed of around .\nThe body of the Gremlin was widely used by NASCAR paved and dirt modified stock car teams in the northeastern U.S. and elsewhere from the 1970s to the early 1990s. It was believed that Gremlin's long roof with its rear kick-up provided aerodynamic advantages over the more commonly used Pinto and Vega bodies. Lenny Podbielski was \"a major player in late 1970s Speedbowl action\".\nOther markets.\nCanada.\nAmerican Motors built an assembly plant in Brampton, Ontario, in 1961 for production of motor vehicles for the Canadian market as well as for the United States. The plant built and offered almost all AMC vehicles through the 1960s, allowing AMC to take advantage of the Canada\u2013United States Automotive Products Agreement established between the two countries in 1965. By 1969 production at the Brampton Assembly had grown to such a size that AMC had the plant producing vehicles for the eastern half of the American continent while Kenosha produced vehicles for the western half of the continent. The plant ceased building the Ambassador after 1968 and imported the Javelin and later Matador from the United States but continued to build the Gremlin and Hornet throughout the 1970s.\nWith Canada moving to the metric system during the 1970s, late model Gremlins were built with their speedometers reading in kilometers per hour.\nMexico.\nVehiculos Automotores Mexicanos (VAM) manufactured Gremlins in Mexico under license and partial ownership (38% equity share) by AMC. Although the Gremlin was introduced to the U.S. and Canadian markets in 1970, VAM continued assembling its version of the Hornet still bearing the name Rambler American as its smallest, least expensive car until 1974. The fact that VAM already had three lines of products (the top limit permitted by legislation) from 1968 through 1973 made it impossible for the Gremlin to be offered. It was not until the discontinuation of the Javelin line in 1973 that free space was available for Gremlin production, making 1974 its year of debut.\nThe 1974 Gremlin was the third VAM car not to bear the Rambler name since the 1968 Javelin and the 1972 Classic (Matador in the U.S.) models. Moreover, the Mexican market continued to use the Gremlin model name for VAM's version of the AMC Spirit sedan from 1979 through 1983, several years after the Gremlin nameplate was withdrawn in the U.S. market.\nThe VAM cars had trim, interiors, and model names that differed from the equivalent AMC-made models. All engines built by VAM were of AMC design, modified to deal with Mexico's lower octane gasoline and higher altitudes. The VAM Gremlin was the only car line of its time not to be available with VAM's version of AMC's I6, due to the economy market segment focus of the cars. This is exactly the opposite case as the AMC Gremlin, which was offered with the option of a 304 V8. The three-speed manual transmission with overdrive, the four-speed manual transmission, the V8 and Audi four-cylinder engines were never available. Trim levels and versions like the two-seater, the Levis Gremlin, the Gremlin Custom, and the Gremlin GT were also never available.\n1974.\nThe introductory 1974 Gremlins became unique by incorporating the front clip of the 1974 U.S. AMC Hornet models. VAM never attempted to hide the relationship between the two models, which never harmed the sales or image of either model and was favored by the public. The launch of the Gremlin in Mexico also meant the resurrection of the I6 engine that was discontinued in 1972. The engine was practically the same as in its final year except for a slightly lower compression ratio (8.3:1 instead of 8.5:1). The advertised output was still the same at 145 gross horsepower at 4,400 revolutions per minute and was restricted to one-barrel carburetors. In contrast, since 1973 all VAM-based Hornets had the six as the standard and only engine. VAM Gremlins were basic economy cars with a full synchromesh manual 3-speed transmission, heavy-duty clutch, manual four-wheel drum brakes, manual steering, front sway bar, 3.31:1 rear gear ratio, rigid four-bladed cooling fan, collapsible steering column with anti-theft lock, base steering wheel, side marker and hazard lights, column-mounted shifters only, two-tone padded dashboard with silver-colored front surfaces, electric wipers and washers, monaural AM radio, cigarette lighter, front and rear ashtrays, locking glovebox, folding bench seats, two-point front seatbelts, flip-open rear side vents, roof rack, full carpeting with driver's side rubber mat, padded sun visors, sound-insulating cardboard-type headliner, dual coat hooks and round dome light. Factory options for 1974 included a column-mounted automatic transmission, power steering, power drum brakes, heater, parcel shelf, light group, remote-controlled driver and passenger side outside mirrors, sports steering wheel, bright molding package, wheel trim rings, and heavy-duty cooling. All VAM Gremlins used AMC's three-pod instrument cluster from the domestic-built Hornet with a blank in the third gauge position from the factory, which could be equipped with a universal tachometer or clock as dealership options. The introductory year production was 2,137.\n1975.\nThe 1975 Gremlin models were upgraded, and along with the improvements to the larger car lines VAM took 9% of the Mexican market. VAM Gremlin interiors now featured individual folding front seats with low backs and new door panels, the \"two-tone\" dashboard with silver-painted front surfaces was replaced by a color-keyed unit, and a new fuel economy gauge was standard on the third space of the instrument cluster. Manual front disk brakes and electronic ignition were among the mechanical upgrades, while the compression ratio of the engine was dropped to 7.6:1. Both transmissions now came only with a floor-mounted shifter. VAM Gremlins ordered with automatic transmissions now included a heater and power steering at no charge. The exterior featured a variation of AMC's \"hockey stick\" side decal and a new design for headlight bezels, grille, and parking lights at the front end that AMC originally developed for its Hornet models. Production doubled to over 4,200 VAM Gremlins.\n1976.\nThe Gremlin X version was added in 1976 as a separate model rather than an optional package. The X models included VAM's larger I6, a 6000 RPM tachometer, sports steering wheel, 7.00X14 radial tires, Hurst linkage with T-shaped shifter for the manual transmissions, courtesy lights under the parcel shelf, heater, power steering, tinted windshield, bright molding package (drip rails, wheel arches, rocker panels), wheel trim rings, and an in-house two-color rally stripe that was unique to the Mexican market. The 1976 VAM Gremlin X also came with an interior featuring the \"Navajo\" pattern cloth upholstery that was optional on AMC's Pacer DL models built for the Canadian and U.S. markets. The base VAM Gremlin now also included luxurious seating with a center armrest that was never available in the U.S. models. Due to the debut of the Gremlin X and its sportier focus, the base Gremlin switched back to the standard column-mounted shifters for either transmission, but keeping the individual seat configuration. Both versions included revised gauges with a 160\u00a0km/h speedometer, new side panel designs, longer folding sun visors, and a styled round dome light lens. Sales for 1976 increased to over 6,000 units.\n1977.\nStarting with the 1977 models, all VAM Gremlins were powered by the I6 regardless of trim level. The exterior featured the shorter new front end clip and rear end treatment as did the U.S. models. The 1977 Gremlin X model included a new digital tachometer and three-point retractable seatbelts, as well as new in-house VAM designs for the seats. The sporty side decal was slightly revised. The seatbelts on the base Gremlin were also changed to three-point units, which were fixed and lacked retractable mechanisms. The option list was expanded with the possibility of ordering a factory air conditioning system for the first time in the VAM line, which was available only in the X model. The previously optional dealership-offered universal air conditioning system remained available for the base model. The VAM Gremlin X (along with the 1977-1979 American ECD, Concord DL four-door equivalent) would be the only VAM car with the 258 I6 engines to be available with a factory air conditioning system, as all other VAM models with it would be units. Around 6,800 VAM Gremlins were sold during 1977.\n1978.\nOnly a few changes were made to the 1978 VAM Gremlin. The dashboard design was from the new U.S. market Concord being restricted to the unit with black surfaces only (no wood imitation or brushed aluminum versions). For the Gremlin X, there was a new VAM logo on the steering wheel horn button, smaller pointy volcano hubcaps with bright exposed lug nuts, and a new full-length bodyside decal incorporated the \"Gremlin X\" logo on the rear quarter panel. The sporty model also got the set of four bumper guards as standard equipment. The base model got another set of new hubcaps with exposed lug nuts, but with a flat top instead. Production fell just below 6,000 VAM Gremlins.\nSecond generation.\nVAM Gremlins used the updated body design of the U.S. and Canadian market AMC Spirit two-door sedan, as well as VAM versions of the Spirit Liftback, called the American GT and the Rally AMX. At the time, cars in Mexico took longer to be perceived as outdated than in the US and since the VAM Gremlin came to the public until 1974 instead of 1970, it was still relatively fresh among the Mexican buyers. Aside from this, the model kept a positive image throughout its whole run. It exceeded VAM's sales expectations in its first years. The company originally considered it a temporary low-volume model that would eventually be replaced by the upcoming Pacer model. In the end, the Gremlin stood and became VAM's all-time second best-selling line after the American. For these reasons VAM decided to keep the Gremlin name for the upcoming Spirit sedan model, being a testament to the very favorable image VAM cars in general held in Mexico. This was the third time a case like this happened within the company with Rebel and Matador models keeping the name Rambler Classic and the Hornet the Rambler American name.\nAustralia.\nAMC exported a fully built Gremlin to its Australian partner, Australian Motor Industries (AMI) of Port Melbourne, Victoria in 1970 for evaluation purposes. (AMI assembled and marketed other AMC models since 1961.) The evaluation model was painted in AMC's \"Big Bad Orange\" and was converted from left-hand drive to right-hand drive by Sydney Toyota dealer Bill Buckle Pty Ltd. The car featured AMC's six-cylinder engine and a three-speed manual transmission. The car was presented at the 1970 Sydney Motor Show to gauge interest and test the market.\nThe car was featured on the front cover of the November 1970 issue of Australia's top motoring magazine, \"Wheels\" magazine. The magazine's review pointed to the likelihood that the \"local content\" requirements would force the price up to that of the high-priced, Australian-assembled Hornet, and probably price the car out of the market.\nFor marketing purposes, it was branded as a \"Rambler Gremlin\" in keeping with the use of the Rambler marque for all AMC vehicles sold in Australia despite that Rambler as a brand was retired in the United States at the end of the 1969 model year. However, no Gremlin models were put into production in Australia.\nRight-hand-drive Gremlins were imported into Australia by U.S. servicemen.\nSwitzerland.\nBeginning in 1970 Zurich automotive importer J.H Heller AG began importing American Motors vehicles, specifically the Javelin, Gremlin and later the Pacer. Swiss market vehicles were shipped from AMC's Canadian plant.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAmerican Motors vehicles were exported to the United Kingdom during the 1960s and 1970s and sold by Rambler Motors (A.M.C.) Ltd in London with dealers in London, Yorks, Kent, and Worcester. While earlier models such as the Rambler Classic, Rebel, Ambassador, and Matador had been exported as completed factory right-hand-drive vehicles, only left-hand-drive Gremlins were exported to the United Kingdom. A British company called C.T. Wooler, in Andover, Hampshire had been in the business for a long time converting LHD cars to RHD and entered into an agreement with AMC to convert AMC vehicles. Wooler converted Gremlins as well as AMC Pacers and Jeeps.\nHurst Rescue System 1.\nBetween 1972 and 1974, Hurst Performance marketed \"a highway safety vehicle\" for emergency services, as well as a compact alternative to trucks for motorsport race tracks. The \"Hurst Rescue System 1\" was based on the AMC Gremlin and designed to quickly assist vehicle extrication of crash victims. The vehicle came with the \"Hurst Rescue Tool\", commonly known as \"The Jaws of Life\", winch, stretcher, and firefighting and first aid supplies. The vehicle also included push bumpers and a 25-gallon water tank. The price for this fully equipped rescue vehicle was between $11,000 to $13,000.\nPolice.\nA 1975 Gremlin was used as an experimental police vehicle by the Houston Police Department's Traffic Bureau, but this did not result in fleet orders.\nExperimental cars.\nThe Gremlin proved a popular testbed for experiments with alternative fuels. Many universities converted them to run on natural gas, hydrogen, and electric power.\nHydrogen.\nIn 1972 University of California, Los Angeles researchers won a nationwide Urban Vehicle Design Competition when they modified a 1972 AMC Gremlin to run on hydrogen. The lessons learned are still useful today. The engine was a converted Ford V8 noted for its volumetric efficiency. Lacking sophisticated electronics and injection systems, the carburetor was a modified propane unit and the \"thermos\"-type hydrogen tank gave the Gremlin a range of . Tests indicated that the car would not only meet the scheduled 1976 vehicle United States emission standards, but also actually emit slightly cleaner air than it took in. As part of the 1972 Urban Vehicle Design Competition, UCLA engineering students also enlarged the side glass area above the rear wheels for improved visibility, designed a roll cage which projected through the Gremlin's roof to double as a roof rack, and designed 5 MPH bumpers with an environmentally-friendly energy-absorbing popcorn core, covered with a recycled-tire tread surface. In 1984, UCLA's first hydrogen-powered car was sold for one dollar to the William F. Harrah Automobile Museum in Reno, Nevada. In 2010, the car was available on an auction site.\nAlternative fuels.\nOther experiments used AMC Gremlins. To evaluate non-petroleum fuel and measure mechanical wear under mostly short city driving, a 1970 Gremlin with AMC's engine operated successfully on methanol for ten years and .\nThe broadest range of fuel tests were conducted by the United States Department of Energy (DOE) labs in Bartlesville, Oklahoma. Engineers estimated the performance and fuel economy of 1977 Gremlin Xs operating on ordinary gasoline, a variety of wide boiling range fuels (naphtha, kerosene, etc.), as well as two alcohols, ethanol and methanol.\nElectric.\nThe Electric Fuel Propulsion Company (EFP) of Ferndale, Michigan, produced a number of electric cars including the AMC Gremlin based, two-passenger X-144. Introduced in 1973 it featured a direct current motor fueled by a 144-volt cobalt-lead storage batteries designed to reduce the formation of harmful gases during recharging, as well as a regular 12-volt battery to operate the cars lights, horn, and heater blower. Performance was claimed to be similar to a base gasoline Gremlin, including a top speed of , but with a calculated lower cost per mile for the X-144 over five years and of use.\nInventor \"Cotton\" Whatley of Wichita Falls, Texas, offered an unknown number of modified electric Gremlins for sale through various dealerships between 1973 and 1978. Whatley's Gremlin Electric had a top speed of and a maximum range of .\nExhibition.\nEngineers at Coleman Products Corporation in Coleman, Wisconsin, created a non-drivable plexiglas Gremlin as a demonstrator of the placement and function of electrical wiring harnesses.\nConcept Gremlins.\nGremlin Voyager.\nIn 1972 AMC developed a prototype \"Gremlin Voyager\" with a slide out rear panel called \"Grem-Bin\". The car was a production Gremlin with a proposed \"shelf\" design to make cargo loading easier.\nXP prototype.\nIn 1974 a production car was modified and dubbed the Gremlin XP prototype. It has a larger glass hatchback and additional side quarter windows. A pronounced crease started from the mid-body section and wraps over the roof while the rear quarter panels feature bulges around the wheel well openings. The rear panel has a recessed and blacked-out area with four lights. The design of the concept car improved visibility around the Gremlin's original wide C-pillar.\nG/II prototype.\nAnother 1974 Gremlin was modified with a front end from the Hornet. The concept car received a special grille, but the most radical design feature was its fastback roofline. This concept car turned out to be similar to the Gremlin's replacement, the liftback Spirit model introduced for the 1979 model year.\nConcept 80.\nIn 1977 American Motors presented six show cars to illustrate the automaker's commitment to smaller, fuel-efficient vehicles for the 1980s. Three of them, the \"Concept I\", \"Concept II\", and \"Concept Grand Touring\" represented new subcompact designs.\nDesign elements from the AMC's show cars \"Concept II\" and \"Concept GT\" were incorporated into the Gremlin's replacement, the AMC Spirit that was introduced in 1979.\nMarketplace and reception.\nThe 1970s were one of the most volatile periods in the history of the automobile industry which is renowned for its ups and downs. A total of 671,475 Gremlins were sold in the United States and Canada, making it the most popular single generation body style/chassis produced by AMC (other models, such as the Rambler and even Hornet, have higher production numbers, but consisted of more than one chassis design and body style in the case of the Rambler, multiple body styles for the Hornet).\nA book about the popular history of the 1970s introduces it as the decade of \"pet rocks, shag carpets, platform shoes, and the AMC Gremlin.\" It is among the cars that people who were in high school in the late 1970s and early 1980s would be familiar with because it was one of the first cars they drove and among most often seen in student parking lots. Kiplinger's personal finance magazine, \"Changing Times\", listed the AMC Gremlin as first among the best subcompact used cars as \"selected by top mechanics for good value, good service.\" Five years after the Gremlin's introduction, the mechanics liked the six-cylinder engine and most preferred automatic transmission. Comments included, \"I have one. It's the greatest. I own one with a 304 V-8 engine. Have no trouble outside of normal maintenance.\"\nDuring the early 1970s American cars \"are remembered far more often for their power than their style, and ... throughout the decade, the character of cars became blurred. Only a handful of cars had real personalities...\" the AMC Gremlin was one of them, \"a pioneering hatchback\". According to Tom and Ray Magliozzi, \"it's easy to criticize this car now, because just about any car from the early '70s would look bad next to today's cars. They had no fuel injection, no independent suspension, no air bags, no anti-lock brakes, no nothing! But compared with the other cars of its era, the Gremlin wasn't bad.\"\nOfficially discontinued after the 1978 model year, the Gremlin was restyled, including a new model that featured a sloping liftback for 1979 and the model line renamed the AMC Spirit. This restyled continuation of the familiar chopped-tail two-door and the new hatch coupe caused sales to increase to 52,478 units for 1979. The original \"Kammback\" body style continued in production until 1982 as the Spirit Sedan with larger rear side windows. The basic design was also used for the small AMC Eagle Kammback in 1981 and 1982.\nAmerican Motors lacked the funds to come up with a separate platform for a sub-compact car, so it did something different with an existing model, and \"although car snobs make fun of the chop-tailed Gremlin, it was a huge sales hit.\" The authors of the book \"365 Cars You Must Drive\" \"that any self-respecting auto enthusiast just has to know and experience from the driver's seat\" describe that \"driving a Gremlin isn't about the drive; it's about being seen in one, making a statement that you dig the mid-1970s, and also wouldn't be caught dead in something normal.\" An article published by \"Time\" in 2007 included the Gremlin as one of \"The 50 Worst Cars of All Time\", describing it as an AMC Hornet with the rear end whacked off, and criticizing its exterior proportions, with a long low snout, long front overhang, and a truncated tail, \"like the tail snapped off a salamander\".\nIn 2007, \"Popular Science\" magazine included the AMC Gremlin as one of six historic cars that took \"Small Steps to a Smart Future\" in a special issue about the \"Future of the Car: Efficiency\".\nThe Gremlin has a following among old car hobbyists and collectors of historic vehicles. In some cases, the Gremlin enjoys \"a cult-like following in today's collectible car market\". In 2007, \"Business Week\" reported that 1970s cars such as the Gremlin were increasingly attractive to buyers, and an insurance provider for collector-car owners reported that values were rising at that time.\nIn light of rising gasoline prices, the Gremlin offers a relatively economical alternative to muscle cars and the more massive American cars of its era-especially for buyers leaning toward the eccentric. AMC said the Gremlin got \"the best gas mileage of any production car made in America\", and its gas tank allowed or more between fill-ups.\nFuture U.S. presidents.\nTwo former U.S. presidents drove AMC Gremlins during their younger days.\n\"Bill Clinton drove the back roads of Northwest Arkansas in his green AMC Gremlin\" during his 1974 campaign for the only attempt he made for a seat in the United States Congress.\nAn AMC Gremlin with a Levi interior was owned by the George H. W. Bush family and driven by George W. Bush in 1973 while getting his Master of Business Administration (MBA) degree.\nHot Wheels model.\nHot Wheels designer Paul Tam created a model of a Gremlin with six wheels for the 1972 Hot Wheels series, called \"Open Fire\", with the extra pair of wheels under a large, exposed metal engine. Other than the engine, extra wheels, and elongated hood, \"the Open Fire retains many accurate styling details of the Gremlin. Later on, in the Flying Colors range, Hot Wheels made the Gremlin Grinder: A rear-jacked Gremlin with a huge open engine that was produced through the mid-1970s in either green or chrome. The last one was a stockcar or rally car custom version of the Gremlin that was first made in the early 1980s and is still popular today, \"The Greased Gremlin\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53358", "revid": "33299132", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53358", "title": "Pope Marcellinus", "text": "Head of the Catholic Church from 296 to 304\nPope Marcellinus was the bishop of Rome from 30 June 296 to his death in 304. A historical accusation was levelled at him by some sources to the effect that he might have renounced Christianity during Emperor Diocletian's persecution of Christians before repenting afterwards, which would explain why he is omitted from lists of martyrs. The accusation is rejected, among others, by Augustine of Hippo. He is today venerated as a saint in the Catholic Church and in the Serbian Orthodox Church.\nPontificate.\nAccording to the \"Liberian Catalogue\", Marcellinus was a Roman, the son of Proiectus or Projectus. He succeeded Caius as bishop of Rome on 30 June 296. Marcellinus' pontificate began at a time when Diocletian was Roman emperor, but had not yet started to persecute the Christians, and their membership grew. Caesar Galerius led the pagan movement against Christianity and aroused Diocletian against Christians in 302; first, Christian soldiers had to leave the army, later the Church's property was confiscated and their books destroyed. After two fires in Diocletian's palace, he took harder measures; Christians had to apostatize or be sentenced to death.\nMarcellinus is not mentioned in the \"Martyrologium hieronymianum\", or in the \"Depositio episcoporum\", or in the \"Depositio martyrum\". The \"Liber Pontificalis\", based on the lost \"Acts of St Marcellinus\", relates that during Diocletian\u2019s persecution, Marcellinus offered incense to idols, but that, repenting shortly afterwards, he re-confessed the faith of Christ and suffered martyrdom with several companions. Other documents speak of his defection, and it is probably this lapse that explains the silence of the ancient liturgical calendars. In the beginning of the 5th century, Petilianus, the Donatist bishop of Cirta, says that Marcellinus and his priests had given up the holy books to the pagans during the persecution and offered incense to false gods. Augustine of Hippo denied the affair. The records of the pseudo-Council of Sinuessa, which were fabricated at the beginning of the 6th century, state that Marcellinus after his fall presented himself before a council, which refused to try him on the ground that \"prima sedes a nemine iudicatur\" (\"The first See is judged by none\").\nAccording to the \"Liber Pontificalis\", Marcellinus was buried on 26 April 304 in the cemetery of Priscilla, on the Via Salaria, 25 days after his martyrdom; the Liberian Catalogue gives as the date 25 October. The fact of the martyrdom, too, is not established with certainty. After a considerable interregnum, he was succeeded by Marcellus, with whom he has sometimes been confused.\nVeneration.\nMarcellinus was mentioned in the General Roman Calendar, into which a feast day in his honour jointly with that of Saint Cletus on 26 April was inserted in the thirteenth century. Because of the uncertainties regarding both, this joint feast was removed from that calendar in 1969. Saint Cletus is still listed in the Roman Martyrology under 26 April date; but Saint Marcellinus is no longer mentioned in that professedly incomplete list of recognized saints. Pope Marcellinus, along with Pope Marcellus, is commemorated in the Serbian Prologue of Ohrid on 7 June according to the Julian Calendar.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53359", "revid": "35698510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53359", "title": "Suffolk County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nSuffolk County ( ) is the easternmost county in the U.S. state of New York, constituting the eastern two-thirds of Long Island. It is bordered to its west by Nassau County, to its east by Gardiners Bay and the open Atlantic Ocean, to its north by Long Island Sound, and to its south by the Atlantic Ocean.\nAs of the 2020 United States census, the county's population was 1,525,920, its highest decennial count ever, making Suffolk the fourth-most populous county in the State of New York, and the most populous outside of the boroughs of New York City. Its county seat is Riverhead, though most county offices are in Hauppauge. The county was named after the county of Suffolk in England, the origin of its earliest European settlers.\nSuffolk County incorporates the easternmost extreme of both the New York City metropolitan area and New York State. The geographically largest of Long Island's four counties and the second-largest of New York's 62 counties, Suffolk County is in length and in width at its widest (including water). Most of the island is near sea level, with over of coastline.\nLike other parts of Long Island, the county's high population density and proximity to New York City has resulted in a diverse economy, including industry, science, agriculture, fishery, and tourism. Major scientific research facilities in Suffolk County include Brookhaven National Laboratory in Upton and Plum Island Animal Disease Center on Plum Island. The county is home to Stony Brook University in Stony Brook and Farmingdale State College in East Farmingdale.\nHistory.\nSuffolk County was part of the Connecticut Colony before becoming an original county of the Province of New York, one of twelve created in 1683. From 1664 until 1683, it had been the East Riding of Yorkshire. Its boundaries were essentially the same as at present, with only minor changes in the boundary with its western neighbor, which was originally Queens County but has been Nassau County since the separation of Nassau from Queens in 1899.\nDuring the American Revolutionary War, Great Britain occupied Suffolk County after the retreat of George Washington's forces in the Battle of Long Island, and the county remained under occupation until the British evacuation of New York on November 25, 1783.\nAccording to the Suffolk County website, the county is the leading agricultural county in the state of New York, saying that: \"The weather is temperate, clean water is abundant, and the soil is so good that Suffolk is the leading agricultural county in New York State. That Suffolk is still number one in farming, even with the development that has taken place, is a tribute to thoughtful planning, along with the excellent soil, favorable weather conditions, and the work of the dedicated farmers in this region.\"\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has an area of , of which is land and (62%) is water. It is the second-largest county in New York by total area and occupies 66% of the land area of Long Island.\nSuffolk County occupies the central and eastern part of Long Island, in the extreme east of the State of New York. The eastern end of the county splits into two peninsulas, known as the North Fork and the South Fork. The county is surrounded by water on three sides, including the Atlantic Ocean and Long Island Sound, with of coastline. The eastern end contains large bays.\nThe highest elevation in the county, and on Long Island as a whole, is Jayne's Hill in West Hills, at above sea level. This low lying-geography means that much of the county is vulnerable to sea level rise.\nClimate.\nSuffolk County sits at the convergence of climate zones including the humid continental (\"Dfa\") and humid subtropical (\"Cfa\"), bordering closely on an oceanic climate (Cfb). The majority of the county by land area is in the \"Dfa\" zone. Summers are cooler at the east end than in the western part of the county. The hardiness zone is 7a, except in Copiague Harbor, Lindenhurst, and Montauk, where it is 7b. Average monthly temperatures in Hauppauge range from in January to in July, and in the Riverhead town center they range from in January to in July, which includes both daytime and nighttime temperatures. On February 9, 2013, Suffolk County was besieged with 30 inches of snow, making it the largest day of snowfall on record in Suffolk.\nAdjacent counties.\nSuffolk County has maritime boundaries with five other U.S. counties and is connected by land only to Nassau County.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2010 census.\nAccording to the 2010 U.S. census there were 1,493,350 people and 569,985 households residing in the county. The census estimated Suffolk County's population decreased slightly to 1,481,093 in 2018, representing 7.5% of the census-estimated New York State population of 19,745,289 and 19.0% of the census-estimated Long Island population of 7,869,820. The population density in 2010 was , with 569,985 households at an average density of . However, by 2012, with an estimated total population increasing moderately to 1,499,273 there were 569,359 housing units. As of 2006, Suffolk County was the 21st-most populous county in the United States.\nBy 2014, the county's racial makeup was estimated at 85.2% White, 8.3% African American, 0.6% Native American, 4.0% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, and 1.8% from two or more races. Those identifying as Hispanic or Latino, of any race, were 18.2% of the population. Those who identified as \"white alone\", not being of Hispanic or Latino origin, represented 69.3% of the population. In 2006, the county's racial or ethnic makeup was 83.6% White (75.4% White Non-Hispanic). African Americans were 7.4% of the population. Asians stood at 3.4% of the population. 5.4% were of other or mixed race. Latinos were 13.0% of the population. In 2007, Suffolk County's most common ethnicities were Italian (29.5%), Irish (24.0%), and German (17.6%).\nIn 2002, \"The New York Times\" cited a study by the non-profit group ERASE Racism, which determined Suffolk and its neighboring county, Nassau, to be the most racially segregated suburbs in the United States.\nIn 2006, there were 469,299 households, of which 37.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 62.00% were married couples living together, 10.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 23.20% were non-families. 18.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 7.80% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.96 and the average family size was 3.36.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.10% under the age of 18, 7.60% from 18 to 24, 31.20% from 25 to 44, 23.30% from 45 to 64, and 11.80% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.80 males.\nIn 2008, \"Forbes\" magazine released its American Community Survey and named Suffolk County number 4 in its list of the top 25 richest counties in America. In 2016, according to \"Business Insider\", the 11962 zip code encompassing Sagaponack, within Southampton, was listed as the most expensive in the U.S., with a median home sale price of $8.5\u00a0million.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $84,767, and the median income for a family was $72,112. Males had a median income of $50,046 versus $33,281 for females. The per capita income for the county was $26,577. Using a weighted average from 2009 to 2014 about 6.40% of the population were below the poverty line In earlier censuses, the population below the poverty line included 2.70% of those under age 18 and 2.30% of those age 65 or over.\nLaw and government.\nUnited States Senate.\nIn 2003, Democrat Steve Levy was elected county executive, ending longtime Republican control. In 2001, Democrat Thomas Spota was elected District Attorney, and ran unopposed in 2005. Although Suffolk voters gave George H. W. Bush a victory here in 1992, the county voted for Bill Clinton in 1996 and continued the trend by giving Al Gore an 11-percent victory in the county in 2000. 2004 Democratic candidate John Kerry won by a much smaller margin of under one percent, in 2008 Democratic candidate Barack Obama won by a slightly larger 6 percent margin, 52.5%-46.5%. In 2012, he carried the county by a slightly smaller margin 51%-47%. In 2016, Republican candidate Donald Trump won Suffolk County by a 6.9 percent margin, becoming the first Republican to carry the county since 1992. In 2020, Trump again won Suffolk County; this time, however, it was decided by just 232 votes out of nearly 800,000 votes cast, making it the closest county in the nation in terms of percentage margin, and representing nearly a seven-point swing towards the Democratic ticket of former Vice President Joe Biden and junior California senator Kamala Harris. In percentage terms, it was the closest county in the state, although Ontario County and Warren County had narrower raw vote margins of just 33 and 57 votes, respectively. Suffolk was one of five counties in the state that Trump won by less than 500 votes. With Tarrant County, Texas and Maricopa County, Arizona flipping Democratic in 2020, Suffolk County was the most populous county in the nation to vote for Trump in 2020. In 2024, Trump won 54% of the vote in Suffolk county, the highest percentage since 1988.\nAs a whole, both Suffolk and Nassau counties are considered swing counties. However, until 2016, they tended not to receive significant attention from presidential candidates, as the state of New York has turned reliably Democratic at the national level. In 2008 and 2012, Hofstra University in Nassau County hosted a presidential debate. Hofstra hosted the first debate of the 2016 presidential election season, on September 26, 2016, making Hofstra the first college or university in the United States to host a presidential debate in three consecutive elections. The presence on the 2016 ticket of Westchester County resident Hillary Clinton and Manhattan resident Donald Trump resulted in greater attention by the candidates to the concerns of Long Island. Trump visited Long Island voters and donors at least four times while Clinton made one stop for voters and one additional stop in the Hamptons for donors.\nAfter the 2022 midterm election results were counted, Suffolk appears to have moved further to the right. Republican gubernatorial candidate and Suffolk County native Lee Zeldin won the county by more than 17 points over the Democratic candidate Kathy Hochul. Republicans, as of 2024, hold both congressional districts covering that being New York's 1st congressional district represented by Nick LaLota and New York's 2nd congressional district represented by Andrew Garbarino.\nThe 2023 election saw this trend continue, with Republican Edward P. Romaine defeating Democrat David Calone by 14 points to become the next County Executive. Republicans also gained a 12-6 supermajority in the County Legislature, seeing a net gain of one seat.\nSuffolk County Executives.\n\"* Appointed to complete Cohalan's term.\"\n\"** Levy was originally elected as a Democrat, but became a Republican in 2010.\"\nSuffolk County Legislature.\nThe county has 18 legislative districts, each represented by a legislator. As of 2024, there are 10 Republicans, 6 Democrats, and 2 Conservative.\nHistorical composition of the Suffolk County Legislature.\nRepublicans controlled the county legislature until a landmark election in November 2005 where three Republican seats switched to the Democrats, giving them control. In November 2007, the Democratic Party once again retained control over the Suffolk County Legislature, picking up one seat in the process. In November 2009, the Republican Party regained the seat lost in 2007 but remained in the minority for the 2010-2011 session. In November 2011, the Democratic Party maintained control over the Suffolk County Legislature picking up one seat that had been held by an Independence Party member. In November 2013, the Republican Party gained the 14th district seat, but remained in the minority until 2021, when the GOP flipped the county legislature, picking up three seats with incumbents Robert Calarco (the sitting Presiding Officer) and Susan Berland (the sitting Majority Leader) losing their bids for re-election. The Suffolk GOP built on these gains in the 2023 general election, gaining a 12-6 supermajority.\nLaw enforcement.\nPolice services in the five western towns (Babylon, Huntington, Islip, Smithtown and Brookhaven) are provided primarily by the Suffolk County Police Department. The five \"East End\" towns (Riverhead, Southold, Shelter Island, East Hampton, and Southampton), maintain their own police and other law enforcement agencies. Also, there are a number of villages, such as Amityville, Asharoken, Lloyd Harbor, Northport, and Westhampton Beach that maintain their own police forces. In 1994, the Village of Greenport voted to abolish its police department and turn responsibility for law and order over to the Southold police department.\nAfter the Long Island State Parkway Police was disbanded in 1980, all state parkways in Suffolk County became the responsibility of Troop L of the New York State Police, headquartered at Republic Airport. State parks, such as Robert Moses State Park, are the responsibility of the New York State Park Police, based at Belmont Lake State Park. In 1996, the Long Island Rail Road Police Department was consolidated into the Metropolitan Transportation Authority Police, which has jurisdiction over all rail lines in the county. Since the New York state legislature created the New York State University Police in 1999, they are in charge of all law enforcement services for State University of New York property and campuses. The State University Police have jurisdiction in Suffolk County at Stony Brook University and Farmingdale State College.\nThe Suffolk County Sheriff's Office is a separate agency. The sheriff, an elected official who serves a four-year term, operates the two Suffolk County correctional facilities (in Yaphank and Riverhead), provides county courthouse security and detention, service and enforcement of civil papers, evictions and warrants. The Sheriff's Office is also responsible for securing all county-owned property, such as county government office buildings, as well as the campuses of the Suffolk County Community College. As of 2008, the Suffolk County Sheriff's Office employed 275 Deputy Sheriffs, 850 corrections officers, and about 200 civilian staff.\nSuffolk County has a long maritime history with several outer barrier beaches and hundreds of square miles of waterways. The Suffolk Police Marine Bureau patrols the of navigable waterways within the police district, from the Connecticut and Rhode Island state line which bisects Long Island Sound to the New York state line south of Fire Island in the Atlantic Ocean. Some Suffolk County towns (Islip, Brookhaven, Southampton, East Hampton, Babylon, Huntington, Smithtown) also employ various bay constables and other local marine patrol, which are sworn armed peace officers with full arrest powers, providing back up to the Suffolk Police Marine Bureau as well as the United States Coast Guard.\nThis includes Fire Island and parts of Jones Island barrier beaches and the islands of the Great South Bay. Marine units also respond to water and ice rescues on the inland lakes, ponds, and streams of the District.\nIn February 2019, legislator Robert Trotta (R-Fort Salonga) put forward a resolution to recover salary and benefits from James Burke, the county's former police chief. Burke had pled guilty to beating a man while in police custody and attempting to conceal it, and the county had paid the victim $1.5\u00a0million in a settlement; it had also paid Burke more than $500,000 in benefits and salary while Burke was concealing his conduct. Trotta said that the faithless servant doctrine in New York common law gave him the power to claw back the compensation. The Suffolk County Legislature supported the suit unanimously. The following month Suffolk County Executive Steve Bellone signed the bill.\nAlso in February 2019, a court ruled against the Suffolk County jail in the case of a former inmate who was denied hormone replacement therapy by the jail's doctors. Documents introduced in the trial indicate 11 other inmates were also denied treatment.\nCourts.\nSuffolk County is part of the 10th Judicial District of the New York State Unified Court System; is home to the Alfonse M. D'Amato Courthouse of the Federal U.S. District Court, Eastern District of New York; and has various local municipal courts. The State Courts are divided into Supreme Court, which has general jurisdiction over all cases, and lower courts that either hear claims of a limited dollar amount, or of a specific nature. Similarly, the local courts hear claims of a limited dollar amount, or hear specific types of cases. The Federal Court has jurisdiction over Federal Claims, State Law claims that are joined with Federal claims, and claims where there is a diversity of citizenship.\nLocal courts.\nThe District Court and the Town and Village Courts are the local courts of Suffolk County. There are more than 30 local courts, each with limited criminal and civil subject matter and geographic jurisdictions. The local criminal courts have trial jurisdiction over misdemeanors, violations and infractions; preliminary jurisdiction over felonies; and traffic tickets charging a crime. The local civil courts calendar small claims, evictions, and civil actions.\nMost non-criminal moving violation tickets issued in the five west towns are handled by the Traffic Violations Bureau, which is part of the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles, not the court system.\nEducation.\nSchool districts.\nSchool districts (all officially designated for grades K-12) include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRadio stations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSuffolk seashore.\nFire Island Lighthouse was an important landmark for many trans-Atlantic ships coming into New York Harbor in the early 20th century. For many European immigrants, the Fire Island Light was their first sight of land upon arrival in America.\nThe Fire Island Inlet span of the Robert Moses Causeway connects to Robert Moses State Park on the western tip of Fire Island.\nThe Great South Bay Bridge, the first causeway bridge, had only one northbound and one southbound lane, was opened to traffic in April 1954. The span of across Great South Bay to Captree Island features a main span of , with a clearance for boats of .\nAfter crossing the State Boat Channel over its bascule bridge, the causeway meets the Ocean Parkway at a cloverleaf interchange. This interchange provides access to Captree State Park, Gilgo State Park and Jones Beach State Park.\nThe Fire Island Inlet Bridge continues the two-lane road, one lane in each direction, across Fire Island Inlet to its terminus at Robert Moses State Park and The Fire Island Lighthouse. Robert Moses Causeway opened in 1964.\nSuffolk County has the most lighthouses of any United States county, with 15 of its original 26 lighthouses still standing. Of these 15, eight are in Southold township alone, giving it more lighthouses than any other township in the United States.\nSecessionist movements.\nAt various times, there have been proposals for a division of Suffolk County into two counties. The western portion would be called Suffolk County, while the eastern portion of the current Suffolk County would comprise a new county to be called Peconic County. Peconic County would consist of the five easternmost towns of Suffolk County: East Hampton, Riverhead, Shelter Island, Southampton and Southold, plus the Shinnecock Indian Reservation.\nThe proposed Peconic County flag showed the two forks at the east end of Long Island separated by Peconic Bay. The star on the north represents Southold. The stars on the South Fork represent Southampton and East Hampton. Riverhead is at the fork mouth and Shelter Island is between the forks.\nThe secessionist movement has not been active since 1998.\n\"The End of the Hamptons: Scenes from the Class Struggle in America's Paradise\", by Corey Dolgon (New York University Press, 2005) examined the class roots of the secessionist movement in the Hamptons. In his review, Howard Zinn wrote that the book \"[t]akes us beyond the much-romanticized beaches of Long Island to the rich entrepreneurs and their McMansions, the Latino workers, and the stubborn indigenous residents refusing to disappear. The book is important because it is in so many ways a microcosm of the nation.\" The book won the Association for Humanist Sociology's 2005 Book Prize and the American Sociological Association's Marxist Section Book Award in 2007.\nMatt DeSimone, a young adult from Southold, and his partner Jake Dominy unsuccessfully started a similar movement in the late 2010s.\nFinance and taxation.\nSuffolk County has an 8.625% sales tax, compared to an overall New York State sales tax of 4%, consisting of an additional 4.25% on top of the state and MTA assessment of .375%\nHealth.\nIn March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic first affected the county. As of December 12, 2020, there have been a total of 73,281 cases and 2,153 deaths from the virus.\nHospitals.\nTertiary care hospitals:\nCommunity hospitals:\nSpecialty care hospitals:\nCommunities.\nIn the State of New York, a town is the major subdivision of each county. Towns provide or arrange for most municipal services for residents of hamlets and selected services for residents of villages. All residents of New York who do not live in a city or on an Indian reservation live in a town. A village is an incorporated area which is usually, but not always, within a single town. A village is a clearly defined municipality that provides the services closest to the residents, such as garbage collection, street and highway maintenance, street lighting and building codes. Some villages provide their own police and other optional services. A hamlet is an informally defined populated area within a town that is not part of a village.\nFigures in parentheses are 2022 population estimates from the Census Bureau.\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nVillages (incorporated).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCensus-designated places (unincorporated).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGardiners Island.\nGardiners Island is an island off eastern Suffolk County. The Island is long, and wide and has of coastline. The same family has owned the Island for nearly 400 years; one of the largest privately owned islands in America or the world. In addition, it is the only American real estate still intact as part of an original royal grant from the English Crown.\nRobins Island.\nRobins Island is an Island in the Peconic Bay between the North and South folks of eastern Suffolk County. It is within the jurisdiction of Town of Southold in Suffolk County, New York. The Island is and presently undeveloped. The island is privately owned and not accessible to the public.\nIndian reservations.\nTwo Indian reservations are within the borders of Suffolk County:\nTransportation.\nThe county includes a lot of roadways and other public transportation infrastructure. The local Suffolk County Legislature oversees funding and regulations for the infrastructure. In 2019, the legislature required all new projects to account for future climate change caused sea level rise.\nAirports.\nCommercial airport:\nGeneral aviation airports:\nPublic transportation.\nSuffolk County is served by Suffolk County Transit. Long Island Rail Road, the Hampton Jitney, and Hampton Luxury Liner connect Suffolk County to New York City. Some parts of Suffolk County are also served by NICE bus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53360", "revid": "40638945", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53360", "title": "Cole Porter", "text": "American composer and songwriter (1891\u20131964)\nCole Albert Porter (June 9, 1891\u00a0\u2013 October 15, 1964) was an American composer and songwriter. Many of his songs became standards noted for their witty, urbane lyrics, and many of his scores found success on Broadway and in Hollywood films.\nBorn to a wealthy family in Indiana, Porter defied his grandfather's wishes for him to practice law and took up music as a profession. Classically trained, he was drawn to musical theatre. After a slow start, he began to achieve success in the 1920s, and by the 1930s he was one of the major songwriters for the Broadway musical stage. Unlike many successful Broadway composers, Porter wrote the lyrics as well as the music for his songs.\nAfter a serious horseback riding accident in 1937, Porter was left disabled and in constant pain, but he continued to work. His shows of the early 1940s did not contain the lasting hits of his best work of the 1920s and 1930s, but in 1948 he made a triumphant comeback with his most successful musical, \"Kiss Me, Kate\". It won the first Tony Award for Best Musical.\nPorter's other musicals include \"Fifty Million Frenchmen\", \"DuBarry Was a Lady\", \"Anything Goes\", \"Can-Can\" and \"Silk Stockings\". His numerous hit songs include \"Night and Day\", \"Begin the Beguine\", \"I Get a Kick Out of You\", \"Well, Did You Evah!\", \"I've Got You Under My Skin\", \"Let's Do It, Let's Fall in Love\", \"My Heart Belongs to Daddy\" and \"You're the Top\". He also composed scores for films from the 1930s to the 1950s, including \"Born to Dance\" (1936), which featured the song \"You'd Be So Easy to Love\"; \"Rosalie\" (1937), which featured \"In the Still of the Night\"; \"High Society\" (1956), which included \"True Love\"; and \"Les Girls\" (1957).\nLife and career.\nEarly years.\nPorter was born in Peru, Indiana, on June 9, 1891, the only surviving child of a wealthy family. His father, Samuel Fenwick Porter, was a pharmacist by trade. His mother, Kate, was the indulged daughter of James Omar \"J. O.\" Cole, \"the richest man in Indiana\", a coal and timber speculator who dominated the family. J. O. Cole built the couple a house on his Peru-area property, known as Westleigh Farms. After high school, Porter returned to his childhood home only for occasional visits.\nPorter's strong-willed mother doted on him and began his musical training at an early age. He learned the violin at age six, the piano at eight, and wrote his first operetta (with help from his mother) at ten. She falsified his recorded birth year, changing it from 1891 to 1893 to make him appear more precocious. His father, a shy and unassertive man, played a lesser role in Porter's upbringing, although as an amateur poet, he may have influenced his son's gifts for rhyme and meter. Porter's father was also a talented singer and pianist, but the father-son relationship was not close.\nJ. O. Cole wanted his grandson to become a lawyer, and with that in mind, sent him to Worcester Academy in Massachusetts in 1905. Porter brought an upright piano with him to school and found that music, and his ability to entertain, made it easy for him to make friends. Porter did well in school and rarely came home to visit. He became class valedictorian and was rewarded by his grandfather with a tour of France, Switzerland and Germany. Entering Yale College in 1909, Porter majored in English, minored in music, and also studied French. He was a member of Scroll and Key and Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and contributed to campus humor magazine \"The Yale Record\". He was an early member of the Whiffenpoofs \"a cappella\" singing group and participated in several other music clubs; in his senior year, he was elected president of the Yale Glee Club and was its principal soloist.\nPorter wrote 300 songs while at Yale, including student songs such as the football fight songs \"Bulldog\" and \"Bingo Eli Yale\" (aka \"Bingo, That's The Lingo!\") that are still played at Yale. During college, Porter became acquainted with New York City's vibrant nightlife, taking the train there for dinner, theater, and nights on the town with his classmates, before returning to New Haven, Connecticut, early in the morning. He also wrote musical comedy scores for his fraternity, the Yale Dramatic Association, and as a student at Harvard \u2013 \"Cora\" (1911), \"And the Villain Still Pursued Her\" (1912), \"The Pot of Gold\" (1912), \"The Kaleidoscope\" (1913) and \"Paranoia\" (1914) \u2013 which helped prepare him for a career as a Broadway and Hollywood composer and lyricist. After graduating from Yale, Porter enrolled in Harvard Law School in 1913, where he roomed with future Secretary of State Dean Acheson. He soon felt that he was not destined to be a lawyer, and, at the suggestion of the dean of the law school, switched to Harvard's music department, where he studied harmony and counterpoint with Pietro Yon. His mother did not object to this move, but it was kept secret from J. O. Cole.\nIn 1915, Porter's first song on Broadway, \"Esmeralda\", appeared in the revue \"Hands Up\". The quick success was immediately followed by failure: his first Broadway production, in 1916, \"See America First\", a \"patriotic comic opera\" modeled on Gilbert and Sullivan, with a book by T. Lawrason Riggs, was a flop, closing after two weeks. Porter spent the next year in New York City before going overseas during World War I.\nWWI, Paris and marriage.\nIn 1917, when the United States entered World War I, Porter moved to Paris to work with the Duryea Relief organization. Some writers have been skeptical about Porter's claim to have served in the French Foreign Legion, but the Legion lists Porter as one of its soldiers and displays his portrait at its museum in Aubagne. By some accounts, he served in North Africa and was transferred to the French Officers School at Fontainebleau, teaching gunnery to American soldiers. An obituary notice in \"The New York Times\" stated that, while in the Legion, \"he had a specially constructed portable piano made for him so that he could carry it on his back and entertain the troops in their bivouacs.\" Another account, given by Porter, is that he joined the recruiting department of the American Aviation Headquarters, but, according to his biographer Stephen Citron, there is no record of his joining this or any other branch of the forces.\nPorter maintained a luxury apartment in Paris, where he entertained lavishly. His parties were extravagant and scandalous, with \"much gay and bisexual activity, Italian nobility, cross-dressing, international musicians and a large surplus of recreational drugs\". In 1918, he met Linda Lee Thomas, a rich, Louisville, Kentucky-born divorc\u00e9e eight years his senior. She was beautiful and well-connected socially; the couple shared interests, including a love of travel, and she became Porter's confidante and companion. The couple married the next year. She was in no doubt about Porter's homosexuality, but it was mutually advantageous for them to marry. For Linda, it offered continued social status and a partner who was the antithesis of her abusive first husband. For Porter, it brought a respectable heterosexual front in an era when homosexuality was not publicly acknowledged. They were, moreover, genuinely devoted to each other and remained married from December 19, 1919, until her death in 1954. Linda remained protective of her social position and, believing that classical music might be a more prestigious outlet than Broadway for her husband's talents, tried to use her connections to find him suitable teachers, including Igor Stravinsky, but was unsuccessful. Finally, Porter enrolled at the Schola Cantorum in Paris, founded by Vincent d'Indy, where he studied orchestration and counterpoint. Meanwhile, Porter's first big hit was the song \"Old-Fashioned Garden\" from the revue \"Hitchy-Koo of 1919\". In 1920, he contributed the music of several songs to the musical \"A Night Out\".\nMarriage did not diminish Porter's taste for extravagant luxury. The Porter home on the rue Monsieur near Les Invalides was a palatial house with platinum wallpaper and chairs upholstered in zebra skin. In 1923, Porter came into an inheritance from his grandfather, and the Porters began living in rented palaces in Venice. He once hired the entire Ballets Russes to entertain his guests, and for a party at Ca' Rezzonico, which he rented for $4,000 a month ($ in current value), he hired 50 gondoliers to act as footmen and had a troupe of tightrope walkers perform in a blaze of lights. In the midst of this extravagant lifestyle, Porter continued to write songs with his wife's encouragement.\nPorter received few commissions for songs in the years immediately after his marriage. He had the occasional number interpolated into other writers' revues in Britain and the U.S. For a C. B. Cochran show in 1921, he had two successes with the comedy numbers \"The Blue Boy Blues\" and \"Olga, Come Back to the Volga\". In 1923, in collaboration with Gerald Murphy, he composed a short ballet, originally titled \"Landed\" and then \"Within the Quota\", satirically depicting the adventures of an immigrant to America who becomes a film star. The work, written for the Ballets su\u00e9dois, lasts about 16 minutes. It was orchestrated by Charles Koechlin and shared the same opening night as Milhaud's \"La cr\u00e9ation du monde\". Porter's work was one of the earliest symphonic jazz-based compositions, predating George Gershwin's \"Rhapsody in Blue\" by four months, and was well received by both French and American reviewers after its premiere at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in October 1923.\nThe next month, the Ballets su\u00e9dois toured the work in the U.S., performing it 69 times. Reviews of the inaugural performance in New York were mixed; critics found the work to be too much like Milhaud and not American enough. A year later the company disbanded, and the score was lost until it was reconstructed from Porter's and Koechlin's manuscripts between 1966 and 1990, with help from Milhaud and others. Porter had even less success with his work on \"The Greenwich Village Follies\" (1924). He wrote most of the original score, but his songs were gradually dropped during the Broadway run, and by the time of the post-Broadway tour in 1925, all his numbers had been deleted. Frustrated by the public response to these works, Porter nearly gave up songwriting as a career, although he continued to compose songs for friends and perform at private parties.\nBroadway and West End success.\nAt the age of 36, Porter reintroduced himself to Broadway in 1928 with the musical \"Paris\", his first hit. It was commissioned by E. Ray Goetz at the instigation of Goetz's wife and the show's star, Ir\u00e8ne Bordoni. She had wanted Rodgers and Hart to write the songs, but they were unavailable, and Porter's agent persuaded Goetz to hire Porter instead. In August 1928, Porter's work on the show was interrupted by the death of his father. He hurried back to Indiana to comfort his mother before returning to work. The songs written for the show included \"Let's Misbehave\", which was dropped before the show opened in New York, and one of Porter's best-known list songs, \"Let's Do It, Let's Fall in Love\", which replaced \"Let's Misbehave\" and was introduced by Bordoni and Arthur Margetson. The show opened on Broadway on October 8, 1928. The Porters did not attend the first night because Porter was in Paris supervising another show for which he had been commissioned, \"La Revue des Ambassadeurs\" at the Les Ambassadeurs music hall. This was also a success, and, in Citron's phrase, Porter was finally \"accepted into the upper echelon of Broadway songwriters\". Cochran now wanted more from Porter than isolated extra songs; he planned a West End extravaganza similar to Ziegfeld's shows, with a Porter score and a large international cast led by Jessie Matthews, Sonnie Hale and Tilly Losch. The revue, \"Wake Up and Dream\", ran for 263 performances in London, after which Cochran transferred it to New York in 1929. On Broadway, business was badly affected by the 1929 Wall Street crash, and the production ran for only 136 performances. From Porter's point of view, it was nonetheless a success, as his song \"What Is This Thing Called Love?\" became immensely popular. Porter's new fame brought him offers from Hollywood, but because his score for Paramount's \"The Battle of Paris\" was undistinguished, and its star, Gertrude Lawrence, was miscast, the film was not a success. Citron expresses the view that Porter was not interested in cinema and \"noticeably wrote down for the movies.\"\nStill on a Gallic theme, Porter's last Broadway show of the 1920s was \"Fifty Million Frenchmen\" (1929), for which he wrote 28 numbers, including \"You Do Something to Me\", \"You've Got That Thing\" and \"The Tale of the Oyster\". The show received mixed notices. One critic wrote, \"the lyrics alone are enough to drive anyone but P. G. Wodehouse into retirement\", but others dismissed the songs as \"pleasant\" and \"not an outstanding hit song in the show\". As it was a lavish and expensive production, nothing less than full houses would suffice, and after only three weeks, the producers announced that they would close it. Irving Berlin, who admired and championed Porter, took out a paid press advertisement calling the show \"The best musical comedy I've heard in years. ... One of the best collections of song numbers I have ever listened to\". This saved the show, which ran for 254 performances, considered a successful run at the time.\n1930s.\nRay Goetz, producer of \"Paris\" and \"Fifty Million Frenchmen\", the success of which had kept him solvent when other producers were bankrupted by the post-crash slump in Broadway business, invited Porter to write a musical show about the other city that he knew and loved: New York. Goetz offered the team with whom Porter had last worked: Herbert Fields writing the book and Porter's old friend Monty Woolley directing. \"The New Yorkers\" (1930) acquired instant notoriety for including a song about a streetwalker, \"Love for Sale\". Originally performed by Kathryn Crawford in a street setting, critical disapproval led Goetz to reassign the number to Elisabeth Welch in a nightclub scene. The lyric was considered too explicit for radio at the time, though it was recorded and aired as an instrumental and rapidly became a standard. Porter often referred to it as his favorite of his songs. \"The New Yorkers\" also included the hit \"I Happen to Like New York\".\nNext came Fred Astaire's last stage show, \"Gay Divorce\" (1932). It featured a hit that became Porter's best-known song, \"Night and Day\". Despite mixed press (some critics were reluctant to accept Astaire without his previous partner, his sister Adele), the show ran for a profitable 248 performances, and the rights to the film, retitled \"The Gay Divorcee\", were sold to RKO Pictures. Porter followed this with a West End show for Gertrude Lawrence, \"Nymph Errant\" (1933), presented by Cochran at the Adelphi Theatre, where it ran for 154 performances. Among the songs Porter composed for the show were \"Experiment\" and \"The Physician\" for Lawrence, and \"Solomon\" for Elisabeth Welch.\nIn 1934, producer Vinton Freedley came up with a new approach to producing musicals. Instead of commissioning book, music and lyrics and then casting the show, Freedley sought to create an ideal musical with stars and writers all engaged from the outset. The stars he wanted were Ethel Merman, William Gaxton and comedian Victor Moore. He planned a story about a shipwreck and a desert island, and for the book he turned to P. G. Wodehouse and Guy Bolton. For the songs, he decided on Porter. By telling each of these that he had already signed the others, Freedley gathered his ideal team together. A drastic last-minute rewrite was necessitated by a major shipping accident that dominated the news and made Bolton and Wodehouse's book seem tasteless. Nevertheless, the show, \"Anything Goes\", was an immediate hit. Porter wrote what many consider his greatest score of this period. \"The New Yorker\" magazine's review said, \"Mr. Porter is in a class by himself\", and Porter subsequently called it one of his two perfect shows, along with the later \"Kiss Me, Kate\". Its songs include \"I Get a Kick Out of You\", \"All Through the Night\", \"You're the Top\" (one of his best-known list songs), and \"Blow, Gabriel, Blow\", as well as the title number. The show ran for 420 performances in New York (a particularly long run in the 1930s) and 261 in London. Now at the height of his success, Porter was able to enjoy the opening night of his musicals; he made grand entrances and sat in front, apparently relishing the show as much as any audience member. Russel Crouse commented \"Cole's opening-night behaviour is as indecent as that of a bridegroom who has a good time at his own wedding.\"\n\"Anything Goes\" was the first of five Porter shows featuring Merman. He loved her loud, brassy voice and wrote many numbers that displayed her strengths. \"Jubilee\" (1935), written with Moss Hart while on a cruise around the world, was not a major hit, running for only 169 performances, but it featured two songs that have since become standards, \"Begin the Beguine\" and \"Just One of Those Things\". \"Red, Hot and Blue\" (1936), featuring Merman, Jimmy Durante and Bob Hope, ran for 183 performances and introduced \"It's De-Lovely\", \"Down in the Depths (on the Ninetieth Floor)\", and \"Ridin' High\". The relative failure of these shows convinced Porter that his songs did not appeal to a broad enough audience. In an interview, he said \"Sophisticated allusions are good for about six weeks ... more fun, but only for myself and about eighteen other people, all of whom are first-nighters anyway. Polished, urbane and adult playwriting in the musical field is strictly a creative luxury.\"\nPorter also wrote for Hollywood in the mid-1930s. His scores include those for the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films \"Born to Dance\" (1936), with James Stewart, featuring \"You'd Be So Easy to Love\" and \"I've Got You Under My Skin\", and \"Rosalie\" (1937), featuring \"In the Still of the Night\". He wrote the score of the short film \"Paree, Paree\", in 1935, using some of the songs from \"Fifty Million Frenchmen\". Porter also composed the cowboy song \"Don't Fence Me In\" for \"Adios, Argentina\", an unproduced movie, in 1934, but it did not become a hit until Roy Rogers sang it in the 1944 film \"Hollywood Canteen\". Bing Crosby, The Andrews Sisters, and other artists also popularized it in the 1940s. The Porters moved to Hollywood in December 1935, but Porter's wife did not like the movie environment, and Porter's closeted homosexual acts, formerly very discreet, became less so; she retreated to their Paris house. When his film assignment on \"Rosalie\" was finished in 1937, Porter hastened to Paris to make peace with Linda, but she remained cool. After a walking tour of Europe with his friends, Porter returned to New York in October 1937 without her. They were soon reunited by an accident Porter suffered.\nOn October 24, 1937, Porter was riding with Countess Edith di Zoppola and Duke Fulco di Verdura at Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, New York, when his horse rolled on him and crushed his legs, leaving him substantially crippled and in constant pain for the rest of his life. Though doctors told Porter's wife and mother that his right leg would have to be amputated, and possibly the left one as well, he refused to have the procedure. Linda rushed from Paris to be with him, and supported him in his refusal of amputation. He remained in the hospital for seven months before being allowed to go home to his apartment at the Waldorf Towers. He resumed work as soon as he could, finding it took his mind off his perpetual pain.\nPorter's first show after his accident was not a success. \"You Never Know\" (1938), starring Clifton Webb, Lupe V\u00e9lez and Libby Holman, ran for only 78 performances. The score included the songs \"From Alpha to Omega\" and \"At Long Last Love\". He returned to success with \"Leave It to Me!\" (1938); the show introduced Mary Martin, singing \"My Heart Belongs to Daddy\", and other numbers included \"Most Gentlemen Don't Like Love\" and \"From Now On\". Porter's last show of the 1930s was \"DuBarry Was a Lady\" (1939), a particularly risqu\u00e9 show starring Merman and Bert Lahr. After a pre-Broadway tour, during which it ran into trouble with Boston censors, it achieved 408 performances, beginning at the 46th Street Theatre. The score included \"But in the Morning, No\" (which was banned from the airwaves), \"Do I Love You?\", \"Well, Did You Evah!\", \"Katie Went to Haiti\" and another of Porter's up-tempo list songs, \"Friendship\". At the end of 1939, Porter contributed six songs to the film \"Broadway Melody of 1940\" for Fred Astaire, George Murphy and Eleanor Powell.\nMeanwhile, as war became imminent in Europe, Porter's wife closed their Paris house in 1939, and the next year bought a country home in the Berkshire mountains, near Williamstown, Massachusetts, which she decorated with elegant furnishings from their Paris home. Porter spent time in Hollywood, New York and Williamstown.\n1940s and postwar.\n\"Panama Hattie\" (1940) was Porter's longest-running hit so far, running in New York for 501 performances despite the absence of any enduring Porter songs. It starred Merman, Arthur Treacher and Betty Hutton. \"Let's Face It!\" (1941), starring Danny Kaye, had an even better run, with 547 performances in New York. This, too, lacked any numbers that became standards, and Porter always counted it among his lesser efforts. \"Something for the Boys\" (1943), starring Merman, ran for 422 performances, and \"Mexican Hayride\" (1944), starring Bobby Clark, with June Havoc, ran for 481 performances. These shows, too, are short of Porter standards. The critics did not pull their punches, complaining about the lack of hit tunes and the generally low standard of the scores. After two flops, \"Seven Lively Arts\" (1944) (which featured the standard \"Ev'ry Time We Say Goodbye\") and \"Around the World\" (1946), many thought that Porter's best period was over.\nBetween Broadway musicals, Porter continued to write for Hollywood. His film scores of this period were \"You'll Never Get Rich\" (1941) with Astaire and Rita Hayworth, \"Something to Shout About\" (1943) with Don Ameche, Janet Blair and William Gaxton, and \"Mississippi Belle\" (1943\u201344), which was abandoned before filming began. He also cooperated in the making of the film \"Night and Day\" (1946), a largely fictional biography of Porter, with Cary Grant implausibly cast in the lead. The critics scoffed, but the film was a huge success, chiefly because of the wealth of vintage Porter numbers in it. The biopic's success contrasted starkly with the failure of Vincente Minnelli's film \"The Pirate\" (1948), with Judy Garland and Gene Kelly, in which five new Porter songs received little attention.\nFrom this low spot, Porter made a conspicuous comeback in 1948 with \"Kiss Me, Kate\". It was by far his most successful show, running for 1,077 performances in New York and 400 in London. The production won the Tony Award for Best Musical (the first Tony awarded in that category), and Porter won for best composer and lyricist. The score includes \"Another Op'nin', Another Show\", \"Wunderbar\", \"So In Love\", \"We Open in Venice\", \"Tom, Dick or Harry\", \"I've Come to Wive It Wealthily in Padua\", \"Too Darn Hot\", \"Always True to You (in My Fashion)\", and \"Brush Up Your Shakespeare\".\nPorter began the 1950s with \"Out of This World\" (1950), which had some good numbers but too much camp and vulgarity, and was not greatly successful. His next show, \"Can-Can\" (1952), featuring \"C'est Magnifique\" and \"It's All Right with Me\", was another hit, running for 892 performances. The soundtrack from \"Can-Can\"'s film adaptation won the 1960 Grammy Award for Best Sound Track Album. Porter's last original Broadway production, \"Silk Stockings\" (1955), featuring \"All of You\", was also successful, with a run of 477 performances. Porter wrote two more film scores and music for a television special before ending his Hollywood career. The film \"High Society\" (1956), starring Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra and Grace Kelly, included Porter's last major hit song \"True Love\". It was adapted as a stage musical of the same name. Porter also wrote numbers for the film \"Les Girls\" (1957), which starred Gene Kelly. His final score was for the CBS television special \"Aladdin\" (1958).\nLast years.\nPorter's mother died in 1952, and Linda died of emphysema in 1954. By 1958, Porter's injuries caused a series of ulcers on his right leg. After 34 operations, it had to be amputated and replaced with an artificial limb. His friend No\u00ebl Coward visited him in the hospital and wrote in his diary, \"The lines of ceaseless pain have been wiped from his face...I am convinced that his whole life will cheer up and that his work will profit accordingly.\" In fact, Porter never wrote another song after the amputation and spent the remaining six years of his life in relative seclusion, seeing only intimate friends. He continued to live in the Waldorf Towers in New York in his memorabilia-filled apartment. On weekends, he often visited his estate in the Berkshires, and he stayed in California during the summers.\nPorter died of kidney failure at age 73 on October 15, 1964, in Santa Monica, California. He is interred in Mount Hope Cemetery in his native Peru, Indiana, between his wife and father.\nMusical style.\nPorter wrote both the music and lyrics of his songs. But he did not write the books of the shows, or the screenplays, in which his songs appeared. Nor, except in \"Kiss Me Kate\", did he tailor his songs to the shows in which they appeared. For Porter, plot was only \"a convenient clothesline on which to hang his songs\", and he stated in his will that any of his songs could be used in any of his shows. Not needing to accommodate plots or songwriting partners, his recognizable style remained much the same throughout his career.\nHis lyrics are often about people like himself, upper-class people in elegant or exotic settings: penthouses, cruise ships or foreign countries. He was educated, sophisticated, witty, and an outstanding rhymer. He was a modern master of the list song, such as \"Let's Do It\" and \"You're the Top\", but also wrote sentimental ballads that were intensely sincere, sometimes too much so for critics. He was more often risqu\u00e9 than other mainstream songwriters of his time, even using single entendres.\nThough he had more formal training in composition than his peers, Porter abandoned \"serious\" music after his efforts composing for ballet gained him little. Despite his studies in orchestration, he hired other composers to orchestrate his scores for his shows, films, and even his wholly instrumental music for \"Within the Quota\", but he reviewed and edited their work. After he wrote a melody and lyrics, a musical secretary would help him harmonize and notate it, but he actively participated in that process and knew what he wanted.\nPorter used chromaticism extensively in both melody and harmony. Early in his career, Porter told Richard Rodgers that he intended to write \"Jewish tunes\"; Rodgers later noted, in that connection, Porter's chromaticism and \"unmistakably Mediterranean\" use of minor keys. Porter sometimes drew on other foreign musical traditions to match his songs' exotic settings: he often used Latin American rhythms and claimed that \"Night and Day\" was inspired by a chant heard in Morocco, whereas \"Begin the Beguine\" was inspired by a native dance in the Dutch East Indies, though these stories' details varied.\nTributes and legacy.\nMany artists have recorded Porter songs, and dozens have released entire albums of his songs. The first prominent artist to do so was Crosby in \"Bing Crosby Sings Cole Porter Songs\" (1950), followed in 1956 by Ella Fitzgerald in \"Ella Fitzgerald Sings the Cole Porter Songbook\". In 1972, she released another collection, \"Ella Loves Cole\". Others who recorded all-Porter albums include Oscar Peterson, Anita O'Day, , Frank Sinatra, Rosemary Clooney, , Dionne Warwick and Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga. In 1990, \"Red Hot + Blue\", released to benefit AIDS research, featured 20 Cole Porter songs recorded by artists such as U2 and Annie Lennox.\nIn 1965, shortly after Porter's death, Judy Garland performed a medley of Porter's songs at the 37th Academy Awards. Porter received a Grammy Trustees Award in 1989. Numerous ensembles have paid tribute to Porter since his death, including the National Symphony Orchestra in 2005; the Yale Concert Band in 2010; the Seattle Symphony Orchestra, with Marvin Hamlisch as conductor, in 2011; the Boston Pops in 2011 and 2012; and the Dallas Symphony Orchestra, with Hamlisch and Michael Feinstein, in 2012. In 1980, Porter's music was used for the score of the musical \"Happy New Year\". The cast of \"The Carol Burnett Show\" paid tribute to Porter in two different episodes of the series. The Swedish pop music group Gyllene Tider recorded the song \"Flickan i en Cole Porter-s\u00e5ng\" (\"That Girl from the Cole Porter Song\") in 1982. David Byrne mentioned Porter in his 1989 song \"The Call of the Wild\", as did Mercury Rev in its 1998 song \"Tonite It Shows\".\nPorter's life has been dramatized several times. The biographical show \"Cole\", by Alan Strachan and Benny Green, featuring Porter hits, ran in 1974 at London's Mermaid Theatre. In contrast to the highly embellished 1946 screen biography \"Night and Day\", Porter's life was chronicled more realistically in \"De-Lovely\", a 2004 Irwin Winkler film starring Kevin Kline as Porter and Ashley Judd as Linda. \"De-Lovely\"'s soundtrack includes Porter songs sung by Alanis Morissette, Sheryl Crow, Elvis Costello, Diana Krall and Natalie Cole, among others. Porter is also a character in Woody Allen's 2011 film \"Midnight in Paris\".\nMany events commemorated the centenary of Porter's birth, including the halftime show of the 1991 Orange Bowl. Joel Grey and a large cast of singers, dancers and marching bands performed a tribute to Porter in Miami, Florida, during the 57th King Orange Jamboree parade, whose theme was \"Anything Goes\". The Indianapolis Symphony Orchestra performed a program of Cole Porter music at the Circle Theatre in Indianapolis. \"A Gala Birthday Concert\" was held at New York City's Carnegie Hall, with more than 40 entertainers and friends paying tribute to Porter's long career in theater and film. The Indiana University Opera performed Porter's musical \"Jubilee\" in Bloomington, Indiana. \"You're the Top: The Cole Porter Story\", a video of archival material and interviews, and \"Red, Hot and Blue\", a video of artists performing Porter's music, were released. In addition, the U.S. Postal Service issued a commemorative postage stamp honoring Porter's birth.\nIn May 2007, a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame was dedicated to Porter. In December 2010, his portrait was added to the Hoosier Heritage Gallery in the office of the Governor of Indiana. In 2014, Porter was honored with a plaque on the Legacy Walk in Chicago, which celebrates LGBT achievers. Porter is a member of the Songwriters Hall of Fame, the American Theater Hall of Fame and the Great American Songbook Hall of Fame, which recognized his \"musically complex [songs] with witty, urbane lyrics\".\nThe Cole Porter Festival is held every year in June in his hometown of Peru, Indiana, to foster music and art appreciation. Porter's birthplace, restored to its 1891 appearance, is now an inn with suites named for him and his works. Costumed singers in the cabaret-style Cole Porter Room at the Indiana Historical Society's Eugene and Marilyn Glick Indiana History Center in Indianapolis take requests from visitors and perform Porter's hit songs. Since Porter's death, except for a brief time at the New York Historical Society, his 1908 Steinway grand piano, which he had used when composing since the mid-1930s, has been displayed and often played in the lobby of the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.\nNotable shows and songs.\nDates, shows and songs are given in Robert Kimball's \"The Complete Lyrics of Cole Porter\". Shows listed are stage musicals unless otherwise noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\u2020 Was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song, but did not win.\nDiscography.\nHundreds of recordings have been made of Porter's works. Many of these are listed in \"The Cole Porter Reference Guide\".\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53364", "revid": "45807063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53364", "title": "Low Earth orbiting satellite", "text": ""}
{"id": "53366", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53366", "title": "Reconnaissance satellite", "text": "Satellite that covertly collects data for intelligence or military applications\nA reconnaissance satellite or intelligence satellite (commonly, although unofficially, referred to as a spy satellite) is an Earth observation satellite or communications satellite deployed for military or intelligence applications.\nThe first generation type (i.e., Corona and Zenit) took photographs, then ejected canisters of photographic film which would descend back down into Earth's atmosphere. Corona capsules were retrieved in mid-air as they floated down on parachutes. Later, spacecraft had digital imaging systems and downloaded the images via encrypted radio links.\nIn the United States, most information available about reconnaissance satellites is on programs that existed up to 1972, as this information has been declassified due to its age. Some information about programs before that time is still classified information, and a small amount of information is available on subsequent missions.\nA few up-to-date reconnaissance satellite images have been declassified on occasion, or leaked, as in the case of KH-11 photographs which were sent to \"Jane's Defence Weekly\" in 1984, or US President Donald Trump tweeting a classified image of the aftermath of a failed test of Iran's Safir rocket in 2019.\nHistory.\nOn 16 March 1955, the United States Air Force officially ordered the development of an advanced reconnaissance satellite to provide continuous surveillance of \"preselected areas of the Earth\" in order \"to determine the status of a potential enemy's war-making capability\".\nDuring the mid-late 1950s, both the United States and the Soviet Union took interest into reconnaissance satellites. The United States began the CORONA project, which encompassed several series of launches starting in 1959 and ending in 72. This program was made a priority to photograph denied areas, replace the U-2, and due to public concern about a technological gap between the West and the Soviet Union. It was expedited significantly after the shooting of a U-2 in 1960.\nMeanwhile, in the Soviet Union, a decree that authorized the development of Sputnik apparently authorized a program for a satellite to be used for photo reconnaissance. This design evolved into Vostok, while another version became Zenit, which was an unmanned reconnaissance satellite. Zenit was launched from 1961 to 1994, however the last flight in 1994 was as a test payload.\nBoth the CORONA and Zenit satellites had to be recovered in order to access the used film, making them distinct from future reconnaissance satellites that could transmit photos without returning film to earth.\nTypes.\nThere are several major types of reconnaissance satellite.\nProvides warning of an attack by detecting ballistic missile launches. Earliest known are Missile Defense Alarm System.\nDetects nuclear detonation from space. Vela is the earliest known.\nSignals intelligence, intercepts stray radio waves. SOLRAD is the earliest known.\nEarth imaging satellites. Satellite images can be a survey or close-look telephoto. Corona is the earliest known. Spectral imaging is commonplace.\nMost space-based radars use synthetic-aperture radar. Can be used at night or through cloud cover. Earliest known are the Soviet US-A series.\nMissions.\nExamples of reconnaissance satellite missions:\nOn 28 August 2013, it was thought that \"a $1-billion high-powered spy satellite capable of snapping pictures detailed enough to distinguish the make and model of an automobile hundreds of miles below\" was launched from California's Vandenberg Air Force Base using a Delta IV Heavy launcher, America's highest-payload space launch vehicle at the time.\nOn 17 February 2014, a Russian Kosmos-1220 originally launched in 1980 and used for naval missile targeting until 1982, made an uncontrolled atmospheric entry.\nBenefits.\nDuring the 1950s, a Soviet hoax had led to American fears of a bomber gap. In 1968, after gaining satellite photography, the United States' intelligence agencies were able to state with certainty that \"No new ICBM complexes have been established in the USSR during the past year\". President Lyndon B. Johnson told a gathering in 1967:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I wouldn't want to be quoted on this ... We've spent $35 or $40 billion on the space program. And if nothing else had come out of it except the knowledge that we gained from space photography, it would be worth ten times what the whole program has cost. Because tonight we know how many missiles the enemy has and, it turned out, our guesses were way off. We were doing things we didn't need to do. We were building things we didn't need to build. We were harboring fears we didn't need to harbor.\nDuring his 1980 State of the Union Address, President Jimmy Carter argued that all of humanity benefited from the presence of American spy satellites:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...photo-reconnaissance satellites, for example, are enormously important in stabilizing world affairs and thereby make a significant contribution to the security of all nations.\nReconnaissance satellites have been used to enforce human rights, through the Satellite Sentinel Project, which monitors atrocities in Sudan and South Sudan.\nAdditionally, companies such as GeoEye and DigitalGlobe have provided commercial satellite imagery in support of natural disaster response and humanitarian missions.\nIn fiction.\nSpy satellites are commonly seen in spy fiction and military fiction. Some works of fiction that focus specifically on spy satellites include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53368", "revid": "40093439", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53368", "title": "Clinton County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nClinton County is the northeasternmost county in the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 United States Census, the population was 79,843. Its county seat is the city of Plattsburgh. The county lies just south of the border with the Canadian province of Quebec, and to the west of the State of Vermont. The county is named for George Clinton, the first Governor of New York, who later was elected as Vice President. He had been a Founding Father who represented New York in the Continental Congress. Clinton County comprises the Plattsburgh, New York micropolitan statistical area. The county is part of the North Country region of the state.\nHistory.\nWhen counties were established in New York State in 1683, the present Clinton County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present state of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. This county was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont. On March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Charlotte County, contained the eastern portion.\nIn 1784, the name \"Charlotte County\" was changed to Washington County to honor George Washington, the American Revolutionary War General and later the first President of the United States of America.\nIn 1788, Clinton County split off from Washington County.\nIn 1799, Essex County split off from Clinton County.\nIn 1802, parts of Clinton, Herkimer, and Montgomery counties formed the new St. Lawrence County.\nIn 1808, Franklin County split off from Clinton County.\nGeography.\nClinton County lies at the northeast corner of New York state. Its northern border abuts the Canadian province of Quebec. Its eastern border abuts the state of Vermont (across Lake Champlain). The encompassing region is referred to as the \"Adirondack Coast\".\nThe Saranac River flows easterly through the central part of the county, discharging into Lake Champlain at Plattsburgh, and the Great Chazy River flows northeastward through the upper part of the county, discharging into Lake Champlain at Coopersville. The Ausable River forms a large part of the southern county line. The county's highest point is Lyon Mountain, in the town of Dannemora, at ASL. According to the US Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (7.1%) is water.\nAdjacent counties and municipalities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProtected areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLakes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGovernment and politics.\nLike much of the North Country region, Clinton County has historically been a Republican county. However, it has voted for Democratic candidates at the state and national level in recent times. Beginning in 1996, it voted for the Democratic candidate for president in every election until 2024. In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Barack Obama carried the county by a 22.9% margin over John McCain (Obama won every municipality in the county), and won by a 26.9% margin over McCain statewide. In 2006, both Eliot Spitzer and Hillary Clinton carried the county, respectively winning 63% and 64% of the vote. In 2010, Governor Andrew Cuomo and Senators Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand won in the county, each receiving more than 60% of the vote. In the 2024 U.S. presidential election, Donald Trump flipped the county by a 2.1% margin over Kamala Harris, despite previously losing the county to Joe Biden by a 5.2% margin in the 2020 U.S. presidential election.\nRepublicans continue to win most local races. The county's Congressional district did not elect a Democrat to Congress until 2009 when Bill Owens defeated Doug Hoffman in the special election to replace John McHugh, who resigned to serve as the Obama Administration's Secretary of the Army. The special election received nationwide attention due to Hoffman, a third-party candidate and Tea Party favorite, polling higher than the Republican nominee, Dede Scozzafava, which ultimately led to her dropping out of the race and supporting Owens. It had not elected a Democrat to the State Senate or State Assembly in over a half-century until Billy Jones was elected to the State Assembly in 2016. Clinton County is represented by Elise Stefanik in the House of Representatives.\nThe Clinton County Legislature is the lawmaking body of the county. It consists of 10 members, each elected from single member districts. As of 2021, the County Legislature consisted of five Republicans, four Democrats, and a vacancy.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 census.\nAs of the 2000 United States census, there were 79,894 people, 29,423 households, and 19,272 families in the county. The population density was . There were 33,091 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 93.33% White, 3.58% Black or African American, 0.36% Native American, 0.67% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 1.10% from other races, and 0.93% from two or more races. 2.46% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 23.7% were of French, 15.0% French Canadian, 12.5% American, 11.8% Irish, 7.6% English and 5.5% German ancestry according to Census 2000. 94.1% spoke English, 2.8% French and 1.7% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 29,423 households, out of which 32.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 51.00% were married couples living together, 10.20% had a female householder with no husband present, and 34.50% were non-families. 26.30% of all households were made up of individuals, and 10.00% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 2.98.\nThe county population contained 23.00% under the age of 18, 12.40% from 18 to 24, 30.60% from 25 to 44, 22.10% from 45 to 64, and 11.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 104.90 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 104.60 males.\nThe median household income was $37,028, and the median income for a family was $45,732. Males had a median income of $33,788 versus $25,520 for females. The per capita income for the county was $17,946. About 9.40% of families and 13.90% of the population were below the poverty line, including 15.30% of those under age 18 and 11.40% of those age 65 or over.\nEducation.\nSchool districts include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe State University of New York at Plattsburgh is located in the City of Plattsburgh. The county is also served by Clinton Community College, which is located in the Town of Plattsburgh.\nInfrastructure.\nClinton Correctional Facility, a maximum-security prison is located in the village of Dannemora. Altona Correctional Facility is a medium-security prison in the town of Altona.\nTransportation.\nHighways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRail.\nAmtrak's Adirondack Train travels through the county, connecting Montreal to New York City. Two trains a day (one north and one south) stop in the county in Plattsburgh and Rouses Point.\nMass transit.\nThe Clinton County Public Transit runs bus routes that branch from Plattsburgh to towns in the county.\nCommunities.\nLarger settlements.\n\u2020 - County seat\n\u2020\u2020 - Former village\n\u2021 - Not wholly in this county\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53369", "revid": "1297791668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53369", "title": "Costantino Nivola", "text": "Italian sculptor\nCostantino (also known as Antine, in Sardinia, or Tino, in the US) Nivola (July 5, 1911 \u2013 May 6, 1988) was an Italian sculptor, architectural sculptor, muralist, designer, and teacher.\nBorn in Orani, a town in the region of Sardinia, Nivola had already started his career when he fled Fascism for Paris in 1938, going to the U.S. in 1939. His major sculptural work is abstract, large-scale architectural reliefs in concrete, made in his own sandcasting and cement carving processes. These were erected in and on American buildings between the late 1950s and early 1970s. Creatively busy and while remaining active in Italy, Nivola also taught at the Harvard Graduate School of Design, Columbia University, UC Berkeley, and elsewhere.\nThe Nivola Museum in Orani, Sardinia is dedicated to his life and sculpture, and hosts the largest collection of his smaller scale work.\nEarly career.\nNivola was born and grew up poor in Orani, a village in Sardinia. As an adolescent, he worked as an apprentice stonemason. In Sassari in 1926, Nivola served as apprentice to fellow painter , executing frescoes for the \"aula magna\" of the local university.\nIn 1931 Nivola enrolled in the ISIA (, the State Institute of Industrial Arts) in Monza. Through one of his teachers, the architect Giuseppe Pagano, he contributed work to the 1936 Milan Triennial VI and the Italian Pavilion at the 1937 Paris Exposition. This drew the attention of Adriano Olivetti, who named him art director of his company's Publicity Department, where Nivola \"made a significant contribution to... 'the Olivetti style'.\nUnited States.\nNivola married fellow ISIA student Ruth Guggenheim in 1938, and left together for the United States via Paris in 1939. He established a home in Greenwich Village (first at Waverly Place, then at No. 47 West Eighth Street) to rebuild a social circle and a career despite speaking no English.\nNivola resumed a close friendship with artist Saul Steinberg from Milan, attended meetings of the anti-fascist Italian-American Mazzini Society in 1941, and by the 1940s Nivola was presiding over a weekly gathering of artists at Del Pezzo's restaurant described by Peter Blake as comparable to the Algonquin Round Table. One key friendship was Le Corbusier. Introduced in 1945 by Josep Llu\u00eds Sert, Nivola became warm lifelong friends with the Swiss architect, his houseguest on Corbu's rare trips to America.\nSupported by small exhibitions and a progression of jobs in factories, for Bonwit Teller, and for architectural magazines, the Nivolas bought a modest property in Springs, East Hampton, Long Island. It would expand to 35 acres. Their garden landscape, a series of outdoor rooms and a roofless solarium, was co-designed by the Nivolas and architect Bernard Rudofsky; in 1950 Le Corbusier impulsively painted murals on two walls of their kitchen. On the nearby beach Nivola developed the principle of his distinctive concrete sandcasting technique while playing with his children. They sculpted wet sand, then poured a slurry of plaster or concrete into the form.\nIn 1951 Nivola was one of the artists shown in the pivotal 9th Street Art Exhibition, hung by Leo Castelli.\nOnce more Olivetti provided the sculptor with a major commission, for an interior wall in their stylish Fifth Avenue showroom in 1953. Nivola executed it with a refined, scaled-up version of the beach process, in a sequence of panels. The resulting attention and publicity started a successful career in large-scale architecture work which lasted for decades. One project, involving two thousand and ten cast-concrete panels for the McCormick Place Exposition Center in Chicago in 1959, was touted as the largest such installation ever.\nIn 1954 Nivola was named to direct the Design Workshop at the Harvard Graduate School of Design, where he stayed until 1957. He was also visiting professor or artist in residence at Columbia University (1961), Harvard (1970 and 1973), Dartmouth (1978), UC Berkeley (1978\u201379 and 1982), and the Royal Academy of Art, The Hague (1982). The American Institute of Graphic Arts awarded him its Certificate of Excellence. In 1972 the American Academy of Arts and Letters admitted Nivola as its first non-American member.\nNivola died of a heart attack in Southampton Hospital, Long Island, in May 1988. He was the father of children's book author Claire Nivola, and the grandfather of actor Alessandro Nivola. A foundation and museum dedicated to Nivola's work opened in his hometown in 1995, in a building partly designed by architect Peter Chermayeff.\nWork.\nThe Sardinian town of Ulassai decided, in the early 1980s, to rehabilitate its neglected dating from 1903. It was turned into an open-air contemporary museum with a number of artists represented \u2013 , Luigi Veronesi, . Nivola's contribution, a sculptural sound fountain, was completed in 1987 as his final work. \nNivola's public work includes:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53371", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53371", "title": "Chenango County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nChenango County is a county located in the south-central section of the U.S. state of New York. As of the 2020 census, the population was 47,220. Its county seat is Norwich. The county's name originates from an Oneida word meaning 'large bull-thistle'. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.\nHistory.\nThis was long the territory of the Oneida people, one of the first Five Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy or \"Haudenosaunee\". They occupied the area until after the Revolutionary War, when they were forced off the land, although they had been allies of the patriot colonists. They were granted a small reservation, which settlers continued to encroach on.\nWhen English colonists organized counties in 1683 in what is now New York, the present Chenango County was part of Albany County. This was an enormous county, including the northern part of New York State as well as all of the present State of Vermont and, in theory, extending westward to the Pacific Ocean. However, territories located to the west of present-day Pennsylvania were under effective French control as part of New France. Albany County was reduced in size on July 3, 1766, by the creation of Cumberland County, and further on March 16, 1770, by the creation of Gloucester County, both containing territory now in Vermont.\nOn March 12, 1772, what was left of Albany County was split into three parts, one remaining under the name Albany County. One of the other pieces, Tryon County, contained the western portion (and thus, since no western boundary was specified, theoretically still extended west to the Pacific). The eastern boundary of Tryon County was approximately five miles west of the present city of Schenectady, and the county included the western part of the Adirondack Mountains and the area west of the West Branch of the Delaware River. The area then designated as Tryon County has since been organized as 37 counties of New York State. The county was named for William Tryon, the British colonial governor of New York.\nIn the years prior to 1776, during the increasing tensions most of the Loyalists in Tryon County fled to Fort Niagara on the Western Frontier. In 1784, following the peace treaty that ended the American Revolutionary War, the Americans renamed Tryon County as Montgomery County in honor of the US general Richard Montgomery. He had captured several places in Canada and died attempting to capture the city of Quebec. The US residents replaced the name of the former British governor.\nIn 1788, the Oneida Reservation was considerably reduced by what is known as Clinton's Purchase, when land was sold off west of the Unadilla River to create what are now 20 towns. (See map to the right.) Settlers from eastern New York and New England entered the area and began farming.\nIn 1789, Montgomery County was reduced in size by the splitting-off of Ontario County. The area split off from Montgomery County was much larger than the present Ontario County, as it included the present Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Livingston, Monroe, Niagara, Orleans, Steuben, Wyoming, Yates, and part of Schuyler and Wayne counties. It was the practice to establish a large geographic county and divide it as settlement increased.\nIn 1791, Herkimer, Otsego and Tioga counties were organized from land separated from Montgomery County.\nChenango County was formed on March 15, 1798, from of Tioga and Herkimer counties. Its eastern border is formed by the Unadilla River. The land had been purchased the previous year from the Oneida, who were forced into a smaller reservation to the north.\nOn April 4, 1804, of Chenango County was partitioned to expand Oneida County; the communities of Waterville and Sangerfield were assigned to the new Oneida County.\nOn March 21, 1806, of Chenango County was partitioned to produce Madison County. This established the current borders of Chenango County, which have been maintained to the early 21st century. This area was developed for agriculture in the nineteenth century and is still largely rural.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.6%) is water.\nChenango County is in the approximate center of the state, located west of Albany, north of Binghamton, and southeast of Syracuse. The county is considered to be in the Southern Tier region of New York State.\nThe Chenango River, a tributary of the Susquehanna River, flows southward through the county.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 Census.\nAs of the census of 2000, there were 51,401 people, 19,926 households, and 13,549 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 23,890 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 97.65% White, 0.82% Black or African American, 0.27% Native American, 0.28% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.22% from other races, and 0.74% from two or more races. 1.07% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 20.2% were of English, 14.5% German, 13.8% Irish, 12.3% American and 8.9% Italian ancestry according to Census 2000. 96.7% spoke English and 1.3% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 19,926 households, out of which 32.50% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 53.10% were married couples living together, 9.80% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.00% were non-families. 26.10% of all households were made up of individuals, and 11.40% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.52 and the average family size was 3.01.\nIn the county, the population was spread out, with 26.20% under the age of 18, 7.00% from 18 to 24, 27.50% from 25 to 44, 24.40% from 45 to 64, and 14.90% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 97.00 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.70 males.\nThe median income for a household in the county was $33,679, and the median income for a family was $39,711. Males had a median income of $30,363 versus $22,429 for females. The per capita income for the county was $16,427. About 10.70% of families and 14.40% of the population were below the poverty line, including 19.50% of those under age 18 and 8.70% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nChenango County has a Board of Supervisors that consists of 23 Town/City elected officials, serving as representatives at the County level. The term for each Supervisor is based on the term set by each particular Town. A Supervisor holds office for either two or four years.\nIn 21st-century United States politics, Chenango County is considered to be a Republican-leaning county, where the majority of voters elect national Republican candidates. In 2004, Republican George Bush won by an 11% margin over Democrat John Kerry. For state and congressional offices, voters sometimes elect Democratic candidates. In 2006 both Eliot Spitzer and Hillary Clinton carried it, winning 57% and 54% of the vote for governor and US Senator, respectively. In 2008, John McCain carried Chenango County over Barack Obama in the presidential election by a close margin of 49.59%-48.45% or a difference of 237 votes. In 2010, Democrat Andrew Cuomo for governor, and Democrats Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand for the US Senate each carried it. In 2012, Republican Mitt Romney narrowly won the county over Obama, but like most of the Upstate, swung sharply towards the Republicans in 2016 and 2020, with Donald Trump receiving over 60% of the vote in 2020 making him the first Republican to do so since 1984.\nEducation.\nMorrisville State College has a branch in Norwich.\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n\u2020 - County seat\nTowns.\nIn New York, a \"town\" is a political subdivision (synonymous with township). The towns in northern Chenango County originated from the Twenty Townships ceded by the Oneida tribe to the State of New York.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53372", "revid": "49089944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53372", "title": "Chemung County, New York", "text": "County in New York, United States\nChemung County is a county in the U.S. state of New York. The population was 84,148 as of the 2020 census. Its county seat is Elmira. Its name is derived from a Delaware Indian village whose name means \"big horn\" in the Seneca language. The county is part of the Southern Tier region of the state.\nChemung County comprises the Elmira, NY Metropolitan Statistical Area, which is also included in the Elmira-Corning, NY Combined Statistical Area.\nMany signs posted along roads in Chemung County refer to the area as \"Mark Twain Country,\" because the noted author lived and wrote for many years in Elmira.\nHistory.\nChemung County was formed from of Tioga County in 1836.\nIn 1854, Chemung County was divided and became Schuyler County, reducing Chemung to , its current size.\nIn the late 1870s, the Greenback Party became prominent in Chemung and nearby counties in western New York. Here it was primarily allied with labor in a critique of capital, reaching its peak in 1878, the year following the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 and the Scranton General Strike in Pennsylvania. There were also strikes that year in Albany, Syracuse and Buffalo, starting with the railroad workers. In Steuben and Chemung counties, Greenbackers were elected to county councils in 1878 instead of Democrats, and others were elected from there and nearby counties to the state legislature, gaining votes of more than 25 percent in several of the Southern Tier counties. It gradually declined after that, due to internal dissension and the strength of the two major parties.\nGeography.\nAccording to the U.S. Census Bureau, the county has a total area of , of which is land and (0.8%) is water.\nChemung County is in the southwestern part of New York State, along the Pennsylvania border, in a part of New York called the Southern Tier and is also part of the Finger Lakes Region.\nThe Southern Tier Expressway runs through the County east-west near the Pennsylvania border, between Waverly, New York and Corning, New York via Elmira, New York.\nTransportation.\nMajor highways.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2000 Census.\nAs of the 2000 census, there were 91,070 people, 35,049 households and 23,272 families residing in the county. The population density was . There were 37,745 housing units at an average density of . The racial makeup of the county was 90.96% White, 5.82% Black or African American, 0.23% Native American, 0.78% Asian, 0.02% Pacific Islander, 0.75% from other races, and 1.44% from two or more races. 1.77% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race. 16.4% were of German, 15.7% Irish, 12.5% English, 11.8% Italian, 7.8% American and 6.3% Polish ancestry according to Census 2000 https://. Most of those claiming to be of \"American\" ancestry are of English descent and, in upstate New York, also in some cases of Dutch descent, but have family that has been in the country for so long, in many cases since the early seventeenth century, that they choose to identify simply as \"American\". 96.2% spoke English and 1.6% Spanish as their first language.\nThere were 35,049 households, of which 31.00% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.80% were married couples living together, 12.40% had a female householder with no husband present, and 33.60% were non-families. 27.90% of all households were made up of individuals, and 12.20% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 2.97.\nAge distribution was 24.40% under the age of 18, 8.80% from 18 to 24, 28.30% from 25 to 44, 22.90% from 45 to 64, and 15.60% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 38 years. For every 100 females there were 97.70 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 95.30 males.\nThe median household income was $36,415, and the median family income was $43,994. Males had a median income of $35,076 versus $24,215 for females. The per capita income for the county was $18,264. About 9.10% of families and 13.00% of the population were below the poverty line, including 18.40% of those under age 18 and 6.80% of those age 65 or over.\nGovernment.\nBefore 1974, Chemung County was governed by a board of supervisors. On January 1, 1974, executive and legislative powers were split between a county executive and a 15-seat legislature. All 15 members are elected from single-member districts. As of 2024, the Chemung County Legislature includes 13 Republicans and 2 Democrats. Chemung County is a part of the 23rd congressional district, represented by Republican Nick Langworthy.\nIn presidential elections, Chemung County tends to vote Republican. Only two Democrats (Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 and Bill Clinton in 1996) have carried the county since 1920. It voted for George W. Bush in 2004 by a 10.85% margin. In 2008, the margin was much closer, but voters still gave John McCain a 1.23% win over Barack Obama. In 2012, Mitt Romney carried the county by 2.33%. In 2016, Donald Trump carried Chemung County with 55.64% of the vote compared to Hillary Clinton's 38.09%. Trump carried the county again in 2020 with over 55% of the vote.\nEducation.\nEducation in Chemung County is provided by various private and public institutions. High school students and adults have access to GST BOCES. BOCES provides vocation-style training in a wide range of fields as well as adult education and special education.\nPublic school districts.\nSchool districts with any portion of territory in the county, even if the schools and/or administrative offices are elsewhere, include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPublic libraries.\nChemung County Library District\nCommunities.\nLarger Settlements.\n\u2020 - County Seat\n\u2020\u2020 - Former Village\nTowns.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53373", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53373", "title": "Emil von Behring", "text": "German physiologist (1854\u20131917)\nEmil von Behring (; Emil Adolf von Behring: born Emil Adolf Behring; 15 March 1854 \u2013 31 March 1917), was a German physiologist who received the 1901 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, the first one awarded in that field, for his discovery of a diphtheria antitoxin. He was widely known as a \"saviour of children\", as diphtheria used to be a major cause of child death. His work with the disease, as well as tetanus, has come to bring him most of his fame and acknowledgment. He was honoured with Prussian nobility in 1901, henceforth being known by the surname \"von Behring\".\nBiography.\nBehring was born in Hansdorf, Kreis Rosenberg, Province of Prussia (now \u0141awice, I\u0142awa County, Poland). His father was a schoolmaster; the family had 13 children.\nBetween 1874 and 1878, Emil von Behring studied medicine at the Kaiser Wilhelm Academy in Berlin, an institution established for the training of military physicians. His enrollment there was largely due to financial necessity, as his family could not afford a civilian university education. During his studies, Behring conducted early research on the antiseptic properties of iodoform, reflecting the medical preoccupation of the time with preventing infection in surgical practice.\nFollowing graduation, Behring earned his medical doctorate through work on neurotomia opticociliaris (optociliary neurotomy) which is a surgical procedure involving the optic nerve. Behring subsequently passed the state medical examination qualifying him to practice in the Marburg district. In 1878, as part of his military service obligations, he was stationed in Poland, where he investigated septic diseases, an experience that deepened his understanding of infection and wound pathology. His skill and diligence attracted attention, leading to his transfer back to Prussia to work under Robert Koch, whose laboratory at the Imperial Health Office was becoming a center of pioneering bacteriological research.\nBehring\u2019s academic and professional advancement remained closely tied to his military sponsorship. For each semester of state-funded study, he was required to complete a year of military service as a surgeon this commitment that totaled two years, during which he served (1881\u20131883) with the Second Hussar Regiment.\nAn often overlooked aspect of Behring\u2019s early career was his research in ophthalmology, conducted during his tenure at Wicherkiewicz\u2019s hospital in Pozna\u0144. There, he authored a clinical paper on a case of ocular tumor, in which the patient ultimately succumbed to leukemia. Although the outcome was fatal, Behring\u2019s detailed pathological observations contributed to contemporary discussions on surgical techniques and therapeutic strategies for ocular disease. His early ophthalmologic training under renowned specialists such as Carl Ernst Schweigger and Wilhelm Uhthoff fostered this interest and culminated in his doctoral dissertation on diseases of the eye, a field that would later inform his meticulous experimental approach to infectious disease and immunity.\nIn 1890 he published an article with Kitasato Shibasabur\u014d reporting that they had developed \"antitoxins\" against both diphtheria and tetanus. They had injected diphtheria and tetanus toxins into guinea pigs, goats and horses; when these animals developed immunity, they derived antitoxins (now known to contain antibodies) from their serum. This process was called \"serum therapy\" at the time. Behring described this therapy as a way to induce permanent immunity or \"to stimulate the body's internal disinfection\". These antitoxins could protect against and cure the diseases in non-immunized animals. In 1892 he started the first human trials of the diphtheria antitoxin, but they were unsuccessful. Successful treatment started in 1894, after the production and quantification of antitoxin had been optimized. In 1894, Behring was also awarded the Cameron Prize for Therapeutics of the University of Edinburgh.\nBy 1895 Behring became Professor of Hygienics within the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Marburg, a position held for the rest of his life. He and the pharmacologist Hans Horst Meyer had their laboratories in the same building, and Behring stimulated Meyer's interest in the mode of action of tetanus toxin.\nBehring won the first Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1901 for the development of serum therapies against diphtheria. His research colleague Kitasato Shibasabur\u014d who had performed most of the meticulous work that laid the foundation for serum therapy in 1890, while nominated as well, was not awarded the Nobel Prize as it was only given to a single awardee at the time.\nEmil von Behring was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1902.\nIn 1904 he founded the Behringwerke in Marburg, a company to produce antitoxins and vaccines.\nAt the International Tuberculosis Congress in 1905 he announced that he had discovered \"a substance proceeding from the virus of tuberculosis\". This substance, which he designated \"T C\", plays the important part in the immunizing action of his \"bovivaccine\", which prevents bovine tuberculosis. He tried unsuccessfully to obtain a protective and therapeutic agents for humans.\nBehring died at Marburg, Hessen-Nassau, on 31 March 1917. His name survived in the Dade Behring organisation (now part of the Siemens Healthineers), in CSL Behring, a manufacturer of plasma-derived biotherapies, in Novartis Behring and in the Emil von Behring Prize of the University of Marburg, the highest endowed medicine award in Germany.\nHis Nobel Prize medal is now kept on display at the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Museum in Geneva.\nControversy.\nvon Behring is believed to have cheated Paul Ehrlich out of recognition and financial reward in relation to collaborative research in diphtheria. The two men developed a diphtheria serum by repeatedly injecting the deadly toxin into a horse. The serum was used effectively during an epidemic in Germany. A chemical company preparing to undertake commercial production and marketing of the diphtheria serum offered a contract to both men, but von Behring manoeuvered to claim all the considerable financial rewards for himself. To add insult to injury, only Behring received the first Nobel Prize in Medicine, in 1901, for his contributions. However, Ehrlich went on to win the 1908 Nobel Prize in Medicine for his contribution to immunology.\nPersonal life.\nOn 29 December 1896 Behring married the then twenty-year-old Else Spinola (1876\u20131936), who was a daughter of Bernhard Spinola, the director of the Charit\u00e9 hospital in Berlin, and a Jewish-born mother \u2013 Elise Spinola, born Bendix \u2013 who had converted to Christianity upon her marriage. The couple had six sons: Fritz (1898\u20131966), Bernhard (1900\u20131918, killed in action on 20 July 1918 in Cuch\u00e9ry/Marne), Hans (1903\u20131982), Kurt (1905\u20131935), Emil (1906\u20131970), and Otto (1913\u20132002), two of whom, Hans and Otto von Behring, also studied medicine.\nThe couple held their honeymoon at villa \"Behring\" on Capri 1897, where Behring owned a vacation home. In 1909\u20131911, the Russian writer Maxim Gorky lived at this villa.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53374", "revid": "51013895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53374", "title": "Strategic bombing", "text": "Systematic aerial attacks to destroy infrastructure and morale\nStrategic bombing is a systematically organized and executed military attack from the air which can utilize strategic bombers, long- or medium-range missiles, or nuclear-armed fighter-bomber aircraft to attack targets deemed vital to the enemy's war-making capability. It is a military strategy used in total war with the goal of defeating the enemy by destroying its morale, its economic ability to produce and transport materiel to the theatres of military operations, or both. The term terror bombing is used to describe the strategic bombing of civilian targets without military value, in the hope of damaging an enemy's morale.\nOne of the strategies of war is to demoralize the enemy so that peace or surrender becomes preferable to continuing the conflict. Strategic bombing has been used to this end. The phrase \"terror bombing\" entered the English lexicon towards the end of World War II and many strategic bombing campaigns and individual raids have been described as terror bombing by commentators and historians. Because the term has pejorative connotations, some, including the Allies of World War II, have preferred to use euphemisms such as \"morale bombings\".\nThe theoretical distinction between tactical and strategic air warfare was developed between the two world wars. Some leading theorists of strategic air warfare during this period were the Italian Giulio Douhet, the Trenchard school in the United Kingdom, and General Billy Mitchell in the United States. These theorists were influential, both on the military justification for an independent air force (such as the Royal Air Force) and in influencing political thoughts on a future war as exemplified by Stanley Baldwin's 1932 comment that \"the bomber will always get through\".\nEnemy morale.\nOne of the aims of war is to demoralize the enemy; facing continual death and destruction may make the prospect of peace or surrender preferable. The proponents of strategic bombing between the world wars, such as General Douhet, expected that direct attacks upon an enemy country's cities by strategic bombers would lead to a rapid collapse of civilian morale so that political pressure to sue for peace would lead to a rapid conclusion. When such attacks were tried in the 1930s\u2014in the Spanish Civil War and the Second Sino-Japanese War\u2014they were ineffective. Commentators observed the failures and some air forces, such as the Luftwaffe, concentrated their efforts upon direct support of the troops. As World War Two progressed, the focus by the Allies on the enemy's morale was modified. Observation of the effect of the Blitz on British industrial war production showed that it was difficult to put factories out of action by bombing, but, in comparison, destroying the housing of the workforce had a much more disruptive effect. Morale collapse was expected to affect war industries, rather than, as in the pre-war theories, initiating political pressure for war leaders to sue for peace.\nThe term \"terror bombing\".\n\"Terror bombing\" is a term used for aerial attacks planned to weaken or break enemy morale. Use of the term to refer to aerial attacks implies the attacks are criminal according to the law of war, or if within the laws of war are nevertheless a moral crime. According to John Algeo in \"Fifty Years among the New Words: A Dictionary of Neologisms 1941\u20131991\", the first recorded usage of \"Terror bombing\" in a United States publication was in a \"Reader's Digest\" article dated June 1941, a finding confirmed by the \"Oxford English Dictionary\".\nAerial attacks described as terror bombing are often long range strategic bombing raids, although attacks which result in the deaths of civilians may also be described as such, or if the attacks involve fighters strafing they may be labelled \"terror attacks\".\nGerman propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels and other high-ranking officials of Nazi Germany frequently described attacks by the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) during their strategic bombing campaigns as \"Terrorangriffe\"\u2014terror attacks. The Allied governments usually described their bombing of cities with euphemisms such as area bombing (RAF). The USAF referred to their daylight raids as precision bombing though weather conditions over Europe usually made attempts at accuracy void, and for most of World War II the Allied news media did the same. However, at a SHAEF press conference on 16 February 1945, two days after the bombing of Dresden, British Air Commodore Colin McKay Grierson replied to a question by one of the journalists that the primary target of the bombing had been on communications to prevent the Germans from moving military supplies and to stop movement in all directions if possible. He then added in an offhand remark that the raid also helped destroy \"what is left of German morale.\" Howard Cowan, an Associated Press war correspondent, filed a story about the Dresden raid. The military press censor at SHAEF made a mistake and allowed the Cowan cable to go out starting with \"Allied air bosses have made the long awaited decision to adopt deliberate terror bombing of great German population centers as a ruthless expedient to hasten Hitler's doom.\" There were follow-up newspaper editorials on the issue and a longtime opponent of strategic bombing, Richard Stokes MP, asked questions in the House of Commons on 6 March.\nThe controversy stirred up by the Cowan news report reached the highest levels of the British Government when on 28 March 1945 the Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, sent a memo by telegram to General Ismay for the British Chiefs of Staff and the Chief of the Air Staff in which he started with the sentence \"It seems to me that the moment has come when the question of bombing of German cities simply for the sake of increasing the terror, though under other pretexts, should be reviewed\u2026\" Under pressure from the Chiefs of Staff and in response to the views expressed by Chief of the Air Staff Sir Charles Portal, and the head of Bomber Command, Arthur \"Bomber\" Harris, among others, Churchill withdrew his memo and issued a new one. This was completed on 1 April 1945 and started instead with the usual euphemism used when referring to strategic bombing: \"It seems to me that the moment has come when the question of the so called 'area-bombing' of German cities should be reviewed from the point of view of our own interests\u2026\".\nMany strategic bombing campaigns and individual raids of aerial warfare have been described as \"terror bombing\" by commentators and historians since the end of World War II, but because the term has pejorative connotations, others have denied that such bombing campaigns and raids are examples of \"terror bombing\".\nDefensive measures.\nDefensive measures against air raids include:\nHistory and origins.\nWorld War I.\nStrategic bombing was used in World War I, though it was not understood in its present form. The first aerial bombing of a city was on 6 August 1914 when the German Army Zeppelin Z VI bombed, with artillery shells, the Belgian city of Li\u00e8ge, killing nine civilians. The second attack was on the night of 24\u201325 August 1914, when eight bombs were dropped from a German airship onto the Belgian city of Antwerp.\nThe first effective strategic bombing was pioneered by the Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) in 1914. The mission was to attack the Zeppelin production lines and their sheds at Cologne (K\u00f6ln) and D\u00fcsseldorf. Led by Charles Rumney Samson, the force of four aircraft inflicted minor damage on the sheds. The raid was repeated a month later with slightly more success. Within a year or so, specialized aircraft and dedicated bomber squadrons were in service on both sides. These were generally used for tactical bombing; the aim was that of directly harming enemy troops, strongpoints, or equipment, usually within a relatively small distance of the front line. Eventually, attention turned to the possibility of causing \"indirect\" harm to the enemy by systematically attacking vital rear-area resources.\nThe most well known attacks were those done by Zeppelins over England through the course of the war. The first aerial bombardment of English civilians was on January 19, 1915, when two Zeppelins dropped 24 fifty-kilogram (110-pound) high-explosive bombs and ineffective three-kilogram incendiaries on the Eastern England towns of Great Yarmouth, Sheringham, King's Lynn, and the surrounding villages. In all, four people were killed and sixteen injured, and monetary damage was estimated at \u00a37,740 (about US$36,000 at the time). German airships also bombed on other fronts, for example in January 1915 on Liep\u0101ja in Latvia.\nIn 1915 there were 19 more raids, in which 37 tons of bombs were dropped, killing 181 people and injuring 455. Raids continued in 1916. London was accidentally bombed in May, and in July the Kaiser allowed directed raids against urban centers. There were 23 airship raids in 1916, in which 125 tons of ordnance were dropped, killing 293 people and injuring 691. Gradually British air defenses improved. In 1917 and 1918, there were only 11 Zeppelin raids against England, and the final raid occurred on August 5, 1918, which resulted in the death of KK Peter Strasser, commander of the German Naval Airship Department.\nBy the end of the war, 51 raids had been undertaken, in which 5,806 bombs were dropped, killing 557 people and injuring 1,358. These raids caused only minor hampering of wartime production, by later standards. A much greater impact was the diversion of twelve aircraft squadrons, many guns, and over 10,000 men to air defenses. The raids generated a wave of hysteria, partially caused by media. This revealed the tactic's potential as a weapon that was of use for propagandists on both sides. The late Zeppelin raids were complemented by the Gotha bomber, which was the first heavier-than-air bomber to be used for strategic bombing.\nThe French army on June 15, 1915, attacked the German town of Karlsruhe, killing 29 civilians and wounding 58. Further raids followed until the Armistice in 1918. In a raid in the afternoon of June 22, 1916, the pilots used outdated maps and bombed the location of the abandoned railway station, where a circus tent was placed, killing 120 persons, most of them children.\nThe British also stepped up their strategic bombing campaign. In late 1915, the order was given for attacks on German industrial targets, and the 41st Wing was formed from units of the RNAS and Royal Flying Corps. The RNAS took to the strategic bombing in a bigger way than the RFC, who were focused on supporting the infantry actions of the Western Front. At first, the RNAS attacked the German submarines in their moorings and then steelworks further in targeting the origin of the submarines themselves.\nIn early 1918 they operated their \"round the clock\" bombing raid, with lighter bombers attacking the town of Trier by day and large HP O/400s attacking by night. The Independent Force, an expanded bombing group, and the first independent strategic bombing force, was created in April 1918. By the end of the war, the force had aircraft that could reach Berlin, but these were never used.\nInterwar period.\nFollowing the war, the concept of strategic bombing developed. Calculations of the number of dead to the weight of bombs would have a profound effect on the attitudes of the British authorities and population in the interwar years. As bombers became larger, it was fully expected that deaths would dramatically increase. The fear of aerial attack on such a scale was one of the fundamental driving forces of the appeasement of Nazi Germany in the 1930s.\nThese early developments of aerial warfare led to two distinct branches in the writings of air warfare theorists: tactical air warfare and strategic air warfare. Tactical air warfare was developed as part of a combined-arms attack which would be developed to a significant degree by Germany, and which contributed much to the success of the Wehrmacht during the first four years (1939\u201342) of World War II. The Luftwaffe became a major element of the German blitzkrieg.\nSome leading theorists of strategic air warfare, namely strategic bombing during this period were the Italian Giulio Douhet, the Trenchard school in Great Britain, and General Billy Mitchell in the United States. These theorists thought that aerial bombardment of the enemy's homeland would be an important part of future wars. Not only would such attacks weaken the enemy by destroying important military infrastructure, they would also break the morale of the civilian population, forcing their government to capitulate. Although area bombing theorists acknowledged that measures could be taken to defend against bombers\u2014using fighter planes and anti-aircraft artillery\u2014the maxim of the times remained \"the bomber will always get through\". These theorists for strategic bombing argued that it would be necessary to develop a fleet of strategic bombers during peacetime, both to deter any potential enemy, and also in the case of a war, to be able to deliver devastating attacks on the enemy industries and cities while suffering from relatively few friendly casualties before victory was achieved.\nIn the period between the two world wars, military thinkers from several nations advocated strategic bombing as the logical and obvious way to employ aircraft. Domestic political considerations saw to it that the British worked harder on the concept than most. The British Royal Flying Corps and Royal Naval Air Service of the Great War had been merged in 1918 to create a separate air force, which spent much of the following two decades fighting for survival in an environment of severe government spending constraints.\nIn Italy, the airpower prophet General Giulio Douhet asserted the basic principle of strategic bombing was the offensive, and there was no defense against carpet bombing and poison gas attacks. The seeds of Douhet's apocalyptic predictions found fertile soil in France, Germany, and the United States, where excerpts from his book \"The Command of the Air\" (1921) were published. These visions of cities laid waste by bombing also gripped the popular imagination and found expression in novels such as Douhet's \"The War of 19--\" (1930) and H. G. Wells's \"The Shape of Things to Come\" (1933) (filmed by Alexander Korda as \"Things to Come\" (1936)).\nDouhet's proposals were hugely influential among air force enthusiasts, arguing as they did that the bombing air arm was the most important, powerful, and invulnerable part of any military. He envisaged future wars as lasting a matter of a few weeks. While each opposing Army and Navy fought an inglorious holding campaign, the respective Air Forces would dismantle their enemies' country, and if one side did not rapidly surrender, both would be so weak after the first few days that the war would effectively cease. Fighter aircraft would be relegated to spotting patrols but would be essentially powerless to resist the mighty bombers. In support of this theory, he argued for targeting of the civilian population as much as any military target, since a nation's morale was as important a resource as its weapons. Paradoxically, he suggested that this would actually reduce total casualties, since \"The time would soon come when to put an end to horror and suffering, the people themselves, driven by the instinct of self-preservation, would rise up and demand an end to the war\u2026\". As a result of Douhet's proposals, air forces allocated greater resources to their bomber squadrons than to their fighters, and the 'dashing young pilots' promoted in the propaganda of the time were invariably bomber pilots.\nRoyal Air Force leaders, in particular Air Chief Marshal Hugh Trenchard, believed the key to retaining their independence from the senior services was to lay stress on what they saw as the unique ability of a modern air force to win wars by unaided strategic bombing. As the speed and altitude of bombers increased in proportion to fighter aircraft, the prevailing strategic understanding became \"the bomber will always get through\". Although anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft had proved effective in the Great War, it was accepted there was little warring nations could do to prevent massive civilian casualties from strategic bombing. High civilian morale and retaliation in kind were seen as the only answers\u2014a later generation would revisit this, as Mutual Assured Destruction.\nDuring the interwar period (1919\u20131939), the use of aerial bombing was developed as part of British foreign policy in its colonies, with Hugh Trenchard as its leading proponent, Sir Charles Portal, Sir Arthur Harris, and Sidney Bufton. The Trenchard School theories were successfully put into action in Mesopotamia (modern-day Iraq) where RAF bombers used high-explosive bombs and strafing runs against Arab forces. The techniques of so-called \"Air Control\" also included target marking and locating, as well as formation flying. Arthur Harris, a young RAF squadron commander (later nicknamed \"Bomber\"), reported after a mission in 1924, \"The Arab and Kurd now know what real bombing means, in casualties and damage. They know that within 45 minutes a full-sized village can be practically wiped out and a third of its inhabitants killed or injured\".\nOn an official level, RAF directives stressed:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In these attacks, endeavour should be made to spare the women and children as far as possible, and for this purpose, a warning should be given, whenever practicable. It would be wrong even at this stage to think that airpower was simply seen as a tool for rapid retribution.\nA statement clearly pointed out that the ability of aircraft to inflict punishment could be open to abuse:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Their power to cover great distances at high speed, their instant readiness for action, their independence (within the detachment radius) of communications, their indifference to obstacles, and the unlikelihood of casualties to air personnel combine to encourage their use offensively more often than the occasion warrants.\nIn British strikes over Yemen in over a six-month period, sixty tons of bombs were dropped in over 1,200 cumulative flying hours. By August 1928, total losses in ground fighting and air attack, on the Yemeni side, were 65 killed or wounded (one RAF pilot was killed and one airman wounded). Between the wars the RAF conducted 26 separate air operations within the Aden Protectorate. The majority were conducted in response to persistent banditry or to restore the Government's authority. Excluding operations against Yemeni forces\u2014which had effectively ceased by 1934\u2014a total of twelve deaths were attributed to air attacks conducted between 1919 and 1939. Bombing as a military strategy proved to be an effective and efficient way for the British to police their Middle East protectorates in the 1920s. Fewer men were required as compared to ground forces.\nPre-war planners, on the whole, vastly overestimated the damage bombers could do, and underestimated the resilience of civilian populations. Jingoistic national pride played a major role: for example, at a time when Germany was still disarmed and France was Britain's only European rival, Trenchard boasted, \"the French in a bombing duel would probably squeal before we did\". At the time, the expectation was any new war would be brief and very brutal. Chamberlain believed the German air force could devastate vulnerable British cities and military bases. This type of expectation would justify the appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s.\nDuring the Spanish Civil War, the bombing of Guernica by German aviators including the Condor Legion, under Nationalist command, resulted in its near destruction. Casualties were estimated to be between 500 and 1500. Though this figure was relatively small, aerial bombers and their weaponry were continually improving\u2014already suggesting the devastation that was to come in the near future. Yet the theory that \"the bomber will always get through\" started to appear doubtful, as stated by the U.S.\u00a0 Attach\u00e9 in 1937, \"The peacetime theory of the complete invulnerability of the modern type of bombardment airplane no longer holds. The increased speeds of both the bombardment and pursuit plane have worked in favor of the pursuit ... The flying fortress died in Spain.\"\nLarge scale bombing of the civilian population, thought to be demoralizing to the enemy, seemed to have the opposite effect. E.\u00a0B.\u00a0Strauss surmised, \"Observers state that one of the most remarkable effects of the bombing of open towns in Government Spain had been the welding together into a formidable fighting force of groups of political factions who were previously at each other's throats...\", a sentiment with which Hitler's Luftwaffe, supporting the Spanish Nationalists, generally agreed.\nWorld War II.\nIn terms of scale, the strategic bombing conducted in World War II was unlike any before. The bombing campaigns then conducted over Europe and Asia could involve aircraft dropping thousands of tons of conventional bombs or, as happened twice in Japan in 1945, devastating much of a city all at once with an atomic bomb.\nArea bombardment came to prominence during World War II, with the use by attacking forces of large numbers of unguided gravity bombs, often mixed with a high proportion of incendiary devices to strike the target region indiscriminately: to kill war workers, to destroy materiel, and to demoralize the enemy. In high-enough concentration, such bombing could start a destructive firestorm. Often, high-explosive delay-action bombs could kill or intimidate people fighting the fires initially caused by the incendiary bombs.\nStrategic bombing campaigns were conducted in Europe and Asia. The Germans and Japanese mostly used smaller twin-engined bombers with a typical payload of less than ; they did not manufacture larger aircraft to any significant extent. By comparison, the British and American militaries (which at first used similarly sized bombers early in the war), soon developed significantly-larger strategic bombers with four engines. The increased payloads of these big airplanes ranged from for the B-17 Flying Fortress on long-range missions, to for the B-24 Liberator, for the Avro Lancaster, and B-29 Superfortress, (also with some specialized Allied aircraft, such as the modified \"Special B\" Avro Lancaster, able to carry a gigantic Grand Slam).\nDuring the first year of the war in Europe, strategic bombing was developed through \"trial-and-error.\" The \"Luftwaffe\" had been attacking both civilian and military targets from the first day of the war, when Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939. A strategic-bombing campaign was launched by the Germans as a precursor to the invasion of the United Kingdom to force the RAF to engage the Luftwaffe and so to be destroyed either on the ground or in the air. That tactic failed, and the RAF began bombing German cities on 11 May 1940. After the Battle of Britain, the Germans launched their night time Blitz hoping to break British morale and to have the British be cowed into making peace.\nAt first the Luftwaffe raids took place in daylight, but changed to night bombing attacks when losses became unsustainable. The RAF, who had preferred precision bombing, also switched to night bombing, also due to excessive losses. Before the Rotterdam Blitz on 14 May 1940 the British restricted themselves to tactical bombing west of the Rhine and naval installations. The day after the Rotterdam Blitz a new directive was issued to the RAF to attack targets in the Ruhr, including oil plants and other civilian industrial targets which aided the German war effort, such as blast furnaces that at night were self-illuminating. After the Butt Report (released in September 1941) proved the inadequacy of RAF Bomber Command training methods and equipment, the RAF adopted an area-attack strategy, by which it hoped to impede Germany's war production, her powers of resistance (by destroying resources and forcing Germany to divert resources from her front lines to defend her air space), and her morale. The RAF dramatically improved its navigation so that on average its bombs hit closer to target. Accuracy never exceeded a radius from point of aim in any case.\nThe United States Army Air Forces adopted a policy of daylight precision bombing for greater accuracy as, for example, during the Schweinfurt raids. That doctrine, based on the erroneous supposition that bombers could adequately defend themselves against air attack, entailed much higher American losses until long-range fighter escorts (e.g. the Mustang) became available. Conditions in the European theatre made it very difficult to achieve the accuracy achieved using the top-secret Norden optical bombsight in the clear skies over the desert bombing ranges of Nevada and California. Raids over Europe commonly took place in conditions of very poor visibility, with targets partly or wholly obscured by thick cloud, smokescreens, or smoke from fires started by previous raids. As a result, bomb loads were regularly dropped \"blind\" using dead-reckoning methods little different from those used by the RAF night bombers. In addition, only the leading bomber in a formation actually utilized the Norden sight, the rest of the formation dropping their bombs only when they saw the lead aircraft's bombload falling away. Since even a very tight bomber formation could cover a vast area, the scatter of bombs was likely to be considerable. Add to these difficulties the disruptive effects of increasingly accurate anti-aircraft fire and head-on attacks by fighter aircraft and the theoretical accuracy of daylight bombing was often hard to achieve. Accuracy, described as \"pinpoint\", never exceeded the best British average of about a radius from point of aim in any case. Postwar German engineers considered the bombing of railways, trains, canals, and roads more harmful to production than attacks on factories themselves, Sir Roy Fedden (in his report on a postwar British scientific intelligence mission) calling it \"fatal\" and saying it reduced aero-engine production by two thirds (from a maximum output of 5,000 to 7,000 a month).\nStrategic bombing was a way of taking the war into Europe while Allied ground forces were unable to do so. Between them, Allied air forces claimed to be able to bomb \"around the clock\". In fact, few targets were ever hit by British and American forces the same day, the strategic isolation of Normandy on D-Day and the bombing of Dresden in February 1945 being exceptions rather than the rule. There were generally no coordinated plans for the around-the-clock bombing of any target.\nIn some cases, single missions have been considered to constitute strategic bombing. The bombing of Peenem\u00fcnde was such an event, as was the bombing of the Ruhr dams. The Peenem\u00fcnde mission delayed Nazi Germany's V-2 program enough that it did not become a major factor in the outcome of the war.\nSoviet Air Forces conducted strategic bombings of Helsinki, the capital of Finland, between 1939 and 1944, with Finland being subjected to a number of bombing campaigns by the USSR in that period. The largest were three raids in February 1944, which have been called \"The Great Raids Against Helsinki\". The Finnish Air Force responded to the air raids with a series of night infiltration bombings of ADD airfields near Leningrad.\nStrategic bombing in Europe never reached the decisive completeness the American campaign against Japan achieved, helped in part by the fragility of Japanese housing, which was particularly vulnerable to firebombing through the use of incendiary devices. The destruction of German infrastructure became apparent, but the Allied campaign against Germany only really succeeded when the Allies began targeting oil refineries and transportation in the last year of the war. At the same time, the strategic bombing of Germany was used as a morale booster for the Allies in the period before the land war resumed in Western Europe in June 1944.\nIn the Asiatic-Pacific Theater, the Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service and the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service frequently used strategic bombing over Singaporean, Burmese, and Chinese cities such as Shanghai, Guangzhou, Nanjing, Chongqing, Singapore, and Rangoon. However, the Japanese military in most places advanced quickly enough that a strategic bombing campaign was unnecessary, and the Japanese aircraft industry was incapable of producing truly strategic bombers in any event. In those places where it was required, the smaller Japanese bombers (in comparison to British and American types) did not carry a bombload sufficient to inflict the sort of damage regularly occurring at that point in the war in Europe, or later in Japan.\nThe development of the B-29 gave the United States a bomber with sufficient range to reach the Japanese home islands from the safety of American bases in the Pacific or western China. The capture of the Japanese island of Iwo Jima further enhanced the capabilities that the Americans possessed in their strategic bombing campaign. High-explosive and incendiary bombs were used against Japan to devastating effect, with greater indiscriminate loss of life in the firebombing of Tokyo on March 9\u201310, 1945 than was caused either by the Dresden mission, or the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima or Nagasaki. Unlike the USAAF's strategic bombing campaign in Europe, with its avowed (if unachievable) objective of precision bombing of strategic targets, the bombing of Japanese cities involved the deliberate targeting of residential zones from the outset. Bomb loads included very high proportions of incendiaries, with the intention of igniting the highly combustible wooden houses common in Japanese cities and thereby generating firestorms.\nThe final development of strategic bombing in World War II was the use of nuclear weapons. On August 6 and 9, 1945, the United States exploded nuclear bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing 105,000 people and inflicting a psychological shock on the Japanese nation. On August 15, Emperor Hirohito announced the surrender of Japan, stating:\nMoreover, the enemy has begun to employ a new and most cruel bomb, the power of which to do damage is indeed incalculable, taking the toll of many innocent lives. Should We continue to fight, it would not only result in an ultimate collapse and obliteration of the Japanese nation but also it would lead to the total extinction of human civilization. Such being the case, how are We to save the millions of Our subjects; or to atone Ourselves before the hallowed spirits of Our Imperial Ancestors? This is the reason why We have ordered the acceptance of the provisions of the Joint Declaration of the Powers.\nCold War.\nNuclear weapons defined strategic bombing during the Cold War. The age of the massive strategic bombing campaign had come to an end. It was replaced by more devastating attacks using improved targeting and weapons technology. Strategic bombing by the Great Powers also became politically indefensible. The political fallout resulting from the destruction being broadcast on the evening news ended more than one strategic bombing campaign.\nKorean War.\nStrategic bombing during the Korean war was a huge part of the aerial warfare for the United States. It was widely used at targeting infrastructure and economic targets forcing the USSR and China to leverage more economically and materially in the supporting North Korean efforts. It was also consistently reliable for the US even amongst Chinese and USSR interference throughout the war.\nWhile nuclear weapons were never used, at the outset of the war the US Strategic Air Command was ready with 9 B-29s from the 9th Bomb Wing acting as an atomic task force which were sent to Guam on standby duty.\nThe United States Air Force (USAF) at first conducted only tactical attacks against strategic targets. Because it was widely considered a limited war, the Truman Administration prohibited the USAF to bomb near the borders of China and the Soviet Union in fear of provoking the countries to enter into the war. Common targets were railroad yards, bridges, and airfields, seeking to disrupt supply lines and ability to produce materials for the war. The first notable strategic bombing was a bombing consisting of nine B-29s which bombed the Rising Sun oil refinery at Wonsan on July 6, 1950, followed by a bombing of a chemical plant at Hungnam. Later that month on July 30 a Chosen nitrogen explosives factory at Hungnam was bombed destroying the largest of the Konan Industrial-Chemical Complex.\nThe Chinese intervention in the war in November 1950 changed the aerial bombing policy dramatically. In response to the Chinese intervention, the USAF carried out an intensive bombing campaign against North Korea to demoralize the North Koreans and inflict as much economic cost to North Korea in order to reduce their ability to wage war. The largest incendiary raid of the war had 70 B-29s drop firebombs on the town of Sinuiju and was a representation for the change in aerial bombing policy. The extensive bombing raids on North Korea continued until the armistice agreement was signed between communist and UN forces on July 27, 1953.\nVietnam War.\nIn the Vietnam War, the strategic bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder could have been more extensive, but fear by the Johnson Administration of the entry of China into the war led to restrictions on the selection of targets, as well as only a gradual escalation of intensity.\nThe aim of the bombing campaign was to demoralize the North Vietnamese, damage their economy, and reduce their capacity to support the war in the hope that they would negotiate for peace, but it failed to have those effects. The Nixon Administration continued this sort of limited strategic bombing for most of the war but pivoted towards the ending of it. Operation Linebacker campaigns were much heavier bombing campaigns taking off many of the restrictions that were placed initially and began flying B-52 bombers. Images such as that of Kim Phuc Phan Thi (although this incident was the result of close air support rather than strategic bombing) disturbed the American public enough to demand a stop to the campaign.\nDue to this, and the ineffectiveness of carpet bombing (partly because of a lack of identifiable targets), new precision weapons were developed. The new weapons allowed more effective and efficient bombing with reduced civilian casualties. High civilian casualties had always been the hallmark of strategic bombing, but later in the Cold War, this began to change.\nLaos was also bombed heavily during the Vietnam War. While originally denied by the US government Laos became the most heavily bombed country per capita as the result of more than 2 million tons of ordinance dropped. Laos contained heavy supply lines for communist troops and the US sought to destroy them safely before they could enter Vietnam and be used against American troops. The first of many targets within the country was the \"Plain of Jars\" which was known as a logistical center for military forces to gather and is the main air base in Urdon. While there were two different aerial operations held within Laos, Operation Steel Tiger is the one that focused on the Strategic Bombing of supporting civilian infrastructure that could aid in the up-and-coming communist regime and was assisting in getting rebels to aid the North Vietnamese military.\nStrategic bombing was entering a new phase of high-intensity attacks, specifically targeting factories that take years to build and enormous investment capital. These new high-intensity and focused attacks made extra use of newer and modern fighter aircraft such as the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II enabling less reliance on heavier, more vulnerable bombers.\nIran-Iraq War.\nAfter the fall of 1981, in the context of the Iranian ground counter-offensives, the USSR lifted their arms embargo and massively rearmed Iraq, including with 40 MiG-25s, which enabled the Iraqi air force to challenge Iran's F-14s in their air space. Iraq used Tu-22 Blinder and Tu-16 Badger strategic bombers to carry out long-range high-speed raids on Iranian cities, including Tehran. Fighter-bombers such as the MiG-25 Foxbat and Su-22 Fitter were used against smaller or shorter range targets, as well as escorting the strategic bombers. Civilian and industrial targets were hit by the raids, and each successful raid inflicted economic damage from regular strategic bombing. Iran also launched several retaliatory air raids on Iraq, while primarily shelling border cities such as Basra. Iran also bought some Scud missiles from Libya and launched them against Baghdad. These too inflicted damage upon Iraq.\nPost\u2013Cold War.\nStrategic bombing in the post\u2013Cold War era is defined by American advances in and the use of smart munitions. The developments in guided munitions meant that the Coalition forces in the First Gulf War were able to use them, although the majority\u201493%\u2014of bombs dropped in that conflict were still conventional, unguided bombs. More frequently in the Kosovo War, and the 2003 invasion of Iraq, strategic bombing campaigns were notable for the heavy use of precision weaponry by those countries that possessed them. Although bombing campaigns were still strategic in their aims, the widespread area bombing tactics of World War II had mostly disappeared. This led to significantly fewer civilian casualties associated with previous bombing campaigns, though it has not brought about a complete end to civilian deaths or collateral property damage.\nAdditionally, strategic bombing via smart munitions is now possible through the use of aircraft that have been considered traditionally tactical in nature such as the F-16 Fighting Falcon or F-15E Strike Eagle, which had been used during Operation Desert Storm, Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom to destroy targets that would have required large formations of strategic bombers during World War II. \nDuring the Kosovo campaign NATO forces bombed targets far from Kosovo like bridges in Novi Sad, power plants around Belgrade and flea market in Ni\u0161. During the 2008 South Ossetia war Russian aircraft attacked the shipbuilding center of Poti.\nRussian invasion of Ukraine.\nAs part of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, missile and drone waves hit Ukraine infrastructure periodically, causing damage, deaths, injuries, and deeply affecting energy distribution across Ukraine and nearby countries. By late November 2022, nearly half of the country's energy systems had been destroyed, leaving millions of Ukrainians without power; energy workers rushed to restore services. The methodical attacks on power stations and electrical nodes imposed large economic and practical costs on Ukraine, with a severe impact for millions of civilians over the winter. It was assumed that Russia's strategic intention was to break the will of the Ukrainian population to continue the war.\nAerial bombardment and international law.\nAir warfare must comply with laws and customs of war, including international humanitarian law by protecting the victims of the conflict and refraining from attacks on protected persons.\nThese restraints on aerial warfare are covered by the general laws of war, because unlike the war on land and at sea\u2014which is specifically covered by rules such as the 1907 Hague Convention and Protocol I additional to the Geneva Conventions, which contain pertinent restrictions, prohibitions and guidelines\u2014there are no treaties specific to aerial warfare.\nTo be legal, aerial operations must comply with the principles of humanitarian law: \"military necessity\", \"distinction\", and \"proportionality\": An attack or action must be intended to help in the defeat of the enemy; it must be an attack on a legitimate military objective, and the harm caused to protected civilians or civilian property must be proportional and not excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53376", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53376", "title": "Star Trek/Vulcan", "text": ""}
{"id": "53377", "revid": "43674674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53377", "title": "Vulcan (Star Trek)", "text": "Fictional extraterrestrial species in Star Trek\nVulcans, sometimes referred to as Vulcanians, are a fictional extraterrestrial humanoid species in the \"Star Trek\" media franchise. They are noted for their strict adherence to logic and reason and suppression of emotion. Known for their pronounced eyebrows and pointed ears, they originate from the fictional planet Vulcan. In the \"Star Trek\" universe, they were the first extraterrestrial species to make contact with humans.\nThe most notable Vulcan character is Spock, first played by actor Leonard Nimoy in \"\" (1966\u20131969). Some aspects of this fictional alien race that have entered popular culture are their pointy ears, the Vulcan salute, the Vulcan nerve pinch, and their adherence to logical thinking and disdain for emotion. \nA 2019 journal article, \"Science Fiction and the Abolition of Man\" argued that many science fiction characters such as Vulcans of \"Star Trek\" are based on the ideas of \"The Abolition of Man\" by C. S. Lewis. \nDevelopment.\nThe Vulcan Mister Spock first appeared in the original 1965 \"Star Trek\" pilot, \"\", shown to studio executives. Show creator Gene Roddenberry revealed in 1964 that he wanted an alien as part of the ship's crew, but knew that budget restraints would limit make-up choices. He chose actor Leonard Nimoy because of his \"high Slavic cheekbones and interesting face\" and \"with those cheekbones some sort of pointed ear might go well.\" Nimoy later commented that Roddenberry felt the presence of an alien would \"establish that we were in the 23rd century and that interplanetary travel was an established fact.\"\nVulcan salute.\nThe Vulcan salutation is that of the Jewish priestly blessing: a hand gesture consisting of a raised hand with the palm forward and the thumb extended, while the fingers are parted between the middle and ring finger. Typically, the phrase \"live long and prosper\" is uttered when making the salute, adapting the priestly blessing \"may the Lord bless you and keep you.\" An appropriate reply would be to return the gesture and utter either \"live long and prosper\", or \"peace and long life\".\nBiology.\nPhysical characteristics.\nVulcans are depicted as similar in appearance to humans, as budget constraints in \"The Original Series\" did not allow for elaborate make-up. All Vulcans have arched and upswept eyebrows and pointy ears. White actors portraying Vulcans are given a yellowish hue to their skin. A Vulcan's on-screen blood is green due to copper-based hemocyanin. Vulcans are said to possess an inner eyelid, or nictitating membrane, which protects their vision from bright light, an evolutionary trait developed due to the fictional planet Vulcan being so close to its sun. In addition, their heart is located on the right side of the torso, between the ribs and pelvis; as Dr. McCoy once says about Spock after the Vulcan has been shot through the chest: \"Lucky his heart's where his liver should be, or he'd be dead now.\"\nDiet.\nVulcans are vegetarians by choice and were omnivores in ages past. It is a Vulcan custom for guests in the home to prepare meals for their hosts.\nVulcans are said to not drink alcohol, though they are often depicted as doing so.\nIn an episode of \", Quark alludes to Vulcans becoming inebriated by ingesting chocolate. This is confirmed in the novelisation of . Kirk buys some candy to get change for the bus. When he gives one to Spock, Spock asks if it contains sucrose. When Kirk asks why, Spock tells him that sucrose has the same effect on Vulcans as alcohol has on humans.\nThe first draft of an episode of \" mentions that Vulcan coffee is poisonous to humans.\nMating drive.\nEvery seven years, Vulcan males and females experience an overpowering hormone imbalance known as pon farr. Once triggered, a Vulcan must have sexual intercourse with someone or the chemical imbalance may cause insanity, loss of self-control, and death.\nDespite popular opinion, \"TOS\" writer and story editor, D. C. Fontana, insists that pon farr is not the only time that Vulcans feel sexual desire or engage in sexual activity:\nVulcans mate normally any time they want to. However, every seven years you do the ritual, the ceremony, the whole thing. The biological urge. You must, but any other time is any other emotion\u2014humanoid emotion\u2014when you're in love. When you want to, you know when the urge is there, you do it. This every-seven-years business was taken too literally by too many people who don't stop and understand. We didn't mean it only every seven years. I mean, every seven years would be a little bad, and it would not explain the Vulcans of many different ages that are not seven years apart.\nIf a mate is not available, there are other ways to relieve the effects of the pon farr, including meditation, violence, \"shock\", and simulation.\nOther characteristics.\nVulcans are typically depicted as stronger, faster, and longer-lived than humans. This is hypothesized to be due to the increased gravity on Vulcan (1.4 \"g\"). However, Vulcans are less cold-tolerant than humans. There are instances of them living over 220 years. Having evolved on a fictional desert planet, Vulcans can survive without water for longer periods than humans. Vulcans can also go without sleep for as long as two weeks.\nPsychology.\nEmotion.\nVulcans are known as logical beings who have removed emotions from their daily lives. The Vulcan character, Spock, struggles with this throughout the original series as he is half-human. T'Pol states that paranoia and homicidal rage were common on Vulcan before the adoption of Surak's code of emotional control.\nSurak's ideas were that all Vulcans should suppress emotions, for the safety of the species. Before him, Vulcans were dangerously raging, emotional, war-like and religiously fanatical, to the point that it could have threatened the continuation of their society and species. Then, around the 4th century BC, he created a system revolving around these ideas, intended to create a peaceful society. Some Vulcans disagreed, causing a war to break out. The two sides separated, causing the emotional ones to become Romulans and the logical ones to become what is referred to as modern-day Vulcans. Vulcans still possess and experience emotions, but make great efforts to keep them from being expressed or controlling their behavior. They occasionally have mental breakdowns. Only those who follow the discipline of \"kolinahr\" have completely purged all emotions from their minds. Spock, in \"\", attempts to achieve \"kolinahr\", but ultimately fails to do so.\nOther Vulcans who did not believe in war but still wanted to embrace emotions made different choices. A group of renegade Vulcans who believed in this was encountered in the ' episode \"\", while Spock's half-brother Sybok, seen in the film ', was also fully emotional. An episode of \"Enterprise\" titled \"E\u00b2\" featured an elderly T'Pol in an alternative timeline who had embraced emotion and allowed her half-human son, Lorian, to do likewise.\nIn the 1st pilot episode, \"\", Spock showed much more emotion. For the second pilot, \"Where No Man Has Gone Before\", Number One\u00a0\u2013 Spock's superior officer, who showed little emotion\u00a0\u2013 was removed, and it was decided that Spock would take on those traits.\nVulcan emotions are seemingly more intense than those of humans. In the TNG episode \"\", Ambassador Sarek warns Captain Picard that \"Vulcan emotions are extremely intense; we have learned to suppress them\", and that Picard would be overwhelmed by Sarek's unrestrained emotions due to the effects of Bendii syndrome while the two are linked during a Vulcan mind-meld. Picard does, in fact, have tremendous difficulty controlling himself while experiencing Sarek's emotions during the meld, including the ambassador's suppressed loves and hidden regrets.\nTelepathy.\nVulcans are telepaths. Beginning in the original series, the character Spock was able to \"mind meld\" (see below) by touching another being and to share thoughts. Vulcans have also displayed telepathy at great distance and through walls.\nMind melds.\nA mind meld is a technique for sharing thoughts, experiences, memories, and knowledge with another individual, essentially a limited form of telepathy. It usually requires physical contact with a subject, though instances of mind melds without contact have been seen. When first depicted in the \"TOS\" episode \"Dagger of the Mind\", the procedure was said to require several moments of intense concentration and preparation. However, subsequent episodes show contact between minds occurring almost immediately. Although most often seen done with humanoids, mind melds can be performed with members of other species. Spock even once successfully mind melded with a machine and was able to establish telepathic contact with the space probe V'ger, with a silicon-based lifeform, the Horta, and, in another instance, with a humpback whale.\nMind melds can be used both to erase and restore memories; Spock performs each of these on Captain Kirk during \"TOS\"'s third season. A mind meld was even used to rejoin Spock's \"katra\" (see below) with his physical body in \"\". Mind melds can also allow more than one mind to experience memories and sensations, and sometimes even interact with the memories. Some species are able to resist mind melds.\nThe quad-lobed brain structure of Ferengi make them unable to be telepathically read by other species, and with sufficient training and mental discipline, high-level Cardassian military personnel and/or agents of the Obsidian Order are able to resist mind melds used to extract information. For example, when Gul Dukat was captured by the Maquis, he successfully resisted a prolonged mind meld attempt from a female Vulcan Maquis member, much to the latter's frustration.\nKatra.\nVulcans are able to implant their \"katra\" into another person via a mind meld just before death. Sarek explained to Kirk that Spock's katra was \"his essence, everything that was not of the body, his katra, his living spirit...everything that he was, everything that he knew\". He further explained that this transference was \"the Vulcan way, when the body's end is near.\" Dr Julian Bashir in the ' episode \"\" referred to this phenomenon as \"synaptic pattern displacement\". The ' Season 4 trilogy of episodes (\", \", and \"Kir'Shara\") reveal some of the history of mind-melding and the journey of the katra of Surak to modern times. \nKatra can also be used to transfer a Vulcan's healing ability to another to aid in regeneration for serious injury. Sarek transferred some of his katra to Michael Burnham ( Season 1, Episode 6, \"Lethe\") in order to save her life as a child, which connected Michael to Sarek, and she refers to it as a \"soul graft\".\nKatras can be returned to the body. Such was the case with Spock, who, near the end of ', implanted his katra into the mind of Dr. McCoy before sacrificing his life. In ', a mind meld ritual, the \"fal tor pan\" (\"re-fusion\"), removed the katra from McCoy and implanted it into Spock's regenerated body. The ritual was successful, though it carried risks for both.\nCulture.\nLanguage.\nVulcans have their own language in the \"Star Trek\" universe. Several words are heard throughout the various television series starting with the \"Star Trek: The Original Series\" episode \"Amok Time\". Words and dialogue are heard in the feature films ', ', ' and '.\nLinguist Marc Okrand is credited for creating the Vulcan spoken language for \"Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan\". As in most of the films, the actors filmed their lines in English which was later dubbed with the Vulcan translation.\nNames.\nThe treatment of Vulcan names has been erratic throughout \"Star Trek\"'s production history. Early on, female Vulcans were typically given names beginning with \"T\" followed by an apostrophe then a \"p\". The earliest reference to Vulcan names following a set pattern dates back to a May 3, 1966 memo from \"TOS\" producer Robert H. Justman to Gene Roddenberry (later reprinted in the book \"The Making of Star Trek\") in which Justman recommended that all Vulcan names begin with \"SP\" and end with \"K\", and have exactly five letters. (It is clear from the context of the book, however, that the memo was intended as a joke, as the series of memos ends up discussing the pronunciation of such names as \"Spook\", \"Spilk\" and \"Spork\".)\nOnly non-canonical sources have provided any Vulcans with family names, which are usually spoken of as defying attempts at both human pronunciation, especially with English-language phonemes, and human typesetting, especially with the characters of the modern Latin alphabet used for the English language. Hence, no canonical source has given any family names to any Vulcan characters, and, indeed, every one of the personal names previously mentioned is officially described as being only Latin-alphabetical and English-phonetic approximations of the real ones. In the \"TOS\" episode \"\", Spock is asked if he has another name, to which he replies \"You couldn't pronounce it.\"\nMarriage.\nVulcans practice arranged marriage, in which a male and a female are bonded as children, with consummation at a later date. Spock explains that this childhood pairing has no one-for-one human analogue, as it is considered less than a full \"marriage\", but more than simply a \"betrothal\". This is why Spock first described T'Pring as his \"wife\", before later explaining that this was an incorrect approximation. Following adult union, it is customary for the couple to remain on Vulcan for at least one Vulcan year before conducting off-world travel, though it is possible to defer this requirement until a later date, upon negotiation with the male's family. The state of pon farr is not required for marriage to occur.\nA Vulcan female can challenge the proposed bonding by calling for \"koon-ut-kal-if-fee\", meaning \"marriage or challenge\", in which a challenger for marriage engages the bonded male in a fight to the death. Alternatively, the bonded male has the option of rejecting his intended bride and choosing another. It is acceptable for a male to \"release\" his mate from marriage (effectively the same as a divorce). It is not established whether females have the same option, and T'Pring stated in \"Amok Time\" that a koon-ut-kal-if-fee challenge was the only way she could legally divorce Spock.\nWhile most Vulcan marriages are arranged in childhood, adult Vulcans who have no mates may also declare the \"koon-ut-so-lik\", the ritual Vulcan marriage proposal. As with arranged marriages, the Vulcan being proposed to may accept or challenge the union.\nFamily.\nIt is customary for Vulcan children to undertake an initiation ordeal known as the \"Kahs-wan\" (sometimes spelled Kaswahn), in which they are left to fend for themselves in the desert for a specific period of time. Not all children survive this rite of passage. T'Pol underwent the ritual, while Tuvok experienced a variation known as the \"tal'oth\". The Kahs-wan was first introduced in the \"Star Trek: The Animated Series\" episode \", in which Spock's experience as a child was detailed.\nContrary to the Vulcan image of expressing no emotion, family bonds can be strong and affectionate just as they are for humans. Tuvok expressed his love for his wife on a few occasions (without actually using the term), Sarek openly expressed affection for both his human wives, and a clear bond of love existed between T'Pol and her mother, T'Les. The bond between Spock and his adopted sister, Michael Burnham, is a central theme of the \" second season.\nFighting and self-defense.\nIn the \"TOS\" episode \"The Savage Curtain\", Surak explains to Kirk Vulcan's history of violence and the turn to peace that saved their civilization. He tells Kirk that he will not fight. Spock says that he has fought, and will fight again, but that he, too, is a \"Vulcan, bred to peace.\"\nVulcan nerve pinch.\nVulcans are capable of a technique known as the \"Vulcan nerve pinch\" or \"neck pinch\", which targets a location on the neck between the head and the shoulder that renders the victim unconscious. The pinch was first seen in the \"TOS\" episode \"The Naked Time\". The mechanics of the pinch have never been explained. While practiced mainly by Vulcans, it is apparently not exclusive to their race. Jonathan Archer and Jean-Luc Picard both use the technique after becoming involved in Vulcan telepathic rituals (Archer holding the katra of Surak, Picard having undergone a mind-meld with Sarek). Seven of Nine is depicted as capable of using this ability in the episode of \"Voyager\" \"\". The android Data also displayed this ability in the \"TNG\" episode \",\" which Spock described as \"not bad.\" In \"\", Michael Burnham does the nerve pinch on Captain Philippa Georgiou and commits mutiny.\nThe neck pinch itself (referred to in scripts as \"FSNP\", or \"Famous Spock Neck Pinch\") was created by Leonard Nimoy, who objected to a scene in \"\", in which a transporter malfunction had divided Kirk between his good and evil selves, that required Spock to render the \"evil\" Kirk unconscious and subduing him by hitting him over the head with the butt of a phaser. Nimoy was convinced that such overt violence, in addition to being too similar to that found in many crime dramas of the time, was uncharacteristic of the strictly-logical Spock, and suggested the neck pinch as a less-emotional alternative.\nIDIC.\nIn \"Star Trek\", the IDIC (Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations) has become a symbol of Vulcan equality philosophy. It is symbolized by the \"Kol-Ut-Shan\", a pendant of yellow and white gold with a circle and triangle resting upon each other, and adorned with a white jewel in the center.\nThe Vulcan IDIC pendant was designed by Gene Roddenberry as a marketing premium to be sold through mail order to \"Star Trek\" fans. As early as the end of the first season, fans of the show had begun writing to the studio asking for copies of the scripts, film clip frames, etc., and these were soon sold through Roddenberry's mail order company, Lincoln Enterprises. As evidenced in some of his letters and memos, Roddenberry was fond of circle-and-triangle designs and had wanted to use them as early as the first season's \"The Return of the Archons\". As reported by \"Inside Star Trek\" editor Ruth Berman, \"ardent rock hound and amateur lapidary\" Roddenberry came up with the Vulcan philosophy after he presented Leonard Nimoy with a unique hand-crafted piece of jewelry, a pendant of a polished yellow gold circle and a florentined white gold triangle with a stone of brilliant white fabulite\u2014an artificial gem \"developed by the laser industry and used in space mechanisms for its optical qualities\", and thus well-suited as a gift for an actor in a science fiction show. Readers were encouraged to submit their interest in such a product to Lincoln Enterprises mail order firm. It was noted that less expensive materials would keep costs down.\nAccording to William Shatner in \"Star Trek Memories\", IDIC was only worked into the episode \"Is There in Truth No Beauty?\" as an afterthought. The actors all knew it was a mere advertising toy. Reportedly, Leonard Nimoy was asked to wear it and refused, so it was passed on to Shatner; when he also refused, Nimoy reluctantly agreed to wear it. At the last minute, Roddenberry sent down several pages of new script for the dinner scene, in which Spock was to give a long-winded explanation of the philosophy. The actors refused to film it until Roddenberry cut it down.\nIn an issue of \"The Humanist\", Majel Barrett claimed that the philosophy of \"Infinite Diversity in Infinite Combinations\" was based on the teachings of Rabbi Maimonides.\nAlthough its origins are rooted in marketing and sales, the IDIC became a theme writers and set designers have used in most of the \"Star Trek\" franchise. Spock wore the symbol during important gatherings and ceremonies as part of his dress uniform. After appearing for the first time in the \"TOS\" episode, \"Is There in Truth No Beauty?\", it appeared in Spock's quarters in \"Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan\", ', and '. In the series \"\", T'Pol is given an IDIC pendant from her mother T'Les, she holds an IDIC pendant in \"Terra Prime\" while she is in mourning for her dying child, and in the episode \"The Andorian Incident\" the IDIC symbol appears on small playing pieces that are being used to construct a map of the P'Jem catacombs. In the \"DS9\" episode \"The Jem'Hadar\", Quark mentions selling Vulcan IDIC pins, and in the \"DS9\" episode \"Take Me Out to the Holosuite\", Captain Solok and his Vulcan team, the Logicians, wear ball caps featuring the IDIC symbol.\nHomeworld.\nThe fictional Vulcan homeworld, also named \"Vulcan,\" was visited several times in the \"Star Trek\" series and feature films. The inhabitants are known as \"Vulcans\" or \"Vulcanians\". First seen in the \"TOS\" episode \"Amok Time\", Vulcan, a Class M planet, is an arid world with a thinner atmosphere than Earth. Upon beaming down, McCoy states \"'Hot as Vulcan.' Now I understand what that phrase means.\" In the \"TOS\" episode \"The Man Trap\", while Uhura is attempting to make conversation with Spock, he informs her that Vulcan has no moon.\nAccording to Star Trek canon, the planet orbits 40 Eridani A. The authorized \"Star Trek\" book \"Star Trek: Star Charts\" and Roddenberry himself give this location. In addition, Commander Tucker's statement in the ' episode \"\" that Vulcan is \"a little over\" 16 light years from Earth supports this location, as 40 Eridani A is 16.39 light-years from our own Solar System. The planet's location is confirmed by a map shown in the ' episode \"Magic to Make the Sanest Man Go Mad\".\nIn several non-canon works, Vulcan is also claimed to be located in the triple star system 40 Eridani, less than 17 light-years from Earth.\nThe ' episode \"Unification III\" reveals that after the Vulcans reunified with their ancient cousins, the Romulans, the Vulcan homeworld was renamed Ni'Var. Ni'Var had seceded from the Federation (due to the apocalyptic event known as The Burn); in the later episode \"All Is Possible\", Ni'Var rejoins the Federation.\nIn the 2009 film \"Star Trek\", an alternate timeline is created in which Vulcan is destroyed by Nero, a Romulan renegade. By the time of \"Star Trek Into Darkness\" a Vulcan colony named \"New Vulcan\" had been established.\nHistory.\nVulcans once practiced a form of polytheism; this can be seen in gods of war, peace, and death depicted on the Stone of Gol relic in the \"TNG\" episode \"\". The DVD commentary for \"Amok Time\" says that \"TOS\" writer D. C. Fontana named the Vulcan god of death \"Shariel\", a bust of whom is seen in Spock's quarters.\nVulcan civilization is ancient. In \"Amok Time\", Spock says that the place of \"Koon-ut-kal-if-fee\" has been held by his family for 2,000 years. In the \"TOS\" episode \"The Savage Curtain\", the image of Surak speaks of a time when Vulcan war nearly destroyed them, before logic was embraced as a way of life.\nIn 1957, the launch of \"Sputnik I\", Earth's first artificial satellite, was observed by a Vulcan vessel that subsequently crashed on the planet, marooning several crew members for a number of months in , Pennsylvania; the humans were unaware of the alien nature of their guests.\nOn April 5, 2063, Vulcans and humans made official first contact near the town of Bozeman, Montana, following the successful test of Earth scientist Zefram Cochrane's first warp-capable starship.\nIn 2097, the Vulcans annexed the Andorian planetoid Weytahn and renamed it Pan Mokar.\nIn 2105, the Vulcans and the Andorians agreed to a compromise over Weytahn/Pan Mokar. Still, tensions continued due to the threat of mutual annihilation.\nBy the 22nd century, the \"Vulcan High Command\" is a form of military government that controls both the Vulcan space fleet and most of the planet itself. Most Vulcans, including T'Pol, from \"Star Trek: Enterprise\" obey the High Command. It is dissolved in the early fourth season of \"Star Trek: Enterprise\".\nIn 2151, Sub-Commander T'Pol joined the crew of the Earth Starfleet vessel \"Enterprise\" (NX-01), within a couple of weeks setting a Vulcan endurance record for serving aboard a human vessel. In 2154, T'Pol became a commissioned officer with Starfleet.\nIn the time of \"Star Trek: Enterprise\", Vulcans are seen to be arrogant and cold in their behavior towards humans. Soval, Vulcan's ambassador to Earth, appeared particularly distrustful of humans, and was often at odds with Archer and his crew. Soval later justified this behavior in the fourth season episode \"\":\n'We don't know what to do about humans. Of all the species we've made contact with, yours is the only one we can't define. You have the arrogance of Andorians, the stubborn pride of Tellarites. One moment you're as driven by your emotions as Klingons, and the next, you confound us by suddenly embracing logic\"\nSoval also explained that Earth recovered from World War III far more quickly than Vulcan did from its equivalent. (In \"\" and its sequel episodes, it is said that Vulcans took almost a thousand years to fully rebuild their society after their last catastrophic war.) This alarmed many Vulcans, who were confused as to how to deal with a rapidly growing and emotional society such as Earth's.\nThroughout the period of \"Star Trek: Enterprise\", the High Command's actions were the themes of several episodes. Vulcan starships were sent to spy on the \"Enterprise\" and report on the ship's activities. They appeared to participate in open acts of persecution towards other Vulcans, such as isolating and quarantining victims of Pa'nar Syndrome rather than treating them; prejudicial acts against any Vulcan proven to have committed a mind meld; and hunting down and capturing, sometimes killing, members of the underground dissident group, the Syrranites.\nIn 2154, V'Las, the head of the High Command and undercover agent for the Romulans, bombed the United Earth embassy on Vulcan in an attempt to frame and eliminate all Syrranites while simultaneously attempting an invasion of Andoria. He was foiled by the crew of the \"Enterprise\". During these events, the Kir'Shara, a device containing the original writings of Surak, was discovered by Jonathan Archer. This led to the prompt dissolution of the High Command and a reevaluation of Vulcan traditional values. It also resulted in Vulcan agreeing to stop \"looking over Earth's shoulder\" in space exploration matters.\nIt was revealed to viewers that the High Command's illogical and often emotionally based actions were, in reality, the result of covert Romulan influence. The Romulans had secretly made contact with V'Las and attempted to reunify their long-lost peoples. After the invasion of Andoria was foiled, the High Command was disbanded and V'Las was dismissed from his post. Subsequently, the altered political climate on Vulcan caused the undercover Romulan operative Talok to leave Vulcan, apparently ending the infiltration.\nAfter the overthrow of the corrupt Vulcan High Command and the death of Admiral Maxwell Forrest, who sacrificed his life to save Soval from a terrorist attack, the attitudes of Soval, and Vulcan society in general, became more cordial and accepting towards humanity.\nOn August 12, 2161, Vulcan became one of the founding members of the United Federation of Planets.\nBy the 32nd century, Ambassador Spock's dream of Vulcan/Romulan reunification has been achieved. Following the destruction of Romulus, the surviving Romulans have returned to their ancestral homeworld, now called Ni'Var.\n\"Star Trek\" (2009) alternate timeline.\nIn the alternate timeline of the 2009 film, the planet Vulcan is destroyed in 2258 by the Romulan known as Nero, who had time-traveled from the future. Using his space mining vessel, \"Narada\", Nero created a singularity in Vulcan's planetary core as part of his quest to avenge the destruction of Romulus, which Spock failed to save. The resulting implosion destroyed Vulcan, killing most of its six billion inhabitants. Only around 10,000 managed to escape. At the end of the film, Spock Prime tells the younger Spock a suitable planet has been located to establish a colony for the surviving Vulcans; this world is named \"New Vulcan\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53378", "revid": "22090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53378", "title": "Eridani", "text": ""}
{"id": "53379", "revid": "488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53379", "title": "Dutch politics", "text": ""}
{"id": "53381", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53381", "title": "Periods of architecture", "text": ""}
{"id": "53382", "revid": "343456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53382", "title": "Camillo Golgi", "text": "Italian biologist and pathologist (1843\u20131926)\nCamillo Golgi (; 7 July 1843\u00a0\u2013 21 January 1926) was an Italian biologist and pathologist who was awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his works on the central nervous system. He studied medicine at the University of Pavia (where he later spent most of his professional career) between 1860 and 1868 under the tutelage of Cesare Lombroso. Inspired by pathologist Giulio Bizzozero, he pursued research in the nervous system. His discovery of a staining technique called black reaction (sometimes called Golgi's method or Golgi's staining in his honour) in 1873 was a major breakthrough in neuroscience. Several structures and phenomena in anatomy and physiology are named for him, including the Golgi apparatus, the Golgi tendon organ and the Golgi tendon reflex.\nGolgi and the Spanish biologist Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal were jointly awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 \"in recognition of their work on the structure of the nervous system\".\nBiography.\nCamillo Golgi was born on 7 July 1843 in the village of Corteno near Brescia, in the province of Brescia (Lombardy), at the time Kingdom of Lombardy\u2013Venetia, today Italy. The village is now named Corteno Golgi in his honour. His father Alessandro Golgi was a physician and district medical officer, originally from Pavia. In 1860, he entered the University of Pavia to study medicine, and earned his medical degree in 1865. He did an internship at the San Matteo Hospital (now IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo Foundation). During his internship he briefly worked as a civil physician in the Italian Army, and as assistant surgeon at the Novara Hospital (now Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Maggiore della Carit\u00e0 di Novara). At the same time he was also involved in the medical team for investigating cholera epidemic in villages around Pavia.\nIn 1867, he resumed his academic study under the supervision of Cesare Lombroso. Lombroso was a renowned scientist in medical psychology such as genius, madness and criminality. Inspired by Lombroso, Golgi wrote a thesis on the etiology of mental disorders, from which he obtained his M.D. in 1868. He became more interested in experimental medicine, and started attending the Institute of General Pathology headed by Giulio Bizzozero. Three years his junior, Bizzozero was an eloquent teacher and experimenter, who specialised in histology of the nervous system and the properties of bone marrow. The most important research publications of Golgi were directly or indirectly influenced by Bizzozero. The two became so close that they lived in the same building; and Golgi later married Bizzozero's niece, Lina Aletti. By 1872, Golgi was an established clinician and histopathologist. He, however, had no opportunity as a tenured professor in Pavia to pursue teaching and research in neurology.\nFinancial pressure prompted him to join the Hospital of the Chronically Ill (Pio Luogo degli Incurabili) in Abbiategrasso, near Milan, as Chief Medical Officer in 1872. To continue research, he set up a simple laboratory on his own in a refurbished hospital kitchen, and it was there that he started making his most notable discoveries. His major achievement was the development of staining technique for nerve tissue called the black reaction (later the Golgi's method). He published his major works between 1875 and 1885 in the journal \"Rivista sperimentale di Freniatria e di medicina legale\". In 1875, he joined the faculty of histology at the University of Pavia. In 1879, he was appointed Chair of Anatomy at the University of Siena. But the next year, he returned to the University of Pavia as full Professor of histology. From 1879 he also became Professor of General Pathology as well as Honorary Chief (\"Primario ad honorarem\") at the San Matteo Hospital. He served as Rector of the University of Pavia twice, first between 1893 and 1896, and second between 1901 and 1909. During the First World War (1914\u20131917), he directed the military hospital Collegio Borrmeo at Pavia. He retired in 1918 and continued to research in his private laboratory till 1923. He died on 21 January 1926.\nPersonal life.\nGolgi and his wife Lina Aletti had no children, and they adopted Golgi's niece Carolina.\nGolgi was irreligious in his later life and became an agnostic atheist. One of his former students attempted an unsuccessful deathbed conversion on him.\nContributions.\nBlack reaction or Golgi's staining.\nThe central nervous system was difficult to study during Golgi's time because the cells were hard to identify. The available tissue staining techniques were useless for studying nervous tissue. While working as chief medical officer at the Hospital of the Chronically Ill, he experimented with metal impregnation of nervous tissue, using mainly silver (silver staining). In early 1873, he discovered a method of staining nervous tissue that would stain a limited number of cells at random in their entirety. He first treated the tissue with potassium dichromate to harden it, and then with silver nitrate. Under the microscope, the outline of the neuron became distinct from the surrounding tissue and cells. The silver chromate precipitate, as a reaction product, selectively stains only some cellular components randomly, sparing other cell parts. The silver chromate particles create a stark black deposit on the soma (nerve cell body) as well as on the axon and all dendrites, providing an exceedingly clear and well-contrasted picture of neuron against a yellow background. This makes it easier to trace the structure of the nerve cells in the brain for the first time. Since cells are selective stained in black, he called the process \"la reazione nera\" (\"the black reaction\"), but today it is called Golgi's method or the Golgi stain. On 16 February 1873, he wrote to his friend Niccol\u00f2 Manfredi:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am delighted that I have found a new reaction to demonstrate, even to the blind, the structure of the interstitial stroma of the cerebral cortex.\nHis discovery was published in the \"Gazzeta Medica Italiani\" on 2 August 1873.\nNervous system.\nIn 1871, a German anatomist Joseph von Gerlach postulated that the brain is a complex \"protoplasmic network\", in the form of a continuous network called the reticulum. Using his black reaction, Golgi could trace various regions of the cerebro-spinal axis, clearly distinguishing the different nervous projections, namely axon from the dendrites. He drew up a new classification of cells on the basis of the structure of their nervous prolongation. He described an extremely dense and intricate network, composed of a web of intertwined branches of axons coming from different cell layers (\"diffuse nervous network\"). This network structure, which emerges from the axons, is essentially different from that hypothesized by Gerlach. It was the main organ of the central nervous system according to Golgi. Thus, Golgi presented the reticular theory which states that the brain is a single network of nerve fibres, and not of discrete cells. Although Golgi's earlier works between 1873 and 1885 clearly depicted the axonal connections of cerebellar cortex and olfactory bulb as independent of one another, his later works including the Nobel Lecture showed the entire granular layer of the cerebellar cortex occupied by a network of branching and anastomosing nerve processes. This was due to his strong conviction in the reticular theory. Golgi's theory was challenged by Ram\u00f3n y Cajal, who used the same technique developed by Golgi. According to Ram\u00f3n y Cajal's neurone theory, the nervous system is but a collection of individual cells, the neurones, which are interconnected to form a network.\nIn addition to this, Golgi was the first to give clear descriptions of the structure of the cerebellum, hippocampus, spinal cord, olfactory lobe, as well as striatal and cortical lesions in a case of chorea. In 1878, he also discovered a receptor organ that senses changes in muscle tension, and is now known as Golgi tendon organ or Golgi receptor; and Golgi-Mazzoni corpuscles (pressure transductors). He further developed a stain specific for myelin (a specialised membrane which wraps around the axon) using potassium dichromate and mercuric chloride. Using this he discovered the myelin annular apparatus, often called the horny funnel of Golgi-Rezzonico.\nKidney.\nGolgi studied kidney function during 1882 to 1889. In 1882, he published his observations on the mechanism of renal hypertrophy, which he understood to be due to renal cell proliferation. In 1884, he described tubular cell mitoses in the kidney of a person suffering from tubulointerstitial nephritis, and he noted that the process was an essential part of repairing the kidney tissue. He was the first to dissect out intact nephrons, and show that the distal tubulus (loop of Henle) of the nephron returns to its originating glomerulus, a finding that he published in 1889 (\"Annotazioni intorno all'Istologia dei reni dell'uomo e di altri mammifieri e sull'istogenesi dei canalicoli oriniferi\". \"Rendiconti R. Acad. Lincei\" 5: 545\u2013557, 1889).\nMalaria.\nA French Army physician Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran discovered that malaria was caused by microscopic parasite (now called \"Plasmodium falciparum\") in 1880. But scientists were sceptical until Golgi intervened. It was Golgi who helped him prove that malarial parasite was a microscopic protozoan. From 1885, Golgi studied the malarial parasite and its transmission. He established two types of malaria, tertian and quartan fevers caused by \"Plasmodium vivax\" and \"Plasmodium malariae\" respectively. In 1886, he discovered that malarial fever (paroxysm) was produced by the asexual stage in the human blood (called erythrocytic cycle, or Golgi cycle). In 1889\u20131890, Golgi and Ettore Marchiafava described the differences between benign tertian malaria and malignant tertian malaria (the latter caused by \"P. falciparum\"). By 1898, along with Giovanni Battista Grassi, Amico Bignami, Giuseppe Bastianelli, Angelo Celli and Marchiafava, he confirmed that malaria was transmitted by anopheline mosquitoes.\nCell organelle.\nAn organelle in eukaryotic cells now known as Golgi apparatus or Golgi complex, or sometimes simply as Golgi, was discovered by Camillo Golgi. Golgi modified his black reaction using osmium dichromate solution with which he stained the nerve cells (Purkinje cells) of the cerebellum of a barn owl. He noticed thread-like networks inside the cells and named them \"apparato reticolare interno\" (internal reticular apparatus). Recognising them to be unique cellular components, he presented his discovery before the Medical-Surgical Society of Pavia in April 1898. After the same was confirmed by his assistant Emilio Veratti, he published it in the \"Bollettino della Societ\u00e0 medico-chirurgica di Pavia\". However, most scientists disputed his discovery as nothing but a staining artefact. Their microscopes were not powerful enough to identify the organelles. By the 1930s, Golgi's description was largely rejected. It was only firmly established 50 years after its discovery, when electron microscopes were developed.\nAwards and legacy.\nIn 1903, Golgi was named an honorary member of the American Association for Anatomy.\nGolgi, together with Santiago Ram\u00f3n y Cajal, received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 for his studies of the structure of the nervous system. Prior to the work that earned Cajal and Golgi their prize, there was a debate over how nerve impulses were conducted in the brain. One camp thought that neurons fused (between axon terminals of cell #1 and dendrites of cell #2), so that the brain essentially became one contiguous cell, a superneuron; this would result in a syncytium, forming the basis of the obsolete reticular theory. The other camp thought that neurons didn't fuse, but met in very close proximity, and this was called the neuron doctrine. Resolution of the cellular components at the point of interaction between cells was impossible at the time, and would only become possible much later with the invention of the electron microscope in the 1950s. But with Golgi's stain, Cajal was able to decisively demonstrate the outline of a complete neuron, to the exclusion of adjacent neurons, thereby demonstrating that a universal neural syncytium did not exist. Cajal and Golgi, being from opposing camps, came to hate each other and would not speak. When they arrived in Stockholm to receive their joint prize, Cajal managed to put their differences aside enough to praise Golgi, but Golgi did not reciprocate.\nIn 1900 he was named senator by King Umberto I. In 1913 he became foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. He received honorary doctorates from the University of Cambridge, University of Geneva, Kristiania University College, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, and Paris-Sorbonne University. In 1994, the European Community commemorated him with postage stamps.\nMonuments in Pavia.\nIn Pavia several landmarks stand as Golgi's memory.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53386", "revid": "1584593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53386", "title": "Charles Beaumont", "text": "American author (1929\u20131967)\nCharles Beaumont (born Charles Leroy Nutt; January 2, 1929 \u2013 February 21, 1967) was an American author of speculative fiction, including short stories in the horror and science fiction subgenres. He is remembered as a writer of classic \"Twilight Zone\" episodes, such as \"The Howling Man\", \"Static\", \"Nice Place to Visit\", \"Miniature\", \"Printer's Devil\", and \"Number Twelve Looks Just Like You\", but also penned the screenplays for several films, such as \"7 Faces of Dr. Lao\", \"The Intruder\" (based on his novel), and \"The Masque of the Red Death\".\nNovelist Dean Koontz said \"Charles Beaumont was one of the seminal influences on writers of the fantastic and macabre.\" Beaumont is also the subject of the documentary \"Charles Beaumont: The Short Life of Twilight Zone's Magic Man\" by Jason V. Brock.\nLife and work.\nBeaumont was born Charles Leroy Nutt in Chicago, on January 2, 1929, the only child of Charles Hiram Nutt (an auditor of freight accounts for the Chicago &amp; Alton Railroad) and Violet \"Letty\" (Phillips) Nutt, a homemaker who had been a scenarist at Essanay Studios. His father was 56 when Charles was born; Letty, his mother, was 22 years her husband's junior. Letty is known to have dressed young Charles in girls' clothes, and once threatened to kill his dog to punish him. These early experiences inspired the celebrated short story \"Miss Gentilbelle\", but according to Beaumont, \"Football, baseball, and dimestore cookie thefts filled my early world\".\nSchool did not hold his attention, and his last name exposed him to ridicule, so Charles Nutt found solace as a teenager in science fiction. He dropped out of high school in tenth grade to join the Army in the final years of World War II. He also worked as a cartoonist, illustrator, disc jockey, usher, and dishwasher before selling his first story to \"Amazing Stories\" in 1950. During his time as an illustrator, he briefly used the pseudonyms Charles McNutt (circa 1947/48) and E.T. Beaumont (inspired by a female artist named \"Miss Beaumont\" with whom he had collaborated in Everett, Washington), before settling on the name Charles Beaumont. He soon adopted this name legally and used it both personally and professionally for the rest of his life.\nIn 1954, \"Playboy\" magazine selected his story \"Black Country\" to be the first work of short fiction to appear in its pages. It was at this time that Beaumont started writing for television and film.\nBeaumont was energetic and spontaneous, and was known to take trips (sometimes out of the country) at a moment's notice. An avid racing fan, he often enjoyed participating in or watching area speedway races, with other authors tagging along. Beaumont and several friends built their own SCCA H Modified racecar dubbed the \"Monzetta\", consisting of Panhard mechanicals and a Devin body and chassis, which was raced at many Southern California tracks including Paramount Ranch Racetrack. \nHis cautionary fables include \"The Beautiful People\" (1952), about a rebellious adolescent girl in a future conformist society in which people are obligated to alter their physical appearance (adapted with friend and frequent writing partner John Tomerlin as an episode of \"Twilight Zone\", \"Number 12 Looks Just Like You\"), and \"Free Dirt\" (1955), about a man who gorges on his entire vegetable harvest and dies from having consumed the magical soil he used to grow it.\nHis short story \"The Crooked Man\" (also published by \"Playboy\" in 1955) presents a dystopian future wherein heterosexuality is stigmatized in the same way that homosexuality then was, with heterosexual people living furtively like pre-Stonewall gay and lesbian people. In the story, a heterosexual man meets his lover in a gay orgy bar; they try to have sex in a curtained booth (she dressed in male drag) and are caught.\nBeaumont wrote several scripts for \"The Twilight Zone\", including an adaptation of his own short story, \"The Howling Man\", about a prisoner who might be the Devil, and the hour-long \"Valley of the Shadow\", about a cloistered Utopia that refuses to share its startlingly advanced technology with the outside world.\nBeaumont scripted the film \"Queen of Outer Space\" from an outline by Ben Hecht, deliberately writing the screenplay as a parody. According to Beaumont, the directorial style is not informed by his satiric intent. He penned one episode of the TV show \"Steve Canyon\", titled \"Operation B-52\", in which Canyon and his crew attempt to set a speed record in a B-52 accompanied by a newsman who hates Air Force pilots.\nBeaumont was much admired by his colleagues (Ray Bradbury, Harlan Ellison, Richard Matheson, Robert Bloch, Roger Corman). Many of his stories have been re-released in the posthumous volumes \"Best of Beaumont\" (Bantam, 1982) and \"The Howling Man\" (Tom Doherty, 1992), and a set of previously unpublished tales, \"A Touch of the Creature\" (Subterranean Press, 1999). In 2004, Gauntlet Press released the first of two volumes collecting Beaumont's \"Twilight Zone\" scripts.\nBeaumont wrote several scripts for Roger Corman including \"The Intruder\". According to \"Filmink\", \"In Corman-ology, Beaumont\u2019s often confused for Richard Matheson.\"\nA book-length biography of Beaumont, titled \"Trapped in the Twilight Zone: The Life and Times of Charles Beaumont\", by Roger Anker, is due to be published by Centipede Press in late 2024.\nIllness and death.\nIn 1963, when Beaumont was 34 and overwhelmed by numerous writing commitments, he began to suffer the effects of \"a mysterious brain disease\" which seemed to age him rapidly. His ability to speak, concentrate, and remember became erratic. While some people attributed all of this to Beaumont's heavy drinking, his friend and colleague John Tomerlin disagreed: \"I was working closely with Chuck at the time, and we were good enough friends for me to know that alcohol by itself could not possibly account for the odd state of mind that he was in.\"\n\"He was rarely well,\" his friend and colleague William F. Nolan later recalled. \"He was thin, and kept having headaches. He used Bromo-Seltzer like most people use water. He had a big Bromo bottle with him all the time\". The disease also affected his work. \"He could barely sell stories, much less write. He would go unshaven to meetings with producers, which would end in disaster. [A script writer has] got to be able to think on your feet, which Chuck couldn't do anymore; and so the producers would just go, 'We're sorry, Mr. Beaumont, but we don't like the script'.\"\nThe condition might have been related to the spinal meningitis he suffered as a child. His friend and early agent Forrest J. Ackerman has asserted an alternative, that Beaumont suffered simultaneously from Alzheimer's disease and Pick's disease. This claim was supported by the UCLA Medical Staff, who subjected Beaumont to a battery of tests in the summer of 1964 that indicated that it might be either Alzheimer's or Pick's. Nolan recalls that the UCLA doctors sent Beaumont home with a death sentence: \"They said 'There's absolutely no treatment for this disease. It's permanent and it's terminal. He'll probably live from six months to three years with it. He'll decline and get to where he can't stand up. He won't feel any pain. In fact, he won't even know this is happening'.\" In Nolan's own words: \"Like his character 'Walter Jameson,' Chuck just dusted away\".\nSeveral fellow writers, including Nolan and friend Jerry Sohl, began ghostwriting for Beaumont during 1963\u20131964, so that he could meet his many writing obligations. Privately, he insisted on splitting these fees. By 1965, however, Beaumont was too ill to even create or sell story ideas. His last on-screen writing credit during his lifetime was for the 1965 film \"Mister Moses\", officially a screenplay written with (but more likely written by) Monja Danischewsky.\nOn February 21, 1967, Beaumont died in Woodland Hills, California at the age of 38. His son Christopher later said that his father, \"[...]looked ninety-five and was, in fact, ninety-five by every calendar except the one on your watch\".\nBibliography.\n\"Twilight Zone\" credits.\nThe following is a list of episodes Beaumont penned for \"The Twilight Zone\" (an asterisk indicates that the episode was credited to Beaumont, but ghostwritten by Jerry Sohl).\nNote.\nBeaumont co-wrote the stories with William F. Nolan.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53388", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53388", "title": "William F. Nolan", "text": "American writer (1928\u20132021)\nWilliam Francis Nolan (March 6, 1928 \u2013 July 15, 2021) was an American author who was active in the science fiction, fantasy, horror, and crime fiction genres.\nCareer.\nNolan became involved in science fiction fandom in the 1950s, and published several fanzines, including \"Ray Bradbury Review\". During this time, Nolan befriended several science fiction and fantasy writers, including Ray Bradbury, Robert Bloch, Richard Matheson, Charles Beaumont, and Ray Russell. Nolan became a professional author in 1956. Nolan is perhaps best known for coauthoring the novel \"Logan's Run\", with George Clayton Johnson, but wrote hundreds of pieces, from poetry to nonfiction, to prose, for many publications, such as \"Sports Illustrated\", \"Rogue\", \"Playboy\", \"Dark Discoveries\", \"Nameless Digest\", and others. Nolan wrote several mystery novels, including the \"Challis\" series. He also had a long career in the movie industry, primarily working for Dan Curtis, and co-wrote the screenplay for the 1976 horror film \"Burnt Offerings\" which starred Karen Black and Bette Davis.\nNolan was also a prolific editor of collections (by others), and anthologies, most recently co-editing two anthologies with friend, filmmaker, and writer Jason V Brock: \"The Bleeding Edge\" (2009), with stories from fellow writers Ray Bradbury, Richard Matheson, George Clayton Johnson, John Shirley, Dan O'Bannon, and several others, and \"The Devil's Coattails\" (2012), which featured offerings from Ramsey Campbell, S. T. Joshi, Richard Selzer, Earl Hamner Jr., and more, both from Cycatrix Press. Nolan teamed up with Bluewater Productions for a comic book series, \"Logan's Run: Last Day,\" released in 2010. In addition, he developed comics based on one other property of his for Bluewater: \"Tales from William F. Nolan's Dark Universe\" (featuring stories adapted by Nolan and Brock and published in 2013). \nNolan was nominated once for the Edgar Allan Poe Award from the Mystery Writers of America. He was voted a Living Legend in Dark Fantasy by the International Horror Guild in 2002, and in 2006 was bestowed the honorary title of Author Emeritus by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America. In 2010, he received the Lifetime Achievement Bram Stoker Award from the Horror Writers Association (HWA). In 2013 he was a recipient, along with Brian W. Aldiss, of the World Fantasy Convention Award in Brighton, England by the World Fantasy Convention. In May 2014, Nolan was presented with another Bram Stoker Award, for Superior Achievement in Nonfiction; this was for his collection about his late friend Ray Bradbury, called \"Nolan on Bradbury: Sixty Years of Writing about the Master of Science Fiction\". In 2015, Nolan was named a World Horror Society Grand Master; the award was presented at the World Horror Convention in Atlanta in May of that year.\nPersonal life.\nNolan was born in Kansas City, Missouri, the son of Bernadette Mariana Kelly, a stenographer, and Michael Cahill Nolan, an adventurer, and sportsman. His family was Irish Catholic. He briefly attended the Kansas City Art Institute. Later, he worked for Hallmark Cards, Inc. writing verses and illustrating greeting cards before moving to California with his parents.\nAfter a few years working in offices, he met Charles Beaumont, who would remain a close friend until Beaumont's untimely death at age thirty-eight. Beaumont was instrumental in Nolan becoming an author.\nNolan was a close friend to radio writer Norman Corwin as well as speculative writer Ray Bradbury. He was also a member of the influential Southern California School of Writers in the 1950s\u20131960s (known informally as \"The Group\"), many of whom wrote for \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\", \"The Twilight Zone\", \"Star Trek\", and other popular series of the day. Nolan was an ethical vegetarian and loved animals. In later life, he still wrote new material and was active in various literary projects, and conventions (he was Guest of Honor at Killer Con and Portland's Orycon, as well as a special guest at the World Horror Convention, World Fantasy Convention, and many others), and promotional opportunities.\nThough estranged for more than ten years, he had been married since 1970. He resided in Vancouver, Washington. With regard to his work, he said: \"I get excited about something, and I want to write about it.\"\nNolan died from complications of an infection in July 2021 at the age of 93.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53390", "revid": "49853791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53390", "title": "Constitutional monarch", "text": ""}
{"id": "53391", "revid": "30392814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53391", "title": "Befunge", "text": "2-dimensional esoteric programming language\nBefunge is a two-dimensional stack-based, reflective, esoteric programming language. It differs from conventional languages in that programs are arranged on a two-dimensional grid. \"Arrow\" instructions direct the control flow to the left, right, up or down, and loops are constructed by sending the control flow in a cycle. It has been described as \"a cross between Forth and Lemmings\".\nBefunge was created by Chris Pressey in 1993 for the Amiga. The language was designed to be as hard to compile as possible, featuring self-modifying code and a multi-dimensional playfield. Despite this, several compilers have been written for the language. The original Befunge-93 specification limited programs to an 80x25 grid, and while not Turing-complete, subsequent extensions like Funge-98 expanded the concept to achieve Turing completeness.\nThe name \"Befunge\" originated from a typing error in an online discussion. While it was designed to be difficult to compile, compilers such as bef2c and Betty have managed to implement the language using various techniques. Befunge programs are characterized by their use of arrows to change control flow, and they can produce outputs like random number sequences or classic \"Hello, World!\" messages.\nHistory.\nThe language was originally created by Chris Pressey in 1993 for the Amiga, as an attempt to devise a language which is as hard to compile as possible. Note that the codice_1 command allows for self-modifying code. Nevertheless, a number of compilers have subsequently been written. A number of extensions to the original \"Befunge-93\" specification also exist, most notably Funge-98, which extends the concept to an arbitrary number of dimensions and can be multithreaded, with multiple instruction pointers operating simultaneously on the same space. Befunge-extensions and variants are called \"Fungeoids\" or just \"Funges\".\nThe Befunge-93 specification restricts each valid program to a grid of 80 instructions horizontally by 25 instructions vertically. Program execution which exceeds these limits \"wraps around\" to a corresponding point on the other side of the grid; a Befunge program is in this manner topologically equivalent to a torus. Since a Befunge-93 program can only have a single stack and its storage array is bounded, the Befunge-93 language is not Turing-complete (however, it has been shown that Befunge-93 is Turing Complete with unbounded stack word size). The later Funge-98 specification provides Turing completeness by removing the size restrictions on the program; rather than wrapping around at a fixed limit, the movement of a Funge-98 instruction pointer follows a model dubbed \"Lahey-space\" after its originator, Chris Lahey. In this model, the grid behaves like a torus of finite size with respect to wrapping, while still allowing itself to be extended indefinitely.\nEtymology.\nThe word Befunge is derived from a typing error in an online discussion, where the word 'before' was intended.\nCompilation.\nAs stated, the design goal for Befunge was to create a language which was difficult to compile. This was attempted with the implementation of self-modifying code (the 'p' instruction can write new instructions into the playfield) and a multi-dimensional playfield (the same instruction can be executed in four different directions).\nNevertheless, these obstacles have been overcome, to some degree, and Befunge compilers have been written using appropriate techniques.\nThe bef2c compiler included with the standard Befunge-93 distribution uses threaded code: each instruction is compiled to a snippet of C code, and control flows through the snippets just as it does in a Befunge interpreter (that is, conditionally on the value of some 'direction' register). This does not result in a significant advantage over a good interpreter. Note that the bef2c compiler is not correct since it does not handle either 'p' or string mode, but it would not be impossible to make it do so (although the C language might not be well-suited for this).\nThe Betty compiler, for example, treats every possible straight line of instructions as a subprogram, and if a 'p' instruction alters that subprogram, that subprogram is recompiled. This variation on just-in-time compilation results in a much better advantage over an interpreter, since many instructions can be executed in native code without making intervening decisions on the 'direction' register.\nSample Befunge-93 code.\nThe technique of using arrows to change control flow is demonstrated in the random number generator program below. The Befunge instruction pointer begins in the upper left corner and will travel to the right if not redirected. Following the arrows around, the codice_2 instructions send the instruction pointer in random cardinal directions until the pointer hits a digit, pushing it to the stack. Then the arrows navigate to the codice_3 to output the digit from the stack and return the pointer to the first directional randomiser. There is no codice_4 to terminate this program, so it produces an endless stream of random numbers from 1 to 9.\n v\u00bb\u00bb&gt;v\n 12345\n &gt; ? ?^\n v?v\n 6789\n \u00bb\u00bb v\nThe following code is an example of the classic \"Hello World!\" program. First the letters \"olleH\" are pushed onto the stack as ASCII numbers. These are then popped from the stack in LIFO order and output as text characters to give \"Hello\". A space is character number 32 in ASCII, which here is constructed by multiplying 4 and 8, before being output as text. The remaining code then outputs \"World!\" in a similar way, followed by ASCII character 10 (a line feed character, moving the output cursor to a new line).\n&gt; v\nv ,,,\"Hello\"&lt;\n&gt;48*, v\nv,,,\"World!\"&lt;\n&gt;25*,@\nThe following code is a slightly more complicated version. It adds the ASCII character 10 (a line feed character) to the stack, and then pushes \"!dlrow ,olleH\" to the stack. Again, LIFO ordering means that \"H\" is now the top of the stack and will be the first printed, \"e\" is second, and so on. To print the characters, the program enters a loop that first duplicates the top value on the stack (so now the stack would look like \"\\n!dlrow ,olleHH\"). Then the \"_\" operation will pop the duplicated value, and go right if it's a zero, left otherwise. (This assumes a compliant interpreter that \"returns\" 0 when popping an empty stack.) When it goes left, it pops and prints the top value as an ASCII character. It then duplicates the next character and loops back to the \"_\" test, continuing to print the rest of the stack until it is empty and so the next value popped is 0, at which point \"@\" ends the program.\n &gt;25*\"!dlrow ,olleH\":v\n v:,_@\nBefunge-93 instruction list.\nMost one-dimensional programming languages require some syntactic distinction between comment text and source code \u2014 although that distinction may be as trivial as Brainfuck's rule that any character not in the set codice_5 is a comment. Languages like Lisp and Python treat strings as comments in contexts where the values are not used. Similarly, in Befunge, there is no comment syntax: to embed documentation in the code, the programmer simply routes the control flow \"around\" the \"comment\" area, so that the text in that area is never executed.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53392", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53392", "title": "The Twilight Zone", "text": "Media franchise based on an American television anthology series\nThe Twilight Zone is an American media franchise based on the anthology television series created by Rod Serling in which characters find themselves dealing with often disturbing or unusual events, an experience described as entering \"the Twilight Zone\". The episodes are in various genres, including science fiction, fantasy, absurdism, dystopian fiction, suspense, horror, supernatural drama, black comedy, and psychological thriller, frequently concluding with a macabre or unexpected twist, and usually with a moral. A popular and critical success, it introduced many Americans to common science fiction and fantasy tropes. The first series, shot entirely in black-and-white, ran on CBS for five seasons from 1959 to 1964.\n\"The Twilight Zone\" followed in the tradition of earlier television shows such as \"Tales of Tomorrow\" (1951\u201353), \"Out There\" (1951\u20131952) and \"Science Fiction Theatre\" (1955\u201357); radio programs such as \"The Weird Circle\" (1943\u201345), \"Dimension X\" (1950\u201351) and \"X Minus One\" (1955\u201358); and the radio work of one of Serling's inspirations, Norman Corwin. The success of the series led to (1983), (1994), a radio series (2002\u201312), various literature, theme park attractions and various other spin-offs that spanned five decades, including three revival television series. The second series (1985\u20131989) ran on CBS and in syndication in the 1980s, while the third series ran on UPN (2002\u201303). The fourth \"Twilight Zone\" series, helmed by Jordan Peele, was released on CBS All Access from 2019-20.\n\"TV Guide\" ranked the original TV series #5 in their 2013 list of the 60 greatest shows of all time and #5 in their list of the 60 greatest dramas.\nTelevision history.\nBackground.\nAs a boy, Rod Serling was a fan of pulp fiction stories. As an adult, he sought books with themes such as racism, government, war, society, and human nature in general. Serling decided to combine these interests to broach these subjects on television at a time when they were considered taboo.\nThroughout the 1950s, Serling established himself as one of the most popular names in television. He was as famous for writing televised drama as he was for criticizing the medium's limitations. His most vocal complaints concerned censorship, which was frequently practiced by sponsors and networks. In a 1957 production for \"Studio One\" called \"The Arena,\" Serling intended to explore contemporary politics. However, Serling said he \"was not permitted to have [his] senators discuss any current or pressing problem.\" He explained that talking about tariffs would align him with Republicans, and talking about labor would associate him with Democrats. According to Serling, \"To say a single thing germane to the current political scene was absolutely prohibited.\"\n\"The Time Element\" (1958).\nCBS purchased a teleplay in 1958 that writer Rod Serling hoped to produce as the pilot of a weekly anthology series. \"The Time Element\" marked Serling's first entry in the field of science fiction.\nPlot.\n13 years after the end of World War II, a man named Peter Jenson (William Bendix) visits a psychoanalyst, Dr. Gillespie (Martin Balsam). Jenson tells him about a recurring dream in which he tries to warn people about the \"sneak attack\" on Pearl Harbor before it happens, but the warnings are disregarded. Jenson believes the dream's events are real and he travels back to 1941 each night. Dr. Gillespie insists that time travel is impossible given the nature of temporal paradoxes. While on the couch, Jenson falls asleep once again, but this time dreams that the Japanese planes shoot and kill him. In Dr. Gillespie's office, the couch on which Jenson was lying is now empty. Dr. Gillespie goes to a bar where he finds Jenson's picture on the wall. The bartender tells him that Jenson had tended bar there, but he was killed during the Pearl Harbor attack.\nProduction.\nWith the \"Time Element\" script, Serling drafted the fundamental elements that defined the subsequent series: a science-fiction/fantasy theme, opening and closing narration, and an ending with a twist. \"The Time Element\" was purchased immediately but shelved indefinitely.\nThis is where things stood when Bert Granet, the new producer for \"Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse\", discovered \"The Time Element\" in CBS' vaults while searching for an original Serling script to add prestige to his show. \"The Time Element\" (introduced by Desi Arnaz) debuted on November 24, 1958, to an overwhelmingly delighted audience of television viewers and critics alike. \"The humor and sincerity of Mr. Serling's dialogue made 'The Time Element' consistently entertaining,\" offered Jack Gould of \"The New York Times\". More than 6,000 letters of praise flooded Granet's offices. Convinced that a series based on such stories could succeed, CBS again began talks with Serling about the possibilities of producing \"The Twilight Zone\". \"Where Is Everybody?\" was accepted as the pilot episode and the project was officially announced to the public in early 1959. Other than reruns at the time, \"The Time Element\" was not aired on television again until it was shown as part of a 1996 all-night sneak preview of the new cable channel TVLand. It is available in an Italian DVD boxed set titled \"Ai confini della realt\u00e0 \u2013 I tesori perduti\". The \"Twilight Zone Season 1\" Blu-ray boxed set released on September 14, 2010, offers a remastered high-definition version of the original \"Desilu Playhouse\" production as a special feature. The program's supporting cast features Darryl Hickman, Jesse White, Bartlett Robinson and future Three Stooges member Joe DeRita.\nFirst series (1959\u20131964).\nThe series was produced by Cayuga Productions, Inc., a production company owned and named by Serling. It reflects his background in Central New York State and is named after Cayuga Lake, on which he owned a home, and where Cornell University and Ithaca College are located.\nAside from Serling, who wrote or adapted nearly two-thirds of the series' total episodes, writers for \"The Twilight Zone\" included leading authors such as Charles Beaumont, Ray Bradbury, Earl Hamner, Jr., George Clayton Johnson, Richard Matheson, Reginald Rose, and Jerry Sohl. Many episodes also featured new adaptations of stories by classic writers such as Ambrose Bierce and Lewis Padgett, and by contemporary writers such as Jerome Bixby, Damon Knight, and John Collier.\n\"Twilight Zone\"'s writers frequently used science fiction as a vehicle for social comment, as networks and sponsors who censored controversial material from live dramas were less concerned with seemingly innocuous fantasy and sci-fi stories. Frequent themes on \"The Twilight Zone\" included nuclear war, McCarthyism, and mass hysteria, subjects that were avoided on less serious primetime television. Episodes such as \"The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street\" and \"I Am the Night\u2014Color Me Black\" offered specific commentary on current events and social issues. Other stories, such as \"The Masks\", \"I Dream of Genie\", or \"Mr. Denton on Doomsday\" were allegories, parables, or fables that reflected the moral and philosophical choices of the characters.\nDespite his esteem in the writing community, Serling found the series difficult to sell. Few critics felt that science fiction could transcend empty escapism and enter the realm of adult drama. In a September 22, 1959, interview with Serling, Mike Wallace asked a question illustrative of the times: \"...[Y]ou're going to be, obviously, working so hard on \"The Twilight Zone\" that, in essence, for the time being and for the foreseeable future, you've given up on writing anything important for television, right?\" While Serling's appearances on the show became one of its most distinctive features, with his clipped delivery still widely imitated today, he was reportedly nervous about it and had to be persuaded to appear on camera. Serling often appeared in medias res with the characters remaining oblivious to him, with one notable exception: In \"A World of His Own\", a writer (Keenan Wynn) with the ability to make characters appear and disappear protests Serling's narration and promptly erases Serling from the show.\nIn season two, due to budgetary constraints, the network decided \u2013 against Serling's wishes \u2013 to cut costs by shooting some episodes on videotape rather than film. The requisite multicamera setup of the videotape format precluded location shooting, severely limiting the potential scope of the storylines, and the experiment was abandoned after just six episodes (\"Twenty Two\", \"Static\", \"The Whole Truth\", \"The Lateness of the Hour\", \"The Night of the Meek\", and \"Long Distance Call\").\nThe first series contains 156 episodes. The episodes in seasons one through three are 30 minutes long with commercials (24 or 25 minutes without commercials). Season four (1962\u201363) consists of one-hour episodes with commercials (51 minutes without commercials). Season five returned to the half-hour format.\nSecond series (1985\u20131989).\nIt was Serling's decision to sell his share of the series back to the network that eventually allowed for a \"Twilight Zone\" revival. As an in-house production, CBS stood to earn more money producing \"The Twilight Zone\" than it could by purchasing a new series produced by an outside company. Even so, the network was slow to consider a revival, turning down offers from the original production team of Rod Serling and Buck Houghton and later from American filmmaker Francis Ford Coppola.\nCBS gave the new \"Twilight Zone\" a greenlight in 1984 under the supervision of Carla Singer, then Vice President of Drama Development. While the show did not come close to matching the enduring popularity of the original, some episodes \u2013 particularly Alan Brennert's love story \"Her Pilgrim Soul\" and J. Neil Schulman's \"Profile in Silver\" \u2013 were critically acclaimed. In a tribute to the first series, the opening credits include a brief image of Rod Serling. Four episodes are remakes of those from the first series: \"Night of the Meek\", \"Shadow Play\", \"The After Hours\" and \"A Game of Pool\", while \"Dead Woman's Shoes\" is an adaptation of \"Dead Man's Shoes\". Unlike the first, third and fourth series, this version does not include the opening monologue during the title sequence. As well, the narration is all strictly voice-over and the narrator never appears on-screen.\n\"Rod Serling's Lost Classics\" (1994).\nIn the early 1990s, Richard Matheson and Carol Serling produced an outline for a two-hour made-for-TV movie which would feature Matheson adaptations of three yet-unfilmed Rod Serling short stories. Outlines for such a production were rejected by CBS until early 1994, when Serling's widow discovered a complete shooting script (\"Where the Dead Are\") authored by her late husband, while rummaging through their garage. She showed the forgotten script to producers Michael O'Hara and Laurence Horowitz, who were significantly impressed by it. \"I had a pile of scripts, which I usually procrastinate about reading. But I read this one right away and, after 30 pages, called my partner and said, \"I love it,\" recalled O'Hara. \"This is pure imagination, a period piece, literate \u2013 some might say wordy. If Rod Serling's name weren't on it, it wouldn't have a chance at getting made.\"\nEager to capitalize on Serling's celebrity status as a writer, CBS packaged \"Where the Dead Are\" with Matheson's adaptation of \"The Theatre\", debuting as a two-hour feature on the night of May 19, 1994, under the name \"Twilight Zone: Rod Serling's Lost Classics\". The title represents a misnomer, as both stories were conceived long after \"Twilight Zone's\" cancellation. Written just months before Serling's death, \"Where the Dead Are\" starred Patrick Bergin as a 19th-century doctor who stumbles upon a mad scientist's medical experiments with immortality. \"The Theatre\" starred Amy Irving and Gary Cole as a couple who visits a cineplex where they discover the feature presentation depicts their own lives. James Earl Jones provided opening and closing narrations.\nCritical response was mixed. Gannett News Service described it as \"taut and stylish, a reminder of what can happen when fine actors are given great words.\" \"USA Today\" was less impressed, even suggesting that Carol Serling \"should have left these two unproduced mediocrities in the garage where she found them.\" Ultimately, ratings proved insufficient to justify a proposed sequel featuring three scripts adapted by Matheson.\nThird series (2002\u20132003).\nA third series was developed by UPN in 2002; it was hosted by Forest Whitaker. It was broadcast in a one-hour format composed of two half-hour stories, it was canceled after one season. \"It's Still a Good Life\" is a sequel to \"It's a Good Life\", \"The Monsters Are on Maple Street\" is an adaptation of \"The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street\" and \"Eye of the Beholder\" is a remake of an episode from the first series, with Serling still credited as writer.\nFourth series (2019\u20132020).\nIn December 2012, it was reported that Bryan Singer was developing and executive producing a fourth television series for CBS Television Studios. A writer for the series was not chosen and the program was not pitched to any networks. CBS, which broadcast the first series and second series, was reportedly interested. In February 2013, Singer told \"TG Daily\" that the project was still in development and that he hoped to direct the pilot and have A-list actors appear on the revival. The following month, he told \"IGN\" that a writer with whom he had previously worked was in negotiations to join the revival and that he felt \"passionate\" towards the first series and the planned revival.\nIn February 2016, it was reported that Ken Levine would write and direct the pilot episode of the revival series. It was also reported that the series would be interactive. In November 2017, it was reported that Jordan Peele was developing a reboot of the series for streaming service CBS All Access with Marco Ramirez serving as potential showrunner. In December 2017, CBS All Access ordered the fourth \"The Twilight Zone\" series to series. It was announced that the series would be produced by CBS Television Studios in association with Monkeypaw Productions and Genre Films. Jordan Peele, Marco Ramirez, and Simon Kinberg will serve as executive producers for the series and collaborate on the premiere episode. Win Rosenfeld and Audrey Chon will also serve as executive producers. Peele was revealed to be the new host and narrator in September 2018, and the new opening sequence was released. The series premiered on April 1, 2019.\nThe season 1 episode \"Nightmare at 30,000 Feet\" is based on the first series' season 5 episode \"Nightmare at 20,000 Feet\". The season 2 episode \"You Might Also Like\" features the Kanamits, who first appeared in the first series' season 3 episode \"To Serve Man\". On February 24, 2021, CBS All Access canceled the series after two seasons.\nOther media.\nFilm.\n\"\" is a 1983 feature film produced by Steven Spielberg and John Landis. It starred Dan Aykroyd, Albert Brooks, John Lithgow, Vic Morrow and Scatman Crothers. The film remade three classic episodes of the first series and included one original story. Landis directed the prologue and the first segment (\"Time Out\"), Spielberg directed the second (\"Kick the Can\"), Joe Dante the third (\"It's a Good Life\"), and George Miller directed the fourth (\"Nightmare at 20,000 Feet\"). Landis's segment became notorious for a helicopter accident during filming that caused the deaths of Morrow and two child actors.\nPotential film.\nLeonardo DiCaprio is planning to make a new film with Warner Bros., citing \"The Twilight Zone\" as his favorite TV series. Unlike the first film, which was an anthology feature, it will be a big-budget, SFX-laden continuous story possibly based on classic episodes of the series such as \"Eye of the Beholder\", \"To Serve Man\", or any of the 92 scripts written by Rod Serling, to which Warner Bros. owns the rights. One plot leaked from the script tells about a pilot who time-travels 96 years into the future. \"Cloverfield\" director Matt Reeves was signed in 2011 to direct the movie, but left in 2012 to direct \"Dawn of the Planet of the Apes\". On August 16, 2013, Joseph Kosinski was announced to direct. The studio hired Aron Eli Coleite to pen the screenplay for the film and will not be an anthology but use various elements from the \"Twilight Zone\" universe. In June 2017, Christine Lavaf was hired to write the script. In June 2025 it was reported that Severance Director Ben Stiller was attached to direct the film adaptation after reportedly quietly developing the project over the last 6 months with Dicaprio still attached.\nGames.\nIn 1964, Ideal released a board game, \"The Twilight Zone Game\", at the height of the show's popularity. The game consisted of a cardboard playing surface, four colored playing pieces, a colored spinning wheel, and 12 \"door\" playing cards. In 1988, Gigabit Systems, Inc. published a text adventure video game for Amiga and the PC. In March 1992, Midway Games released a wide-body pinball game, \"Twilight Zone\", based on the original TV series, as a Bally title. Conceived by Pat Lawlor, it uses Golden Earring's hit song \"Twilight Zone\" (1982) as its theme song. The game sold 15,235 units. It is often regarded as one of the greatest pinball machines of all time. On September 17, 2014, Legacy Interactive and Spark Plug Games released a casual adventure game based on \"The Twilight Zone\". On July 14, 2022, Fun Train and Pocket Money Games released a Virtual Reality game based on \"The Twilight Zone\" for Meta Quest 2 titled \"Twilight Zone VR\".\nLiterature.\nSerling novelized several of his original scripts, which were published in the anthologies \"Stories from the Twilight Zone\" (1960), \"More Stories from the Twilight Zone\" (1961) and \"New Stories from the Twilight Zone\" (1962); these have all been reprinted several times, including in an omnibus, \"The Twilight Zone: Complete Stories\" (1980). In 1995, DAW Books published the anthology books \"Journeys to the Twilight Zone\" (16 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling's \"Suggestion\"), \"Return to the Twilight Zone\" (18 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling's \"The Sole Survivor\"), and \"Adventures in the Twilight Zone\" (24 stories edited by Carol Serling including Rod Serling's \"Lindemann's Catch\"). In September 2009, Tor Books published \"\", to mark the 50th anniversary of the series. It contains stories by 20 authors such as R. L. Stine and Timothy Zahn, and an introduction by Carol Serling.\nComic books.\nWestern Publishing published a \"Twilight Zone\" comic book, first providing content under contract to publisher Dell Comics for four issues, one in 1961 and three further issues in 1962, with the first two published as part of their long-running \"Four Color\" anthology series as issue numbers 1173 and 1288, and then two further one-shots numbered separately in Dell's unique fashion as 01-860-207 and 12-860-210 (numbered as 01-860-210 on the inside) respectively. Western then restarted the series under its own Gold Key imprint with a formal issue No. 1, which ran 92 issues from 1962 to 1979, with the final issue being published in 1982. Several of the stories were reprinted in their \"Mystery Comics Digest\", which mentioned the title on the covers. A wide range of artists worked on the title, including Jack Sparling, Reed Crandall, Lee Elias, George Evans, Russ Jones, Joe Orlando, Jerry Robinson, Mike Sekowsky, Dan Spiegle, Frank Thorne, and Alex Toth. The first published comic book work of artist Frank Miller appeared in issue 84 (June 1978). In 1990, NOW Comics published a single issue of a new series using the title logo from the 1985 revival, featuring an adaptation of Harlan Ellison's story \"Crazy as a Soup Sandwich\". The issue was reprinted as \"Twilight Zones Premiere\" in 1991, followed by an eleven-issue second volume (1991\u20131992) and a four-issue third volume (1993), as well as an annual and a 3-D special in 1993.\nIn 2008, students at the Savannah College of Art and Design partnered with Walker &amp; Co. to create graphic novels based on eight episodes of the series through 2009. The first four, \"Walking Distance\", \"The After Hours\", \"The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street\", and \"The Odyssey of Flight 33\", were released in December 2011. The other four were \"The Midnight Sun\", \"Deaths-Head Revisited\", \"The Big Tall Wish\" and \"Will the Real Martian Please Stand Up?\" Comics publisher Dynamite Entertainment ran a multiple-issue series, written by J. Michael Straczynski and with art by Guiu Vilanova, beginning in December 2013.\nMusic.\nInfluence in popular music.\nMichael Jackson used samples from The Twilight Zone in his songs \"The Lost Children\" and \"Threatened\" from the 2001 album \"Invincible\".\nThe Marketts' biggest hit, \"Out of Limits\", originally entitled \"Outer Limits\", was named after the 1963 TV series \"The Outer Limits\". Rod Serling sued the Marketts for quoting the four-note motif from \"The Twilight Zone\", without his approval, which resulted in the change of the title to \"Out of Limits\". It reached number 3 on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100 chart in 1964. It sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold disc.\nMany other musicians have written and performed music based on \"The Twilight Zone\", including: 2 Unlimited (\"Twilight Zone\"), Anthrax (\"Intro to Reality\"), Average White Band, John Cale, Dr. John, David Dubowski (\"To Serve Man\"), Golden Earring (\"Twilight Zone\"), Michael Hurley, Tech N9ne, Iron Maiden (\"Twilight Zone\"), Mekong Delta (\"Twilight Zone\"), Van Morrison (\"Twilight Zone\"), Rush (\"The Twilight Zone\"), Raymond Scott, Sly &amp; Robbie, Magneto Dayo, The Manhattan Transfer (\"Twilight Zone/Twilight Tone\"), The Residents, The Ventures (\"Twilight Zone\"), Panic! at the Disco Ariana Grande (\"Twilight Zone\") and John Williams.\nRadio.\nBeginning in 2002, episodes of the original \"The Twilight Zone\" were adapted for radio, with Stacy Keach taking Serling's role as narrator and produced by Carl Amari of Falcon Picture Group. Each episode features a current Hollywood celebrity, including Jason Alexander, Blair Underwood, Lou Gossett, Jr., Michael York, Jim Caviezel, Jane Seymour, Don Johnson, Sean Astin, Luke Perry and others in the title roles. The series is broadcast on hundreds of radio stations from coast to coast and over Sirius/XM. The station list and episodes for download, including 3 Free episodes are available at the official website at www.twilightzoneradio.com\nScripts.\nBeginning in 2001, Gauntlet Press began publishing collections of original scripts from \"The Twilight Zone\" by Charles Beaumont, Richard Matheson, and Rod Serling. A ten-volume signed, limited edition series of all 92 of Rod Serling's scripts, authorized by his wife, Carol Serling, began yearly publication in 2004. Many of the scripts contain handwritten edits by Serling himself and differ in significant ways from the aired versions; most volumes contain an alternate version of a selected script. The script for \"The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street\" has been published into 7th grade reading books in the form of a play.\nStage productions.\nLive theatre productions of the original episodes can be seen in Los Angeles and Seattle, where Theater Schmeater has continuously produced a late-night series, \"The Twilight Zone \u2013 Live\" with permission of the Serling estate, since 1996. In 2009, Masquerade, A Chennai based theater group produced 'Dystopia', loosely based on the episodes \"The Obsolete Man\" and \"Five Characters in Search of an Exit\". In 2011, the Penn State University theatre group, No Refund Theatre, produced a stage adaptation of \"The Twilight Zone\". It included the episodes \"The Eye of the Beholder\", \"The Midnight Sun\", and \"Nothing in the Dark\". It was directed by Anthony Arbaiza.\nIn 2017, Bethesda-Chevy Chase High School produced a live adaptation directed by Adam Graham with permission from CBS, with two shows containing four episodes each. These episodes included \"Will The Real Martian Please Stand Up?\" and \"The Monsters Are Due On Maple Street.\" as well as more technically challenging episodes such as \"Penny For Your Thoughts\" and \"The Eye of the Beholder.\"\nIn December 2017 the Almeida Theatre in London are staging the World Premiere production of 'The Twilight Zone'. Adapted by Anne Washburn and directed by Laurence Olivier Award winner Richard Jones, and will be based on stories from the first series by Rod Serling, Charles Beaumont and Richard Matheson.\nTheme park attraction.\n\"The Twilight Zone\" Tower of Terror is a theme park attraction based on the original \"Twilight Zone\" series. Designed by Walt Disney Imagineering, the attraction is present at Disney's Hollywood Studios in Orlando, Walt Disney Studios Park in Paris and Tokyo DisneySea in Japan. A fourth attraction at Disney California Adventure operated from 2004 to 2017 before being re-themed to . The attraction in Japan is the only one not themed to \"The Twilight Zone\", due to cultural differences and constraints in licensing for the Oriental Land Company, owner and operator of the Tokyo parks. The ride also served as the inspiration for the 1997 TV film \"Tower of Terror\", which bears no connection to \"The Twilight Zone\".\nSyndication.\n\"The Twilight Zone\" first series is currently in syndication on MeTV Network and Syfy, and the 2002 revival is syndicated on the El Rey Network.\nIn popular culture.\nIn Matt Groening's \"Futurama\", there is a dystopian TV show called \"The Scary Door\", the title sequence, dystopian themes and comedic premise of which are heavily influenced by \"The Twilight Zone\". One episode of The Scary Door, \"The Last Man On Earth,\" parodies The Twilight Zone's original season 1 episode \"Time Enough At Last.\"\nMany Treehouse Of Horror episodes of \"The Simpsons\" also reference the show. These include \"Treehouse of Horror\" (where the family are abducted by aliens, \"Hungry Are The Damned\"), \"Treehouse of Horror III\" (which features an evil Krusty The Clown doll, \"Clown Without Pity\") and \"Treehouse of Horror IV\" (where Bart sees a gremlin on the side of the school bus, \"Terror at 5 1/2 Feet\"). Homer also references the show in the \"Homer3\" segment of \"Treehouse of Horror VI,\" when, upon entering the 3rd dimension, he says \"It's like something out of that twilighty show about that zone\".\n\"The X-Files\" character Robert Matheson is named after one of the original series' writers.\nIn \"Mad Men\", Paul Kinsey quotes Rod Serling's \"submitted for your approval\" opening and foreshadows the original show's cancellation (Season 1, Episode 2), saying \"Mitch in Media says CBS might pull the plug -- I'll kill myself.\"\n\"The Late Show with Stephen Colbert\" aired a skit \"The Twilight Zone: Just The Twists\" on February 1, 2016 and on January 22, 2024, where the host claims to get access to unreleased alternative versions of episodes.\nThe video game \"Alan Wake\" contains an in-universe series called \"Night Springs\", episodes of which the player can find on televisions scattered through the game. The episodes mirror \"The Twilight Zone\"'s intro, theme song, and storytelling style, complete with an announcer impersonating Rod Serling's voice and narration.\nMany bands and artists have released songs dedicated to the show, with some titled \"The Twilight Zone\"/\"Twilight Zone\", as listed above. John Grant briefly mentions the show's title in the song \"Sigourney Weaver\", from his 2010 album, \"Queen of Denmark\". British post-punk band The Fall released a song called \"Time Enough At Last\" appearing on their \"\" album. The song recounts the events of the original \"Twilight Zone\" episode of the same name and also appears on the band's 2003 compilation album of the same name. Mathcore duo Serling is named after the shows creator, Rod Serling. All songs, lyrics, and albums of theirs discuss particular \"Twilight Zone\" episodes and themes.\nSee also.\nScience fiction on television\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53393", "revid": "1317251503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53393", "title": "History of Taiwan", "text": "The history of the island of Taiwan dates back tens of thousands of years to the earliest known evidence of human habitation. The sudden appearance of a culture based on agriculture around 3000 BC is believed to reflect the arrival of the ancestors of today's Taiwanese indigenous peoples. People from China gradually came into contact with Taiwan by the time of the Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368) and Han Chinese people started settling there by the early 17th century. The island became known by the West when Portuguese explorers discovered it in the 16th century and named it Formosa. Between 1624 and 1662, the south of the island was colonized by the Dutch headquartered in Zeelandia in present-day Anping, Tainan whilst the Spanish built an outpost in the north, which lasted until 1642 when the Spanish fortress in Keelung was seized by the Dutch. These European settlements were followed by an influx of Hoklo and Hakka immigrants from Fujian and Guangdong.\nIn 1662, Koxinga defeated the Dutch and established a base of operations on the island. His descendants were defeated by the Qing dynasty in 1683 and their territory in Taiwan was annexed by the Qing dynasty. Over two centuries of Qing rule, Taiwan's population increased by over two million and became majority Han Chinese due to illegal cross-strait migrations from mainland China and encroachment on Taiwanese indigenous territory. Due to the continued expansion of Chinese settlements, Qing-governed territory eventually encompassed the entire western plains and the northeast. This process accelerated in the later stages of Qing rule when settler colonization of Taiwan was actively encouraged. The Qing ceded Taiwan and Penghu to Japan after losing the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895. Taiwan experienced industrial growth and became a productive rice- and sugar-exporting Japanese colony. During the Second Sino-Japanese War it served as a base for invasions of China, and later Southeast Asia and the Pacific during World War II.\nIn 1945, following the end of hostilities in World War II, the nationalist government of the Republic of China (ROC), led by the Kuomintang (KMT), took control of Taiwan. The legality and nature of its control of Taiwan, including transfer of sovereignty, is debated. In 1949, after losing control of mainland China in the Chinese Civil War, the ROC government under the KMT withdrew to Taiwan where Chiang Kai-shek declared martial law. The KMT ruled Taiwan (along with the islands of Kinmen, Wuqiu and the Matsu) as a single-party state for forty years until democratic reforms in the 1980s. The first-ever direct presidential election was held in 1996. During the post-war period, Taiwan experienced rapid industrialization and economic growth known as the \"Taiwan Miracle\", and was one of the \"Four Asian Tigers\".\nPrehistory.\nIn the Late Pleistocene, sea levels were about lower than at present, exposing the floor of the shallow Taiwan Strait as a land bridge. A concentration of vertebrate fossils has been found in the channel between the Penghu Islands and Taiwan, including a partial jawbone designated Penghu 1, apparently belonging to a previously unknown species of genus \"Homo\", dated 450,000 to 190,000 years ago. The oldest evidence of modern human presence on Taiwan consists of fragments and a tooth found at Chouqu and Gangzilin, in Zuojhen District, estimated to be between 20,000 and 30,000 years old. The oldest artefacts are chipped-pebble tools of the Paleolithic Changbin culture found in Changbin, Taitung, dated 15,000 to 5,000 years ago. The same culture is found at sites at Eluanbi on the southern tip of Taiwan, persisting until 5,000 years ago. Analysis of spores and pollen grains in sediment of Sun Moon Lake suggests that traces of slash-and-burn agriculture started in the area 11,000 years ago, and ended 4,200 years ago, when abundant remains of rice cultivation were found. At the beginning of the Holocene 10,000 years ago, sea levels rose, forming the Taiwan Strait and cutting off the island from the Asian mainland.\nIn 2011, the ~8,000-year-old Liangdao Man skeleton was found on Liang Island. The only Paleolithic burial that has been found on Taiwan was in Chenggong in the southeast, dating from about 4000 BC.\nAround 3,000 BC, the Neolithic Dapenkeng culture abruptly appeared and quickly spread around the coast. Their sites are characterised by corded-ware pottery, polished stone adzes and slate points. The inhabitants cultivated rice and millet, but were also heavily reliant on marine shells and fish. Most scholars believe this culture is not derived from the Changbin culture, but was brought across the Strait by the ancestors of today's Taiwanese aborigines, speaking early Austronesian languages. Some of these people later migrated from Taiwan to the islands of Southeast Asia and throughout the Pacific and Indian Oceans.\nMalayo-Polynesian languages are now spoken across a huge area, but form only one branch of the Austronesian family, the rest of whose branches are found only on Taiwan.\nTrade links with the Philippine archipelago continued from the early 2nd millennium BC, including the use of jade from eastern Taiwan.\nThe Dapenkeng culture was succeeded by a variety of cultures throughout the island, including the Tahu and Yingpu.\nIron appeared in such cultures as the Niaosung Culture.\nThe earliest metal artifacts were trade goods, but by around 400 AD wrought iron was being produced locally using bloomeries, a technology possibly introduced from the Philippines.\nChinese contact and settlement.\nEarly records of possible visits.\nEarly Chinese histories refer to visits to eastern islands that some historians identify with Taiwan. Troops of the Three Kingdoms state of Eastern Wu are recorded visiting an island known as Yizhou in the spring of 230. Some scholars have identified this island as Taiwan while others do not. The \"Book of Sui\" relates that Emperor Yang of the Sui dynasty sent three expeditions to a place called \"Liuqiu\" early in the 7th century. The Liuqiu described by the \"Book of Sui\" produced little iron, had no writing system, taxation, or penal code, and was ruled by a king. The natives used stone blades and practiced slash-and-burn agriculture. Later the name Liuqiu (whose characters are read in Japanese as \"Ryukyu\") referred to the island chain to the northeast of Taiwan, but some scholars believe it may have referred to Taiwan in the Sui period.\nChinese fishermen had settled on the Penghu Islands near Taiwan by 1171. Although Penghu is not part of Taiwan island, it is currently governed as part of Taiwan Area by the Republic of China. In 1171, \"Bisheye\" bandits, a Taiwanese people related to the Bisaya of the Visayas, landed on Penghu and plundered fields planted by Chinese migrants. The Song dynasty sent soldiers after them, and from that time on Song patrols regularly visited Penghu in the spring and summer. A local official, Wang Dayou, stationed troops there to prevent depredations from the Bisheye.\nYuan dynasty.\nDuring the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty (1271\u20131368), Han Chinese people started visiting Taiwan. The first Yuan emperor, Kublai Khan, sent officials to the Ryukyu Kingdom in 1292 to demand its loyalty, but the officials ended up in Taiwan and mistook it for Ryukyu. After three soldiers were killed, the delegation immediately retreated. Another expedition was sent in 1297. Wang Dayuan visited Taiwan in 1349 and provided the first detailed written description of Taiwan. He mentioned the presence of Chuhou pottery from modern Lishui, suggesting that Chinese merchants had already visited the island.\nWang described Taiwan as the first overseas kingdom or country\u300c\u6d77\u5916\u8af8\u570b\uff0c\u84cb\u7531\u6b64\u59cb\u300d\u201cOverseas countries start from here\u201d. He found no Chinese settlers there but many on Penghu.\nHe called different regions of Taiwan \"Liuqiu\" and \"Pisheye\". Liuqiu was a vast land of huge trees and mountains named Cuilu, Zhongman, Futou, and Dazhi. A mountain could be seen from Penghu. He climbed the mountain and could see the coasts. Wang described a rich land with fertile fields that was hotter than Penghu and had people whose customs differed from Penghu. They did not have boats and oars but only rafts. The men and women bound their hair and wore colored garments. They obtained salt from boiled sea water and liquor from fermented sugarcane juice. There were barbarian lords and chiefs that were respected by the people and they had a bone-and-flesh relationship between father and son. They practiced cannibalism against their enemies. The land's products included gold, beans, millet, sulphur, beeswax, deer hide, leopards, and moose. They accepted pearls, agates, gold, beads, dishware, and pottery as items of trade.\nPisheye was located to the east. It had extensive mountains and plains but the people did not engage in much agriculture or produce any products. The weather was hotter than Liuqiu. Its people wore their hair in tufts, tattooed their bodies with black juice, and wrapped red silk and yellow cloth around their heads. Pisheye had no chief. Its people hid in wild mountains and solitary valleys. They practiced raiding and plundering by boat. Kidnapping and slave trading were common.\nMing dynasty.\nBy the early 16th century, increasing numbers of Chinese fishermen, traders and pirates were visiting the southwestern part of the island. Some merchants from Fujian were familiar enough with the indigenous peoples of Taiwan to speak Formosan languages. The people of Fujian sailed closer to Taiwan in the mid-16th century to trade with Japan while evading Ming authorities. Chinese who traded in Southeast Asia also began taking an East Sea Compass Course (\"dongyang zhenlu\") that passed southwestern and southern Taiwan. Some of them traded with the Taiwanese aborigines. Taiwan was referred to as \"Xiaodong dao\" (\"little eastern island\") and \"Dahui guo\" (\"the country of Dahui\"), a corruption of Tayouan, a tribe that lived on an islet near modern Tainan from which the name \"Taiwan\" is derived. By the late 16th century, Chinese from Fujian were settling in southwestern Taiwan. In 1593, Ming officials started issuing licenses for Chinese junks to trade in northern Taiwan, acknowledging already existing illegal trade.\nInitially Chinese merchants arrived in northern Taiwan and sold iron and textiles to the aboriginal peoples in return for coal, sulfur, gold, and venison. Later the southwest became the primary destination for its mullet fish. Some fishing junks camped on Taiwan's shores and many began trading with the indigenous people for deer products. The southwestern Taiwanese trade was of minor importance until after 1567 when it was used as a location outside of Ming control to circumvent the ban on Sino-Japanese trade, particularly to access Japanese silver. The Chinese bought deerskins from the aborigines and sold them to the Japanese for a large profit.\nChen Di visited Taiwan in 1603 on an expedition against the Wokou pirates led by Ming general Shen Yourong. The pirates were defeated and they met a native chieftain who presented them with gifts. Chen recorded these events in an account of Taiwan known as \"Dongfanji\" (An Account of the Eastern Barbarians) and described the natives of Taiwan and their lifestyle. Chen Di's book also indicates a substantial number of Chinese settlers who were living together with the indigenous people on Taiwan. Later, General Shen returned again and commanded a force to Keelung, driving off a Tokugawa shogunate expedition to seize the island.\nWhen a Portuguese ship sailed past southwestern Taiwan in 1596, several of its crew members who had been shipwrecked there in 1582 noticed that the land had become cultivated, presumably by settlers from Fujian. When the Dutch arrived in 1623, they found about 1,500 Chinese visitors and residents. A small minority brought Chinese plants with them and grew crops such as apples, oranges, bananas, watermelons. Some estimates of the Chinese population put it at 2,000 over two villages, one of which would become Tainan. There was also a significant population of Chinese living in an aboriginal village where the villagers spoke a creole language incorporating many Chinese words.\nDutch and Spanish colonies (1624\u20131668).\nContact and establishment.\nThe name Formosa (\u798f\u723e\u6469\u6c99) dates from 1542, when Portuguese sailors noted it on their maps as \"Ilha Formosa\" (Portuguese for \"beautiful island\"). In 1582, the survivors of a Portuguese shipwreck spent 45 days battling malaria and aborigines before returning to Macau.\nThe Dutch East India Company (VOC) came to the area in search of an Asian trade and military base. Defeated by the Portuguese at the Battle of Macau in 1622, they attempted to occupy Penghu, but were driven off by the Ming authorities in 1624. They then built Fort Zeelandia on the islet of Tayowan off the southwest coast. On the adjacent mainland, they built a smaller brick fort, Fort Provintia.\nPiracy.\nThe Europeans worked with and also fought against Chinese pirates. The pirate Li Dan mediated between Ming Chinese forces and the Dutch at Penghu, leading to the Dutch relocating to Taiwan. At this time it became common for Chinese pirates in the Taiwan strait to sell protection guarantees (racketeering). In one case fishermen paid 10 percent of their catch to the Li Dan's son for a document guaranteeing their safety. On discovering this, the VOC also entered the protection business; this was one of the first taxes levied on the colony. In July 1626, the Council of Formosa ordered all Chinese individuals living or trading in Taiwan to obtain a license to \"distinguish the pirates from the traders and workers\". This residence permit eventually became a head tax and major source of income for the Dutch.\nZheng Zhilong supplanted Li Dan as the region's most influential pirate in 1625. Like Li Dan before him, he worked with the Dutch, even at times pillaging under the Dutch flag. At his peak, he commandeered a fleet of tens of thousands of men, according to Fujianese officials. Recognizing his large fleet of superior European-style ships, the Chinese asked the Dutch for help against Zheng. Company officials were told that if they refused their help, their main Chinese trading partner, Xu Xinsu, would no longer be permitted to trade with the company but would instead \"be destroyed along with his entire family.\" The Dutch agreed, but acted too late, and Zheng sacked the city of Xiamen. Now considering Zheng too powerful to fight against, in 1628 Chinese authorities awarded him with an official title and imperial rank to appease him. Zheng became the \"Patrolling Admiral\" responsible for clearing the coast of pirates, and eliminated his competitors. In the summer of 1633, a Dutch fleet and the pirate Liu Xiang carried out a successful sneak attack, destroying Zheng's fleet. On 22 October 1633, Zheng forces lured the Dutch fleet and their pirate allies into an ambush and defeated them. The Dutch reconciled with Zheng and he arranged for more Chinese trade in Taiwan. In 1637, Liu was defeated by Zheng.\nJapanese trade.\nThe Japanese had been trading for Chinese products in Taiwan since before the Dutch arrived in 1624. In 1593, Toyotomi Hideyoshi attempted but failed at compelling Taiwan into a tributary relationship as the island lacked a unified government.60 In 1609, the Tokugawa shogunate sent an exploratory mission to the island. In 1609 and 1615, Tokugawa Ieyasu sent expeditions to attack Penghu and Taiwan. General Shen of Wuyu was sent to Keelung against the Japanese invaders and sunk one of their ships, forcing them to retreat. In 1616, Murayama T\u014dan sent 13 vessels to conquer Taiwan. The fleet was dispersed by a typhoon.\nIn 1625, Batavia ordered the governor of Taiwan to prevent the Japanese from trading because they paid more for silk. The Dutch also restricted Japanese trade with the Ming dynasty. The loss of Japanese trade made trade in Taiwan far less profitable. After 1635, the shogun forbade Japanese from going abroad and eliminated the Japanese threat to the company. The VOC expanded into previous Japanese markets in Southeast Asia.\nSpanish Formosa.\nIn 1626, the Spanish Empire, viewing the Dutch presence on Taiwan as a threat to their colony in the Philippines, established a settlement at Sant\u00edsima Trinidad on the northeast coast (modern Keelung), building Fort San Salvador. They also built Fort Santo Domingo in the northwest (modern Tamsui) in 1629 but abandoned it by 1638 due to conflicts with the local population. The small colony was plagued by disease, faced hostile locals, and received little support from Manila, who viewed the fortresses as a drain on their resources.\nIn August 1641, the Dutch and their native allies tried to take the Spanish fortresses manned by a small Spanish-Kampanpagan-Cagayano force but abandoned the attempt when the commander realised they had insufficient cannon to mount a successful siege. In August 1642, a second Dutch invasion with a larger and better equipped force succeeded in capturing the forts. The Spanish as well as Filipinos plus Hispanic-Americans, who had manned the fortresses, dispersed to live with the natives or retreated to the Philippines.\nDutch colonization.\nAccording to Salvador Diaz, a pirate informant who worked in the protection racket business with ties to the Portuguese, initially there were only 320 Dutch soldiers and they were \"short, miserable, and very dirty.\" Conditions were probably not as bad as described by Diaz. Dutch records state that there were 450 soldiers in 1626. Dutch ships wrecked at Liuqiu in 1624 and 1631; their crews were killed by the inhabitants. In 1633, an expedition consisting of 250 Dutch soldiers, 40 Chinese pirates, and 250 Taiwanese natives were sent against Liuqiu Island but met with little success.\nThe Dutch allied with Sinkan, a small village that provided them with firewood, venison and fish. In 1625, they bought land from the Sinkanders and built the town of Sakam for Dutch and Chinese merchants. Initially the other villages maintained peace with the Dutch. In 1625, the Dutch attacked 170 Chinese pirates in Wankan but were driven off. Encouraged by the Dutch failure, Mattau warriors raided Sinkan. The Dutch returned and drove off the pirates. The people of Sinkan then attacked Mattau and Baccluan, and sought protection from Japan. In 1629, Pieter Nuyts visited Sinkan with 60 musketeers. After Nuyts left, the musketeers were killed in an ambush by Mattau and Soulang warriors. On 23 November 1629, an expedition set out and burned most of Baccluan, killing many of its people, who the Dutch believed harbored proponents of the previous massacre. Baccluan, Mattau, and Soulang people continued to harass company employees until late 1633 when Mattau and Soulang went to war with each other.\nIn 1635, 475 soldiers from Batavia arrived in Taiwan. By this point even Sinkan was on bad terms with the Dutch. Soldiers were sent into the village and arrested those who plotted rebellion. In the winter of 1635 the Dutch defeated Mattau and Baccluan. In 1636, a large expedition was sent against Liuqiu Island. The Dutch and their allies chased about 300 inhabitants into caves, sealed the entrances, and killed them with poisonous fumes. The native population of 1100 was removed from the island. They were enslaved with the men sent to Batavia while the women and children became servants and wives for the Dutch officers. The Dutch planned to depopulate the outlying islands. The villages of Taccariang, Soulang, and Tevorang were also pacified. In 1642, the Dutch massacred the people of Liuqiu island again.\nThe Dutch estimated in 1650 that there were around 50,000 natives in the western plains region; the Dutch Formosa ruled around \"315 tribal villages with a total population of around 68,600, estimated 40\u201350% of the entire indigenes of the island\". The Dutch tried to convince the natives to give up hunting and adopt sedentary farming but their efforts were unsuccessful. The VOC administered the island and its predominantly aboriginal population until 1662. They set up a tax system and schools to teach romanized script of Formosan languages and evangelize Christianity. They tried to teach the native children the Dutch language but the effort was abandoned after failing to produce good results. The native Taiwanese religion was primarily animist. Practices like mandatory abortion, marital infidelity, nakedness, and non-observation of the Christian Sabbath were considered sinful. The Bible was translated into the native languages. This was the first entrance of Christianity into Taiwan.\nThe Dutch levied a tax on all imports and exports. A tax was also levied on every non-Dutch person above the age of six. This poll tax was highly unpopular and caused the major insurrections in 1640 and 1652. A tax was imposed on hunting through licenses for pit-traps and snaring. Although its control was mainly limited to the western plain of the island, the Dutch systems were adopted by succeeding occupiers. The Dutch originally sought to use their castle Zeelandia at Tayowan as a trading base between Japan and China, but soon realized the potential of the huge deer populations that roamed Taiwan's western regions.\nChinese settlers.\n \nThe VOC encouraged Chinese migration to Taiwan and provided a military and administrative structure for Chinese immigration. It advertised to the Chinese a number of economic benefits and even paid them to move to Taiwan. Thousands of Chinese, mostly young single men, became rice and sugar planters.\nIn 1625, the company started advertising Provintia as a site of settlement. The next year the town caught fire and both the Chinese and company personnel left. In 1629, the natives of Mattau and Soulang attacked Sakam and chased away the inhabitants of Provintia. In 1632, the company encouraged the Chinese to plant sugarcane in Sakam. In the spring of 1635, 300 Chinese laborers arrived. The Chinese initially cultivated rice but lost interest in the crop by 1639 due to lack of access to water. This was addressed in the early 1640s and rice production resumed. Various industries sprung up and in the 1640s the Dutch began to tax them, causing some discontent. After 1648, nearly all company revenue came from the Chinese.\nThe Chinese were allowed to own property in a limited area. The Dutch attempted to prevent the Chinese from mingling with the natives. The natives traded meat and hides for salt, iron, and clothing from Chinese traders. In 1634 the Dutch ordered the Chinese to sell deerskins to only the company. By 1636, Chinese hunters were entering previously native lands cleared by the Dutch. Commercial hunters replaced the natives and by 1638 the future of the deer population was in question. Restrictions on hunting were implemented.\nIn 1636, Favorolang, the largest aboriginal village north of Mattau, killed three Chinese and wounded several others. From August to November, Favrolangers appeared near Fort Zeelandia and captured a Chinese fishing vessel. The next year the Dutch and their native allies defeated Favorolang. The expedition was paid for by the Chinese populace. When peace negotiations failed, the Dutch blamed a group of Chinese at Favorolang. The Favorolangers continued their attacks until 1638. In 1640 an incident involving the capture of a Favorolang leader and the ensuing death of three Dutch hunters near Favorolang resulted in the banning of Chinese hunters from Favorolang territory. The Dutch blamed the Chinese and orders were given to restrict Chinese residency and travel. No Chinese vessel was allowed around Taiwan unless it carried a license. An expedition was ordered to chase away the Chinese from the land and to subjugate the natives to the north. In November 1642, an expedition set out northward, killing 19 natives and 11 Chinese. A policy banning any Chinese from living north of Mattau was implemented. Later the Chinese were allowed to conduct trade in Favorolang with a permit. The Favorolangers were told to capture any Chinese who did not possess a permit.\nIn the late 1630s, Batavia started pressuring the authority in Taiwan to increase revenues. The Dutch started collecting voluntary donations from the Chinese. In addition to a 10 percent tax on numerous products and real estate sales, they also implemented a residency-permit tax. Chinese settlers began protesting the residency tax, that the Dutch harassed them for pay. The Dutch thought the Chinese were exploiting the natives by selling at high prices. The sale of rights to trade with aborigines was not just a way to raise profits but to keep track of the Chinese and prevent them from mingling with the natives.\nOn 8 September 1652, a Chinese farmer, Guo Huaiyi, and an army of peasants attacked Sakam. Most of the Dutch were able to find refuge but others were captured and executed. Over the next two days, natives and Dutch killed around 500 Chinese. On 11 September, four or five thousand Chinese rebels clashed with the company soldiers and their native allies. The rebels fled; some 4,000 Chinese were killed. The rebellion and its ensuing massacre destroyed the rural labor force. Although the crops survived almost unscathed, there was a below average harvest for 1653. However thousands of Chinese migrated to Taiwan due to war on the mainland and a modest recovery of agriculture occurred. Anti-Chinese measures increased. Natives were reminded to watch the Chinese and not to engage with them. However, in terms of military preparations, little was done. In May 1654, Fort Zeelandia was afflicted by locusts, a plague, and an earthquake.\nEnd of Dutch rule.\nZheng Chenggong, known in Dutch sources as Koxinga, was the son of famed pirate Zheng Zhilong and his Japanese wife Tagawa Matsu. He studied at the Imperial Academy in Nanjing. When Beijing fell in 1644 to rebels, Chenggong and his followers declared their loyalty to the Ming dynasty and he was bestowed the title Guoxingye (Lord of the Imperial surname). Chenggong continued the resistance against the Qing from Xiamen. In 1650 he planned a major offensive from Guangdong. The Qing deployed a large army to the area and Chenggong decided to ferry his army along the coast but a storm hindered his movements. The Qing launched a surprise attack on Xiamen, forcing him to return to protect it. From 1656 to 1658 he planned to take Nanjing. Chenggong encircled Nanjing on 24 August 1659. Qing reinforcements arrived and broke Chenggong's army, forcing them to retreat to Xiamen. In 1660 the Qing embarked on a coastal evacuation policy to starve Chenggong of his source of livelihood. Some of the rebels during the Guo Huaiyi rebellion had expected aid from Chenggong and some company officials believed that the rebellion had been incited by him.\nIn the spring of 1655 no silk junks arrived in Taiwan. Some company officials suspected that this was a plan by Chenggong to harm them. In 1655, the governor of Taiwan received a letter from Chenggong referring to the Chinese in Taiwan as his subjects. He commanded them to stop trading with the Spanish. Chenggong directly addressed the Chinese leaders in Taiwan rather than Dutch authorities, stating that he would withhold his junks from trading in Taiwan if the Dutch would not guarantee their safety. Chenggong had increased foreign trade by sending junks to various regions and Batavia was wary of this competition. Batavia sent a small fleet to Southeast Asian ports to intercept Chenggong's junks. One junk was captured but another junk managed to escape.\nThe Taiwanese trade slowed and for several months in late 1655 and early 1656 not a single Chinese vessel arrived in Tayouan. Even low-cost goods grew scarce and the value of aboriginal products fell. The system of selling Chinese merchants the right to trade in aboriginal villages fell apart. On 9 July 1656, a junk flying Chenggong's flag arrived at Fort Zeelandia. Chenggong wrote that he was angry with the Dutch but since Chinese people lived in Taiwan, he would allow them to trade on the Chinese coast for 100 days so long as only Taiwanese products were sold. Chinese merchants began leaving. Chenggong confiscated a Chinese junk from Tayouan trading pepper in Xiamen, causing Chinese merchants to abort their trade voyages. Chinese merchants refused to buy the company's foreign wares and even sold their own foreign wares, causing prices to collapse.\nChinese merchants in aboriginal villages ran out of goods to trade for aboriginal products. Chinese farmers also suffered due to the exodus of Chinese. By the end of 1656, Chinese farmers were asking for relief from debts and many could barely find food for themselves.\nChenggong retreated from his stronghold in Amoy (Xiamen city) and attacked the Dutch colony in Taiwan in the hope of establishing a strategic base to marshal his troops to retake his base at Amoy. On 23 March 1661, Zheng's fleet set sail from Kinmen with a fleet carrying around 25,000 soldiers and sailors. The fleet arrived at Tayouan on 2 April. Zheng's forces routed 240 Dutch soldiers at Baxemboy Island in the Bay of Taiwan and landed at the bay of \"Luermen\". Three Dutch ships attacked the Chinese junks and destroyed several until their main warship exploded. The remaining ships were unable to keep Zheng from controlling the waters around Taiwan.\nOn 4 April, Fort Provintia surrendered to Zheng's forces. Following a nine-month siege, Chenggong captured the Dutch fortress Zeelandia and established a base in Taiwan. The Dutch held out at Keelung until 1668 when they withdrew from Taiwan completely.\nKingdom of Tungning (1661\u20131683).\nConquest.\nKoxinga renamed Zeelandia to Anping and Provintia to Chikan. On 29 May 1662, Chikan was renamed to \"Ming Eastern Capital\" (\"Dongdu Mingjing\"). Later \"Eastern Capital\" (\"Dongdu\") was renamed \"Dongning\" (Wades Giles: Tungning), which means \"Eastern Pacification,\" by Zheng Jing, Koxinga's son. One prefecture and two counties (Tianxing and Wannian) were established in Taiwan.\nKoxinga died on 23 June 1662. Chinese nationalists in the 20th century invoked Koxinga for his patriotism and political loyalty against Qing and Western influence.\nRetreat to Taiwan.\nZheng Jing's succession was contested by Zheng Miao, Zheng Chenggong's fifth son. Zheng Jing arrived in Taiwan in December 1662 and defeated his enemies. The infighting caused some followers to defect to the Qing. By 1663, some 3,985 officials and officers, 40,962 soldiers, 64,230 civilians, and 900 ships in Fujian had defected from Zheng territory. To combat population decline, Zheng Jing promoted migration to Taiwan. Between 1665 and 1669 a large number of Fujianese moved to Taiwan. Some 9,000 Chinese were brought to Taiwan by Zheng Jing.\nThe Qing dynasty enacted a sea-ban to starve out the Zheng forces. In 1663, the writer Xia Lin testified that the Zhengs were short on supplies and the people suffered tremendous hardship. The Dutch attacked Zheng ships in Xiamen but failed to take the town. The Dutch assisted the Qing in combat against the Zheng fleet in October 1663, resulting in the capture of Zheng bases in Xiamen and Kinmen. The remaining Zheng forces fled southward and completely evacuated from the mainland coast in the spring of 1664. Qing-Dutch forces attempted to invade Taiwan twice in December 1664 and again in 1666 but were impacted by adverse weather. The Dutch continued to attack Zheng ships occasionally but were unable to take back the island.\nAfter Zheng Jing was ejected from the mainland, the Qing tried to settle the conflict through negotiation. In 1669 the Qing offered Zheng significant autonomy in Taiwan if they shaved their heads in the Manchu style. Zheng Jing declined and insisted on a relationship with the Qing similar to Korea. In 1670 and 1673, Zheng forces seized vessels on their way to the mainland. In 1671, Zheng forces raided the coast of Zhejiang and Fujian. In 1674, Zheng Jing joined the Revolt of the Three Feudatories and recaptured Xiamen. He imported war material and made an alliance with Geng Jingzhong in Fujian. They fell afoul of each other not long afterward. Zheng captured Quanzhou and Zhangzhou in 1674. After Geng and other rebels surrendered to the Qing in 1676 and 1677, the tide turned against the Zheng forces. Quanzhou was lost to the Qing on 12 March 1677 and then Zhangzhou and Haicheng on 5 April. Zheng forces counterattacked and retook Haicheng in August. Zheng naval forces blockaded Quanzhou and tried to retake the city in August 1678 but they were forced to retreat when Qing reinforcements arrived. Zheng forces suffered heavy casualties in a battle in January 1679. On 20 March 1680, the Qing fleet led by Wan Zhengse defeated Zheng naval forces near Quanzhou. Many Zheng commanders and soldiers defected to the Qing. Xiamen was abandoned. On 10 April, Zheng Jing's war on the mainland came to a close. Zheng Jing died in early 1681.\nSinicization.\nZheng Jing never relinquished the trappings of a Ming government, enabling him to draw support from Ming loyalists. In Taiwan, the Six Ministries were established, however oversight of all affairs was given to military leaders. Zheng's family and officers remained at the top of the administration. They enacted programs of agricultural and infrastructural development. By 1666, grain harvests were more than capable of sustaining the population. Zheng also advised commoners to improve their dwellings and for temples dedicated to the Buddha and local Fujianese deities to be constructed. An Imperial Academy and Confucian Shrine were established in 1665 and 1666 while regular civil service examinations were implemented.\nZheng dispatched teachers to aboriginal tribes to provide them with supplies and teach them more advanced farming techniques. Schools were set up to teach the aboriginal people the Chinese language and those who refused were punished. The expansion of Chinese settlements often came at the expense of aboriginal tribes, causing rebellions over the course of Zheng rule. In one campaign, several hundred Shalu tribes people in modern Taichung were killed. The Chinese population in Taiwan more than doubled under Zheng rule. Zheng disbanded the troops and turned them into military colonies.\nBy the start of 1684, a year after the end of Zheng rule, areas under cultivation in Taiwan had tripled in size since the end of the Dutch era in 1660. Zheng merchant fleets continued to operate between Japan and Southeast Asian countries, reaping profits as a center of trade. They extracted a tax from traders for safe passage through the Taiwan Strait. Zheng Taiwan held a monopoly on certain commodities such as deer skin and sugarcane, which sold at a high price in Japan. Zheng Taiwan achieved greater economic diversification than the profit-driven Dutch colony and cultivated more types of grain, vegetables, fruits, and seafood. By the end of Zheng rule in 1683, the government was extracting over 30% more annual income in silver than under the Dutch in 1655. Sugar exports exceeded Dutch figures in 1658 while deerskin output remained the same.\nShi Lang.\nShi Lang led the Qing conquest of Zheng Taiwan. He was originally a military leader working under Zheng Zhilong, the father of Zheng Chenggong. He had a falling out with Chenggong. After escaping imprisonment by Chenggong, Shi Lang defected to the Qing dynasty and participated in a successful assault on a Zheng stronghold. In 1658, Shi was made Deputy Commander of Tongan and continued to participate in campaigns against Zheng forces. Shi relayed information about Zheng internal conflict between Chenggong and his son to Beijing. The Qing established a naval force in Fujian in 1662 and appointed Shi Lang as the commander. Shi advocated for more aggressive action against the Zhengs. On 15 May 1663, Shi attacked the Zheng fleet and succeeded in killing and capturing Zheng forces. From 18 to 20 November, the Dutch fought sea battles against Zheng forces while Shi took Xiamen. In 1664, Shi assembled a fleet of 240 ships, and in conjunction with 16,500 troops, chased remaining Zheng forces south. They failed to dislodge the last Zheng stronghold. After the defection of Zheng commander Zhou Quanbin, Zheng Jing pulled out from the remaining mainland stronghold in the spring of 1664.\nEnd of Zheng rule.\nShi Lang was instructed to arrange a peace mission to Taiwan but he did not believe Zheng Jing would accept the terms. He warned that if the Zhengs built up their strength, they would pose a serious danger. Shi detailed his plans to invade Taiwan; he argued that securing Taiwan would render garrisons unnecessary and reduce the defense spending. In 1681, Li Guangdi recommended Shi Lang to be the coordinator of the invasion force. Shi was reappointed as naval chief of Fujian on 10 September 1681. Shi's plan was to take Penghu first. The Governor-general Yao Qisheng disagreed and proposed a two pronged attack on Tamsui and Penghu at the same time. Shi thought the proposal was unrealistic and requested to be put in total control over the entire invasion force. Kangxi denied the request.\nIn Taiwan, Zheng Jing's death resulted in a coup. Zheng Keshuang murdered his brother Zheng Kezang. Political turmoil, heavy taxes, an epidemic in the north, a large fire that caused the destruction of more than a thousand houses, and suspicion of collusion with the Qing caused more Zheng followers to defect to the Qing. Zheng's deputy Commander Liu Bingzhong surrendered with his ships and men from Penghu. Orders from the Kangxi Emperor to invade Taiwan reached Yao Qisheng and Shi Lang on 6 June 1682. The invasion fleet met with unfavorable winds and was forced to turn back. Conflict between Yao and Shi led to Yao's removal in November. On 18 November 1682, Shi Lang was authorized to assume the role of supreme commander and Yao was relegated to logistics. Two attempts to sail to Penghu in February 1683 failed due to a shift in winds.\nShi's fleet of 238 ships and over 21,000 men set sail on 8 July 1683.The next day, Shi's fleet approached small islands to the northwest of Penghu. The Qing forces were met by 200 Zheng ships. Following an exchange of gunfire, the Qing were forced to retreat with Zheng forces in pursuit. The Qing vanguard led by Lan Li provided cover fire for a withdrawal. The Zheng side also suffered heavy losses, making Liu reluctant to pursue the disarrayed Qing forces. On 11 July, Shi regrouped his squadrons and requested reinforcements at Bazhao. On 16 July, reinforcements arrived. Shi divided the main striking force into eight squadrons of seven ships with himself leading from the middle. Two flotillas of 50 small ships sailed in different directions as a diversion. The remaining vessels served as rear reinforcements.\nThe battle took place in the bay of Magong. The Zheng garrison fired at the Qing ships and then set sail from the harbor with about 100 ships to meet the Qing forces. Shi concentrated fire on one big enemy ship at a time until all of Zheng's battle ships were sunk by the end of 17 July. Approximately 12,000 Zheng forces perished. Liu escaped to Taiwan while the garrison commanders surrendered. The Qing captured Penghu on 18 July. Shi Lang arrived in Taiwan on 5 October 1683 to supervise the surrender, which went smoothly. Zheng Keshuang and other leaders shaved their head in the Manchu style. The use of the Ming calendar in Taiwan was ended.\nQing dynasty (1683\u20131895).\nAnnexation.\nShi Lang remained in Taiwan for 98 days before returning to Fujian on 29 December 1683. In Fujian, some officials from the central government advocated for transporting all of Taiwan's inhabitants to the mainland and abandoning the island. One argued that defending Taiwan was impossible and increasing defense expenditures was unfavorable.\nShi opposed abandoning Taiwan, arguing that this would leave it open to other enemies. He assured that defending Taiwan would only take 10,000 men and reduce garrison forces on the coast. Shi convinced all the attendees at the Fujian conference, with the exception of Subai, that it was in their best interests to annex Taiwan. On 6 March 1684, Kangxi accepted Shi's proposal to set up permanent military establishments in Penghu and Taiwan and authorized the establishment of Taiwan Prefecture, divided into three counties, as a prefecture of Fujian Province.\nTaiwan administration.\nThe Qing initially forbade mainlanders from moving to Taiwan and sent most of the people back to the mainland, after which the official population of Taiwan was only 50,000. Manpower shortage compelled local officials to solicit migrants from the mainland despite restrictions. Sometimes even warships transported civilians to Taiwan. By 1711, illegal migrants amounted to tens of thousands yearly. Individuals such as Lin Qianguang, a native of Fujian Province, entered Taiwan. He held office in Taiwan from 1687 to 1691 but lived in Taiwan for several years beforehand. He wrote one of the first accounts of aboriginal life in Taiwan in 1685.\nThe first recorded regulation on the permit system was made in 1712 but it probably existed as early as 1684. Its purpose was to reduce population pressure on Taiwan. The government believed that Taiwan was unable to support a larger population before leading to conflict. Regulations banned migrants from bringing their families. To prevent undesirables from entering Taiwan, the government recommended only allowing those who had property or relatives in Taiwan to enter Taiwan. A regulation to this effect was implemented in 1730.\nOver the 18th century, regulations on migration remained largely consistent. Early regulations focused on the character of permit receivers while later regulations reiterated measures such as patrolling and punishment. The only changes were to the status of families. Families were barred from entering Taiwan to ensure that migrants would return to their families. The overwhelmingly male migrants had few prospects and thus married locally, resulting in the idiom \"has Tangshan father, no Tangshan mother\" (). Marrying aboriginal women was prohibited in 1737 on the grounds that it interfered in aboriginal life and was used as a means to claim aboriginal land.\nMigrant families were allowed to enter Taiwan legally for a period between 1732 and 1740. In 1739, opposition to family migrations claimed that vagrants and undesirables were taking advantage of the system. Families were barred again from 1740 to 1746. In 1760, family crossings to Taiwan became legal again for a short period. Starting in 1771, Qing restrictions on cross-strait migration relaxed as they realized that the policies were unenforceable. Even during periods of legal migration, more individuals chose to hire illegal ferry service than to deal with official procedures. After lifting restrictions on family crossings in 1760, only 277 people requested permits after a year, the majority of them being government employees. In comparison, within a ten-month period in 1758\u20131759, nearly 60,000 people were arrested for illegal crossings. In 1790, an office was set up to manage civilian travel between Taiwan and the mainland, and the Qing government ceased to actively interfere in cross-strait migration. In 1875, all restrictions on entering Taiwan were repealed.\nSettler expansion (1684\u20131795).\nFrom 1661 to 1796, the Qing restricted expansion of territory in Taiwan. Taiwan was garrisoned with 8,000 soldiers at key ports and civil administration was kept to a minimum. Three prefectures nominally covered the entire western plains but effective administration covered a smaller area. A permit was required for settlers to go beyond the mid-point of the western plains. In 1715, the governor-general of Fujian-Zhejiang recommended land reclamation in Taiwan but the Kangxi Emperor was worried that this would cause instability and conflicts.\nUnder the reign of the Yongzheng Emperor (r. 1722\u20131735), the Qing extended control over the entire western plains to better control settlers and maintain security. This was not an active colonization policy but a reflection of continued illegal crossings and land reclamation. After the Zhu Yigui uprising in 1721, Lan Dingyuan, an advisor to Lan Tingzhen, who led forces against the rebellion, advocated for land reclamation to strengthen government control over Chinese settlers and to incorporate aboriginals under their administration.\nUnder the reign of the Qianlong Emperor (r. 1735\u20131796), the administrative structure of Taiwan remained largely unchanged. After the Lin Shuangwen rebellion in 1786, Qianlong agreed that leaving fertile lands to unproductive aborigines only attracted illegal settlers. The Qing did little to administer the aborigines and rarely tried to impose control over them. Aborigines were classified into two categories: acculturated aborigines (\"shufan\") and non-acculturated aborigines (\"shengfan\"). To the Qing, \"shufan\" were aborigines who paid taxes and had adopted Han Chinese culture. When the Qing annexed Taiwan, there were 46 aboriginal villages under government control, likely inherited from the Zheng regime. In the Yongzheng period, 108 aboriginal villages submitted as a result of enticement from the regional commander, Lin Liang. \"Shengfan\" who paid taxes but did not practice Han Chinese culture were called \"guihua shengfan\" (submitted non-acculturated aborigines).\nThe Qianlong administration forbade enticing aborigines to submit due to fear of conflict. In the early Qianlong period, there were 299 named aboriginal villages. Records show 93 \"shufan\" villages and 61 \"guihua shengfan\" villages. The number of \"shufan\" villages remained stable throughout the Qianlong period. Two aboriginal affairs sub-prefects were appointed to manage aboriginal affairs in 1766. One in charge of the north and the other in charge of the south. Boundaries were built to keep the mountain aborigines out of settlement areas. The policy of marking settler boundaries and segregating them from aboriginal territories became official policy in 1722. Fifty-four stelae were used to mark crucial points along the boundary. Settlers were forbidden from crossing into aboriginal territory but settler encroachment continued, and the boundaries were rebuilt in 1750, 1760, 1784, and 1790. Settlers were forbidden from marrying aborigines as marriage was one way to obtain land.\nAdministrative expansion (1796\u20131874).\nQing quarantine policies were maintained in the early 19th century but attitudes towards aboriginal territory shifted. Local officials repeatedly advocated for colonization, especially in the cases of Gamalan and Shuishalian in modern Yilan County in northeastern Taiwan. The Kavalan people had started paying taxes as early as the Kangxi period (r. 1661\u20131722), but they were non-acculturated aborigines.\nIn 1787, a Chinese settler named Wu Sha tried to colonize Gamalan but was defeated. The next year, the Taiwan prefect, Yang Tingli, was convinced to support Wu Sha. Yang recommended colonization of Gamalan to the Fujian governor but the governor refused. In 1797, a new Tamsui sub-prefect supported Wu in his colonization efforts despite the ban. Wu's successors were unable to register their land on government registers. Local officials could not officially recognize it.\nIn 1806 the pirate fleet of Cai Qian was within the vicinity of Gamalan. Taiwan Prefect Yang argued that abandoning Gamalan would cause trouble on the frontier. Later another pirate band tried to occupy Gamalan. Yang recommended establishing administration and land surveys in Gamalan. In 1809, the emperor ordered for Gamalan to be incorporated. An imperial decree for the formal incorporation of Gamalan was issued and a Gamalan sub-prefect was appointed.\nUnlike Gamalan, debates on Shuishalian (upstream areas of the Zhuoshui River and Wu River) resulted in its continued status as a forbidden area. Six aboriginal villages occupied the flat and fertile basin area of Shuishalian. The aboriginals had submitted as early as 1693 but they remained non-acculturated. In 1814, some settlers obtained reclamation permits through fabricating land lease requests. In 1816, government troops evicted the settlers. Multiple officials recommended opening up Shuishalian between 1823 and 1848, but these recommendations were ignored. The subject of land reclamation continued to be a topic of discussion and the Tamsui subprefecture gazetteer in 1871 openly called for colonization.\nExpansion in reaction to crises (1875\u20131895).\nIn 1874, Japan invaded southern Taiwan in what is known as the Mudan Incident (Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874)). For six months Japanese soldiers occupied southern Taiwan until the Qing paid an indemnity in return for their withdrawal.\nThe imperial commissioner for Taiwan, Shen Baozhen, recommended subjugating the aborigines and populating their territory with Chinese settlers to prevent Japanese encroachment. The administration of Taiwan was expanded and campaigns against the aborigines were launched. Starting in 1874, mountain roads were built and aborigines were brought into formal submission. In 1875, the ban on entering Taiwan was lifted. In 1877, 21 guidelines on subjugating aborigines and opening the mountains were issued. Agencies for recruiting settlers were established. Efforts to promote settlement in Taiwan petered out soon after.\nThe Sino-French War broke on in 1883 and the French occupied Keelung in northern Taiwan in 1884. The French army withdrew in 1885. Efforts to colonize aboriginal territory were renewed under Liu Mingchuan, the Taiwan defense commissioner. In 1887, Taiwan became its own province. During Liu's tenure, Taiwan's capital was shifted to modern Taichung. Taipei was built up as a temporary capital and then became the permanent capital in 1893. Liu's efforts to increase revenues were mixed due to foreign pressure to reduce levies. A cadastral reform survey was undertaken from June 1886 to January 1890 that met with opposition in the south. The receipts from the land tax reform fell short of expectations.\nElectric lighting, modern weaponry, a railway, cable and telegraph lines, a local steamship service, and industrial machinery were introduced to Taiwan. A telegraph line from Tainan to Tamsui was constructed in 1886\u201388 and a railway connecting Keelung, Taipei, and Hsinchu was built. These efforts met with mixed results. The telegraph line only functioned in bursts of a week due to a difficult overland connection and the railway required an overhaul, serviced small rolling stock, and carried little freight. Taiwan attracted few laborers and few settlers went to Taiwan due to the aborigines and harsh climate. Governor Liu was criticized for the high cost and little gain of colonization activities. Liu resigned in 1891 and the colonization efforts ceased.\nA Taiwan Pacification and Reclamation Head Office was established. By 1887, roughly 90,000 aborigines had formally submitted to Qing rule. This number increased to 148,479 aborigines over the following years. However the cost of getting them to submit was exorbitant. The Qing offered them materials and paid village chiefs monthly allowances. Not all the aborigines were under effective control and land reclamation in eastern Taiwan occurred at a slow pace. From 1884 to 1891, Liu launched more than 40 military campaigns against the aborigines with 17,500 soldiers. A third of the invasion force was killed or disabled in the conflict.\nBy the end of the Qing period, the western plains were developed farmland areas with about 2.5 million Chinese inhabitants. The mountainous areas were still largely autonomous and aboriginal land loss occurred at a relatively slow pace. However, by the last years of Qing rule, most of the plains aborigines had been acculturated to Han culture, around 20\u201330% could speak their mother tongues, and they gradually lost their land ownership and rent collection rights.\nRebellions.\nIn 1723, aborigines along the central coastal plain rebelled. Troops from southern Taiwan were sent to put down this revolt, but in their absence, Han settlers in Fengshan County rose up in revolt. By 1732, five different ethnic groups were in revolt but the rebellion was defeated by the end of the year. During the Qianlong period (1735\u20131796), the 93 \"shufan\" acculturated aborigine villages never rebelled and over 200 non-acculturated aboriginal villages submitted. During the 200 years of Qing rule in Taiwan, the plains aborigines rarely rebelled against the government and the mountain aborigines were left to their own devices until the last 20 years of Qing rule. Most rebellions were caused by Han settlers.\nIn 1720, there was an upset in Taiwan due to increased taxation. They gathered around Zhu Yigui and supported him in an anti-Qing rebellion. Hakka leader Lin Junying from the south also joined the rebellion. In March 1720, Zhu and Lin attacked Taiwan County. In less than two weeks, the rebels had defeated Qing forces across Taiwan. The Hakka troops left Zhu to follow Lin north. The Qing sent a fleet under the command of Shi Shibian; the rebellion was defeated and Zhu was executed.\nIn 1786, members of the Tiandihui society were arrested for failing to make tax payments. The Tiandihui broke into the jail and rescued their members. When Qing troops were sent to arrest Lin Shuangwen, the leader of the Tiandihui led his forces to defeat the Qing troops. Many of the rebel army's troops came from new arrivals from mainland China who could not find land. Lin attacked Changhua County, killing 2,000 civilians. In early 1787, 50,000 Qing troops under Li Shiyao were sent to put down the rebellion. Lin tried to enlist the support of the Hakka people but they sent their troops to support the Qing. Despite the Tiandihui's ostensibly anti-Qing stance, its members were generally anti-government and were not motivated by ethnic or national interest, resulting in social discord. In 1788, 10,000 Qing troops led by Fuk'anggan and Hailanqa were sent to Taiwan and defeated the rebellion; Lin was executed.\nInvasions.\nBy 1831, the East India Company decided it no longer wanted to trade with the Chinese on their terms and planned more aggressive measures. Given the strategic and commercial value of Taiwan, there were British suggestions in 1840 and 1841 to seize the island. William Huttman wrote to Lord Palmerston pointing out \"China's benign rule over Taiwan and the strategic and commercial importance of the island.\" He suggested that Taiwan could be occupied with only a warship and less than 1,500 troops, and the English would be able to spread Christianity among the natives as well as develop trade. In 1841, during the First Opium War, the British tried to scale the heights around the harbor of Keelung three times but failed. The British transport ship \"Nerbudda\" became shipwrecked near Keelung Harbour due to a typhoon. In October 1841, HMS \"Nimrod\" sailed to Keelung to search for the \"Nerbudda\" survivors, but after Captain Joseph Pearse found out that they were sent south for imprisonment, he ordered the bombardment of the harbour and destroyed 27 sets of cannon before returning to Hong Kong. The brig \"Ann\" also shipwrecked in March 1842. The commanders of Taiwan, Dahonga and Yao Ying, filed a disingenuous report to the emperor, claiming to have defended against an attack from the Keelung fort. Most of the survivors\u2014over 130 from the \"Nerbudda\" and 54 from the \"Ann\"\u2014were executed in Tainan in August 1842. The false report was later discovered and the officials in Taiwan punished.\nOn 12 March 1867, the American barque \"Rover\" shipwrecked offshore off of southern Taiwan. The captain, his wife, and some men escaped. The Koaluts (Guizaijiao) tribe of the Paiwan people captured and killed them. Two rescue attempts failed. Le Gendre, the US Consul, demanded that the Qing send troops to help him negotiate with the aborigines. On 10 September, Garrison Commander Liu Mingcheng led 500 Qing troops to southern Taiwan with Le Gendre. The aboriginal chief, Tanketok (Toketok), explained that a long time ago the white men came and almost exterminated the Koaluts tribe and their ancestors passed down their desire for revenge. They agreed that the mountain aborigines would help the castaways. It was later discovered that Tanketok did not have absolute control over the tribes. Le Gendre castigated China as a semi-civilized power for not seizing the territory of a \"wild race\".\nIn December 1871, a Ryukyuan vessel shipwrecked on the southeastern tip of Taiwan and 54 sailors were killed by aborigines. The shipwreck and murder of the sailors came to be known as the Mudan incident, although it did not take place in Mudan (J. Botan), but at Kuskus (Gaoshifo). The Ryukyu Kingdom did not ask Japanese officials for help regarding the shipwreck. Instead its king, Sh\u014d Tai, sent a reward to Chinese officials in Fuzhou for the return of the 12 survivors. The Mudan incident did not immediately cause any concern in Japan; it was not until April 1874 that it became an international concern. The Imperial Japanese Army started urging the government to invade Taiwan in 1872 with the Mudan incident as casus belli. The king of Ryukyu was dethroned by Japan and preparations for an invasion of Taiwan were undertaken in the same year. On 17 May 1874, Saig\u014d J\u016bd\u014d led the main force, 3,600 strong, aboard four warships. They invaded indigenous territory in southern Taiwan. On 3 June, they burnt all the villages that had been occupied. On 1 July, the new leader of the Mudan tribe and the chief of Kuskus surrendered. The Japanese settled in and established large camps with no intention of withdrawing, but in August and September 600 soldiers fell ill. The death toll rose to 561. Negotiations with Qing China began on 10 September. The Western Powers pressured China not to cause bloodshed with Japan as it would negatively impact the coastal trade. The resulting Peking Agreement was signed on 30 October. Japan gained the recognition of Ryukyu as its vassal and an indemnity payment of 500,000 taels. Japanese troops withdrew from Taiwan on 3 December.\nDuring the Sino-French War, the French invaded Taiwan during the Keelung Campaign in 1884. On 5 August 1884, S\u00e9bastien Lesp\u00e8s bombarded Keelung's harbor and destroyed the gun placements. The next day, the French attempted to take Keelung but failed to defeat the larger Chinese force led by Liu Mingchuan and were forced to withdraw. On 1 October, Am\u00e9d\u00e9e Courbet landed with 2,250 French forces and defeated a smaller Chinese force, capturing Keelung. French efforts to capture Tamsui failed. The French shelled Tamsui, destroying not only the forts but also foreign buildings. Some 800 French troops landed on Shalin beach near Tamsui but they were repelled by Chinese forces. The French imposed a blockade Taiwan from 23 October 1884 until April 1885 but the execution was not completely effective. French ships around mainland China's coast attacked any junk they could find and captured its occupants to be shipped to Keelung for constructing defensive works. However, for every junk the French captured, another five junks arrived with supplies at Takau and Anping. The immediate effect of the blockade was a sharp in decline of legal trade and income.\nIn late January 1885, Chinese forces suffered a serious defeat around Keelung. Although the French captured Keelung they were unable to move beyond its perimeters. In March the French tried to take Tamsui again and failed. At sea, the French bombarded Penghu on 28 March. Penghu surrendered on 31 March but many of the French soon grew ill and 1,100 soldiers and later 600 more were debilitated. An agreement was reached on 15 April 1885 and an end to hostilities was announced. The French evacuation from Keelung was completed on 21 June 1885 and Penghu remained under Chinese control.\nEnd of Qing rule.\nAs part of the settlement for losing the Sino-Japanese War, the Qing empire ceded the islands of Taiwan and Penghu to Japan on April 17, 1895, according to the terms of the Treaty of Shimonoseki. The loss of Taiwan would become a rallying point for the Chinese nationalist movement in the years that followed.\nEmpire of Japan (1895\u20131945).\nThe acquisition of Taiwan by Japan was the result of Prime Minister It\u014d Hirobumi's \"southern strategy\" adopted during the First Sino-Japanese War in 1894\u201395. It\u014d and Mutsu Munemitsu, the minister of foreign affairs, stipulated that Penghu and Taiwan must be ceded to Japan. These conditions were met during the signing of the Treaty of Shimonoseki on 17 April 1895. Taiwan and Penghu were transferred to Japan on 2 June.\nThe period of Japanese rule in Taiwan has been divided into three periods under according to policies: military suppression (1895\u20131915), : assimilation (1915\u201337), and : Japanization (1937\u201345). A separate policy for aborigines was implemented. The matter of assimilation, , was tied to the admonition \"impartiality and equal favor\" (\"isshi d\u014djin\") for all imperial subjects under the Emperor of Japan. Conceptually this colonial ideal conveyed the idea that metropolitan Japanese (\"naichijin\") imparted their superior culture to the subordinate islanders (\"hont\u014djin\"), who would share the common benefits.\nArmed resistance.\nThe colonial authorities encountered violent opposition in Taiwan. Five months of sustained warfare occurred after the 1895 invasion and partisan attacks continued until 1902. For the first two years the colonial authority relied mainly on military force. On 20 May, Qing officials were ordered to leave their posts. General mayhem and destruction ensued in the following months.\nJapanese forces landed on the coast of Keelung on 29 May. After the fall of Taipei on 7 June, local militia and partisan bands continued the resistance. In the south, a small Black Flag force led by Liu Yongfu delayed Japanese landings. Taiwanese gentry approach Britain and then France in a failed attempt to gain protectorate status for Taiwan,66 after which Governor Tang Jingsong attempted to carry out anti-Japanese resistance efforts as the Republic of Formosa. The Green Standard Army and Yue soldiers from Guangxi took to looting and pillaging. Taipei's gentry elite sent Koo Hsien-jung to Keelung to invite the advancing Japanese forces to proceed to Taipei and restore order. The Republic, established on 25 May, disappeared 12 days later when its leaders left for the mainland. Liu Yongfu formed a temporary government in Tainan before escaping as Japanese forces closed in. Between 200,000 and 300,000 people fled Taiwan in 1895. Chinese residents in Taiwan were given the option of selling their property and leaving by May 1897, or become Japanese citizens. From 1895 to 1897, an estimated 6,400 people sold their property and left Taiwan.\nArmed resistance by Hakka villagers broke out in the south. A series of attacks led by \"local bandits\" or \"rebels\" lasted throughout the next seven years. After 1897, uprisings by Chinese nationalists were commonplace. Luo Fuxing, a member of the Tongmenghui, was arrested and executed along with 200 others in 1913. In June 1896, 6,000 Taiwanese were slaughtered in the Yunlin Massacre. From 1898 to 1902, some 12,000 \"bandit-rebels\" were killed in addition to the 6,000\u201314,000 killed in the initial resistance war of 1895.\nMajor armed resistance was largely crushed by 1902 but minor rebellions started occurring again in 1907, such as the Beipu uprising by Hakka and Saisiyat people in 1907, Luo Fuxing in 1913 and the Tapani Incident of 1915. The Beipu uprising occurred on 14 November 1907 when a group of Hakka insurgents killed 57 Japanese officers and members of their family. In response, 100 Hakka men and boys were killed in the village of Neidaping. Luo Fuxing was an overseas Taiwanese Hakka involved with the Tongmenghui. He planned a rebellion against the Japanese with 500 fighters, resulting in the execution of more than 1,000 Taiwanese by Japanese police. Luo was killed on 3 March 1914. In 1915, Yu Qingfang organized a religious group that defied Japanese authority. In the Tapani incident, 1,413 members of Yu's group were captured. Yu and 200 of his followers were executed. After the Tapani rebels were defeated, And\u014d Teibi ordered a massacre. Military police in Tapani and Jiasian lured out anti-Japanese militants with a pardon. They were told to line up in a field, dig holes, and were then executed by firearm. According to oral tradition, some 5,000\u20136,000 people died in this incident.\nNon-violent resistance.\nNonviolent means of resistance such as the Taiwanese Cultural Association (TCA), founded by Chiang Wei-shui in 1921, continued after most violent means were exhausted. Chiang joined the \"Chinese United Alliance\" founded by Sun Yat-sen. He saw Taiwanese people as Japanese nationals of Han Chinese ethnicity and wished to position the TCA as an intermediary between China and Japan. The TCA also aimed to establish independence for Taiwan. Statements of self determination were possible at the time due to the relatively progressive era of Taish\u014d Democracy. \"Taiwan is Taiwan people's Taiwan\" became a common position for all anti-Japanese groups. In December 1920, Lin Hsien-tang and 178 Taiwanese residents filed a petition seeking self-determination. It was rejected.\nThe TCA had over 1,000 members of various backgrounds from across Taiwan except in indigenous areas. The TCA promoted vernacular Chinese language. In 1923 the TCA co-founded \"Taiwan People's News\" which was published in Tokyo and then shipped to Taiwan. It was subjected to censorship and seven or eight issues were banned. Chiang and others applied to set up a parliament for Taiwan that was deemed illegal. In 1923, 99 Alliance members were arrested and 18 were tried in court. Thirteen were convicted. Chiang was imprisoned more than ten times.\nThe TCA split in 1927 to form the New TCA and the Taiwanese People's Party, which both Chiang and Lin left for. The New TCA later became a subsidiary of the Taiwanese Communist Party and the only organization advocating Taiwanese independence. The TPP brought forth issues such as Japanese opium trafficking, the inhumane treatment of the Seediq people, and revealed the colonial authority's use of poisonous gas. In February 1931, the TPP was terminated. Chiang died on 23 August.\nAssimilation movement.\nIn 1914, Itagaki Taisuke briefly led a Taiwan assimilation movement as a response to appeals from influential Taiwanese spokesmen. In December 1914, Itagaki formally inaugurated the Taiwan D\u014dkakai, an assimilation society. Within a week, over 3,000 Taiwanese and 45 Japanese residents joined the society. After Itagaki left later that month, leaders of the society were arrested and its Taiwanese members detained or harassed. In January 1915, the Taiwan D\u014dkakai was disbanded.\nJapanese colonial policy sought to strictly segregate the Japanese and Taiwanese population until 1922. Taiwanese students who moved to Japan for their studies were able to associate more freely with Japanese and took to Japanese ways more readily than their island counterparts. However full assimilation was rare.\nAn attempt to fully Japanize the Taiwanese people was made during the \"k\u014dminka\" period (1937\u201345). The reasoning was that only as fully assimilated subjects could Taiwan's inhabitants fully commit to Japan's war and national aspirations. The \"k\u014dminka\" movement was generally unsuccessful and few Taiwanese became \"true Japanese\" due to the short time period and large population. In terms of acculturation under controlled circumstances, it can be considered relatively effective.\nEducation.\nA system of elementary common schools taught Japanese language and culture, Classical Chinese, Confucian ethics, and practical subjects like science. The emphasis was on Japanese language and ethics while Classical Chinese was included to mollify upper-class Taiwanese parents. These schools served a small percentage of the Taiwanese population and Japanese children attended their own primary schools. Post-elementary education was rare for Taiwanese people and a portion of the population continued to enroll in Qing-style private schools due to limited access to government educational institutions. Most boys attended Chinese schools while a smaller portion trained at religious schools. Elementary education was offered to those Taiwanese who could afford it.\nThe gentry was urged to promote the \"new learning\" and those invested in the Chinese education style were resentful of the proposal. Younger Taiwanese started participating in community affairs in the 1910s. Many were concerned about obtaining modern educational facilities and the discrimination they faced in obtaining spots at the few government schools. Local leaders in Taichung campaigned for the inauguration of the Taich\u016b Middle School but faced opposition from Japanese officials.\nIn 1922, an integrated school system was introduced opening common and primary schools to both Taiwanese and Japanese based on Japanese language proficiency. Few Taiwanese children could speak fluent Japanese and only the children of wealthy Taiwanese families with close ties to Japanese settlers were allowed to study alongside Japanese children. The number of Taiwanese at formerly Japanese-only elementary schools was limited to 10 percent. Some Taiwanese sought secondary education and opportunities in Japan and Manchukuo. In 1943, primary education became compulsory, and by the next year nearly three out of four children were enrolled in primary school. By 1922, around 2,000 Taiwanese students were enrolled in metropolitan Japan, increasing to 7,000 by 1942.\nJapanization.\nAfter full-scale war with China in 1937, the \"k\u014dminka\" imperial Japanization project was implemented to ensure the Taiwanese would remain subjects of the Japanese Emperor rather than support a Chinese victory. The goal was to make sure the Taiwanese people did not develop a sense of national identity. Although the stated goal was to assimilate the Taiwanese, in practice the process segregated the Japanese into their discrete areas, despite co-opting Taiwanese leaders. The organization was responsible for increasing war propaganda, donation drives, and regimenting Taiwanese life.\nAs part of the policies, Chinese language in newspapers and education were removed. China and Taiwan's history were erased from the curriculum. Chinese language use was discouraged. However even some members of model \"national language\" families from well-educated Taiwanese households failed to learn Japanese to a conversational level. A name-changing campaign was launched in 1940 to replace Chinese names with Japanese ones. Seven percent of the Taiwanese had done so by the end of the war. Characteristics of Taiwanese culture considered \"un-Japanese\" or undesirable were banned or discouraged. The Taiwanese were encouraged to pray at Shinto shrines. Some officials removed religious idols and artifacts from native places of worship.\nAboriginal policies.\nJapan continued the Qing classification of aborigines. Acculturated aborigines lost their aboriginal status. Han Chinese and \"shufan\" were both treated as Taiwanese by the Japanese. Below them were the semi-acculturated and non-acculturated \"barbarians\" outside normal administrative units and Japanese law. According to the \"S\u014dtokufu\" (Office of the Governor-General), mountain aborigines were animals under international law. The \"S\u014dtokufu\" declared all unreclaimed and forest land in Taiwan as government property, forbidding any new use of forest land. The Japanese authority denied aboriginal rights to their property and land. Han and acculturated aborigines were forbidden from any contractual relationships with aborigines. The aborigines could not enjoy property ownership and acculturated aborigines lost their rent holder rights under the new property laws.\nInitially the Japanese spent most of their time fighting Chinese insurgents and the government took on a more conciliatory approach towards aborigines. In 1903, the government implemented harsher policies. It expanded guard lines to restrict the aborigines' living space. Sakuma Samata launched a five-year plan for aboriginal management, attacking aborigines and using landmines and electrified fences to force them into submission.\nA small portion of land was set aside for aboriginal use. From 1919 to 1934, aborigines were relocated to out of the way areas. A small compensation for land use was initially given out but discontinued later on. In 1928, each aborigine was allotted three hectares of reserve land. Some of the allotted land was taken away and it was discovered that the aboriginal population was bigger than the estimated 80,000. The allotted land was reduced but they were not adhered to anyways. In 1930, the government relocated aborigines to the foothills. They were given less than half the originally promised land, or one-eighth of their ancestral lands.\nAboriginal resistance lasted until the early 1930s. By 1903, indigenous rebellions had resulted in the deaths of 1,900 Japanese. In 1911, an army invaded Taiwan's mountainous areas and by 1915, many aboriginal villages had been destroyed. The Atayal and Bunun resisted the hardest. The last major aboriginal rebellion, the Musha (Wushe) Uprising occurred on 27 October 1930 when the Seediq people launched the last headhunting party. Seediq warriors led by Mona Rudao attacked police stations and the Musha Public School. Approximately 350 students, 134 Japanese, and 2 Han Chinese were killed. The armed conflict ended in December when the Seediq leaders committed suicide. According to a 1933-year book, wounded people in the war against the aboriginals numbered around 4,160, with 4,422 civilians dead and 2,660 military personnel killed. After the Musha Incident, the government took a more conciliatory stance towards the aborigines.\nJapanese colonists.\nJapanese commoners started arriving in Taiwan in April 1896. Japanese migrants were encouraged to move to Taiwan but few did during the colony's early years. Concern that Japanese children born in Taiwan would not be able to understand Japan resulted in primary schools conducting trips to Japan in the 1910s. Japanese police officers were encouraged to learn the Minnan and Hakka languages. Police officers who passed language examinations received allowances and promotions. By the late 1930s, Japanese people made up about 5.4 percent of Taiwan's population but owned a disproportionate amount of high quality land (20\u201325 percent of cultivated land) as well as the majority of large land holdings. The government assisted them in acquiring land and coerced Chinese land owners to sell. Japanese sugar companies owned 8.2 percent of the arable land.\nThere were almost 350,000 Japanese civilians living in Taiwan by the end of World War II. Offspring of intermarriage were considered Japanese if their Taiwanese mother chose Japanese citizenship or if their Taiwanese father did not apply for ROC citizenship. As many as half the Japanese who left Taiwan after 1945 were born in Taiwan. The Taiwanese seized or attempted to occupy property they believed were unfairly obtained in previous decades. Japanese assets were collected and the ROC government retained most of it for their use. Chen Yi, who was in charge of Taiwan, removed Japanese bureaucrats and police officers from their posts. A survey found that 180,000 Japanese civilians wished to leave for Japan while 140,000 wished to stay. From February to May, the vast majority of Japanese left Taiwan for Japan.\nIndustrialization.\nUnder the colonial government, Taiwan was introduced to a unified system of weights and measures, a centralized bank, education facilities to increase skilled labor, farmers' associations, and other institutions. Transportation and communications systems as well as facilities for travel between Japan and Taiwan were developed. Construction of large scale irrigation facilities and power plants followed. Agricultural development was the goal of colonial projects and the objective was for Taiwan to provide Japan with food and raw materials. Fertilizer and production facilities were imported from Japan. Textile and paper industries were developed near the end of Japanese rule for self-sufficiency. All modern and large enterprises were owned by the Japanese.\nThe Taiwan rail system connecting the south and the north and the K\u012brun and Takao ports were completed to facilitate transport and shipping of raw material and agricultural products. Exports increased fourfold. Fifty-five percent of agricultural land was covered by dam-supported irrigation systems. Food production increased fourfold and sugar cane production increased 15-fold between 1895 and 1925. Taiwan became a major foodbasket serving Japan's economy. A health care system was established. The average lifespan for a Taiwanese resident was 60 years by 1945.\nTaiwan's real GDP per capita peaked in 1942 at $1,522 and declined to $693 by 1944. Wartime bombing caused significant damage to cities and harbors. The railways and factories were either badly damaged or destroyed. Only 40 percent of the railroads were usable and over 200 factories were bombed. Of Taiwan's four electrical power plants, three were destroyed. Damage to agriculture was relatively contained but most developments came to a halt and irrigation facilities were abandoned. Since all key positions were held by Japanese, their departure left Taiwan with a severe lack of trained personnel. Inflation was rampant as a result of the war. Taiwan's standards of living did not recover until the 1960s.\nWorld War II.\nAs Japan embarked on full-scale war with China in 1937, it began expanding Taiwan's industrial capacity to manufacture war material. The Imperial Japanese Navy operated heavily out of Taiwan. The \"South Strike Group\" was based out of the Taihoku Imperial University. Taiwan was used as a launchpad for the invasion of Guangdong in late 1938 and for the occupation of Hainan in February 1939. A joint planning and logistical center was established in Taiwan to assist Japan's southward advance after the bombing of Pearl Harbor. Taiwan served as a base for Japanese naval and air attacks on Luzon until the surrender of the Philippines in May 1942. It served as a rear staging ground for attacks on Myanmar. As the war turned against Japan in 1943, Taiwan suffered due to Allied submarine attacks on Japanese shipping. In the latter part of 1944, Taiwan was bombed in U.S. air raids. An estimated 16,000\u201330,000 civilians were killed. By 1945, Taiwan was isolated from Japan.\nStarting in July 1937, Taiwanese began to play a role on the battlefield, initially in noncombatant positions. Taiwanese people were not recruited for combat until late in the war. In 1942, the Special Volunteer System was implemented, allowing even aborigines to be recruited as part of the Takasago Volunteers. From 1937 to 1945, over 207,000 Taiwanese were employed by the Japanese military. Roughly 50,000 went missing in action or died, another 2,000 were disabled, 21 were executed for war crimes, and 147 were sentenced to imprisonment for two or three years. Some Taiwanese ex-Japanese soldiers claim they were coerced and did not choose to join the army. Racial discrimination was commonplace despite rare occasions of camaraderie. After Japan's surrender, the Taiwanese ex-Japanese soldiers were abandoned by Japan and no transportation back to Taiwan or Japan was provided. Many of them faced difficulties in mainland China, Taiwan, and Japan. An organization of Taiwanese ex-Japanese soldiers tried to get the Japanese government to pay their unpaid wages several decades later. They failed.\nBetween 1,000 and 2,000 Taiwanese women were part of the comfort women system. Aboriginal women served Japanese military personnel in the mountainous region of Taiwan. They were first recruited as housecleaning and laundry workers for soldiers, then they were coerced into providing sex. They were gang-raped and served as comfort women in the evening hours. Han Taiwanese women from low income families were also part of the comfort women system. Some were pressured into it by financial reasons while others were sold by their families. However some women from well to do families also ended up as comfort women. More than half were minors with some as young as 14. Very few women who were sent overseas understood what the true purpose of their journey was. Some of the women believed they would be serving as nurses. Taiwanese women were told to provide sexual services to the Japanese military \"in the name of patriotism to the country.\" By 1940, brothels were set up in Taiwan to service Japanese males.\nEnd of Japanese rule.\nIn 1942, after the United States entered the war against Japan and on the side of China, the Chinese government under the Kuomintang renounced all treaties signed with Japan and made Taiwan's return to China one of the wartime objectives. In the Cairo Declaration of 1943, the Allied Powers declared the return of Taiwan (including the Pescadores) to the Republic of China. The Cairo Declaration was never signed and is not legally binding. In 1945, Japan surrendered with the signing of the instrument of surrender and ended its rule in Taiwan. The territory was put under the administration of the ROC in 1945 by the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. Japanese forces in China and Taiwan surrendered to Chiang Kai-shek and on 25 October 1945, Governor-General Rikichi And\u014d handed over the administration of Taiwan and Penghu to Chen Yi. On 26 October, the government of the Republic of China declared that Taiwan had become a province of China, however the Allied Powers did not recognize this unilateral declaration.\nIn accordance with the provisions of Article 2 of the San Francisco Peace Treaty, the Japanese formally renounced the territorial sovereignty of Taiwan and Penghu islands. The Republic of China and Japan signed the Treaty of Taipei on April 28, 1952, which some consider to be legal support for the ROC's claim to Taiwan as \"de jure\" territory. The treaty states that all treaties, conventions, and agreements between China and Japan prior to 9 December 1941 were null and void. This is supported by Japanese court decisions such as in 1956 stating that Taiwan and the Penghu islands came to belong to the ROC on the date the Treaty of Taipei came into force. The official position of the Government of Japan is that Japan did not in the Treaty of Taipei express that Taiwan and Penghu belong to the ROC, that the Treaty of Taipei could not make any disposition which is in violation of Japan's renouncing Taiwan and Penghu in the San Francisco Peace Treaty, and that the status of Taiwan and Penghu remain to be determined by the Allied Powers in the future.\nSome scholars argue that no post-World War II treaties ceded the territories to any specific state. According to Taiwan Civil Society, the Cairo Declaration that had as one of its main clauses the restoration of territories taken from the Chinese by Japan to the Republic of China (Manchuria, Formosa, Pescadores), was not a binding declaration. The Cairo Declaration was considered outdated by Winston Churchill in 1952, who denied that Taiwan was under Chinese sovereignty or that the Chinese Nationalists represented China and that they only occupied Taiwan militarily. It was not recognized by Anthony Eden in 1955, who said there was a difference of opinion on which Chinese authority to hand it over to. In 1954 and 1960, the United States denied that the issue of sovereignty over Taiwan and the Penghu islands had been settled, although it accepted that they were under ROC control, the exercise of Chinese authority over Taiwan, and that the ROC was the legal government of China.\nScholars and politicians have argued over the international status of Taiwan based on the Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan, with talking points revolving around President Truman's statement on the status of Taiwan in 1950, lack of specificity on the transfer of Taiwan in the 1951 San Francisco peace treaty, and the absence of explicit provisions on the return of Taiwan to China in the 1952 Treaty of Taipei. The Theory of the Undetermined Status of Taiwan is supported by some politicians and jurists to this day, such as the Government of the United States and the Japanese diplomatic circle.\nRepublic of China (1945\u2013present).\nTaiwan under martial law.\nAfter Japan's surrender, most of Taiwan's (approximately 300,000) Japanese residents were expelled.\nThe Republic of China established the Taiwan Provincial Government in September 1945 and proclaimed October 25 1945, the day on which the Japanese surrendered, \"Taiwan Retrocession Day\". By 1938 about 309,000 Japanese lived in Taiwan. Between the Japanese surrender of Taiwan in 1945 and April 25, 1946, the Republic of China forces repatriated 90% of the Japanese living in Taiwan to Japan. During the immediate postwar period, the Kuomintang (KMT) administration on Taiwan was repressive and corrupt compared to the preceding Japanese rule, leading to local discontent. Anti-mainlander violence flared on 28 February 1947. During the ensuing crackdown by the KMT administration, in what became known as the February 28 Incident, tens of thousands of people were killed or arrested, and the incident became a taboo topic. The Memorial Foundation of 228 was established to provide compensation for the victims of the crackdown. From 1995 to 2006, the foundation approved compensation in 2,264 cases. Being controlled by the Republic of China, Taiwan inherited the international pronouncement of the ROC government including the 1932 Note Verbale to France, where China declared that its southernmost territory was the Paracels.\nFrom the 1930s onward the Chinese Civil War was underway in mainland China between Chiang Kai-shek's ROC government and the Chinese Communist Party led by Mao Zedong. When the Communists gained complete control of mainland China in 1949, two million refugees, predominantly from the Nationalist government, military, and business community, fled to Taiwan. On October 1 1949, the People's Republic of China (P.R.C.) was founded in mainland China by the victorious communists; several months earlier, Chiang Kai-shek had established a provisional ROC capital in Taipei and moved his Nanjing-based government there after fleeing Chengdu. Under Nationalist rule, the mainlanders dominated the government and civil services.\nThe KMT viewed their retreat to Taiwan as a temporary one; Chiang Kai-shek said, \"Prepare for one year, counter-attack in two years, sweep out the enemy in three years and succeed within five years.\" This led them, in the first few years after the retreat, to prioritize military armament and preparation over economic development.\nEconomic development.\nThe KMT took control of Taiwan's monopolies, which had been owned by the Japanese before World War II. They nationalized approximately 17% of Taiwan's GNP and voided Japanese bond certificates held by Taiwanese investors. These real estate holdings, as well as American aid such as the China Aid Act and the Sino-American Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, helped to ensure that Taiwan would recover quickly from war. The Kuomintang government also moved the entire gold reserve from the Chinese mainland to Taiwan, and used this reserve to stabilize the newly issued New Taiwan dollar and put a stop to hyperinflation.\nFrom 1950 to 1965, Taiwan received a total of $1.5 billion in economic aid and $2.4 billion in military aid from the United States. In 1965, when Taiwan had established a solid financial base, all American aid ceased. Having accomplished that, ROC premier Chiang Ching-kuo (the son of Chiang Kai-shek) started state projects such as the Ten Major Construction Projects, which provided the infrastructure for building a strong export-driven economy.\nDemocratic reforms.\nAfter Chiang Kai-shek died in April 1975, he was succeeded to the presidency by Yen Chia-kan, while his son Chiang Ching-kuo succeeded to the leadership of the Kuomintang and became president in 1978. Formerly the head of the feared secret police, Chiang Ching-kuo recognized that gaining foreign support to secure the ROC's future security required reform. His administration saw a gradual loosening of political controls, a transition towards democracy, and moves toward the Taiwanization of the regime. Opponents of the Nationalists were no longer forbidden to hold meetings or publish papers. Though opposition political parties were still illegal, when the Democratic Progressive Party was established as the first opposition party in 1986, President Chiang decided against dissolving the group or persecuting its leaders. Its candidates officially ran in elections as independents in the Tangwai movement. In the following year, Chiang ended martial law and allowed family visits to mainland China. Chiang selected Lee Teng-hui to be his vice president. The move followed other reforms giving more power to native born citizens and calmed anti-KMT sentiments.\nDemocratic period.\nThe 2000 presidential election marked the end of the Kuomintang (KMT) rule. DPP candidate Chen Shui-bian won a three-way race. In 2004, President Chen was re-elected to a second four-year term after an assassination attempt which occurred the day before the election. Police investigators have said that the most likely suspect is believed to have been Chen Yi-hsiung, who was later found dead.\nIn 2007, President Chen proposed a policy of Four Wants and One Without, which in substance states that Taiwan wants independence; Taiwan wants the rectification of its name; Taiwan wants a new constitution; Taiwan wants development; and Taiwanese politics is without the question of left or right, but only the question of unification or independence. The reception of this proposed policy in Taiwanese general public was unclear. It, however, was met with a cold reception by both the PRC and the United States. The PRC Foreign Minister emphasised that the Anti-Secession Law was not a piece of unenforceable legislation, while the US Department of State spokesman Sean McCormack described Chen's policy as \"unhelpful\".\nThe KMT also retained control of the legislature in the Legislative Yuan elections in January 2008. In the presidential election in May 2008, KMT candidate Ma Ying-jeou ran on a platform supporting friendlier relations with mainland China and economic reforms, and defeated DPP candidate Frank Hsieh with 58.48% of the vote.\nOn the same day President Chen left office, losing presidential immunity, the Supreme Prosecutor's Office announced that they were launching an inquiry into corruption charges regarding Chen. Later in 2008, members of his administration, including Chiou I-jen, a former National Security Council secretary-general, and Yeh Sheng-mao, former director-general of the Ministry of Justice's Investigation Bureau, were arrested on corruption charges. Chiou I-jen was found not guilty, while Yeh Sheng-mao was convicted and sentenced to 10 years in prison.\nMa was re-elected, and the KMT retained its majority in the Legislative Yuan, in combined elections in January 2012.\nIn March and April 2014, students protesting against undemocratic methods used by the KMT occupied the parliament building. In the end, the government agreed to put on hold the ratification of an agreement with China which they had pushed through without proper debate. This event had far reaching consequences, and changed the mood of the electorate. In the combined elections in January 2016 the opposition candidate for president, Tsai Ing-wen, of the DPP won with 56% of the vote, and the opposition DPP was catapulted into an outright majority in the parliament. The election marked the first time a non-KMT party won a majority in the legislature.\nThe local elections held on November 24, 2018, resulted in a major setback for the DPP majority and led to President Tsai Ing-wen resignation as leader of the party. The DPP lost a total of nine legislative seats, giving the KMT control of the majority of the 22 seats. KMT mayoral candidates won in New Taipei City, Taichung and Kaohsiung, the latter of which has been a political stronghold for the DPP for 20 years.\nIn May 2019, Taiwan became the first country in Asia to legalise same-sex marriage. By the end of the 2010s the semiconductor industry in Taiwan had become globally dominant with TSMC the global leader in high end semiconductor fabrication. The industry became so important that it was seen by many as a \"silicon shield\" protecting the country from China.\nIn January, 2020, Tsai Ing-wen was re-elected in the presidential election. In the parliamentary election President Tsai's Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) won majority 61 out of 113 seats. The Kuomintang (KMT) won 38 seats.\nThe February 2022 full-scale military invasion of Ukraine by Russia changed Taiwanese public perceptions of the Chinese threat and what could be done to counter it. The invasion led to a quickening of Taiwan's post-authoritarian military reform, new weapons acquisitions, and significantly higher military spending, as well as public and private investment in civil defense. The August 2022 visit by Nancy Pelosi to Taiwan resulted in increased tensions between Taiwan and China while reinforcing US-Taiwan ties. In response to the trip the PLA conducted military exercises around Taiwan, including missile launches which overflew Taiwan.\nIn January 2024, William Lai Ching-te of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party won Taiwan's presidential election. However, no party won a majority in the simultaneous Taiwan legislative election for the first time since 2004, meaning 51 seats for the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) and 52 seats for the Kuomintang (KMT), with the Taiwan People's Party (TPP) securing eight seats.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53395", "revid": "50657366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53395", "title": "Harry Houdini", "text": "Escapologist and stuntperson (1874\u20131926)\nErik Weisz (March 24, 1874 \u2013 October 31, 1926), known professionally as Harry Houdini ( ), was an Hungarian-American escapologist, illusionist, and stunt performer noted for his escape acts.\nHoudini first attracted notice in vaudeville in the United States and then as Harry \"Handcuff\" Houdini on a tour of Europe, where he challenged police forces to keep him locked up. Soon he extended his repertoire to include chains, ropes slung from skyscrapers, straitjackets under water, and having to escape from and hold his breath inside a sealed milk can with water in it.\nIn 1904, thousands watched as Houdini tried to escape from special handcuffs commissioned by London's \"Daily Mirror\", keeping them in suspense for an hour. Another stunt saw him buried alive and only just able to claw himself to the surface, emerging in a state of near-breakdown. While many suspected that these escapes were faked, Houdini presented himself as the scourge of fake spiritualists, pursuing a personal crusade to expose their fraudulent methods. As president of the Society of American Magicians, he was keen to uphold professional standards and expose fraudulent artists. He was also quick to sue anyone who imitated his escape stunts.\nHoudini made several movies but quit acting when it failed to bring in money. He was also a keen aviator and became the first man to fly a powered aircraft in Australia.\nEarly life.\nWeisz was born in Budapest, Kingdom of Hungary, to a Jewish family. His parents were Rabbi Mayer S\u00e1muel Weisz and Cecelia Steiner. Houdini was fourth of seven children: Herman M., who was Houdini's half-brother by Rabbi Weisz's first marriage; Nathan J.; Gottfried William; Theodore; Leopold D.; and Carrie Gladys, who was left almost blind after a childhood accident.\nWeisz arrived in the United States on July 3, 1878, on the SS \"Frisia\" with his mother (who was pregnant) and his four brothers. The family changed their name to the German spelling Weiss, and Erik became Ehrich. The family lived in Appleton, Wisconsin, where his father served as rabbi of the Zion Reform Jewish Congregation.\nAccording to the 1880 census, the family lived on Appleton Street in an area which is now known as Houdini Plaza. On June 6, 1882, Rabbi Weiss became an American citizen. Losing his job at Zion in 1882, Rabbi Weiss and family moved to Milwaukee and fell into dire poverty. In 1887, Rabbi Weiss moved with Ehrich to New York City, where they lived in a boarding house on East 79th Street. He was joined by the rest of the family once Rabbi Weiss found permanent housing. As a child, Ehrich Weiss took several jobs, making his public d\u00e9but as a nine-year-old trapeze artist, calling himself \"Ehrich, the Prince of the Air.\"\nMagic career.\nWhen Weisz became a professional magician, he began calling himself \"Harry Houdini\" after the French magician Jean-Eug\u00e8ne Robert-Houdin, whose autobiography he read in 1890. In later life, Houdini claimed the first part of his new name, Harry, was an homage to American magician Harry Kellar whom he also admired - though it was likely adapted from \"Ehri\", a nickname for \"Ehrich\", which is how he was known to his family.\nA teenage Houdini was coached by magician Joseph Rinn at the Pastime Athletic Club.\nHoudini began his magic career in 1891, but had little success. He appeared in a tent act with strongman Emil Jarrow. He performed in dime museums and sideshows, and even doubled as \"The Wild Man\" at a circus. Initially, Houdini focused on traditional card tricks. At one point, he billed himself as the \"King of Cards\". Some \u2013 but not all \u2013 professional magicians came to regard Houdini as a competent but not particularly skilled sleight-of-hand artist, lacking the grace and finesse required to achieve excellence in that craft. He soon began experimenting with escape acts.\nIn the early 1890s, Houdini and his brother \"Dash\" (Theodore) were performing as \"The Brothers Houdini\". They performed at the Chicago World's Fair in 1893 before returning to New York City and working at Huber's Dime Museum for \"near-starvation wages\".\nIn 1894, Houdini met a fellow performer, Wilhelmina Beatrice \"Bess\" Rahner. Bess was initially courted by Dash, but fell in love with and married Harry. She replaced Dash in the act, which became known as \"The Houdinis\". Bess worked as her husband's stage assistant for the rest of Houdini's performing career.\nHoudini's big break came in 1899 when he met manager Martin Beck in St. Paul, Minnesota. Impressed by Houdini's handcuffs act, Beck advised him to concentrate on escape acts and booked him on the Orpheum vaudeville circuit. Within months, he was performing at the top vaudeville houses in the country.\nIn 1900, Beck arranged for Houdini to tour Europe. After some days of unsuccessful interviews in London, Houdini's British agent Harry Day helped him to get an interview with C. Dundas Slater, then manager of the Alhambra Theatre. He was introduced to William Melville and gave a demonstration of escape from handcuffs at Scotland Yard. He succeeded in baffling the police so effectively that he was booked at the Alhambra for six months. His show was an immediate hit and his salary rose to $300 a week ().\nBetween 1900 and 1920, Houdini appeared in theatres all over Great Britain performing escape acts, illusions, card tricks and outdoor stunts, becoming one of the world's highest-paid entertainers. He also toured the Netherlands, Germany, France, and Russia and became widely known as \"The Handcuff King\". In each city, Houdini challenged local police to restrain him with shackles and lock him in their jails. In many of these challenge escapes, he was first stripped nude and searched. In Moscow, he escaped from a Siberian prison transport van, claiming that, had he been unable to free himself, he would have had to travel to Siberia, where the only key was kept.\nIn Cologne, Houdini sued a police officer, Werner Graff, who alleged that he made his escapes via bribery. Houdini won the case when he opened the judge's safe (he later said the judge had forgotten to lock it). With his newfound wealth, Houdini purchased a dress said to have been made for Queen Victoria, then arranged a grand reception where he presented his mother, wearing the dress, to all their relatives. Houdini said it was the happiest day of his life. In 1904, Houdini returned to the U.S. and purchased a house for $25,000 (), a brownstone at 278 W. 113th Street in Harlem, New York City.\nWhile on tour in Europe in 1902, Houdini visited Blois with the aim of meeting the widow of Emile Houdin, the son of Jean-Eug\u00e8ne Robert-Houdin, for an interview and permission to visit his grave. He did not receive permission, but visited the grave regardless. Houdini felt he had been dealt with unfairly and later wrote a negative account of the incident in his magazine, claiming he was \"treated most discourteously by Madame W. Emile Robert-Houdin\". In 1906, he sent a letter to the French magazine \"L'Illusionniste\" stating: \"You will certainly enjoy the article on Robert Houdin I am about to publish in my magazine. Yes, my dear friend, I think I can finally demolish your idol, who has so long been placed on a pedestal that he did not deserve.\"\nIn 1906, Houdini created his own publication, the \"Conjurers' Monthly Magazine\". It competed with \"\", but was short-lived and only two volumes were released until August 1908. Magic historian Jim Steinmeyer noted that \"Houdini couldn't resist using the journal for his own crusades, attacking his rivals, praising his own appearances, and subtly rewriting history to favor his view of magic.\"\nFrom 1907 and throughout the 1910s, Houdini performed with great success in the United States. He freed himself from jails, handcuffs, chains, ropes, and straitjackets, often while hanging from a rope in sight of street audiences. Because of imitators, Houdini put his \"handcuff act\" behind him on January 25, 1908, and began escaping from a locked, water-filled milk can. The possibility of failure and death thrilled his audiences. Houdini also expanded his repertoire with his escape challenge act, in which he invited the public to devise contraptions to hold him. These included nailed packing crates (sometimes lowered into water), riveted boilers, wet sheets, mail bags, and even the belly of a whale that had washed ashore in Boston. Brewers in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and other cities challenged Houdini to escape from a barrel after they filled it with beer.\nMany of these challenges were arranged with local merchants in one of the first uses of mass tie-in marketing. Rather than promote the idea that he was assisted by spirits, as did the Davenport Brothers and others, Houdini's advertisements showed him making his escapes via dematerializing, although Houdini himself never claimed to have supernatural powers.\nAfter much research, Houdini wrote a collection of articles on the history of magic, which were expanded into \"The Unmasking of Robert-Houdin\" published in 1908. He attacked his former idol Robert-Houdin as a liar and a fraud for having claimed the invention of automata and effects such as aerial suspension, which had been in existence for many years. Many of the allegations in the book were dismissed by magicians and researchers who defended Robert-Houdin. Magician Jean Hugard would later write a full rebuttal to Houdini's book.\nHoudini introduced the Chinese Water Torture Cell at the Circus Busch in Berlin, Germany, on September 21, 1912. He was suspended upside-down in a locked glass-and-steel cabinet full to overflowing with water, holding his breath for more than three minutes. He would go on performing this escape for the rest of his life.\nDuring his career, Houdini explained some of his tricks in books written for the magic brotherhood. In \"Handcuff Secrets\" (1909), he revealed how many locks and handcuffs could be opened with properly applied force, others with shoestrings. Other times, he carried concealed lockpicks or keys. When tied down in ropes or straitjackets, he gained wiggle room by enlarging his shoulders and chest, moving his arms slightly away from his body.\nHis straitjacket escape was originally performed behind curtains, with him popping out free at the end. Houdini's brother (who was also an escape artist, billing himself as Theodore Hardeen) discovered that audiences were more impressed when the curtains were eliminated so they could watch him struggle to get out. On more than one occasion, they both performed straitjacket escapes while dangling upside-down from the roof of a building in the same city.\nFor most of his career, Houdini was a headline act in vaudeville. For many years, he was the highest-paid performer in American vaudeville. One of Houdini's most notable non-escape stage illusions was performed at the New York Hippodrome, when he vanished a full-grown elephant from the stage. He had purchased this trick from the magician Charles Morritt. In 1923, Houdini became president of Martinka &amp; Co., America's oldest magic company. The business is still in operation today.\nHe also served as president of the Society of American Magicians ( S.A.M.) from 1917 until his death in 1926. Founded on May 10, 1902, in the back room of Martinka's magic shop in New York, the Society expanded under the leadership of Harry Houdini during his term as national president from 1917 to 1926. Houdini was magic's greatest visionary: He sought to create a large, unified national network of professional and amateur magicians.\nWherever he traveled, he gave a lengthy formal address to the local magic club, made speeches, and usually threw a banquet for the members at his own expense. He said \"The Magicians Clubs as a rule are small: they are weak ... but if we were amalgamated into one big body the society would be stronger, and it would mean making the small clubs powerful and worthwhile. Members would find a welcome wherever they happened to be and, conversely, the safeguard of a city-to-city hotline to track exposers and other undesirables\".\nFor most of 1916, while on his vaudeville tour, Houdini had been recruiting\u00a0\u2013 at his own expense\u00a0\u2013 local magic clubs to join the S.A.M. in an effort to revitalize what he felt was a weak organization. Houdini persuaded groups in Buffalo, Detroit, Pittsburgh, and Kansas City to join. As had happened in London, he persuaded magicians to join. The Buffalo club joined as the first branch, (later assembly) of the Society. Chicago Assembly No. 3 was, as the name implies, the third regional club to be established by the S.A.M., whose assemblies now number in the hundreds.\nIn 1917, he signed Assembly Number Three's charter into existence; that charter and this club continue to provide Chicago magicians with a connection to each other and to their past. Houdini dined with, addressed, and got pledges from similar clubs in Detroit, Rochester, Pittsburgh, Kansas City, Cincinnati and elsewhere - the biggest movement ever in the history of magic. In places where no clubs existed, he rounded up individual magicians, introduced them to each other, and urged them into the fold.\nBy the end of 1916, magicians' clubs in San Francisco and other cities that Houdini had not visited were offering to become assemblies. He had created the richest and longest-surviving organization of magicians in the world. Currently, it embraces almost 6,000 dues-paying members and almost 300 assemblies worldwide. In July 1926, Houdini was elected President of the Society of American Magicians for the ninth successive time (every other president served for only one year). He was also President of the Magicians' Club of London.\nIn the final years of his life (1925/26), Houdini launched his own full-evening show, which he billed as \"Three Shows in One: Magic, Escapes, and Fraud Mediums Exposed\".\nNotable escapes.\n\"Daily Mirror\" challenge.\nIn 1904, the London \"Daily Mirror\" newspaper challenged Houdini to escape from special handcuffs that it claimed had taken Nathaniel Hart, a locksmith from Birmingham, five years to make. Houdini accepted the challenge for March 17 during a matin\u00e9e performance at London's Hippodrome theatre. It was reported that 4,000 people and more than 100 journalists turned out for the much-hyped event.\nThe escape attempt dragged on for over an hour, during which Houdini emerged from his \"ghost house\" (a small screen used to conceal the method of his escape) several times. At one point he asked if the cuffs could be removed so he could take off his coat. The \"Mirror\" representative, Frank Parker, refused, saying Houdini could gain an advantage if he saw how the cuffs were unlocked. Houdini promptly took out a penknife and, holding it in his teeth, used it to cut his coat from his body.\nSome 56 minutes later, Houdini's wife appeared on stage and gave him a kiss. Many thought that the handcuff key was in Bess's mouth. However, it has since been suggested that Bess did not go onstage at all, and that this theory is unlikely because the key was six inches long. Houdini then went back behind the curtain. After an hour and ten minutes, Houdini emerged free. As he was paraded on the shoulders of the cheering crowd, he broke down and wept. At the time, Houdini said it had been one of the most difficult escapes of his career.\nAfter Houdini's death, his friend Martin Beck was quoted in Will Goldston's book, \"Sensational Tales of Mystery Men\", admitting that Houdini was bested that day and had appealed to Bess for help. Goldston claimed that Bess begged the key from the \"Mirror\" representative, then slipped it to Houdini in a glass of water. However, in \"The Secret Life of Houdini,\" it was confirmed that the six-inch-long key could not have been smuggled this way. Goldston offered no proof of his account.\nMany modern biographers have found evidence (notably in the custom handcuff design) that the \"Mirror\" challenge may have been arranged by Houdini and that his long struggle to escape was pure showmanship. James Randi believes the only way the handcuffs could have been opened was by using their key, and speculates that it would have been viewed as \"distasteful\" to the \"Mirror\" and to Houdini if Houdini had failed to escape. This escape was discussed in depth on the Travel Channel's \"Mysteries at the Museum\" in an interview with Houdini expert, magician and escape artist Dorothy Dietrich of Scranton's Houdini Museum.\nA full-sized construction of the same Mirror Handcuffs, as well as a replica of the Bramah style key for them, are on display to the public at The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania. This set of cuffs is believed to be one of only six in the world, some of which are not on display.\nMilk Can Escape.\nIn 1908, Houdini introduced his own original act, the Milk Can Escape. In this act, Houdini was handcuffed and sealed inside an oversized milk can filled with water and made his escape behind a curtain. As part of the effect, Houdini invited members of the audience to hold their breath along with him while he was inside the can. Advertised with dramatic posters that proclaimed \"Failure Means A Drowning Death\", the escape proved to be a sensation. Houdini soon modified the escape to include the milk can being locked inside a wooden chest, being chained or padlocked. Houdini performed the milk can escape as a regular part of his act for only four years, but it has remained one of the acts most associated with him. Houdini's brother, Theodore Hardeen, continued to perform the milk can escape and its wooden chest variant into the 1940s.\nThe American Museum of Magic has the milk can and overboard box used by Houdini.\nAfter other magicians proposed variations on the Milk Can Escape, Houdini claimed that the act was protected by copyright and in 1906, brought a case against John Clempert, one of the most persistent imitators. The matter was settled out of court and Clempert agreed to publish an apology.\nChinese water torture cell.\nAround 1912, the vast number of imitators prompted Houdini to replace his milk can act with the Chinese water torture cell. In this escape, Houdini's feet were locked in stocks, and he was lowered upside down into a tank filled with water. The mahogany and metal cell featured a glass front, through which audiences could clearly see Houdini. The stocks were locked to the top of the cell, and a curtain concealed his escape. In the earliest version of the torture cell, a metal cage was lowered into the cell, and Houdini was enclosed inside that. While making the escape more difficult \u2013 the cage prevented Houdini from turning \u2013 the cage bars also offered protection should the front glass break.\nThe original cell was built in England, where Houdini first performed the escape for an audience of one person as part of a one-act play he called \"Houdini Upside Down\". This was done to obtain copyright protection for the effect, and establish grounds to sue imitators \u2013 which he did. While the escape was advertised as \"The Chinese Water Torture Cell\" or \"The Water Torture Cell\", Houdini always referred to it as \"the Upside Down\" or \"USD\". The first public performance of the USD was at the Circus Busch in Berlin, on September 21, 1912. Houdini continued to perform the escape until his death in 1926.\nSuspended straitjacket escape.\nOne of Houdini's most popular publicity stunts was to have himself strapped into a regulation straitjacket and suspended by his ankles from a tall building or crane. Houdini would then make his escape in full view of the assembled crowd. In many cases, Houdini drew tens of thousands of onlookers who brought city traffic to a halt. Houdini would sometimes ensure press coverage by performing the escape from the office building of a local newspaper. In New York City, Houdini performed the suspended straitjacket escape from a crane being used to build the subway. After flinging his body in the air, he escaped from the straitjacket. Starting from when he was hoisted up in the air by the crane, to when the straitjacket was completely off, it took him two minutes and thirty-seven seconds. There is film footage in the Library of Congress of Houdini performing the escape. Films of his escapes are also shown at The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania.\nAfter being battered against a building in high winds during one escape, Houdini performed the escape with a visible safety wire on his ankle so that he could be pulled away from the building if necessary. The idea for the upside-down escape was given to Houdini by a young boy named Randolph Osborne Douglas (March 31, 1895\u00a0\u2013 December 5, 1956), when the two met at a performance at Sheffield's Empire Theatre.\nOverboard box escape.\nAnother of Houdini's most famous publicity stunts was to escape from a nailed and roped packing crate after it had been lowered into water. He first performed the escape in New York's East River on July 7, 1912. Police forbade him from using one of the piers, so he hired a tugboat and invited press on board. Houdini was locked in handcuffs and leg-irons, then nailed into the crate which was roped and weighed down with two hundred pounds of lead. The crate was then lowered into the water. He escaped in 57 seconds. The crate was pulled to the surface and found still to be intact, with the manacles inside.\nHoudini performed this escape many times, and even performed a version on stage, first at Hamerstein's Roof Garden where a tank was specially built, and later at the New York Hippodrome.\nBuried alive stunt.\nHoudini performed at least three variations on a buried alive stunt during his career. The first was near Santa Ana, California in 1915 and almost cost him his life. Houdini was buried without a casket in a pit of earth six feet deep. He became exhausted and panicked while trying to dig his way to the surface and called for help. When his hand finally broke the surface, he fell unconscious and had to be pulled from the grave by his assistants. Houdini wrote in his diary that the escape was \"very dangerous\" and that \"the weight of the earth is killing\".\nHoudini's second variation on the buried alive stunt was an endurance test designed to expose mystical Egyptian performer Rahman Bey, who had claimed to use supernatural powers to remain in a sealed casket for an hour. Houdini bettered Bey on August 5, 1926, by remaining in a sealed casket or coffin submerged in the swimming pool of New York's Hotel Shelton for an hour and a half. Houdini claimed he did not use trickery or supernatural powers to accomplish this feat, just controlled breathing. He repeated the feat at the YMCA in Worcester, Massachusetts on September 28, 1926, this time remaining sealed for one hour and eleven minutes.\nHoudini's final buried alive feat was an elaborate stage escape that featured in his full evening show. Houdini would escape after being strapped in a straitjacket, sealed in a casket, then buried in a large sand-filled tank. While posters advertising the escape exist (playing off the Bey challenge by boasting \"Egyptian Fakirs Outdone!\"), it is unclear whether Houdini ever performed the buried alive stunt onstage. The stunt was to be the feature escape of his 1927 season, but Houdini died October 31, 1926. The bronze casket Houdini created for this stunt was used to transport his body from Detroit to New York following Houdini's death on Halloween.\nFilm career.\nIn 1906, Houdini started showing films of his outside escapes as part of his vaudeville act. In Boston, he presented a short film called \"Houdini Defeats Hackenschmidt\". Georg Hackenschmidt was a famous wrestler of the day, but the nature of their contest is unknown as the film is lost. In 1909, Houdini made a film in Paris for Cinema Lux titled \"Merveilleux Exploits du C\u00e9l\u00e8bre Houdini \u00e0 Paris\" (Marvellous Exploits of the Famous Houdini in Paris). It featured a loose narrative designed to showcase several of Houdini's famous escapes, including his straitjacket and underwater handcuff escapes. That same year Houdini got an offer to star as Captain Nemo in a silent version of \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas\", but the project never made it into production.\nIt is often erroneously reported that Houdini served as special-effects consultant on the Wharton/International cliffhanger serial \"The Mysteries of Myra\", shot in Ithaca, New York, because Harry Grossman, director of \"The Master Mystery\" also filmed a serial in Ithaca at about the same time. The consultants on the serial were pioneering Hereward Carrington and Aleister Crowley.\nIn 1918, Houdini signed a contract with film producer B. A. Rolfe to star in a 15-part serial, \"The Master Mystery\" (released in November 1918). As was common at the time, the film serial was released simultaneously with a novel. Financial difficulties resulted in B. A. Rolfe Productions going out of business, but \"The Master Mystery\" led to Houdini being signed by Famous Players\u2013Lasky Corporation/Paramount Pictures, for whom he made two pictures, \"The Grim Game\" (1919) and \"Terror Island\" (1920).\n\"The Grim Game\" was Houdini's first full-length movie and is reputed to be his best. Because of the flammable nature of nitrate film and their low rate of survival, film historians considered the film lost. One copy did exist hidden in the collection of a private collector only known to a tiny group of magicians that saw it. Dick Brookz and Dorothy Dietrich of The Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania, had seen it twice on the invitation of the collector. After many years of trying, they finally got him to agree to sell the film to Turner Classic Movies, who restored the complete 71-minute film. The film, not seen by the general public for 96 years, was shown by TCM on March 29, 2015, as a highlight of their yearly 4-day festival in Hollywood.\nWhile filming an aerial stunt for \"The Grim Game\", two biplanes collided in mid-air with a stuntman doubling Houdini dangling by a rope from one of the planes. Publicity was geared heavily toward promoting this dramatic \"caught-on-film\" moment, claiming it was Houdini himself dangling from the plane. While filming these movies in Los Angeles, Houdini rented a home in Laurel Canyon. Following his two-picture stint in Hollywood, Houdini returned to New York and started his own film production company called the \"Houdini Picture Corporation\". He produced and starred in two films, \"The Man from Beyond\" (1921) and \"Haldane of the Secret Service\" (1923). He also founded his own film laboratory business called The Film Development Corporation (FDC), gambling on a new process for developing motion picture film. Houdini's brother, Theodore Hardeen, left his own career as a magician and escape artist to run the company. Magician Harry Kellar was a major investor. In 1919 Houdini moved to Los Angeles to film. He resided in 2435 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, a residence owned by Ralph M. Walker. The Houdini Estate, a tribute to Houdini, is located on 2400 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, previously home to Walker himself. The Houdini Estate is subject to controversy, in that it is disputed whether Houdini ever actually made it his home. While there are claims it was Houdini's house, others counter that \"he never set foot\" on the property. It is rooted in Bess's parties or seances, etc. held across the street, she would do so at the Walker mansion. In fact, the guesthouse featured an elevator connecting to a tunnel that crossed under Laurel Canyon to the big house grounds (though capped, the tunnel still exists).\nNeither Houdini's acting career nor FDC found success, and he gave up on the movie business in 1923, complaining that \"the profits are too meager\".\nIn April 2008, Kino International released a DVD box set of Houdini's surviving silent films, including \"The Master Mystery\", \"Terror Island\", \"The Man From Beyond\", \"Haldane of the Secret Service\", and five minutes from \"The Grim Game\". The set also includes newsreel footage of Houdini's escapes from 1907 to 1923, and a section from \"Merveilleux Exploits du C\u00e9l\u00e9bre Houdini \u00e0 Paris, \"although it is not identified as such.\nAviator.\nIn 1909, Houdini became fascinated with aviation. He purchased a French Voisin biplane for $5,000 () from the Chilean aviators Jos\u00e9 Luis S\u00e1nchez-Besa and Emilio Eduardo Bello, and hired a full-time mechanic, Antonio Brassac. After crashing once, he made his first successful flight on November 26 in Hamburg, Germany.\nThe following year, Houdini toured Australia and brought along his Voisin biplane with the intention to be the first person to fly in Australia.\nMelbourne people will shortly have an opportunity of witnessing the ascent of a flying machine, for Houdini, whose Voisin bi-plane has arrived, has determined to make a flight before his season closes at the [New] Opera House [in Melbourne, at the end of March]. The 60 to 80 horse-power motor used is of the E.N.V. pattern. The machine has been erected at Diggers' Rest. \"Table Talk\", March 3, 1910.\nAustralian flights.\nMarch 18, 1910.\nOn Friday, March 18, 1910, following more than a month of delays due to inclement weather conditions, Houdini completed one of the first powered aeroplane flights ever made in Australia. He made three flights in his Voisin biplane, at the Old Plumpton Paddock at Diggers Rest, Victoria, ranging from 1 minute to 3\u00bd minutes\u00a0\u2013 reaching an altitude of 100\u00a0ft in one of his flights, and travelling more than two miles in another. Nine of the 30 spectators present on that day signed a certificate verifying Houdini's achievement.\nMarch 20, 1910.\nHampered by the windy conditions on the Saturday, and unable to fly safely, Houdini took to the air again early on Sunday morning, 20 March 1910. After a short preliminary flight, lasting 26 sec., Houdini took wing again, and, applauded by hundred or more spectators, flew three circles at altitudes, varying from 20ft to over 100ft, covering a distance of between three and four miles in 3min 45\u00bdsec. \"The Argus\", 21 March 1910.\nMarch 21, 1910.\nOn Monday morning, 21 March 1910, some 30 spectators witnessed Houdini make an extended flight at Diggers Rest of 7min. 37secs., covering at least 6 miles, at altitudes ranging from 20\u00a0ft. to 100\u00a0ft. Australian aviator Basil Watson's father, mother, and younger sister, Venora, were among the spectators; and their names were included in the list of 16 spectator signatures on the certificate that verified Houdini's achievement.\nAfter Australia.\nAfter completing his Australia tour, Houdini put the Voisin into storage in England. He announced he would use it to fly from city to city during his next music hall tour and even promised to leap from it handcuffed, but he never flew again.\nDebunking spiritualists.\nIn the 1920s, Houdini turned his energies toward debunking psychics and mediums in order to show how they were taking advantage of the bereaved, a pursuit that was in line with the debunkings by stage magicians since the late nineteenth century.\nHoudini's training in magic allowed him to expose frauds who had successfully fooled many scientists and academics. He was a member of a \"Scientific American\" committee that offered a cash prize to any medium who could successfully demonstrate supernatural abilities. None were able to do so, and the prize was never collected. The first to be tested was medium George Valiantine of Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania. As his fame as a \"medium-buster\" grew, Houdini took to attending s\u00e9ances in disguise, accompanied by a reporter and a police officer. Possibly the most famous medium he debunked was Mina Crandon, also known as \"Margery\".\nJoaqu\u00edn Argamasilla, known as the \"Spaniard with X-ray Eyes\", claimed to be able to read handwriting or numbers on dice through closed metal boxes. In 1924, he was exposed by Houdini as a fraud. Argamasilla peeked through his simple blindfold and lifted up the edge of the box so he could look inside it without others noticing. Houdini also investigated the Italian medium Nino Pecoraro, who he considered to be fraudulent.\nHoudini's exposure of phony mediums inspired other magicians to follow suit, including The Amazing Randi, Dorothy Dietrich, Penn &amp; Teller, and Dick Brookz.\nHoudini chronicled his debunking exploits in his book, \"A Magician Among the Spirits\", co-authored with C. M. Eddy, Jr., who was not credited. These activities compromised Houdini's friendship with Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Doyle, a firm believer in spiritualism during his later years, refused to give credence to any of Houdini's expos\u00e9s. Doyle came to believe that Houdini was a powerful spiritualist medium and had performed many of his stunts by means of paranormal abilities and was using those abilities to block the powers of the mediums that he was supposedly debunking. This disagreement led to the two men becoming public antagonists and Doyle came to view Houdini as a dangerous enemy.\nBefore Houdini died, he and his wife agreed that if Houdini found it possible to communicate after death, he would communicate the message \"Rosabelle believe\", a secret code which they agreed to use. \"Rosabelle\" was their favorite song. Bess held yearly s\u00e9ances on Halloween for ten years after Houdini's death. She did claim to have contact through Arthur Ford in 1929 when Ford conveyed the secret code, but Bess later said the incident had been faked. The code seems to have been such that it could be broken by Ford or his associates using existing clues. Evidence to this effect was discovered by Ford's biographer after he died in 1971. In 1936, after a last unsuccessful s\u00e9ance on the roof of the Knickerbocker Hotel, she put out the candle that she had kept burning beside a photograph of Houdini since his death. In 1943, Bess said that \"ten years is long enough to wait for any man.\"\nThe tradition of holding a s\u00e9ance for Houdini continues, held by magicians throughout the world. The Official Houdini S\u00e9ance was organized in the 1940s by Sidney Hollis Radner, a Houdini aficionado from Holyoke, Massachusetts. Yearly Houdini s\u00e9ances are also conducted in Chicago at the Excalibur nightclub by \"necromancer\" Neil Tobin on behalf of the Chicago Assembly of the Society of American Magicians; and at the Houdini Museum in Scranton by magician Dorothy Dietrich, who previously held them at New York's Magic Towne House with such magical notables as Houdini biographers Walter B. Gibson and Milbourne Christopher. Gibson was asked by Bess Houdini to carry on the original s\u00e9ance tradition. After doing them for many years at New York's Magic Towne House, before he died, Walter passed on the tradition of conducting of the Original S\u00e9ances to Dorothy Dietrich.\nIn 1926, Harry Houdini hired H. P. Lovecraft and his friend C. M. Eddy, Jr., to write an entire book about the origin, history, and fallacy of primitive, pre-scientific, and superstitious beliefs, which was to be called \"The Cancer of Superstition.\" Houdini had earlier asked Lovecraft to write an article about astrology, for which he paid $75 (). The article does not survive. Lovecraft's detailed synopsis for \"Cancer\" does survive, as do three chapters of the treatise written by Eddy. Houdini's death derailed the plans, as his widow did not wish to pursue the project.\nAppearance and voice recordings.\nUnlike the image of the classic magician, Houdini was short and stocky and typically appeared on stage in a long frock coat and tie. Most biographers give his height as , but descriptions vary. Houdini was also said to be slightly bow-legged, which aided in his ability to gain slack during his rope escapes. In the 1997 biography \"Houdini!!!: The Career of Ehrich Weiss\", author Kenneth Silverman summarizes how reporters described Houdini's appearance during his early career:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They stressed his smallness\u00a0\u2013 \"somewhat undersized\"\u00a0\u2013 and angular, vivid features: \"He is smooth-shaven with a keen, sharp-chinned, sharp-cheekboned face, bright blue eyes and thick, curly, black hair.\" Some sensed how much his complexly expressive smile was the outlet of his charismatic stage presence. It communicated to audiences at once warm amiability, pleasure in performing, and, more subtly, imperious self-assurance. Several reporters tried to capture the charming effect, describing him as \"happy-looking\", \"pleasant-faced\", \"good natured at all times\", \"the young Hungarian magician with the pleasant smile and easy confidence\".\nHoudini made the only known recordings of his voice on Edison wax cylinders on October 29, 1914, in Flatbush, New York. On them, Houdini practices several different introductory speeches for his famous Chinese Water Torture Cell. He also invites his sister, Gladys, to recite a poem. Houdini then recites the same poem in German. The six wax cylinders were discovered in the collection of magician John Mulholland after his death in 1970. They are part of the David Copperfield collection.\nLegal issues.\nIn September 1900, Houdini was summoned by the German police prior to his first performance in the country who suspected his act was fake. Subsequently in Berlin, he was stripped naked and forced to perform an escape routine in front of 300 policemen. Houdini was tightly restrained with \"thumbscrews, finger locks, and five different hand and elbow irons\". He was able to escape in 6 minutes, and later used the stunt in advertising. Subsequently in 1901, a newspaper in Cologne accused him of attempting to bribe a police officer in order to rig an escape attempt, and paying a civilian police employee to aid him with another performance. Houdini sued the newspaper and the police officer for slander. As part of the trial, Houdini was asked to open without the aid of tools one of the police officer's handcrafted locks, for which the officer had said that Houdini had tried to bribe him. Houdini was able to do so, and won the case.\nPersonal life.\nHoudini became an active Freemason and was a member of St. Cecile Lodge No. 568 in New York City.\nIn 1904, Houdini bought a New York City townhouse at 278 West 113th Street in Harlem. He paid US$25,000 () for the five-level, 6,008-square-foot house, which was built in 1895, and lived in it with his wife Bess, and various other relatives until his death in 1926. In March 2018, it sold for $3.6 million. A plaque affixed to the building by the Historical Landmark Preservation Center reads, \"The magician lived here from 1904 to 1926 collecting illusions, theatrical memorabilia, and books on psychic phenomena and magic.\"\nIn 1919, Houdini moved to Los Angeles to film. He resided in 2435 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, a house of his friend and business associate Ralph M. Walker, who owned both sides of the street, 2335 and 2400, the latter address having a pool where Houdini practiced his water escapes. 2400 Laurel Canyon Boulevard, previously numbered 2398, is presently known as The Houdini Estate, thus named in the honor of Houdini's time there, the same estate where Bess Houdini threw a party for 500 magicians years after his death. After decades of abandonment, the estate was acquired in 2006 by Jos\u00e9 Luis Nazar, a Chilean/American citizen who has restored it to its former splendor.\nIn 1918, he registered for selective service as Harry Handcuff Houdini.\nDeath.\nHoudini died on October 31, 1926, at the age of 52 from peritonitis (swelling of the abdomen), possibly related to appendicitis and possibly related to punches to his abdomen he had received about a week and a half earlier.\nWitnesses to an incident at Houdini's dressing room in the Princess Theatre in Montreal on October 22, 1926, speculated that Houdini's death was caused by Jocelyn Gordon Whitehead, who repeatedly struck Houdini's abdomen.\nThe accounts of the witnesses, students named Jacques Price and Sam Smilovitz (sometimes called Jack Price and Sam Smiley), generally corroborated each other. Price said that Whitehead asked Houdini \"if he believed in the miracles of the Bible\" and \"whether it was true that punches in the stomach did not hurt him\". Houdini offered a casual reply that his stomach could endure a lot. Whitehead then delivered \"some very hammer-like blows below the belt\". Houdini was reclining on a couch at the time, having broken his ankle while performing several days earlier. Price said that Houdini winced at each blow and stopped Whitehead suddenly in the midst of a punch, gesturing that he had had enough, and adding that he had had no opportunity to prepare himself against the blows, as he did not expect Whitehead to strike him so suddenly and forcefully. Had his ankle not been broken, he would have risen from the couch into a better position to brace himself.\nThroughout the evening, Houdini performed in great pain. He had insomnia and remained in constant pain for the next two days, but did not seek medical help. When he finally saw a doctor, he was found to have a fever of and acute appendicitis, and was advised to have immediate surgery. He ignored the advice and decided to go on with the show. When Houdini arrived at the Garrick Theater in Detroit, Michigan, on October 24, 1926, for what would be his last performance, he had a fever of . Despite the diagnosis, Houdini took the stage. He was reported to have passed out during the show, but was revived and continued. Afterwards, he was hospitalized at Detroit's Grace Hospital where he died from peritonitis on October 31, aged 52.\nIt is unknown if the blunt trauma Houdini sustained contributed to his eventual death. Although rare, acute appendicitis which follows after direct abdominal trauma has been observed. One theory suggests that Houdini was unaware that he was suffering from appendicitis, and he might have taken his abdominal pain more seriously had he not coincidentally received blows to the abdomen. According to Adam Begley, it is more likely that Houdini was suffering the effects of appendicitis prior to the punches, and his reluctance to seek medical care delayed potential treatment. \nAfter taking statements from Price and Smilovitz, Houdini's insurance company concluded that the death was due to the dressing-room incident and paid double indemnity.\nHoudini grave site.\nHoudini's funeral was held on November 4, 1926, in New York, with more than 2,000 mourners in attendance. He was interred in the Machpelah Cemetery in Glendale, Queens, with the crest of the Society of American Magicians inscribed on his grave site. A statuary bust was added to the exedra in 1927, a rarity, because graven images are forbidden in Jewish cemeteries. In 1975, the bust was destroyed by vandals. Temporary busts were placed at the grave until 2011 when a group from the Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania, placed a permanent bust with the permission of Houdini's family and of the cemetery.\nThe Society of American Magicians took responsibility for the upkeep of the site, as Houdini had willed a large sum of money to the organization he had grown from one club to 5,000\u20136,000 dues-paying membership worldwide. The payment of upkeep was abandoned by the society's dean George Schindler, who said \"Houdini paid for perpetual care, but there's nobody at the cemetery to provide it\", adding that the operator of the cemetery, David Jacobson, \"sends us a bill for upkeep every year but we never pay it because he never provides any care.\" Members of the Society tidy the grave themselves.\nMachpelah Cemetery operator Jacobson said that they \"never paid the cemetery for any restoration of the Houdini family plot in my tenure since 1988\", claiming that the money came from the cemetery's dwindling funds. The granite monuments of Houdini's sister, Gladys, and brother, Leopold were also destroyed by vandals. For many years, until recently, the Houdini grave site has been only cared for by Dorothy Dietrich and Dick Brookz of the Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania. The Society of American Magicians, at its National Council Meeting in Boca Raton, Florida, in 2013, under the prompting of Dietrich and Brookz, voted to assume the financial responsibilities for the care and maintenance of the Houdini Gravesite. While the actual plot will remain under the control of Machpelah Cemetery management, the Society of American Magicians, with the help of the Houdini Museum in Pennsylvania, will be in charge of the restoration.\nHoudini's widow, Bess, died of a heart attack on February 11, 1943, aged 67, in Needles, California, while on a train en route from Los Angeles to New York City. She had expressed a wish to be buried next to her husband, but instead was interred 35\u00a0miles due north at the Gate of Heaven Cemetery in Westchester County, New York, as her Catholic family refused to allow her to be buried in a Jewish cemetery.\nProposed exhumation.\nOn March 22, 2007, Houdini's great-nephew (the grandson of his brother Theo) George Hardeen announced that the courts would be asked to allow exhumation of Houdini's body to investigate the possibility of Houdini being murdered by spiritualists, as suggested in the biography \"The Secret Life of Houdini\".\nIn a statement given to the Houdini Museum in Scranton, the family of Bess Houdini opposed the application and suggested it was a publicity ploy for the book. \"The Washington Post\" stated that the press conference was not arranged by the family of Houdini. Instead, the \"Post\" reported, it was orchestrated by the book's authors William Kalush and Larry Sloman, who had hired the public relations firm Dan Klores Communications to promote the book.\nIn 2008, it was revealed the parties involved had not filed legal papers to perform an exhumation.\nLegacy.\nHoudini's brother, Theodore Hardeen, who returned to performing after Houdini's death, inherited his brother's effects and props. Houdini's will stipulated that all the effects should be \"burned and destroyed\" upon Hardeen's death. Hardeen sold much of the collection to magician and Houdini enthusiast Sidney Hollis Radner during the 1940s, including the water torture cell. Radner allowed choice pieces of the collection to be displayed at The Houdini Magical Hall of Fame in Niagara Falls, Ontario. In 1995, a fire destroyed the museum. The water torture cell's metal frame remained, and it was restored by illusion builder John Gaughan. Many of the props contained in the museum such as the mirror handcuffs, Houdini's original packing crate, a milk can, and a straitjacket, survived the fire and were auctioned in 1999 and 2008.\nRadner loaned the bulk of his collection for archiving to the Outagamie Museum in Appleton, Wisconsin, but reclaimed it in 2003 and auctioned it in Las Vegas, on October 30, 2004.\nHoudini was a \"formidable collector\", and bequeathed many of his holdings and paper archives on magic and spiritualism to the Library of Congress, which became the basis for the Houdini collection in cyberspace. Houdini's book collecting has been explored in an essay in \"The Book Collector.\"\nIn 1934, the bulk of Houdini's collection of American and British theatrical material, along with a significant portion of his business and personal papers, and some of his collections of other magicians were sold to pay off estate debts to theatre magnate Messmore Kendall. In 1958, Kendall donated his collection to the Hoblitzelle Theatre Library at the University of Texas at Austin. In the 1960s, the Hoblitzelle Library became part of the Harry Ransom Center. The extensive Houdini collection includes a 1584 first edition of Reginald Scot's \"Discoverie of Witchcraft\" and David Garrick's travel diary to Paris from 1751. Some of the scrapbooks in the Houdini collection have been digitized. The collection was exclusively paper-based until April 2016, when the Ransom Center acquired one of Houdini's ball weights with chain and ankle cuff. In October 2016, in conjunction with the 90th anniversary of the death of Houdini, the Ransom Center embarked on a major re-cataloging of the Houdini collection to make it more visible and accessible to researchers. The collection reopened in 2018, with its finding aids posted online.\nA large portion of Houdini's estate holdings and memorabilia was willed to his fellow magician and friend John Mulholland. In 1991, illusionist and television performer David Copperfield purchased all of Mulholland's Houdini holdings from Mulholland's estate. These are now archived and preserved in Copperfield's warehouse at his headquarters in Las Vegas. It contains the world's largest collection of Houdini memorabilia and preserves approximately 80,000 items of memorabilia of Houdini and other magicians, including Houdini's stage props and material, his rebuilt water torture cabinet and his metamorphosis trunk. It is not open to the public, but tours are available by invitation to magicians, scholars, researchers, journalists and serious collectors.\nIn a posthumous ceremony on October 31, 1975, Houdini was given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 7001 Hollywood Blvd.\nThe Houdini Museum in Scranton, Pennsylvania, bills itself as \"the only building in the world entirely dedicated to Houdini\". It is open to the public year-round by reservation. It includes Houdini films, a guided tour about Houdini's life and a stage magic show. Magicians Dorothy Dietrich and Dick Brookz opened the facility in 1991. The House of Houdini is a museum and performance venue located at 11, D\u00edsz square in the Buda Castle in Budapest, Hungary. It claims to house the largest collection of original Houdini artifacts in Europe. The Houdini Museum of New York is located at Fantasma Magic, a retail magic manufacturer and seller located in Manhattan. The museum contains several hundred pieces of ephemera, most of which belonged to Harry Houdini.\nCultural depictions of Houdini.\nThere have been multiple depictions, references, homages, and tributes in pop culture entertainment/media, with some taking liberties with biographical accuracy.\nPublications.\nHoudini published a number of books during his career (some of which were written by his friend Walter B. Gibson, the creator of The Shadow).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53396", "revid": "1772381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53396", "title": "Stand-in", "text": "Substitute for an actor for production purposes\nA stand-in, sometimes a lighting double, for film and television is a person who substitutes for the actor before filming, for technical purposes such as lighting and camera setup.\nStand-ins are helpful in the initial processes of film and television production.\nStand-ins allow the director of photography to light the set and the camera department to light and focus scenes while the actors are absent. The director will often ask stand-ins to deliver the scene dialogue (\"lines\") and walk through (\"blocking\") the scenes to be filmed.\nStand-ins are distinguished from doubles, who replace actors \"on camera\" from behind, in makeup, or during dangerous stunts. Stand-ins do not appear on camera. However, on some productions the jobs of stand-in and double may be done by the same person. In rare cases, a stand-in will appear on screen, sometimes as an in-joke. For instance, a scene in \"Heidi\" (1937) features the title character's grandfather (Jean Hersholt) mistake a stranger for Heidi (Shirley Temple); the look-alike was played by Temple's regular stand-in, Mary Lou Islieb. In another case, the actress who pretends to be Ann Darrow in the stage show during the final act of \"King Kong\" (2005) is played by Naomi Watts' stand-in, Julia Walshaw.\nStand-ins do not necessarily look like the actor, but they must have the same skin tone, hair color, height and build as the actor so that the lighting in a scene will be set up correctly. For example, if the lighting is set up with a stand-in shorter than an actor, the actor might end up having their head in relative darkness. In some cases, a star and stand-in do differ in height: Ann Sheridan's stand-in, Marveen Zehner, was taller than the actress and reportedly worked shoeless, and actor Tommy Noonan wore three-inch risers in his shoes to stand-in for Tyrone Power.\nSome actors' contracts mandate that they will always have the same stand-in. Famous cases include Pluma Noisom (stand-in for Claudette Colbert), Harry Cornbleth (Fred Astaire) and Adam Bryant (Robin Williams). Myrna Loy wrote in her autobiography \"Myrna Loy: Being and Becoming\" about her friendship and working relationship with her stand-in, Shirley Hughes. When Bette Davis walked out on her Warner Bros. contract, she negotiated for her regular stand-in, Sally Sage, to continue to work at the studio.\nStand-in use in animation.\nStand-ins are also used for animated characters in live-action animated films, sometimes with life-size character models instead of people. This lets the animators know where to place the animated character in the scene, how to make them move realistically, and for actors to know where to look. In these cases, skin tone and hair color are not important. Height and build, however, are still important for any interaction between live-action actors and animated characters.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53397", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53397", "title": "Sir Arthur Evans", "text": ""}
{"id": "53398", "revid": "45203278", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53398", "title": "Esoteric programming language", "text": "Experimental or artistic programming language\nAn esoteric programming language (sometimes shortened to esolang) or weird language5 is a programming language designed to test the boundaries of computer programming language design, as a proof of concept, as software art, as a hacking interface to another language (particularly functional programming or procedural programming languages), or as a joke. The use of the word \"esoteric\" distinguishes them from languages that working developers use to write software. The creators of most esolangs do not intend them to be used for mainstream programming, although some esoteric features, such as live visualization of code, have inspired practical applications in the arts. Such languages are often popular among hackers and hobbyists.\nUsability is rarely a goal for designers of esoteric programming languages; often their design leads to quite the opposite. Their usual aim is to remove or replace conventional language features while still maintaining a language that is Turing-complete, or even one for which the computational class is unknown.\nHistory.\nThe earliest, and still the canonical example of an esoteric programming language, is INTERCAL, designed in 1972 by Don Woods and James M. Lyon, who said that their intention was to create a programming language unlike any with which they were familiar, namely FORTRAN, BASIC, COBOL, ALGOL, SNOBOL, SPITBOL, FOCAL, SOLVE, TEACH, APL, LISP, and PL/I. It parodied elements of established programming languages of the day.5\nFor many years, INTERCAL was represented only by paper copies of the INTERCAL manual. Its revival in 1990 as an implementation in C6 under Unix stimulated a wave of interest in the intentional design of esoteric computer languages.\nIn 1993, Wouter van Oortmerssen created FALSE, a small stack-oriented programming language with syntax designed to make the code inherently obfuscated, confusing and unreadable. Its compiler is only 1024 bytes in size. This inspired Urban M\u00fcller to create an even smaller language, the now-infamous Brainfuck, which consists of only eight recognized characters. Along with Chris Pressey's Befunge (like FALSE, but with a two-dimensional instruction pointer), Brainfuck is now one of the best-supported esoteric programming languages, with canonical examples of minimal Turing tarpits and needlessly obfuscated language features. Brainfuck is related to the P\u2032\u2032 family of Turing machines.\nCommon features.\nWhile esoteric programming languages differ in many ways, there are some common traits that characterize many languages, such as parody, minimalism, and the goal of making programming difficult. Many esoteric programming languages, such as brainfuck, and similar, use single characters as commands, however, it is not uncommon for languages to read line by line like conventional programming languages.\nUnique data representations.\nConventional imperative programming languages typically allow data to be stored in variables, but esoteric languages may utilize different methods of storing and accessing data. Languages like Brainfuck and Malbolge only permit data to be read through a single pointer, which must be moved to a location of interest before data is read. Others, like Befunge and Shakespeare, utilize one or more stacks to hold data, leading to a manner of execution akin to Reverse Polish notation. Finally, there are languages which explore alternative forms of number representation: the Brainfuck variant Boolfuck only permits operations on single bits, while Malbolge and INTERCAL variant TriINTERCAL replace bits altogether with a base 3 ternary system.\nUnique instruction representations.\nEsoteric languages also showcase unique ways of representing program instructions. Some languages, such as Befunge and Piet, represent programs in two or more dimensions, with program control moving around in multiple possible directions through the program. This differs from conventional languages in which a program is a set of instructions usually encountered in sequence. Other languages modify instructions to appear in an unusual form, often one that can be read by humans with an alternate meaning to the underlying instructions. Shakespeare achieves this by making all programs resemble Shakespearian plays. Chef achieves the same by having all programs be recipes. Chef is particularly notable in that some have created programs that successfully function both as a program and as a recipe, demonstrating the ability of the language to produce this double meaning.\nDifficulty to read and write.\nMany esoteric programming languages are designed to produce code that is deeply obfuscated, making it difficult to read and to write. The purpose of this may be to provide an interesting puzzle or challenge for program writers: Malbolge for instance was explicitly designed to be challenging, and so it has features like self-modifying code and highly counterintuitive operations. On the other hand, some esoteric languages become difficult to write due to their other design choices. Brainfuck is committed to the idea of a minimalist instruction set, so even though its instructions are straightforward in principle, the code that arises is difficult for a human to read. INTERCAL's difficulty arises as a result of the choice to avoid operations used in any other programming language, which stems from its origin as a parody of other languages.\nParody and spoof.\nOne of the aims of esoteric programming languages is to parody or spoof existing languages and trends in the field of programming. For instance, the first esoteric language INTERCAL began as a spoof of languages used in the 1960s, such as APL, Fortran, and COBOL. INTERCAL's rules appear to be the inverse of rules in these other languages. However, the subject of parody is not always another established programming language. Shakespeare can be viewed as spoofing the structure of Shakespearean plays, for instance. The language Ook! is a parody of Brainfuck, where Brainfuck's eight commands are replaced by various orangutan sounds like \"Ook. Ook?\"\nExamples.\nBefunge.\nBefunge allows the instruction pointer to roam in multiple dimensions through the code. For example, the following program displays \"Hello World\" by pushing the characters in reverse order onto the stack, then printing the characters in a loop which circulates clockwise through the instructions , , , , , and .\nThere are many versions of Befunge, the most common being Befunge-93, named as such because of its release year.\nBinary lambda calculus.\nBinary lambda calculus is designed from an algorithmic information theory perspective to allow for the densest possible code with the most minimal means, featuring a 29-byte self interpreter, a 21-byte prime number sieve, and a 112-byte Brainfuck interpreter.\nBrainfuck.\nBrainfuck is designed for extreme minimalism and leads to obfuscated code, with programs containing only eight distinct characters. The following program outputs \"Hello, world!\":\n ..+++.&gt;++.\u00ab+++++++++++++++.&gt;.+++.------.--------.&gt;+.\nAll characters other than are ignored.\nChef.\nChef is a stack-oriented programming language created by David Morgan-Mar, designed to make programs look like cooking recipes. Programs consist of a title, a list of variables and their data values, and a list of stack manipulation instructions. A joking design principle states that \"program recipes should not only generate valid output, but be easy to prepare and delicious\", and Morgan-Mar notes that an example \"Hello, World!\" program with 101 eggs and 111 (~) oil would produce \"a lot of food for one person\".\nFRACTRAN.\nA FRACTRAN program is an ordered list of positive fractions together with an initial positive integer input formula_1. The program is run by multiplying the integer formula_1 by the first fraction formula_3 in the list for which formula_4 is an integer. The integer formula_1 is then replaced by formula_4 and the rule is repeated. If no fraction in the list produces an integer when multiplied by formula_1, the program halts. FRACTRAN was invented by mathematician John Conway.\nINTERCAL.\nINTERCAL, short for \"Compiler Language With No Pronounceable Acronym\", was created in 1972 as a parody to satirize aspects of the various programming languages at the time.\nJSFuck.\nJSFuck is an esoteric programming style of JavaScript, where code is written using only six characters: codice_1, codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, and codice_6. \nUnlike Brainfuck, which requires its own compiler or interpreter, JSFuck is valid JavaScript code, meaning JSFuck programs can be run in any web browser or engine that interprets JavaScript. It has been used in a number of cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks on websites such as eBay due to its ability to evade cross-site scripting detection filters.\nLOLCODE.\nLOLCODE is designed to resemble the speech of lolcats. The following is the \"Hello World\" example:\nWhile the semantics of LOLCODE is not unusual, its syntax has been described as a linguistic phenomenon, representing an unusual example of informal speech and internet slang in programming.\nMalbolge.\nMalbolge (named after the 8th circle of Hell) was designed to be the most difficult and esoteric programming language. Among other features, code is self-modifying by design and the effect of an instruction depends on its address in memory.\nPiet.\nPiet is a language designed by David Morgan-Mar, whose programs are bitmaps that look like abstract art. The execution is guided by a \"pointer\" that moves around the image, from one continuous coloured region to the next. Procedures are carried out when the pointer exits a region.\nThere are 20 colours for which behaviour is specified: 18 \"colourful\" colours, which are ordered by a 6-step hue cycle and a 3-step brightness cycle; and black and white, which are not ordered. When exiting a \"colourful\" colour and entering another one, the performed procedure is determined by the number of steps of change in hue and brightness. Black cannot be entered; when the pointer tries to enter a black region, the rules of choosing the next block are changed instead. If all possible rules are tried, the program terminates. Regions outside the borders of the image are also treated as black. White does not perform operations, but allows the pointer to \"pass through\". The behaviour of colours other than the 20 specified is left to the compiler or interpreter.\nVariables are stored in memory as signed integers in a single stack. Most specified procedures deal with operations on that stack, while others deal with input/output and with the rules by which the compilation pointer moves.\nPiet was named after the Dutch painter Piet Mondrian. The original intended name, \"Mondrian\", was already taken by an open-source statistical data-visualization system.\nShakespeare.\nShakespeare Programming Language (SPL) is designed to make programs look like Shakespearean plays. For example, the following statement declares a point in the program which can be reached via a GOTO-type statement:\n Act I: Hamlet's insults and flattery.\nUnlambda.\nUnlambda is a minimalist functional programming language based on SKI calculus, but combined with first-class continuations and imperative I/O (with input usually requiring the use of continuations).\nVelato.\nVelato was created by Daniel Temkin in 2009 and uses MIDI files as its source code. Programs are composed of musical notes, with each instruction determined by the interval between successive notes relative to a chosen root note.\nThis design allows valid Velato code to double as a musical composition.\nWhitespace.\nWhitespace uses only whitespace characters (space, tab, and return), ignoring all other characters, which can therefore be used for comments. This is the reverse of many traditional languages, which do not distinguish between different whitespace characters, treating tab and space the same. It also allows Whitespace programs to be hidden in the source code of programs in languages like C.\nCultural context.\nThe cultural context of esolangs has been studied by Geoff Cox, who writes that esolangs \"shift attention from command and control toward cultural expression and refusal\", seeing esolangs as similar to code art and code poetry, such as Mez Breeze's mezangelle, a belief shared by others in field. Daniel Temkin claims that \"esolangs are open-ended systems, natively collaborative, and distanced from any single materialized form\", which \"challenge or re-affirm wider ideas in programming culture and in how computer science is taught\", including the neutral, \"professional\" style advocated in Edsgar Dijkstra's \"The Humble Programmer\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53399", "revid": "34975998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53399", "title": "Montage", "text": "Montage may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53403", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53403", "title": "John Burgee", "text": "American architect\nJohn Burgee (born August 28, 1933) is an American architect noted for his contributions to Postmodern architecture. He was a partner of Philip Johnson from 1967 to 1991, creating together the partnership firm Johnson/Burgee Architects. Their landmark collaborations included Pennzoil Place in Houston and the AT&amp;T World Headquarters in New York. Burgee eased Johnson out of the firm in 1991, and when it subsequently went bankrupt, Burgee's design career was essentially over. Burgee is retired, and resides in California.\nLife and career.\nBurgee graduated from the School of Architecture at the University of Notre Dame in 1956, and served on the university's board of trustees from 1988 until 2006, when he was named trustee emeritus, and on the School of Architecture's advisory council from 1982. He also served on the boards of the Architectural League of New York, Lenox Hill Hospital, Columbia University's Master of Sciences Program in Real Estate Development, the Parsons School of Design, and the Friends of the Upper East Side Historic District, and was the co-chairman of the Architectural Committee of the Statue of Liberty/Ellis Island Centennial Commission. For the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies, Burgee was president and chairman.\nJohnson/Burgee Architects.\nJohn Burgee and Philip Johnson established Johnson/Burgee in Manhattan in 1968, with Burgee as the firm's CEO, and they collaborated on many designs. In 1984, Raj Ahuja, who had been an associate with the firm for 15 years, was made a full partner. Two years later, they moved into the Lipstick Building at 885 Third Avenue, between 53rd and 54th Streets, which the firm had designed. That same year, Burgee negotiated a lesser role in the partnership for Johnson, as a design consultant, and in 1988 he asked Ahuja to leave. Completing the transformation of the firm, in 1991 Johnson left altogether, at Burgee's behest. Shortly thereafter, the firm went into bankruptcy because of an arbitration connected to Ahuja's leaving, and Burgee's career was dealt a serious blow.\nTheir collaborations include:\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "53404", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53404", "title": "Frank Gehry", "text": "Canadian and American architect (born 1929)\nFrank Owen Gehry ( ; n\u00e9\u00a0Goldberg; born February 28, 1929) is a Canadian and American architect and designer. A number of his buildings, including his private residence in Santa Monica, California, have become attractions. \nGehry rose to prominence in the 1970s with his distinctive style that blended everyday materials with complex, dynamic structures. Gehry's approach to architecture has been described as deconstructivist, though he himself resists categorization. His works are considered among the most important of contemporary architecture in the 2010 World Architecture Survey, leading \"Vanity Fair\" to call him \"the most important architect of our age\".\nGehry is known for his postmodern designs and use of bold, unconventional forms and materials. His most famous works include the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao in Spain, the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles, and the Louis Vuitton Foundation in Paris. These buildings are characterized by their sculptural, often undulating exteriors and innovative use of materials such as titanium and stainless steel.\nThroughout his career, Gehry has received numerous awards and honors, including the Pritzker Architecture Prize in 1989, considered the field's highest honor. He has also been awarded the National Medal of Arts and the Presidential Medal of Freedom in the United States. Gehry's influence extends beyond architecture; he has designed furniture, jewelry, and liquor bottles.\nEarly life.\nFrank Owen Gehry was born Frank Owen Goldberg on February 28, 1929, at Toronto General Hospital in Toronto, Ontario, to parents Sadie Thelma (n\u00e9e Kaplanski/Caplan) and Irving Goldberg. His American father was born in New York City to Russian-Jewish parents, and his Polish-Jewish mother was an immigrant born in \u0141\u00f3d\u017a, Poland. A creative child, he was encouraged by his grandmother, Leah Caplan, with whom he built little cities out of scraps of wood. With these scraps from her husband's hardware store, she entertained him for hours, building imaginary houses and futuristic cities on the living room floor.\nGehry's use of corrugated steel, chain-link fencing, unpainted plywood, and other utilitarian or \"everyday\" materials was partly inspired by spending Saturday mornings at his grandfather's hardware store. He spent time drawing with his father, and his mother introduced him to the world of art. \"So the creative genes were there\", Gehry says. \"But my father thought I was a dreamer, I wasn't gonna amount to anything. It was my mother who thought I was just reticent to do things. She would push me.\"\nHe was given the Hebrew name \"Ephraim\" by his grandfather, but used it only at his bar mitzvah. In 1954, Gehry changed his surname from Goldberg to Gehry, after his then-wife Anita expressed concern about antisemitism.\nEducation.\nIn 1947, Gehry's family immigrated to the United States, settling in California. He got a job driving a delivery truck and studied at Los Angeles City College.\nAccording to Gehry, \"I was a truck driver in L.A., going to City College, and I tried radio announcing, which I wasn't very good at. I tried chemical engineering, which I wasn't very good at and didn't like, and then I remembered. You know, somehow I just started wracking my brain about, 'What do I like?' Where was I? What made me excited? And I remembered art, that I loved going to museums and I loved looking at paintings, loved listening to music. Those things came from my mother, who took me to concerts and museums. I remembered Grandma and the blocks, and just on a hunch, I tried some architecture classes.\" \nGehry went on to graduate from the University of Southern California's School of Architecture in 1954, where his professors included William Pereira. During that time, he became a member of Alpha Epsilon Pi. He then spent time away from architecture in numerous other jobs, including service in the United States Army. In the fall of 1956, he moved his family to Cambridge, Massachusetts, where he studied city planning at Harvard University's Graduate School of Design. Gehry had always expressed a socialist philosophy for architecture, something that was influenced by political views as he expressed a more leftist attitude to the world. These progressive ideas about socially responsible architecture were under-realized and not respected by his professors at Harvard, leaving him to feel disheartened and \"underwhelmed\". Gehry's distaste for the school culminated after he was invited by his architecture professor to engage in a discussion revolving around a \"secret architectural project in progress\", which was ultimately revealed to Gehry as a palace that he was designing for Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.\nCareer.\nGehry ultimately dropped out of his graduate program at Harvard University (where he studied urban planning) to start a furniture manufacturing company Easy Edges, which specialised in creating pieces with cardboard.\nHe returned to Los Angeles to work for Victor Gruen Associates, with whom he had apprenticed while at USC. In 1957, at age 28, he was given the chance to design his first private residence with friend and old classmate Greg Walsh. Construction was done by another neighbor across the street from his wife's family, Charlie Sockler. Built in Idyllwild, California for his wife Anita's family neighbor Melvin David, the over \"David Cabin\" shows features that were to become synonymous with Gehry's later work, including beams protruding from the exterior sides, vertical-grain douglas fir detail, and exposed unfinished ceiling beams. It also shows strong Asian influences, stemming from his earliest inspirations, such as the Sh\u014ds\u014din in Nara, Japan.\nIn 1961, Gehry moved to Paris, where he worked for architect Andre Remondet. In 1962, he established a practice in Los Angeles that became Frank Gehry and Associates in 1967, then Gehry Partners in 2001. His earliest commissions were in Southern California, where he designed a number of innovative commercial structures such as Santa Monica Place (1980) and residential buildings such as the eccentric Norton House (1984) in Venice, Los Angeles.\nAmong these works, Gehry's most notable design may be the renovation of his own Santa Monica residence. Originally built in 1920 and purchased by Gehry in 1977, it features a metallic exterior wrapped around the original building that leaves many of the original details visible. Gehry still resides there.\nOther of Gehry's buildings completed during the 1980s include the Cabrillo Marine Aquarium (1981) in San Pedro, and the California Aerospace Museum (1984) at the California Museum of Science and Industry in Los Angeles.\nIn 1989, Gehry received the Pritzker Architecture Prize, where the jury described him: \"Always open to experimentation, he has as well a sureness and maturity that resists, in the same way that Picasso did, being bound either by critical acceptance or his successes. His buildings are juxtaposed collages of spaces and materials that make users appreciative of both the theatre and the back-stage, simultaneously revealed.\"\nGehry continued to design other notable buildings in California, such as the Chiat/Day Building (1991) in Venice, in collaboration with Claes Oldenburg, which is well known for its massive sculpture of binoculars. He also began receiving larger national and international commissions, including his first European commission, the Vitra International Furniture Manufacturing Facility and Design Museum in Germany, completed in 1989. It was soon followed by other major commissions including the Frederick Weisman Museum of Art (1993) in Minneapolis, Minnesota; the Cin\u00e9math\u00e8que Fran\u00e7aise(1994) in Paris, originally The American Center in Paris; and the Dancing House (1996) in Prague.\nFrom 1994 to 1996 a couple buildings by Gehry for a public housing project were realized in Goldstein, part of Frankfurt-Schwanheim (1994)\nIn 1997, Gehry vaulted to a new level of international acclaim when the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao opened in Bilbao, Spain. Hailed by \"The New Yorker\" as a \"masterpiece of the 20th century\", and by legendary architect Philip Johnson as \"the greatest building of our time\", the museum became famous for its striking yet aesthetically pleasing design and its positive economic effect on the city.\nSince then, Gehry has regularly won major commissions and established himself as one of the world's most notable architects. His best-received works include several concert halls for classical music. The boisterous, curvaceous Walt Disney Concert Hall (2003) in downtown Los Angeles is the centerpiece of the neighborhood's revitalization; the \"Los Angeles Times\" called it \"the most effective answer to doubters, naysayers, and grumbling critics an American architect has ever produced\". Gehry also designed the open-air Jay Pritzker Pavilion (2004) in Chicago's Millennium Park; and the understated New World Center (2011) in Miami Beach, which the \"LA Times\" called \"a piece of architecture that dares you to underestimate it or write it off at first glance.\"\nHis other notable works include academic buildings such as the Stata Center (2004) at MIT, and the Peter B. Lewis Library (2008) at Princeton University; museums such as the Museum of Pop Culture (2000) in Seattle, Washington; commercial buildings such as the IAC Building (2007) in New York City; and residential buildings, such as Gehry's first skyscraper, the Beekman Tower at 8 Spruce Street (2011) in New York City.\nGehry's recent major international works include the Dr Chau Chak Wing Building at the University of Technology Sydney, completed in 2014, and the Chau Chak Wing, with its 320,000 bricks in \"sweeping lines\", described as \"10 out of 10\" on a scale of difficulty. Ongoing projects include the Guggenheim Abu Dhabi on Saadiyat Island in the United Arab Emirates and the Forma skyscraper project in his hometown. Other significant projects such as a multi-decade renovation of the Philadelphia Art Museum are currently in the design stage. In October 2013, Gehry was appointed joint architect with Foster + Partners to design the High Street phase of the development of Battersea Power Station in London, Gehry's first project there.\nIn recent years, some of Gehry's more prominent designs have failed to go forward. In addition to unrealized designs for the Corcoran Art Gallery expansion in Washington, DC, and a new Guggenheim museum near the South Street Seaport in New York City, Gehry was notoriously dropped by developer Bruce Ratner from the Pacific Park (Brooklyn) redevelopment project, and in 2014 as the designer of the World Trade Center Performing Arts Center in New York City. Some stalled projects have recently shown progress: After many years and a dismissal, Gehry was recently reinstated as architect for the Grand Avenue Project in Los Angeles, and though his controversial design of the National Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial in Washington, DC has had numerous delays during the approval process with the United States Congress, it was finally approved in 2014 with a modified design.\nIn 2014, two significant, long-awaited museums designed by Gehry opened: the Biomuseo, a biodiversity museum in Panama City, Panama; and the Fondation Louis Vuitton, a modern art museum in the Bois de Boulogne park in Paris, France. Both opened to generally positive reviews.\nAlso in 2014, Gehry was commissioned by River LA (formerly the Los Angeles River Revitalization Corporation), a nonprofit group founded by the city of Los Angeles in 2009 to coordinate river policy, to devise a wide-ranging new plan for the river.\nIn February 2015, the new A$180\u00a0million building for the University of Technology Sydney was officially opened, whose fa\u00e7ade has more than 320,000 hand-placed bricks and glass slabs. Gehry said he would not design a building like the \"crumpled paper bag\" again.\nGehry told the French newspaper \"La Croix\" in November 2016 that President of France Fran\u00e7ois Hollande had assured him he could relocate to France if Donald Trump was elected President of the United States. The following month, Gehry said that he had no plans to move. Trump and he exchanged words in 2010 when Gehry's 8 Spruce Street, originally known as Beekman Tower, was built taller than the nearby Trump Building, which until then was New York City's tallest residential building.\nNotable Gehry-designed buildings completed in the 2020s include the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial in Washington, DC and the LUMA Arles museum in France. In 2021, noting Gehry's progress on an increasing number of significant projects in his hometown, including the Grand Avenue Project, a concert hall for the Youth Orchestra Los Angeles, and an office building for Warner Bros., \"The Architect's Newspaper\" stated that \"Seventy-four years after he moved there from his native Toronto, L.A. is looking more and more like Gehry Country.\"\nArchitectural style.\nSaid to \"defy categorisation\", Gehry's work reflects a spirit of experimentation coupled with a respect for the demands of professional practice, and has remained largely unaligned with broader stylistic tendencies or movements. With his earliest educational influences rooted in modernism, Gehry's work has sought to escape modernist stylistic tropes while remaining interested in some of its underlying transformative agendas. Continually working between given circumstances and unanticipated materializations, he has been assessed as someone who \"made us produce buildings that are fun, sculpturally exciting, good experiences\", although his approach may become \"less relevant as pressure mounts to do more with less\".\nGehry's style at times seems unfinished or even crude, but his work is consistent with the California \"funk\" art movement of the 1960s and early 1970s, which featured the use of inexpensive found objects and nontraditional media such as clay to make serious art. His works always have at least some element of deconstructivism; he has been called \"the apostle of chain-link fencing and corrugated metal siding\". However, a retrospective exhibit at New York's Whitney Museum in 1988 revealed that he is also a sophisticated classical artist who knows European art history and contemporary sculpture and painting.\nEarly influences and design philosophy.\nFrank Gehry has often described architecture as inherently sculptural, asserting, \"https://\" This perspective reflects his commitment to blending artistic and architectural disciplines. Gehry\u2019s early work with sculptors influenced his experimental approach, which includes deconstructing traditional architectural forms and embracing ideas of flow and defamiliarization, akin to https:// Critics often describe his work as embodying structuralism rather than traditional formalism.\nCultural and personal influences.\nGehry\u2019s Jewish heritage and immigrant background have shaped his architectural philosophy. He often reinterprets traditional forms in ways that reflect his multicultural experience. His works have been described as embodying \"a critique of consumerism\" by defying expectations of luxury and focusing on creativity. For Gehry, architecture is not just about creating buildings but about crafting spaces that inspire and challenge societal norms. \nMaterial innovation.\nA hallmark of Gehry's style is his innovative use of materials. He challenges architectural norms by incorporating unconventional elements such as corrugated steel, chain-link fencing, and plywood. His works are celebrated for their \"raw aesthetic\" that combines everyday materials in unexpected ways, https:// These material choices also reflect a critique of luxury, emphasizing creativity over opulence. \nBilbao effect.\nThe term \"Bilbao effect\" emerged in urban planning to describe the transformative impact of Gehry\u2019s architecture. His design for the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, revitalized the city, serving as a prime example of how architecture can drive economic and cultural renewal. The museum\u2019s dramatic curves and shimmering titanium panels are defining features of Gehry\u2019s style, emphasizing movement and fluidity. \nAfter the phenomenal success of Gehry's design for the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, critics began referring to the economic and cultural revitalization of cities through iconic, innovative architecture as the \"Bilbao effect\". In the first 12 months after the museum was opened, an estimated US$160\u00a0million were added to the Basque economy. As of 2014, over $3.5 billion have been added to the Basque economy since the building opened. In subsequent years there have been many attempts to replicate this effect through large-scale eye-catching architectural commissions that have been both successful and unsuccessful, such as Daniel Libeskind's expansion of the Denver Art Museum and buildings by Gehry himself, such as the almost universally well-received Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles and the more controversial Museum of Pop Culture in Seattle. Though some link the concept of the Bilbao effect to the notion of starchitecture, Gehry has consistently rejected the label of a starchitect.\nAcademia and design career.\nAcademia.\nIn January 2011, Gehry joined the University of Southern California (USC) faculty, as the Judge Widney Professor of Architecture. He has since continued in this role at his alma mater. He has also held teaching positions at Harvard University, the University of California at Los Angeles, the University of Toronto, Columbia University, the Federal Institute of Technology in Z\u00fcrich, and at Yale University, where he still teaches as of 2017.\nThough he is often referred to as a \"starchitect\", he has repeatedly expressed his disdain for the term, insisting he is only an architect. Steve Sample, President of the University of Southern California, told Gehry that \"...After George Lucas, you are our most prominent graduate\".\nAs of December 2013[ [update]], Gehry has received over a dozen honorary university degrees (see #Honorary doctorates).\nIn February 2017, MasterClass announced an online architecture course taught by Gehry that was released that July.\nExhibition design.\nGehry has been involved in exhibition designs at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art dating back to the 1960s. In 1965, Gehry designed the exhibition display for the \"Art Treasures of Japan\" exhibition at the LACMA. This was followed soon after by the exhibition design for the \"Assyrian Reliefs\" show in 1966 and the \"Billy Al Bengston Retrospective\" in 1968. The LACMA then had Gehry design the installation for the \"Treasures of Tutankhamen\" exhibition in 1978 followed by the \"Avant-Garde in Russia 1910\u20131930\" exhibition in 1980. The subsequent year, Gehry designed the exhibition for \"Seventeen Artists in the '60s\" at the LACMA, followed soon after by the \"German Expressionist Sculpture Exhibition\" in 1983. In 1991\u201392, Gehry designed the installation of the landmark exhibition \"Degenerate Art: The Fate of the Avant-Garde in Nazi Germany\", which opened at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art and traveled to the Art Institute of Chicago, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, and the Altes Museum in Berlin. Gehry was asked to design an exhibition on the work of Alexander Calder at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art's Resnick Pavilion, again invited by the museum's curator Stephanie Barron. The exhibition began on November 24, 2013, and ran through July 27, 2014.\nIn addition to his long-standing involvement with exhibition design at the LACMA, Gehry has also designed numerous exhibition installations with other institutions. In 1998, \"The Art of the Motorcycle\" exhibition opened at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum with its installation designed by Gehry. This exhibition subsequently traveled to the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago, the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao and the Guggenheim Las Vegas.\nIn 2014, he curated an exhibition of photography by his close friend and businessman Peter Arnell that ran from March 5 through April 1 at Milk Studios Gallery in Los Angeles.\nStage design.\nIn 1983, Gehry created the stage design for Lucinda Childs' dance \"Available Light\", set to music by John Adams. It premiered at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles at the \"Temporary Contemporary\", and was subsequently seen at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Opera House in New York City and the Theatre de la Ville in Paris. The set consisted of two levels angled in relation to each other, with a chain-link backdrop. The piece was revived in 2015, and was performed, among other places, in Los Angeles and Philadelphia, where it was presented by FringeArts, which commissioned the revival.\nIn 2003, Gehry designed the set for the American premiere of Jan\u00e1\u010dek's opera \"Osud\" at the Gehry-designed Fisher Center at Bard College.\nIn 2012, Gehry designed the set for the Los Angeles Philharmonic's opera production of \"Don Giovanni\", performed at the Walt Disney Concert Hall.\nIn April 2014, Gehry designed a set for an \"exploration of the life and career of Pierre Boulez\" by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, which was performed in November of that year.\nOther designs.\nIn addition to architecture, Gehry has made a line of furniture for Knoll and for Heller Furniture, jewelry for Tiffany &amp; Co., various household items, sculptures, and even a glass bottle for Wyborowa Vodka. His first line of furniture, produced from 1969 to 1973, was called \"Easy Edges\", constructed out of cardboard. Another line of furniture released in the spring of 1992 is \"Bentwood Furniture\". Each piece is named after a different hockey term. He was first introduced to making furniture in 1954 while serving in the U.S.\u00a0Army, where he designed furniture for enlisted soldiers.\nIn many of his designs, Gehry is inspired by fish. \"It was by accident I got into the fish image\", claimed Gehry. One thing that sparked his interest in fish was the fact that his colleagues were recreating Greek temples. He said, \"Three hundred million years before man was fish...if you gotta go back, and you're insecure about going forward...go back three hundred million years ago. Why are you stopping at the Greeks? So, I started drawing fish in my sketchbook, and then I started to realize that there was something in it.\"\nAs a result of his fascination, the first Fish Lamps were fabricated between 1984 and 1986. They employed wire armatures molded into fish shapes, onto which shards of plastic laminate ColorCore are individually glued. Since the creation of the first lamp in 1984, the fish has become a recurrent motif in Gehry's work, most notably in the \"Fish Sculpture\" at La Vila Ol\u00edmpica del Poblenou in Barcelona (1989\u201392) and \"Standing Glass Fish\" for the Minneapolis Sculpture Garden (1986).\nGehry has previously collaborated with luxury jewelry company Tiffany &amp; Co., creating six distinct jewelry collections: the Orchid, Fish, Torque, Equus, Axis, and Fold collections. In addition to jewelry, Gehry designed other items, including a distinctive collector's chess set and a series of tableware items, including vases, cups, and bowls for the company.\nIn 2004, Gehry designed the official trophy for the World Cup of Hockey. He redesigned the trophy for the next tournament in 2016.\nHe has collaborated with American furniture manufacturer Emeco on designs such as the 2004 \"Superlight\" chair.\nIn 2014, Gehry was one of the six \"iconoclasts\" selected by French fashion house Louis Vuitton to design a piece using their iconic monogram pattern as part of their \"Celebrating Monogram\" campaign.\nIn 2015, Gehry designed his first yacht.\nIn 2020, Gehry designed a limited edition bottle of Hennessy cognac.\nSoftware development.\nGehry's firm was responsible for innovation in architectural software. His firm spun off another firm called Gehry Technologies that was established in 2002. In 2005, Gehry Technologies began a partnership with Dassault Syst\u00e8mes to bring innovations from the aerospace and manufacturing world to AEC and developed Digital Project software, as well as GTeam software. In 2014, Gehry Technologies was acquired by software company Trimble Navigation. Its client list includes Diller Scofidio + Renfro, Herzog &amp; de Meuron, Jean Nouvel, Coop Himmelb(l)au, and Zaha Hadid.\nPersonal life.\nA naturalized U.S. citizen, he also remains a citizen of Canada. He lives in Santa Monica, California, and continues to practice out of Los Angeles. Having grown up in Canada, he is an avid fan of ice hockey. He began a hockey league, FOG (for Frank Owen Gehry), in his office, though he no longer plays with them. In 2004, he designed the trophy for the World Cup of Hockey. \nGehry is known for his occasional bad temper. During a trip to Oviedo, Spain to accept the Prince of Asturias Award in October 2014, he received a significant amount of attention, both positive and negative, for publicly flipping off a reporter at a press conference who accused him of being a \"showy\" architect.\nGehry is a member of the California Yacht Club in Marina Del Rey, and enjoys sailing with his fiberglass-hulled yacht, \"Foggy\".\nPhilanthropy.\nIn 2014, Gehry co-founded Turnaround Arts: California, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit that expands access to the arts in under-resourced public elementary and middle schools across California. In addition to serving as a board member for the organization, Gehry has served as a visiting artist with students. He also serves on the leadership council of the New York Stem Cell Foundation.\nGehry has also donated his time to design projects pro-bono. In 2014, he began pro-bono work with the L.A. River Revitalization Corp., a nonprofit group founded by the city, to develop the LA River Master Plan. In 2015, he unveiled his design, for which he waved his design fee, for the Children's Institute in Watts, an LA-based social services organization that provides services to families who have experienced violence and poverty. The Youth Orchestra Los Angeles (YOLA), which is an educational center and performance space that provides free instruments, music training, and academic support to students from disadvantaged neighborhoods, was also designed pro-bono by Gehry and was completed in 2021.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2004, Gehry voiced himself in an episode of the children's TV\u00a0show \"Arthur\" called \"Castles in the Sky\", where he helped Arthur and his friends design a new treehouse. He also voiced himself in a 2005 episode of \"The Simpsons,\" \"The Seven-Beer Snitch\", where he designs a concert hall for the fictional city of Springfield. He has since said he regrets the appearance, as it included a joke about his design technique that has led people to misunderstand his architectural process.\nIn 2006, filmmaker Sydney Pollack made a documentary about Gehry's work, \"Sketches of Frank Gehry,\" which followed Gehry over five years and painted a positive portrait of his character; it was well-received critically.\nIn 2009, architecture-inspired ice cream sandwich company Coolhaus named a cookie and ice cream combination after Gehry. Dubbed the \"Frank Behry\", it features Strawberries &amp; Cream gelato and snickerdoodle cookies.\nWorks.\nExhibitions.\nIn October 2014, the first major European exhibition of Gehry's work debuted at the Centre Pompidou in Paris. Other museums and major galleries that have held exhibitions on Gehry's architecture and design include the Leo Castelli Gallery in 1983; and the Walker Art Center in 1986, whose exhibition then traveled to the Toronto Harbourfront Museum, the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, the High Museum of Art in Atlanta, the LACMA and the Whitney Museum. Museums with exhibitions on Gehry's work have included the Philadelphia Art Museum, the Museum of Modern Art (1992), the Gagosian Gallery (1984, 1992 and 1993), the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum (2001), the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao (2002), the Jewish Museum in Manhattan (2010), and the Milan Triennale (first in 1988, then in 2010 with an exhibition entitled \"Frank Gehry from 1997\"), and LACMA (2015).\nGehry participated in the 1980 Venice Biennale's The Presence of the Past exhibition, designing an architectural facade for the \"Strada Novissima\" installation. He also contributed to the 1985 Venice Biennale with an installation and performance named \"Il Corso del Coltello,\" in collaboration with Claes Oldenburg. His projects were featured in the 1996 event, and contributed to the 2008 event with the installation \"Ungapatchket\".\nIn October 2015, 21 21 Design Sight in Tokyo held the exhibition \"Frank Gehry. I Have An Idea\", curated by Japanese architect Tsuyoshi Tane.\nIn 2021, the Gagosian Gallery in Beverly Hills held \"Spinning Tales\", an exhibition of new fish sculptures by Gehry.\nAwards and honors.\nGehry was elected to the College of Fellows of the American Institute of Architects (AIA) in 1974, and he has received many national, regional and local AIA awards. He is a senior fellow of the Design Futures Council and serves on the steering committee of the Aga Khan Award for Architecture.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53406", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53406", "title": "Cass Gilbert", "text": "American architect (1859\u20131934)\nCass Gilbert (November 24, 1859 \u2013 May 17, 1934) was an American architect. An early proponent of skyscrapers, his works include the Woolworth Building, the United States Supreme Court building, the state capitols of Minnesota, Arkansas, and West Virginia, the Detroit Public Library, the Saint Louis Art Museum and Public Library. His public buildings in the Beaux Arts style reflect the optimistic American sense that the nation was heir to Greek democracy, Roman law and Renaissance humanism. Gilbert's achievements were recognized in his lifetime; he served as president of the American Institute of Architects in 1908\u201309.\nGilbert was a conservative who believed architecture should reflect historic traditions and the established social order. His design of the new Supreme Court building in 1935, with its classical lines and small size, contrasted sharply with the large federal buildings along the National Mall in Washington, D.C., which he disliked.\nArchitectural historian Margaret Heilbrun said that \"Gilbert's pioneering buildings injected vitality into skyscraper design, and his 'Gothic skyscraper,' epitomized by the Woolworth Building, profoundly influenced architects during the first decades of the twentieth century.\" Historians Christen and Flanders wrote that his reputation among architectural critics went into eclipse during the age of modernism, but has since rebounded because of \"respect for the integrity and classic beauty of his masterworks\".\nEarly life.\nGilbert was born in Zanesville, Ohio, the middle of three sons, and was named after the statesman Lewis Cass, to whom he was distantly related. Gilbert's father General Samuel A. Gilbert was a Union veteran of the American Civil War and a surveyor for the United States Coast Survey. His uncle was Union General Charles Champion Gilbert. When he was nine, Gilbert's family moved to St. Paul, Minnesota, where he was raised by his mother after his father died. Cass was raised Presbyterian. He attended preparatory school but dropped out of Macalester College. He began his architectural career at age 17 by joining the Abraham M. Radcliffe office in St. Paul. In 1878, Gilbert enrolled in the architecture program at MIT.\nMinnesota career.\nGilbert worked for a time with the firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White before starting a practice in St. Paul with James Knox Taylor. He was commissioned to design a number of railroad stations, including those in Anoka, Willmar and the extant Little Falls depot, all in Minnesota. As a Minnesota architect he was best known for his design of the Minnesota State Capitol and the downtown St. Paul Endicott Building. His goal was to move to New York City and gain a national reputation, but he remained in Minnesota from 1882 until 1898. Many of his Minnesota buildings are still standing, including more than a dozen private residences (especially those on St. Paul's Summit Avenue), several churches featuring rich textures and colors, resort summer homes, and warehouses.\nNational reputation.\nThe completion of the Minnesota capitol gave Gilbert his national reputation and in 1898 he permanently moved his base to New York. His breakthrough commission was the design of the Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom House in New York City, which now houses the George Gustav Heye Center. Gilbert served on the U.S. Commission of Fine Arts from 1910 to 1916. In 1906 he was elected into the National Academy of Design as an associate member, and became a full academician in 1908. Gilbert served as president of the academy from 1926 to 1933. He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1934.\nHe was a trustee of the Carnegie Institution from 1924 until he died in 1934.\nHistorical impact.\nGilbert was a skyscraper pioneer; when designing the Woolworth Building he moved into unproven ground \u2014 though he certainly was aware of the ground-breaking work done by Chicago architects on skyscrapers and once discussed merging firms with the legendary Daniel Burnham \u2014 and his technique of cladding a steel frame became the model for decades. Modernists embraced his work: artist John Marin painted it several times; even Frank Lloyd Wright praised the lines of the building, though he decried the ornamentation.\nGilbert was one of the first celebrity architects in America, designing skyscrapers in New York City and Cincinnati, campus buildings at Oberlin College and the University of Texas at Austin, state capitols in Minnesota and West Virginia, the support towers of the George Washington Bridge, railroad stations (including the New Haven Union Station, 1920), and the United States Supreme Court building in Washington, D.C. His reputation declined among some professionals during the age of Modernism, but he was on the design committee that guided and eventually approved the modernist design of Manhattan's groundbreaking Rockefeller Center. Gilbert's body of work as a whole is more eclectic than many critics admit. In particular, his Union Station in New Haven lacks the embellishments common of the Beaux-Arts period and contains the simple lines common in Modernism.\nGilbert wrote to a colleague, \"I sometimes wish I had never built the Woolworth Building because I fear it may be regarded as my only work and you and I both know that whatever it may be in dimension and in certain lines it is after all only a skyscraper.\"\nGilbert's two buildings on the University of Texas at Austin campus, Sutton Hall (1918) and Battle Hall (1911), are recognized by architectural historians as among the finest works of architecture in the state. Designed in a Spanish-Mediterranean revival style, the two buildings became the stylistic basis for the later expansion of the university in the 1920s and 1930s and helped popularize the style throughout Texas.\nArchives.\nGilbert's drawings and correspondence are preserved at the New-York Historical Society, the Minnesota Historical Society, the University of Minnesota, and the Library of Congress.\nName confusion with C. P. H. Gilbert.\nCass Gilbert is often confused with another prominent New York architect of the time, Charles Pierrepont Henry Gilbert, in part because Frank W. Woolworth engaged both; Cass Gilbert designed the famous Woolworth Building skyscraper on Broadway, while C. P. H. Gilbert designed Woolworth's personal mansion.\nThe Ukrainian Institute building on Manhattan's 5th Avenue, the work of C. P. H. Gilbert, is often incorrectly attributed to Cass Gilbert.\nCass Gilbert is sometimes also confused with his son, architect Cass Gilbert Jr.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "53408", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53408", "title": "Michael Graves", "text": "American architect, designer, and educator (1934\u20132015)\nMichael Graves (July 9, 1934 \u2013 March 12, 2015) was an American architect, designer, and educator, and principal of Michael Graves and Associates and Michael Graves Design Group. He was a member of The New York Five and the Memphis Group and a professor of architecture at Princeton University for nearly forty years. Following his own partial paralysis in 2003, Graves became an internationally recognized advocate of health care design.\nGraves' global portfolio of architectural work ranged from the Ministry of Culture in The Hague, a post office for Celebration, Florida, a prominent expansion of the Denver Public Library to numerous commissions for Disney and the scaffolding design for the 2000 Washington Monument restoration. He was recognized for his influence on architectural movements, including New Urbanism, New Classicism, and postmodernism. His postmodern buildings include the Portland Building in Portland, Oregon and the Humana Building in Louisville, Kentucky.\nFor his architectural work, Graves received a fellowship of the American Institute of Architects as well as its highest award, the AIA Gold Medal (2001). He was trustee of the American Academy in Rome and was the president of its Society of Fellows from 1980 to 1984. He received the American Prize for Architecture, the National Medal of Arts (1999) and the Driehaus Architecture Prize (2012).\nGraves produced both high end and mass consumer product designs for several companies, including Alessi in Italy and Target and J. C. Penney in the United States. \"The New York Times\" described Graves as \"one of the most prominent and prolific American architects of the latter 20th century, who designed more than 350 buildings around the world but was perhaps best known for [a] teakettle and pepper mill.\"\nEarly life and education.\nGraves was born on July 9, 1934, in Indianapolis, Indiana, to Erma (n\u00e9e Lowe) and Thomas B. Graves. He grew up in the city's suburbs and later credited his mother for suggesting that he become an engineer or an architect.\nGraves graduated from Indianapolis's Broad Ripple High School in 1952 and earned a bachelor's degree in architecture in 1958 from the University of Cincinnati. During college he also became a member of the Sigma Chi fraternity. Graves earned a master's degree in architecture from Harvard University in 1959.\nAfter graduation from college, Graves spent a year working in George Nelson's office. Nelson, a furniture designer and the creative director for Herman Miller, exposed Graves to the work of fellow designers Charles and Ray Eames and Alexander Girard. In 1960 Graves won the American Academy in Rome's Prix de Rome (Rome Prize) and spent the next two years at the academy in Italy. Graves describes himself as \"transformed\" by his experience in Rome: \"I discovered new ways of seeing and analyzing both architecture and landscape.\"\nCareer.\nGraves began his career in 1962 as a professor of architecture at Princeton University, where he taught for nearly four decades and later helped to establish the Michael Graves College at Kean University in Union Township, New Jersey, and established his own architectural firm in 1964 at Princeton, New Jersey. Graves worked as an architect in public practice designing a variety of buildings that included private residences, university buildings, hotel resorts, hospitals, retail and commercial office buildings, museums, civic buildings, and monuments. During a career that spanned nearly fifty years, Graves and his firm designed more than 350 buildings around the world, and an estimated 2,000 household products.\nPrinceton University.\nIn 1962, after two years of studies in Rome, Graves returned to the United States and moved to Princeton, New Jersey, where he accepted a professorship at the Princeton University School of Architecture. Graves taught at Princeton for thirty-nine years while simultaneously practicing architecture. He retired as the Robert Schirmer Professor of Architecture, Emeritus, in 2001.\nAlthough Graves was a longtime faculty member at Princeton and trained many of its architecture students, the university did not allow its faculty to practice their profession on its campus. As a result, Graves was never commissioned to design a building for the university. Later in his life he contributed to the founding of a new college, which bears his name at Kean University.\nArchitect.\nIn his early years as an architect, Graves did designs for home renovation projects in Princeton. In 1964 he founded the architectural firm of Michael Graves &amp; Associate in Princeton and remained in public practice there until the end of his life. His firm maintained offices in Princeton, New Jersey, and in New York City, but his residence in Princeton served as his design studio, home office and library, and a place to display the many objects he collected during his world travels. Nicknamed \"The Warehouse\", it also displayed many of the household items he designed. After Graves's death, Kean University acquired his former home and studio in Princeton, along with two adjacent buildings.\nModernist.\nGraves spent much of the late 1960s and early 1970s designing modernist residences.\nHis first commission was the Hanselman House in Fort Wayne, Indiana, a design completed in 1971. The modernist structure built for $55,000 received an American Institute of Architects Honor Award in 1975. The New York Times described the home as \"another of Graves's experiments in cubist\u2010influenced spatial manipulations\" and cited the obvious influence of Le Corbusier on Graves' work.\nBuilt for friends he met in high school, the home went up for sale in 2017 for $264,888. The four-bedroom residence features a Graves-painted mural in the living room signed by the architect during a visit to the home in 2000.\nHe also designed the Snyderman House in Fort Wayne (1972, destroyed by fire in 2002) .\nGraves also became one of the New York Five, along with Peter Eisenman, Charles Gwathmey, John Hejduk and Richard Meier. This informal group of Princeton and New York City architects, also known as the Whites due to the predominant color of their architectural work, espoused a pure form of modernism characterized by clean lines and minimal ornamentation. The New York Five became the \"standard-bearers of a movement to elevate modernist architectural form into a serious theoretical pursuit.\" The book, \"Five Architects\" (1973) describes some of their early work.\nPostmodernist.\nIn the late 1970s, Graves shifted away from modernism to pursue Postmodernism and New Urbanism design for the remainder of his career. He began by sketching designs that had Cubist-inspired elements and strong, saturated colors. Postmodernism allowed Graves to introduce his humanist vision of classicism, as well as his sense of irony and humor. His designs, notable for their \"playful style\" and \"colorful facades,\" were a \"radical departure\" from his earlier work. The Plocek Residence (1977), a private home in Warren Township, New Jersey, was among the first of his designs in this new style.\nGraves designed some of his most iconic buildings in the early 1980s, including the Portland Building. The fifteen-story Portland Municipal Services Building, his first major public commission, opened in 1982 in downtown Portland, Oregon. The \"monolithic cube\" with decorated facades and colorful, oversized columns is \"considered a seminal Postmodern work\" and one of Graves's best-known works of architecture. The celebrated but controversial municipal office also became an icon for the city of Portland and subject to an ongoing preservation debate. Regarded as the first major built example of postmodern architecture in a tall office building, the Portland Building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2011. Although it faced demolition in 2014, the city government decided to proceed with a renovation, estimated to cost $195 million.\nAs a result of the notoriety he received from the Portland Building design, Graves was awarded other major commissions in the 1980s and 1990s. Notable buildings from this period include the Humana Building (1982) in Kentucky and the Newark Museum expansion (1982) in New Jersey. Some architecture critics, including Paul Goldberger of \"The New York Times\", consider the Humana Building, a skyscraper in Louisville, Kentucky, one of Graves's finest building designs. \"TIME\" magazine also claimed it was a commercial icon for the city of Louisville and one of the best buildings of the 1980s. The San Juan Capistrano Library (1982) in California, another project from this period, shows his interpretation of the Mission Revival style.\nGraves and his firm also designed several buildings for the Walt Disney Company in the postmodern style. These include the Team Disney headquarters in Burbank, California; the Dolphin (1987) and Swan (1988) resorts at Walt Disney World in Florida; and Disney's Hotel New York (1989) at Disneyland Paris. Patrick Burke, the project architect for the two resort hotels in Florida, commented that the Walt Disney Company described Graves's designs as \"entertainment architecture.\" In addition to the Swan and Dolphin hotel buildings, Graves's firm designed their original interiors, furnishings, signage, and artwork. Graves's other notable commissions for buildings that were completed in the 1990s include an expansion of the Denver Public Library (1990) and the renovation of the Detroit Institute of Arts (1990).\nPostmodern architecture did not have a long-lasting popularity and some of Graves's clients rejected his ideas. For example, his design for an expansion of Marcel Breuer's Whitney Museum of American Art building in New York City in the mid-1980s was highly contested and never built due to architect and local opposition. Graves's designs for a planned Phoenix Municipal Government Center complex were among the project's finalists, but his concept was not selected as the winning entry.\nGraves's prominence as a postmodernist architect may have reached its peak during the 1980s and in the early 1990s, but he continued to practice as an architect until his death in 2015. Later works include the O'Reilly Theater (1996) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; the NCAA Hall of Champions in Indianapolis, Indiana; and 425 Fifth Avenue (2000) in New York City, among others. Graves also received recognition for his multi-year renovation of his personal residence in Princeton. International projects included the Sheraton Miramar Hotel (1997) in El Gouna, Egypt, and the Hard Rock Hotel in Singapore. One of the last projects that Michael Graves and Associates was involved in before Graves's death was the Louwman Museum (2010) in The Hague, Netherlands. Gary Lapera, a principal and studio head of Michael Graves and Associates, designed the museum, also known as the Lowman Collection and the National Automobile Museum of the Netherlands, which houses more than 230 cars.\nProduct and furniture designer.\nIn addition to his architecture, Graves became a noted designer of consumer products. His distinctive style was well known among the general public in the United States in 1980s and 1990s, when he began designing household products for major clients such as the Target Corporation, Alessi, Steuben, and The Walt Disney Company. Over the years, the Michael Graves Design Group, a part of his design firm, designed and brought to market more than 2,000 products.\nIn the early 1980s, Ettore Sottsass recruited Graves to become a member of Memphis, a postmodern design group based in Milan, Italy. Graves began designing consumer products such as furniture and home accessories. Especially notable is his \"Plaza\" dressing table. Around the same time, Graves became associated with Alessi, a high-end Italian kitchenware manufacturer. Graves designed a sterling silver tea service for Alessi in 1982, a turning point in his career, and he was no longer known solely as an architect. After the $25,000 tea service began to attract buyers, Alberto Alessi commissioned Graves to design a moderate-priced kettle for his company. In 1985 Graves designed his iconic a stainless-steel teakettle (9093 stovetop kettle).\nThe kettle featured a red, bird-shaped whistle at the end of the spout. It remained the company's top-selling product for fifteen years. In honor of its thirtieth anniversary in 2015, Graves designed a special edition version with a dragon replacing the kettle's bird-shaped whistle.\nIn Italy in 1987, clock on display \"Apollodoro Gallery\", seventh event \"The Hour of Architects\", with Hans Hollei, Arata Isozaki, Ettore Sottsass, Paolo Portoghesi, paintings by Paolo Salvati, Rome.\nIn 1997\u201398, when Graves designed the scaffolding used in the restoration of the Washington Monument in Washington D.C., he met Ron Johnson, a Target executive who appreciated his product designs. (The Target Corporation contributed $6 million toward restoration of the monument.) The result of their acquaintance was the formation of a business relationship between Graves and the U.S. retailer that lasted until 2012. Graves began the collaboration with Target by designing a half-dozen products for the mass-consumer market. His collection of housewares began selling in Target stores in January 1999.\nIn 1998, Target Corporation commissioned Graves to design a model home to showcase the new line of housewares, but Graves went a step further. He designed \"Cedar Gables,\" contemporary house in Minnetonka, Minnesota, complete with custom furniture, lighting, fixtures, and other unique items, making it only one of three homes he designed and furnished. By 2009, however, Graves noted that the house \"doesn't have a wow factor. That gets old quickly.\" When the partnership with Target ended in 2012, Graves had designed more than 500 objects for the retailer.\nIncreasingly concerned about Target's dwindling partnerships with outside designers, Graves decided to explore other relationships for marketing his consumer products. After Johnson became CEO of J.C. Penney in 2011, he and Graves reached an agreement for Graves to design products exclusively for Penney's. Graves also created products for other manufacturers. In the 1990s for example, Graves created the Mickey Mouse Gourmet Collection for Moeller Design with the Walt Disney Company's approval. The collection of kitchenware and tabletop items was initially sold through the Walt Disney Company's retail stores and later offered at other retail outlets.\nIn 2013, Graves designed what became known as the \u201cHitler teapot\u201d for department store JCPenney, which garnered controversy due to its perceived resemblance to Adolf Hitler.\nIn addition to housewares, Graves was involved in a variety of other design projects that included sets and costumes for New York City's Joffrey Ballet; a shopping bag for Bloomingdale's department store; jewelry for Cleto Munari of Milan, Italy; vinyl flooring for Tajima, a Japanese company; and rugs for Vorwerk, a German firm. In 1994 Graves opened a small retail store named the Graves Design Store in Princeton, New Jersey, where shoppers could purchase his designs and reproductions of his artwork. At that time Graves had designed products for more than fifty manufacturers.\nLater years.\nGraves retired as a professor of architecture at Princeton University in 2001, but remained active in his architecture and design firm. He also became an advocate for the disabled in the last decade of his life. When Graves became paralyzed from the waist down in 2003 as a result of a spinal cord infection, the use of a wheelchair heightened his awareness of the needs of the disabled. After weeks of hospitalization and physical therapy, Graves adapted his home to suit his accessibility needs and resumed his architectural and design work.\nIn addition to other types of buildings and household products, Graves designed wheelchairs, hospital furnishings, hospitals, and disabled veteran's housing. Graves also became a \"reluctant health expert,\" as well as an internationally recognized advocate for accessible design. In 2013, President Barack Obama appointed Graves to an administrative role in the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (also known as the Access Board). The independent agency addresses accessibility concerns for people with disabilities.\nIn 2014, a year before his death, Graves helped to establish and plan the Michael Graves College, which includes The School of Public Architecture at Kean University in Union Township, New Jersey. Kean University's Bachelor of Arts in Architectural Studies program began in 2015; its Master of Architecture program is slated to begin in 2019. As part of gift from Graves's estate, in 2016 the university acquired The Warehouse at 44 Patton Avenue in Princeton, New Jersey, Graves's former home and studio, and two adjacent buildings. The university plans to use the facility as an educational research center for its School of Public Architecture, although its main campus and its School of Public Architecture are located about forty miles away in Union, New Jersey.\nPersonal life.\nGraves' marriage to Gail Devine in 1955 ended in divorce; his subsequent marriage to Lucy James in 1972 also ended in divorce. Graves was the father of three children, two sons and a daughter.\nDeath.\nGraves died at his home in Princeton, New Jersey, on March 12, 2015, at the age of 80, and is buried at Princeton Cemetery.\nLegacy.\nGraves favored a \"humanistic approach to architecture and urban planning\" and was a major influence in late-twentieth-century architecture. Graves was among the most prolific and prominent American architects from the mid-1960s to the end of the twentieth century. Graves and his team designed more than 350 buildings in the Postmodern, New Classical, and New Urbanism styles for projects around the world. His architectural designs have been recognized as major influences in all three of these movements.\nIn naming Graves as a recipient of its national design award for lifetime achievement, the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum explained that Graves broadened \"the role of the architect in society\" and raised \"public interest in good design as essential to the quality of everyday life.\" Graves and his firm designed more than 2,000 consumer products during his lifetime. He was especially noted for his domestic housewares. Many Graves-designed products were sold through mass-market U.S. retailers such as Target and J. C. Penney, but his best-known product is the iconic kettle that he designed in 1985 for Alessi, an Italian housewares manufacturer. As an advocate for the needs of the disabled, Graves used his skills as an architect and designer \"to improve healthcare experience for patients, families and clinicians.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53409", "revid": "39627332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53409", "title": "Walter Burley Griffin", "text": "American architect and landscape architect (1876\u20131937)\n Walter Burley Griffin (November 24, 1876\u00a0\u2013 February 11, 1937) was an American architect and landscape architect. He designed Canberra, Australia's capital city, the New South Wales towns of Griffith and Leeton, and (with his wife) the Sydney suburb of Castlecrag.\nInfluenced by the Chicago-based Prairie School, Griffin developed a unique modern style in partnership with his wife Marion Mahony Griffin. In 28 years they designed over 350 buildings, landscape and urban-design projects as well as designing construction materials, interiors, furniture and other household items.\nEarly life.\nGriffin was born in 1876 in Maywood, Illinois, a suburb of Chicago. He was the eldest of the four children of George Walter Griffin, an insurance agent, and Estelle Burley Griffin. His family moved to Oak Park and later to Elmhurst. As a boy, he had an interest in landscape design and gardening, and his parents allowed him to landscape the yard at their new home in Elmhurst. Griffin attended Oak Park High School. He considered studying landscape design but was advised by the landscape gardener O. C. Simonds to pursue a more lucrative profession.\nGriffin chose to study architecture, and, in 1899, completed his bachelor's degree in architecture at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The University of Illinois program was run by Nathan Clifford Ricker, a German-educated architect, who emphasized the technical aspects of architecture. During his studies, he also took courses in horticulture and forestry.\nChicago career.\nAfter his studies, Griffin moved to Chicago and was employed as a draftsman for two years in the offices of progressive architects Dwight H. Perkins, Robert C. Spencer, Jr., and H. Webster Tomlinson in \"Steinway Hall\". Griffin's employers worked in the distinctive Prairie School style. This style is marked by horizontal lines, flat roofs with broad overhanging eaves, solid construction, craftsmanship, and strict discipline in the use of ornament. Louis Sullivan was influential among Prairie School architects and Griffin was an admirer of his work, and of his philosophy of architecture which stressed that design should be free of historical precedent. Other architects of that school include George Grant Elmslie, George Washington Maher, William Gray Purcell, William Drummond and most importantly, Frank Lloyd Wright.\nIn July 1901, Griffin passed the new Illinois architects' licensing examination and this permitted him to enter private practice as an architect. He began working in Frank Lloyd Wright's famous Oak Park, Illinois, studios. Although he was never made a partner, Griffin oversaw the construction on many of Wright's noted houses including the Willits House in 1902 and the Larkin Administration Building built in 1904. From 1905 he also began to supply landscape plans for Wright's buildings. Wright allowed Griffin and his other staff to undertake small commissions of their own. The William Emery house, built in Elmhurst, Illinois, in 1903 was such a commission. While working for Wright, Griffin fell in love with Mr. Wright's sister, Maginel Wright. He proposed marriage to her, but his affections for her were not returned, and she refused.\nIn 1906, he resigned his position at Wright's studio and established his own practice at Steinway Hall. Griffin and Wright had fallen out over events following Mr. Wright's trip to Japan in 1905. While Wright was away for five months, Griffin ran the practice. When Wright returned, he told Griffin that he had overstepped his responsibilities, completing several of Wright's jobs, and sometimes substituting his own building designs. Further, Wright had borrowed money from Griffin to pay for his travels abroad, and then he tried to pay off his debts to Griffin with prints he had acquired in Japan. It became clear to Griffin then that Wright would not make Griffin a partner in his business.\nGriffin's first independent commission was a landscape design for the State Normal School at Charleston, Illinois, that became Eastern Illinois University. In the fall of 1906, he received his first residential job from Harry Peters. The Peters' House was the first house designed with an L-shaped or open floor plan. The L-shape was an economical design and easily constructed. From 1907 to 1914, several houses designed by Griffin were built on the far southwest side of Chicago in the city's Beverly and Morgan Park, Chicago neighborhoods. In 1981, the city of Chicago granted landmark status to 13 of these Prairie-style bungalows in Beverly along the 1700 block of West 104th Place, 12 blocks of Longwood Drive between West 98th and 110th Streets, and three blocks of Seeley Avenue. With seven of these houses being located on West 104th Place\u2014comprising the largest concentration of original prairie style homes built in Chicago\u2014the street as it runs between Hale Avenue on the west to Prospect Avenue on the east was designated the \"Griffin Place Historic District\", which comprises a part of the larger Ridge Historic District.\nIn 1911, Griffin developed 'Solid Rock' house for William F. Tempel in Winnetka, Illinois. It was the first house built by Griffin in his mature style and of reinforced concrete.\nOn June 29, 1911, Griffin married Marion Lucy Mahony, a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in architecture. She was employed first in Wright's office, and then by Hermann V. von Holst, who had taken over Wright's work in America when Wright left for Europe in 1909. Marion Mahony recommended to von Holst that he hire Griffin to develop a landscape plan for the area surrounding the three houses on Millikin Place for which Wright had been hired in Decatur, Illinois. Mahony and Griffin worked closely on the Decatur project immediately before their marriage.\nAfter their marriage, Mahony went to work in Griffin's practice. A housing development with several homes designed by Griffin and Mahony, Rock Crest \u2013 Rock Glen in Mason City, Iowa, is seen as their most dramatic American design development of the decade and remains the largest collection of Prairie Style homes surrounding a natural setting.\nFrom 1899 to 1914, Griffin created more than 130 designs in his Chicago office for buildings, urban plans and landscapes; half of these were built in the mid-western states of Illinois, Iowa, Michigan and Wisconsin.\nThe relationship between Griffin and Frank Lloyd Wright cooled in the years following Griffin's departure from Wright's firm in 1906. With Walter and Marion's wedding, Wright started to feel they were \"against him\". After the Griffins' win in the Australian federal capital design competition, and resultant front-page coverage in \"The New York Times\", Wright and Griffin never spoke to each other again. In later years, whenever Griffin was brought up in conversation Wright would downplay his achievements and refer to him as a draftsman.\nCanberra.\nIn April 1911, the Australian Commonwealth Government held an international competition to produce a design for its new, as yet unnamed, federal capital city. Griffin produced a design with impressive renderings of the plan by his new wife. They first heard about the competition in July, while on honeymoon, and worked feverishly to prepare the plans. On May 23, 1912, Griffin's design was selected as the winner from among 137 entries. This created significant press coverage at the time and brought him professional and public recognition. Of his plan, he famously remarked:\nI have planned a city that is not like any other in the world. I have planned it not in a way that I expected any government authorities in the world would accept. I have planned an ideal city \u2013 a city that meets my ideal of the city of the future. \nIn 1913, Griffin was invited by the Commonwealth Government to Australia to inspect the site that was to become Canberra. He left Mahony Griffin in charge of the practice and travelled to Australia in July. His letters reveal his appreciation for the Australian landscape. The Griffins joined the Naturalists Society of New South Wales in 1914, where they enjoyed organized bush walks and field studies. The society facilitated their contact with the Australian scientific community, especially botanists. This appreciation for Australian flora was reflected in Griffin's 1914 town plan for the town of Leeton in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area of New South Wales, and later in a design for Newman College at the University of Melbourne. He also used Australian flora botanical names as places names for suburbs and streets in Canberra, such as Grevillea Park, Telopea Park, Clienthus Circle and Blandfordia.\nGriffin was offered the position of head of the department of architecture at the University of Illinois. At the same time he was negotiating a three-year contract with the Commonwealth Government to remain in Australia and oversee the implementation of his plan, which he felt had already been compromised. In October 1913, he was appointed the Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction. In this role, Griffin oversaw the design of North and South Canberra, though he struggled with considerable political and bureaucratic obstacles. In May 1914, he and his wife left America for Australia along with architects Roy Lippincott and George Elgh.\nWith the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Griffin was under pressure to reduce the scope and scale of his plans due to the diversion of funds towards the war effort. Several parts of his basic design underwent change. Plans to create Westbourne, Southbourne and Eastbourne Avenues to complement Canberra's Northbourne Avenue were eliminated, as was a proposed railway connecting South Canberra to North Canberra, and on to Yass, 35\u00a0mi (55\u00a0km) away. A market area that would have been at Russell Hill in North Canberra was moved south to Fyshwick, next to South Canberra.\nThe pace of building was slower than expected, partly because of a lack of funds and partly because of continued disputation between Griffin and Commonwealth Government bureaucrats. Many of Griffin's design ideas were attacked by both the architectural profession and the press. In 1917, a Royal Commission determined that they had undermined Griffin's authority by supplying him with false data which he had used to carry out his work. Ultimately, Griffin resigned from the Canberra design project in December 1920 when he discovered that several of these bureaucrats had been appointed to an agency that would oversee Canberra's construction. The Commonwealth Government under the leadership of Prime Minister Hughes had removed Griffin as Director of Design and Construction after disagreements over his supervisory role, and in 1921 it created the Federal Capital Advisory Committee, with John Sulman as chair. Griffin was offered membership, but declined and withdrew from further activity in Canberra.\nGriffin designed several buildings for Canberra, none of which was built. The grave of General Bridges on Mount Pleasant was the only permanent structure designed by him to be built in Canberra.\nAside from the city's design, Griffin's longest-living legacy is the plantation of Redwood trees (\"Sequoia sempervirens\" and \"Sequoiadendron giganteum\") known as Pialligo Redwood Forest, that he and arborist Thomas Charles Weston planted in 1918. It is on Pialligo Avenue between Canberra and Queanbeyan, 1.8\u00a0mi (2.8\u00a0km) east of Canberra airport.\nLater career.\nThe Griffins' office in Chicago closed in 1917; however, they had successful practices in Melbourne and Sydney, which were a strong motivation for their continuing to live in Australia. The Griffins had received commissions for work outside Canberra since Walter first arrived in the country in 1913, designing town plans, subdivisions, and one of his highly regarded buildings, Newman College, the Catholic residential college of the University of Melbourne while employed in Canberra. While supervising activities in Canberra, Griffin spent much time in Melbourne and, in 1918, became a founder, with Royden Powell, of the Henry George Club, an organization devoted to providing a home for the Single Tax movement. The Griffins' first major commission after leaving Canberra was the Capitol Theatre in Melbourne; it opened on November 7, 1924. In 1964 architectural writer Robin Boyd described the Capitol as \"the best cinema that was ever built or is ever likely to be built\".\nIn 1916 and 1917, Griffin developed a patented modular concrete construction system known as \"Knitlock\" for use in the construction of Canberra. No Knitlock buildings were ever built in Canberra, although several were built in Australia. The first were built on Griffin's property in Frankston in 1922, where he constructed two holiday houses called \"Gumnuts\". The best examples of Knitlock include the S.R. Salter House in Toorak and the Paling House. Frank Lloyd Wright designed a similar system and used Griffin's design to support the arguments for his design.\nIn 1919, the Griffins founded the Greater Sydney Development Association (GSDA), and in 1921 purchased 259 ha of land in North Sydney. The GSDA's goal was the development of an idyllic community with a consistent architectural feel and bushland setting. Walter Burley Griffin as managing director of the GSDA designed all the buildings built in the area until 1935. Castlecrag was the first suburb to be developed by the GSDA. The Redding House and several others in Castelcrag were also built in Knitlock. Almost all the houses Griffin designed in Castlecrag were small and had flat roofs, and he included an internal courtyard in many of them. Griffin used what was at that time the novel concept of including native bushland in these designs. He came to be referred to as \"The Wizard of Castlecrag\".\nOther work the Griffins did during this time included the Melbourne subdivisions of Glenard (where the Griffins built their own Knitlock house \"Pholiota\") and Mount Eagle at Eaglemont, and the Ranelagh Estate in Mount Eliza Victoria 1924. The Ranelagh Estate was listed on the Victorian State Heritage Register (H01605) in 2005 as a significant example of a country estate. Prior to 1920 the Griffins also designed the New South Wales towns of Leeton and Griffith. Griffin and architect J Burcham Clamp designed a large tomb built at Waverley Cemetery, Sydney, between 1914 and 1916 for James Stuart, which still stands as a good example of Griffin's sense of 'human-scale monumentality'.\nThe Griffins participated in the celebrated Chicago Tribune Tower Competition in 1922. Having won one international competition, as architects who were both well acquainted with Chicago and recognized as practical visionaries, they offered a solution that was positive, forward-looking and elegant. Indeed, their non-winning entry appears to have been about a decade ahead of its time, with emphatic verticality along the lines of the Art Deco or Art Moderne. It anticipated, and would have been a near neighbor of, Chicago's 333 North Michigan by Holabird &amp; Roche (1928); with stylistic echos in John and Donald Parkinson's Bullocks Wilshire, in Los Angeles (1929), as well as Adah Robinson and Bruce Goff's Boston Avenue Methodist Church, Tulsa (1929).\nIn the 1920s, the Griffins prepared plans for the Milleara Estate (also known as City View) at Avondale Heights and the Ranelagh Estate at Mount Eliza, both in Victoria (Australia) in conjunction with surveyors Tuxen and Miller.\nIncinerators.\nDuring the financial hardship of the Great Depression, in the 1930s Griffin designed incinerators, collaborating with the Reverberatory Incinerator and Engineering Company (RIECo), in conjunction with his friend and business partner, Eric Nicholls. He was responsible for twelve incinerator designs between 1930 and 1938, of which seven still survive. They are located at:\nThe Willoughby incinerator is a good example of this work. It has been listed by the National Trust of Australia and the Royal Australian Institute of Architects as a building of significance. In 1999 it was listed in the New South Wales State Heritage Register. It has since been restored and converted to commercial use by Willoughby Council.\nThe Walter Burley Griffin Incinerator, Ipswich, Queensland is listed on the Queensland Heritage Register and has been converted into a theatre. Another incinerator was built in the suburb of Pyrmont, not far from the centre of Sydney. This incinerator was considered for heritage listing but was demolished in 1992 because it was in irredeemably bad condition. \nIndia.\nDuring their time at the GSDA, the Griffins became more involved in anthroposophy, and in 1935 through contacts in the movement Griffin won a commission to design the library at the University of Lucknow in Lucknow, India.\nAlthough he had planned to stay in India only to complete the drawings for the library, he soon received more than 40 commissions, including the University of Lucknow Student Union building; a museum and library for the Raja of Mahmudabad; a zenana (women's quarters) for the Raja of Jahangirabad; Pioneer Press building, a bank, municipal offices, many private houses, and a memorial to King George V. He also won complete design responsibility for the 1936\u20131937 United Provinces Exhibition of Industry and Agriculture. His 53 projects for the site featured a stadium, arena, mosque, imambara, art gallery, restaurant, bazaar, pavilions, rotundas, arcades, and towers, however, only part of his elaborate plans were fully executed.\nGriffin was inspired by the architecture and culture of India, modifying forms as \"he sought to create a modern Indian architecture ... Griffin was able to expand his aesthetic vocabulary to create an exuberant, expressive architecture reflecting both the 'stamp of the place' and the 'spirit of the times'\". While in India, Griffin also published numerous articles for the \"Pioneer\", writing about architecture, in particular about ventilation design improvements. Marion joined Walter in Lucknow in April 1936 to collaborate on several projects.\nDeath and burial in India.\nGriffin died of peritonitis in early 1937, five days after gall bladder surgery at King George's Hospital, Lucknow, in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, and was buried in Christian Cemetery in Lucknow. Marion Mahony Griffin oversaw the completion of the Pioneer Building that he had been working on at the time of his death. She closed down their Indian offices before leaving their Australian practice in the hands of Griffin's partner, Eric Milton Nicholls, and returned to Chicago.\nLegacy.\nGriffin was largely under-appreciated during his time in Australia, but, since his death, recognition of his work has steadily grown. In 1964, when Canberra's central lake was filled, as Griffin had intended, Prime Minister Robert Menzies declined to have the lake named after himself. Instead he named it Lake Burley Griffin, making it the first \"monument\" in Canberra dedicated to the city's designer (\"Burley\" was included in the name because of the ongoing misconception that it was part of Griffin's surname). Burley Griffin Way is a 276\u00a0km road linking Griffith, Temora, Harden, and Binalong to the Hume highway west of Bowning, 10\u00a0km northwest of Yass.\nArchitectural drawings and other archival materials by and about the Griffins are held by numerous institutions in the United States, including the Drawings and Archives Department of Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library at Columbia University; the Block Gallery at Northwestern University; the Ryerson &amp; Burnham Libraries at the Art Institute of Chicago; and the New York Historical Society, as well as in several repositories in Australia, including the National Library of Australia, National Archives of Australia, and the Newman College Archives of the University of Melbourne. At the centenary of the Griffins' design work for Canberra, some believe they are owed a permanent memorial.\nRecognition.\nIn 1988 the Royal Australian Institute of Architects named its national Civic Design Award after Griffin. It is now known as the Walter Burley Griffin Award for Urban Design and is awarded annually.\nIn his own words.\n\"I am what may be termed a naturalist in architecture. I do not believe in any school of architecture. I believe in architecture that is the logical outgrowth of the environment in which the building in mind is to be located\".\nFrom \"The New York Times\", Sunday June 2, 1912\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral references.\nGriffin, Dustin, ed., The Writings of Walter Burley Griffin (Cambridge University Press, Melbourne, 2008).\nFurther reading.\n[Move this book from \"Further Reading\" to \"General References.\"\nExternal links.\nNational Library of Australia:"}
{"id": "53410", "revid": "50255754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53410", "title": "Jean-Eug\u00e8ne Robert-Houdin", "text": "French magician (1805\u20131871)\nJean-Eug\u00e8ne Robert-Houdin (; 7 December 1805 \u2013 13 June 1871) was a French watchmaker, magician and illusionist, widely recognized as the father of the modern style of conjuring. He transformed magic from a pastime for the lower classes, seen at fairs, to an entertainment for the wealthy, which he offered in a theatre opened in Paris, a legacy preserved by the tradition of modern magicians performing in tails.\nEarly life and entrance into conjuring.\nRobert-Houdin was born Jean-Eug\u00e8ne Robert in Blois, France, on 7 December 1805\u2014a day after his autobiography said he was. His father, Prosper Robert, was a watchmaker in Blois. Jean-Eugene's mother, the former Marie-Catherine Guillon, died when he was just a young child. At the age of eleven, Prosper sent his son Jean-Eug\u00e8ne to school thirty-five miles up the Loire to the University of Orl\u00e9ans. At 18, he graduated and returned to Blois. His father wanted him to be a lawyer, but Robert-Houdin wanted to follow in his father's footsteps as a watchmaker.\nApprentice clockmaker.\nHis penmanship was excellent, and it landed him a job as a clerk for an attorney's office. Instead of studying law, he tinkered with mechanical gadgets. His employer sent him back to his father. He was told that he was better suited as a watchmaker than a lawyer, but by then, Jean's father had already retired, so he became an apprentice to his cousin who had a watch-shop. For a short time, Jean-Eug\u00e8ne worked as a watchmaker.\nIn the mid-1820s, he saved up to buy a copy of a two-volume set of books on clockmaking called \"Trait\u00e9 de l'horlogerie\" (\"Treatise on Clockmaking\"), written by Ferdinand Berthoud. He would go on to pursue the craft of clockmaking for the rest of his life, and is widely credited with inventing the mystery clock.\nIntroduction to magic.\nWhen he got home and opened the wrapping, instead of the Berthoud books, what appeared before his eyes was a two-volume set on magic called \"Scientific Amusements\". Instead of returning the books, his curiosity got the better of him. From those crude volumes, he learned the rudiments of magic. He practiced at all hours of the day.\nFrom that point on, he became very interested in the art. He was upset that the books he got only revealed how the secrets were done but did not show how to do them. He found that learning from the books available in those days was very difficult due to the lack of detailed explanations, but the books piqued his interest in the art. So Robert-Houdin began taking lessons from a local amateur magician. He paid ten francs for a series of lessons from a man named Maous from Blois who was a podiatrist but also entertained at fairs and parties doing magic. He was proficient at sleight of hand, and taught Robert-Houdin how to juggle to improve his hand-eye coordination. He also taught him rudiments of the cups and balls. He told young Robert-Houdin that digital dexterity came with repetition, and as a direct result, Robert-Houdin practiced incessantly.\nMagic was his pastime, and meanwhile, his studies in horology continued. When he felt he was ready, he moved to Tours and set up a watchmaking business, doing conjuring on the side.\nMuch of what we know about Robert-Houdin comes from his memoirs\u2014and his writings were meant more to entertain than to chronicle, rendering it difficult to separate fact from fiction. Robert-Houdin would have readers believe that a major turning point in his life came when he became apprenticed to the magician Edmund De Grisi, Count's son and better known as Torrini. What is known is that his early performing came from joining an amateur acting troupe.\nMarriage to Jos\u00e8phe Cecile Houdin.\nHe performed at social parties as a professional magician in Europe and the United States. It was during this period while at a party that he met Jos\u00e8phe Cecile Houdin, the daughter of a Parisian watchmaker, Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Houdin, who also originally came from Blois. Jean-Eug\u00e8ne fell in love with her at their first meeting. On 8 July 1830, they were married; he then hyphenated his own name to hers and became Robert-Houdin. He and Jos\u00e8phe had eight children, of whom three survived.\nHe moved to Paris and worked in his father-in-law's wholesale shop. Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois was among the last of the watchmakers to use the old method of handcrafting each piece and embraced his new son-in-law's ambitions for mechanism. While Houdin worked in the main shop, Jean-Eug\u00e8ne was to tinker with mechanical toys and automatic figures. With his work in the shop, Jean-Eug\u00e8ne was still practicing magic. Quite by accident, Robert-Houdin walked into a shop on the Rue Richelieu and discovered that it sold magic. He visited the store, which was owned by a P\u00e8re (Papa) Roujol. There, he met fellow magicians, both amateur and professional, where he engaged in talk about conjuring, and he met an aristocrat by the name of Jules de Rov\u00e8re, who coined the term \"prestidigitation\" to describe a major misdirection technique magicians used.\nAt Papa Roujol's, Robert-Houdin learned the details to many of the mechanical tricks of the time as well as how to improve them. From there, he built his own mechanical figures, like a singing bird, a dancer on a tightrope, and an automaton doing the cups and balls. His most acclaimed automaton was his writing and drawing figure. He displayed this figure before King Louis Philippe I and eventually sold it to P. T. Barnum.\nOn 19 October 1843, Jos\u00e8phe died at the age of thirty-two, having been ill for months. At her death, having three young children to take care of, he remarried in August to Fran\u00e7oise Marguerite Olympe Braconnier, a woman ten years younger, who soon took over the household.\nRobert-Houdin loved to watch the big magic shows that came to Paris. He dreamed about some day opening his own theatre. In the meantime, he was hired by a friend by the name of Count de l'Escalopier to perform at private parties.\nNow that he had free time, he began constructing equipment for his own use instead of selling it to others. The income from the shop and his new inventions gave him enough money to experiment on new tricks using glass apparatus that would be (or at least appear to be) free of trickery. He envisioned a stage that would be as elegant as the drawing rooms in which he was hired to perform. He also decided that a magician should be dressed as such by wearing traditional evening clothes.\nOpening the \"Palais Royale\".\nHe obtained financial backing from Count de l'Escalopier, who fronted him the 15,000 francs to turn his vision into reality. He rented out a suite of rooms above the archways around the gardens of the Palais Royal, which was once owned by Cardinal Richelieu. He hired workmen to redesign the old assembly room into a theatre. They painted it white with gold trim. Tasteful drapes were hung, chic candelabras were placed throughout, and the stage furniture was set in the style of Louis XV.\nOn 3 July 1845, Robert-Houdin premiered his 200-seat Th\u00e9\u00e2tre Robert-Houdin in what he called \"Soir\u00e9es fantastiques\". No critics covered Robert-Houdin's debut, and in his memoirs, Robert-Houdin said that the show had been a disaster. He suffered from stage fright that caused him to talk too fast and in a monotone. He said that he did not know what he was saying or doing, and everything was a blur. He believed that a magician should not present a trick until it was mechanically perfected to be certain of avoiding failure, and this caused him to over-rehearse.\nAfter the first show, he was close to having a nervous breakdown. He closed the theatre and had every intention to close it for good, until a friend agreed that the venture was a silly idea. Instead of admitting defeat, Robert-Houdin, irked at the friend's effrontery, used this insult to regain his courage, and persevered in giving the show a long run at his little theatre. Although the forty-year-old magician was unpolished at first, he soon gained the confidence required for the stage.\nWith each performance, Robert-Houdin got better, and he began to receive critical acclaim. \"Le Charivari\" and \"L'Illustration\" both said that his mechanical marvels and artistic magic were comparable to those of his predecessors like Philippe and Bartolomeo Bosco. Even with all of this, still relatively few people would come to the little theatre during the summer months, and he struggled to keep it open. To meet expenses, he sold the three houses that he had inherited from his mother.\nThe following year, he added a new trick to his programme that became especially popular. Seats at the Palais Royal were at a premium. This new marvel was called \"Second Sight\" drew the audiences into the little theatre. Once there, they saw the other creations Robert-Houdin had to offer. He also performed outside Paris, sometimes with local magicians, as he did in Li\u00e8ge in 1846 with the then well-known Belgian magician Louis Courtois.\nFamous illusions.\nRobert-Houdin combined his mechanical abilities along with \"showmanship, humour, and artistic handling\" to produce his illusions. Robert-Houdin felt that every magic programme should be arranged so one trick builds upon the others. One surprise should lead to an even bigger surprise. Some of the tricks and illusions Robert-Houdin presented became classics. Here are a few of them.\nSecond sight.\nWhen Robert-Houdin first opened his theatre, it was sparsely attended and he realized that he needed something more extraordinary that would bring the public to his theatre. So he came upon the idea of doing a two-person mind-reading act, concocting a silly story about how his son \u00c9mile had created a game of hot and cold that resulted in Robert-Houdin using it for the stage.\nHe named the trick \"Second Sight\", a title that was already used by magicians such as John Henry Anderson, but the effect was entirely different. Anderson had a box into which items were inserted. The medium would then describe the contents inside. In Robert-Houdin's version, he walked into the audience and touched items that the audience held up, and his blindfolded assistant, played by his son, described each one in detail. It caused a sensation and brought the throng to see his shows.\nEventually, Robert-Houdin changed the method, so instead of asking his son what was in his hands, he simply rang a bell. This stunned those that suspected a spoken code. He would even set the bell off to the side and remain silent, and his son still described every object handed to his father.\nRobert-Houdin made the test even more difficult. He placed a glass of water into his son's hands, and \u00c9mile proceeded to drink from it. He was able to perceive the taste of the liquids that spectators from the audience merely thought of. Even then, the audiences were not entirely convinced; they tried to trip up \u00c9mile by bringing in books written in Greek, or odd tools such as a thread counter.\nThe ethereal suspension.\nDuring Robert-Houdin's time, all of Paris was enthusiastically talking about the mysterious uses of \"ether\". He took advantage of this by presenting an illusion that appeared to use the pungent liquid. He told the audience that he had discovered a marvelous new property of ether. \"If one has a living person inhale this liquid when it is at its highest degree of concentration, the body of the patient for a few moments becomes as light as a balloon,\" Robert-Houdin claimed.\nHe proceeded to \"prove\" just that. He placed three stools on a wooden bench. His youngest son Eug\u00e8ne stood on the middle one. With the instructions from his father, he extended his arms. Robert-Houdin placed two canes on top of the stools and positioned them under his son's arms.\nHe took a vial of ether and opened it. The audience smelled it wafting through the theatre. He placed the vial under his son's nose, and he went limp. In reality, the vial was empty, with the odour being produced by his son \u00c9mile pouring real ether on a hot iron shovel.\nRobert-Houdin took the stool away from his son's feet, and he just hung limp as a rag. He took away one of the canes, so he was dangling by one arm, and carefully placed his head against his upraised hand. This was startling enough. What he did next was stunning. He lifted his boy upright in a horizontal position by his little finger and then let go until he was suspended in mid air. Robert-Houdin stepped away to leave his son in that suspended state, balanced only by his right elbow and no other support.\nWhen it was apparent that the drug was wearing off, Robert-Houdin returned his son to his upright position. When he woke up, he seemed no worse for wear. Robert-Houdin built up the surprise of spectators until, \"\u2026 by gradually heightening it up to the moment when, so to speak, it exploded.\" This brought letters of protest against Robert-Houdin, thinking he was putting his son's health in jeopardy, although the ether had nothing to do with the trick.\nRobert-Houdin was not the first to perform the Levitation Illusion. The first in Europe was Ching Lau Lauro in the 1830s. The illusion was also reported to be performed by an Indian conjuror before that, but sitting cross-legged rather than lying down.\nThe Marvelous Orange Tree.\nThis trick was likely inspired by the Indian mango tree trick, where a performer would grow a tree from a seed to a sprout, then into a tree with fruit. On one of Robert-Houdin's side tables, he had an egg, a lemon, and an orange. He went into the audience and borrowed a lady's handkerchief that was in style then. He rolled it into a ball. He rubbed the ball in between his hands, and the handkerchief got smaller and smaller until it disappeared, passing through to the egg on the table.\nCarefully, he picked up the egg. The audience expected him to crack it open and produce the spectator's handkerchief. Instead, he made that disappear too. He told the audience that the egg went to the lemon. This was repeated with the lemon and the orange. When he made the orange disappear, all that was left was a fine powder. This was placed into a silver vial. He soaked this vial with alcohol and set it on fire.\nA small orange tree planted in a wooden box was brought forth by one of his assistants. The audience noticed that the tree was barren of any blossoms or fruit. The blue flame from the vial was placed underneath it. The vapors from it caused the leaves to spread and sprout orange blossoms from it. Robert-Houdin then picked up his magic wand and waved it. The flowers disappeared and oranges bloomed forth.\nHe plucked the oranges from the tree and tossed them to the audience to prove they were real. He did this until he only had one left. He waved his wand again, and the orange split open into four sections, revealing a white material of sorts inside of it. Two clockwork butterflies appeared from behind the tree. The butterflies grabbed the end of the corner of the white cloth and spread it open, revealing the spectator's handkerchief.\nThe Marvelous Orange Tree trick was used by the eponymous conjurer in Steven Millhauser's short story \"Eisenheim the Illusionist\" and its film adaptation \"The Illusionist\" (2006), where a more complex variant is shown. It is also alluded to in Donald Barthelme's short story \"Sentence\".\nRobert-Houdin's portfolio.\nRobert-Houdin brought in under his arm a large portfolio used for holding documents or art work. The portfolio was only about one and three-quarters of an inch thick, too small or too thin to hold anything but pictures.\nHe set it on two thin trestles to hold the case with the spine facing the audience. He removed the expected drawings from it. One of those pictures showed a bareheaded woman. Then, he produced two lady's bonnets decorated with flowers; one for winter, the other for summer. He lowered the flap for each production. Then, he showed a picture of birds, followed by a stuffed bird flat as a pancake. With that, he proceeded to produce from the portfolio four live turtle doves.\nHe showed a picture of a cartoon of two cooks fighting with pots. This was followed by three enormous copper pots. One was filled with beans, another with flames bursting forth, and the third pot was filled with boiling water. As an afterthought, he lifted the top flap of the portfolio and pulled out a large cage filled with birds.\nHe walked forward towards the audience with the square cage, and they applauded thinking the trick was over. \"Nothing here now\u2014neither anything, nor anybody,\" he said as he knocked on the upright flap. For a finale, he closed the portfolio one last time and produced his young son from it.\nThe light and heavy chest.\nThe number of tricks he invented for his theatre was extensive, but his most remarkable one was the \"Light and Heavy Chest\". He took advantage of the infancy of the usage of electricity, especially the then-novelty of Hans Christian \u00d8rsted's discovery of electromagnetism, to his advantage. Robert-Houdin brought on a small wooden box about a foot wide. He said that he had found a way to protect it from thieves. He asked a spectator to lift it, usually a small child. The child lifted it with ease. Then, he brought an adult male up from the audience and asked him to lift the same box. The adult male was unable to lift the box.\nInventions pirated.\nRobert-Houdin's inventions were pirated by his trusted mechanic Le Grand, who was arrested for making and selling duplicate illusions. Many of those illusions fell into the hands of his competitors, such as John Henry Anderson, Robin, Robert Heller, and Compars Herrmann. It is not known whether Herrmann or the others bought the illusions directly from LeGrand or from another source, but they willingly performed the illusions after knowing that they were invented by Robert-Houdin.\nRobert-Houdin on tour.\nRobert-Houdin's little theatre became a mecca for magic enthusiasts. Herrmann was a constant visitor to the Palais Royal. It became the place for the Paris elite to go. Even King Louis Philippe rented out the room for a private performance. After the triumph he gave at the Royal Palace, in 1847, the king decided to take his entourage to see Robert-Houdin at the Palais Royal.\nThe following February, a revolution ended the reign of Louis-Philippe. With it, show business also ended. The Revolution closed all Parisian theatres. Robert-Houdin shut down his theatre and went on the road. He toured the Continent briefly, and then he headed off to Great Britain.\nWith a company of French dramatists, Robert-Houdin made his English debut at the St. James Theatre in London. He presented his programme three times a week. Much to his dismay, he found out that Compars Herrmann had beaten him to the territory. Not only was he billing himself as \"the Premier Prestidigitateur of France\", but he was also using pirated versions of his illusions. Despite this, Robert-Houdin still accomplished a success there. So much so, in 1848, he did a command performance for Queen Victoria. After a three-month tour of England, he went back home after about a year and a half away. He reopened the theatre and became a permanent fixture in Paris. In 1850, he handed the Palais Royal to his brother-in-law Hamilton (Pierre Etienne Chocat). This left him free to tour France. He did so for two years. Then he went to Germany and on a return engagement to England, where he ended up performing a second time for Queen Victoria.\nHe did a brief tour of France and then, at the age of 48, retired from public performances. He gave the theatre back to Hamilton, who continued to fill the little theatre. After Robert-Houdin retired, he devoted himself to his inventions with electricity and his writings. His home, \"Le Prieur\u00e9\" (the Priory), was a marvel in advancement.\nMagic mission to Algeria.\nIn 1856, he was asked by Napoleon III to pacify the tribes in French Algeria. During this period, the French Army commanders maintained order in the newly pacified region. They supervised local Muslim administrations and the \"bureaux arabes\". These areas were closed off to colonization by the Europeans. Napoleon III was worried about religious leaders called Marabouts. The Marabouts were able to control their tribe with their faux magical abilities. They advised their leaders to break ranks with the French. Napoleon wanted Robert-Houdin to show that French magic was stronger.\nThe magical mission began with an informal show at the Bab Azoun Theatre in Algeria, where he would give performances twice weekly. He also gave many special galas before the country's tribal chiefs. He used \"The Light and Heavy Chest\" during these performances, but instead of playing it for comedy as he had in Paris, here he played it straight. Robert-Houdin once invited the strongest tribesman on stage and asked the Arabian to pick up the wooden chest placed on stage. The Arabian picked it up with no problem. Then Robert-Houdin announced that he was going to sap his strength. He waved his wand and declared: \"Contemplez ! Maintenant vous \u00eates plus faible qu'une femme ; essayez de soulever la bo\u00eete.\" (\"Behold! Now you are weaker than a woman; try to lift the box.\") The Arabian pulled on the handle of the chest, but it would not budge. He tried and tried until he tried to rip it apart. Instead, he screamed in pain, as Robert-Houdin had rigged the box to give the Arabian an electrical shock if he tried to rip the handles off. The Arabian let go of the handle, ran off into the aisle, and ran screaming out of the theatre.\nAfter his performances were done, he gave a special presentation for several chief men of their tribe. He was invited to the home of the head of the tribe of the desert interior, Bou-Allem. In dawn of the Arab desert, Robert-Houdin was challenged to do a special trick. He obliged by inviting one of the rebels to shoot at him with a marked bullet, which he caught between his teeth. He was given a certificate from Bou-Allem, who wore a red robe symbolizing his loyalty to France. With this scroll praising his mysterious manifestations, Robert-Houdin went back to France with the mission accomplished.\n\"The blow was struck\", Robert-Houdin said, \"...henceforth the interpreters and all those who had dealings with the Arabs received orders to make them understand that my pretended miracles were only the result of skill, inspired and guided by an art called prestidigitation, in no way connected with sorcery\". He went on to say, \"The Arabs doubtless yielded to these arguments, for henceforth I was on the most friendly terms with them.\" He was rewarded for his services by the French government for suppressing any possible rebellion.\nRetirement and death.\nAfter his mission in Algeria was completed, Robert-Houdin gave his last public performance at the Grand Th\u00e9\u00e2tre in Marseille, then returned to his home in Saint-Gervais, near his native Blois, where he wrote his memoirs, \"Confidences d'un Prestidigitateur\". He also wrote several books on the art of magic. He lived happily in retirement for about fifteen years, until the advent of the Franco Prussian War. His son Eug\u00e8ne was a captain in a Zouave regiment. On 6 August 1870, Robert-Houdin heard news of his son being mortally wounded at the Battle of W\u00f6rth. Meanwhile, Hessian Soldiers captured Paris, and Robert-Houdin hid his family in a cave near his property. The Russian soldiers were very rude, according to Robert-Houdin, but he found the Polish soldiers to be a lot kinder.\nFour days later, Robert-Houdin was to find out that his son had died of his wounds. With the stress from that and the war, his health deteriorated, and he contracted pneumonia. On 13 June 1871, he died of his illness at the age of 65.\nLegacy.\nHis home in Blois is open to the public as the publicly owned La Maison de la Magie Robert-Houdin. It is a museum and theatre first opened by his grandson Paul Robert-Houdin in April 1966. As a museum of France and bearing the official label of \"Mus\u00e9e de France\", it is the only public museum in Europe that incorporates in one place collections of magic and a site for permanent performing arts. The creation of such a site is directly linked to the personality of Robert-Houdin. Several of Robert-Houdin's apparatuses, including automata and mystery clocks, reside in David Copperfield's private museum.\nIn December 1852, the Theatre Robert-Houdin moved from its original location to the Boulevard des Italiens in Paris. Ownership passed from Hamilton to Cleverman (Fran\u00e7ois Lahire), then to Robert-Houdin's son \u00c9mile. Emile was too busy to perform at the theatre, so he arranged for Pierre Edouard Brunnet to present the show.\nAfter his death, \u00c9mile's widow sold the theatre to Georges M\u00e9li\u00e8s in 1888. M\u00e9li\u00e8s, himself a magician but best known to history as one of the greatest early innovators of film making, later presented his first movies there. He accidentally discovered stop-action special effects and presented his creation at the Theatre Robert-Houdin. One of his classics is \"A Trip to the Moon\". In 1924, the building was demolished.\nRobert-Houdin's autobiography is \"The Memoirs of Robert-Houdin\". His life and works are also cited in Robertson Davies's \"Deptford Trilogy\", notably in the trilogy's third novel, \"World of Wonders\", which takes place on the set of a movie about Robert-Houdin.\nIn his book \"Hiding the Elephant\", Jim Steinmeyer said that every magician of the 20th century was \"haunted\" by Robert-Houdin, \"... who cast an enormous shadow over their generation\". Hungarian-American magician and escape artist Harry Houdini (born Ehrich Weiss) was so impressed by Robert-Houdin that, after reading his autobiography in 1890, Weiss adopted the stage name of \"Houdini\" in honour of Robert-Houdin. He incorrectly believed that an \"i\" on the end of a name meant \"like\" in French; but Houdini, his own career and reputation established by that time, later lost his youthful respect for Robert-Houdin, believing that he took undue credit for other magicians' innovations, and wrote \"The Unmasking of Robert-Houdin\" in 1908.\nRobert-Houdin is often credited as being \"the father of modern magic\". Before him, magicians performed in marketplaces and fairs, for the lower classes, but Robert-Houdin performed magic in theatres and private parties for wealthier patrons. He also chose to wear formal clothes, like those of his more upscale audiences, which has become a tradition for many modern magicians who wear tail-coats.\nMany cities have streets that bear his name: Blois, Bourges, Caen, Paris (11th), Saint-\u00c9tienne, and Saint-Gervais-la-For\u00eat in France; Monticiano in Siena, Italy; and others.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53412", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53412", "title": "Stage name", "text": "Pseudonym used by performing artist\nA stage name or professional name is a pseudonym used by performers, authors, and entertainers\u2014such as actors, comedians, singers, and musicians. The equivalent concept among writers is called a \"nom de plume\" (pen name). Some performers eventually choose to adopt their stage name as a legal name.\nSuch professional aliases are adopted for a wide variety of reasons and may be similar or nearly identical to an individual's birth name or be inspired by nicknames or maiden names. Some people take a stage name because their birth name is difficult to pronounce or spell; is considered unattractive, dull, or unintentionally amusing; or projects an undesired image. Sometimes a performer adopts a name that is unusual or outlandish to attract attention. Some individuals use a stage name because their birth name is already being used by another notable individual, including names that are not exactly the same but still too similar; many guilds and associations that represent actors mandate that no two members may have identical working names. Other performers use a stage name in order to retain anonymity, as is often the case for porn stars, especially if they intend on switching careers. The phrase \"nom de porn\" is sometimes used to refer to a pornographic actor's stage name, referring to the English use of the French-language phrase for pen name.\nFamily connection.\nSome individuals who are related to a celebrity take a different last name, so they are not perceived to have received undue advantage from their family connection. Actor Nicolas Cage, born Nicolas Coppola, chose a new last name to avoid comparisons with his uncle, director Francis Ford Coppola, who gave him his big break in the 1982 film \"Fast Times at Ridgemont High\".\nConversely, individuals who wish to receive benefits from their family connections may take that person's first or last name. Lon Chaney Sr.'s son Creighton spent a number of years appearing in minor roles before renaming himself Lon Chaney Jr. Likewise, Emilio Estevez and his sister Renee chose not to take their father Martin Sheen's professional name and use their birth names. Their brother Carlos chose to use their father's professional name and took the name Charlie Sheen. Some children born outside marriage to a (usually male) celebrity parent have done the same: Jett Williams (n\u00e9e Antha Bell Jett) and Scott Eastwood (n\u00e9 Scott Clinton Reeves) each use their fathers' last names; while others have not: Joseph Baena, son of Arnold Schwarzenegger, chose not to use his father's last name.\nWomen who achieve fame after marriage often use their married name as part of their professional name, while women who achieved fame before marriage may continue to use their maiden name or a hyphenated surname.\nIn some cases, the individual may adopt a stage name to avoid confusion with other family members who have similar names. Actor Mark Harmon (Thomas Mark Harmon) uses his middle name professionally to avoid confusion with his father Heisman Trophy winner and former broadcaster Tom Harmon (Thomas Dudley Harmon).\nStephen Nice, the birth name of the lead singer of Steve Harley and Cockney Rebel, took on the stage name \"Steve Harley\" after realising that his on stage persona differed greatly from his real-life persona, and as a result feeling that he was no longer \"Ronald and Joyce's (Harley's parents) little boy\" when on stage.\nComedian Amos Muzyad Yaqoob Kairouz adopted the stage name Danny Thomas, largely because he did not want his friends and family to know he had gone back into working clubs where the salary was better.\nUnion rules.\nGuilds and associations that represent actors, such as the SAG-AFTRA (formed from a 2012 merger between the Screen Actors Guild and the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists) in the United States and Equity in the United Kingdom, stipulate that no two members may have identical working names. An actor whose name has already been taken must choose a new name. SAG-AFTRA allows any new member to keep their legal name as their stage name, even if another member has the same stage name already, as long as they sign a waiver.\nNotable examples include: Nathan Lane, whose birth name (Joseph Lane) was already in use; Stewart Granger, born James Stewart; and Michael Keaton, born Michael Douglas. Diane Keaton, whose birth name is Diane Hall, took her mother's maiden name as a stage name after learning that there was already a registered actress named Diane Hall in the Actors' Equity Association. \"Ugly Betty\" actress Vanessa Williams officially uses \"Vanessa L. Williams\" because of SAG guidelines, although the other actress with same first and last name (Vanessa E. Williams) is arguably less notable. Similarly, David Walliams changed one letter in his surname owing to there being another \"David Williams\". Terry O'Quinn of \"Lost\" fame changed his surname from Quinn to O'Quinn as another registered actor already had the name Terrance Quinn. Long-time \"Simpsons\" writer and \"Futurama\" executive producer David X. Cohen changed his middle initial from S to X because there was already a David S. Cohen registered with the Writers Guild of America. Julianne Moore was born Julie Anne Smith but found that all variations of that name were already used by other actors. Former American football player Thomas Q. Jones added his middle initial to his name when he began acting, as his name was already taken.\nThe rumor that Michael Keaton changed his surname because of an attraction to actress Diane Keaton is incorrect; he chose Keaton because of an affinity for the physical comedy of Buster Keaton.\nA middle name may be adopted in preference to changing a name. American author James Finn Garner, born James Edward Garner, adopted his mother's maiden name for a middle name after joining the SAG, to avoid confusion with James Garner, and retained the name for his writing career. In some cases, attaching a generational suffix is sufficient for guild rules; broadcaster David Lawrence is credited as David H. Lawrence XVII as a result of there being sixteen other David Lawrences in show business at the time he received his SAG card.\nA person hoping to become successful as an entertainer who has a name identical to a name already familiar to the public (in any field of endeavor) may change their name in order to avoid having their name evoke the other person with the same name. Singer Katy Perry, born Katheryn Elizabeth Hudson, released her self-titled album under the name Katy Hudson, but later used her mother's maiden name to avoid confusion with actress Kate Hudson.\nBy suggestion.\nA performer may also have had their stage name chosen for them by their agent \u2013 such was the case with Barbara Eden, born Barbara Jean Morehead (later known as Barbara Huffman) \u2013 or, in the heyday of the Hollywood studios, by a movie studio. \nJoan Rivers (born Joan Alexandra Molinsky) went one step further and named herself after a former agent, Tony Rivers, after he told her to change her name. \nIn the non-English-speaking world, an example is the Taiwanese Mandopop girl group S.H.E (composed of Selina Jen, Hebe Tian, and Ella Chen), whose members' English names were chosen by their manager after taking personality tests.\nFormer child star Patty Duke (whose real name is Anna Marie Duke) had her stage name chosen for her by her first managers. Their choice of the name \"Patty\" was inspired by another child actress named Patty McCormack.\nCary Grant (born Archibald Alexander [or Alec] Leach) had his name selected for him by Paramount Pictures. He had been using the name \"Cary Lockwood\", but the studio decided against it, deeming it too similar to another actor working at the time. Cary and the studio eventually settled on \"Cary Grant\" (Grant thought the letters \"C\" and \"G\" to be lucky: they had brought previous success for both Clark Gable and Gary Cooper). \nJoan Crawford, born Lucille Fay LeSueur, had her name changed as a result of a magazine poll organised by her studio, MGM.\nGorden Kaye (born Gordon Kaye) had one letter in his first name changed owing to a spelling error by the British Actors' Equity Association; he preferred the mistake over his original name.\nMaribel Guardia (born Maribel Fernandez Garcia) had her last name changed not only because was there an actress of the same first and last names, but also because \"Maribel Garcia\" had 13 letters; she changed the spelling of her mother's maiden name, adding a \"u\" and changing the \"c\" to a \"d\" in the process.\nEthnicity.\nIn the past, a stage name was often used when a performer's real name was considered to denote a specific ethnicity that faced potential discrimination. In other cases, actors have reinvented themselves with a more ethnic identity, when that gave them an advantage in playing \"ethnic\" roles.\nSteven Tyler of Aerosmith changed his name from Steven Victor Tallarico \"for more promotional appeal\".\nHistorically, Jews in Hollywood were encouraged to anglicize their names to avoid possible discrimination. Examples of such name changes are Danny Kaye and Mel Brooks, both of whom were born with the surname Kaminsky, the original two lineups of The Three Stooges (born Moses Horwitz, Jerome Horwitz, Samuel Horwitz and Louis Feinberg) and Woody Allen (born Allan Konigsberg). Jon Stewart claims that he did not anglicize his name for career reasons, but because of his estranged relationship with his father. Israeli-American Natalie Portman, (born Natalie Hershlag), changed her name allegedly to protect her privacy. James Goldman, retired television anchorman, has stated that he chose the name Jim Gardner because of the thought that there were too many people with Jewish last names on staff.\nRam\u00f3n Est\u00e9vez changed his name to Martin Sheen as he felt it affected his job prospects owing to racial discrimination and bias, although he maintains his birth name for legal documents such as his passport; his sons made divergent choices: Carlos Irwin Est\u00e9vez is now Charlie Sheen, while Emilio Estevez left his name unchanged. German-born actor Hans Gudegast adopted the stage name of Eric Braeden.\nActors Anthony Quinn and Anne Bancroft were advised to anglicize their names because 'Antonio Rodolfo Quinn Oaxaca' and 'Anna Maria Louisa Italiano', respectively, were considered too 'ethnic' for Hollywood and Broadway at the time. Eydie Gorme (born Edith Garmezano), Sophia Loren (born Sofia Villani Scicolone), Charles Bronson (born Charles Dennis Buchinsky), and Rita Hayworth (born Margarita Carmen Cansino), are four more well-known examples of this trend.\nBroadcaster Dave Roberts was born David T. Boreanaz but was known professionally as Dave Thomas and later Dave Roberts as ethnic surnames were discouraged when he first began his career during the 1950s; his son, actor David Boreanaz, chose not to adopt a stage name.\nThe use of stage names for ethnic purposes may vary widely depending on the media market the personality is representing. For example, in Buffalo, New York, a city with a large Polish-American population, Polish-American media personalities typically work freely using their birth names.\nSicilian-American actor Espera Oscar de Corti, who built his film career portraying Native Americans, reinvented himself as Iron Eyes Cody. He not only took his stage name as his legal name but eventually began insisting that he actually was Native American.\nActress Bernadette Peters (born Bernadette Lazzara) was encouraged as a child actress to use her father's first name, Peter as her last name by her mother to avoid being type-cast in Italian roles.\nChloe Bennet had used her birth name, Chloe Wang, for her singing career in China, along with a short-lived TeenNick music series. She started using the surname Bennet, after her father's first name, when she failed to be welcomed by Hollywood agents. In reverse, Nichole Bloom, an actress with mixed Japanese-Irish parentage, changed her stage name to her birth name of Nichole Sakura in the wake of the summer of 2020, to honor her Japanese heritage; she had originally used Bloom, an English equivalent to Sakura (meaning cherry blossom) out of a fear of typecasting.\nEase of use.\nAnother consideration in choosing a stage name is the ease of use. The Actors' Equity Association (AEA) advises performers to select a name that is easy for others to pronounce, spell, and remember. Some performers, while paying great attention to their skills and abilities, give little thought to the difference that a well-thought-out name can make to their career. Often a person or group decides on a different name only after they realize that a poorly chosen name gives a bad impression.\nActor Michael Caine was born Maurice Micklewhite and chose his new first name because he preferred the sound of it to the less glamorous-sounding \"Maurice\". He reputedly chose the surname \"Caine\" because, while deciding on a new surname, he looked across the street and saw a cinema advertising the film \"The Caine Mutiny\". He later joked that he would be called \"Michael The One Hundred and One Dalmatians\" if he had looked in the other direction. \nActor Pete Postlethwaite was advised to change his surname by peers who quipped that it \"would never be put up in lights outside theaters because they couldn't afford the electricity\", but he decided to keep it. \nIn a similar situation, Doris Day (born Doris Mary Ann Kappelhoff) was told by a bandleader that her name would never fit on the marquee, and she thus took the surname \"Day\" because the song \"Day By Day\" had become one of her signature tracks.\nRelevance to image.\nThe 19th century stage magician and contortionist who performed under the Chinese stage name Ching Lau Lauro did so to support his stage image. Believed to be from Cornwall, England, he may have been the first European magician to dress in Chinese costume on stage.\nCommonly in the music world, especially those of heavy metal, punk rock, industrial, and hip hop, musicians will rename themselves with names more menacing or striking than their birth names. Every member of the punk band Ramones took the pseudonymous \"Ramone\" surname as part of their collective stage persona. Members of New Zealand art-rock band Split Enz all took their middle names as stage names, so as to keep their private image separate from their public personae.\nOther performers may assume stage names as a means of distancing themselves from publicly known childhood names that could be considered professionally embarrassing, outlandish, or otherwise inappropriate. Film director Duncan Jones (son of singer David Bowie) was known publicly as a child as Zowie Bowie.\nRappers are known to use stage names, such as Jay-Z (Shawn Carter), 50 Cent (Curtis Jackson), Diddy (Sean Combs), Young Thug (Jeffery Williams), Ludacris (Chris Bridges), Lil Wayne (Dwayne Carter Jr.), and Soulja Boy (DeAndre Way). At times, these artists will use their real names to make some of their material seem more authentic or personal. Eminem (Marshall Mathers) took his stage name from the pronunciation of his initials (M and M), and later used his real name at various public events and as an alter ego after his real name gained recognition following the release of his multi-platinum album \"The Marshall Mathers LP\". LL Cool J (James Todd Smith) referenced his real name on the albums \"Mr. Smith\" and \"Todd Smith\". Queen Latifah (Dana Owens) released \"The Dana Owens Album\" after changing her focus from hip-hop to jazz. Xzibit (Alvin Joiner) has also been credited by his real name when acting in several television shows.\nEuphony and ease of remembrance.\nSome performers and artists may choose to simplify their name to make it easier to spell and pronounce, and easier for others to remember. For instance, Fall Out Boy vocalist and guitarist Patrick Stump removed the \"h\" from his original surname, Stumph. It was still pronounced \"stump\", but the change ensured his audience would not think to pronounce it \"stumf\". Singer Jason Derulo (known for announcing his name in many of the introductions of his songs) uses the phonetic spelling of his given name, Jason Desrouleaux. Australian actress Yvonne Strahovski adopted a phonetic spelling of her Polish surname, Strzechowski, as her stage name upon moving to the United States. American stand-up comedian Louis C.K. adopted his stage name from the phonetic spelling of his Hungarian surname, Sz\u00e9kely.\nAndy Warhol dropped an \"a\" from his original name, Warhola, while couturier Yves Mathieu-Saint-Laurent dropped the first of his two surnames. Rodolfo Alfonso Raffaello Piero Filiberto Guglielmi adopted the stage name Rudolph Valentino in part because American casting directors found his original surname difficult to pronounce. Singer George Michael (the son of a Greek Cypriot restaurateur in North London) was born Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou.\nSome surnames may carry unfortunate connotations. Hal Linden, born Harold Lipshitz, adopted his stage name for fear that the embedded obscenity in his original surname could cost him work. Ralph Lauren's brother (who was his guardian) changed their family name from Lifshitz for a similar reason: fear of mockery. Duran Duran's Nick Rhodes, born Nicholas James Bates, changed his name to escape childhood ridicule (as a child, children would often tease him by calling him \"Master Bates\"); he adopted the surname \"Rhodes\" after the keyboard manufacturer of the same name. Diana Dors was born Diana Fluck (one letter away from a profanity); this prompted her to change her name to a more benign one in order to avoid an accidental obscenity (which could have been exacerbated by her status as a sex symbol).\nMusical use.\nSome types of music are more associated with stage names than others. For example, hip hop and EDM artists almost always use stage names, whereas \"classical\" composers and performers rarely do. Classical violinist Amad\u00e9us Leopold (born in South Korea as Yoo Hanbin) and opera singers Beverly Sills (born Belle Miriam Silverman), Nellie Melba (born Helen Porter Mitchell) and Jennifer Toye (born Jennifer Gay Bishop) are exceptions.\nSome Algerian ra\u00ef musicians use the prefix Cheb (for men) or Chaba (Chebba) for women. Both Arabic words mean \"young\" (e.g. as in Cheb Khaled, or \"Young Khaled\"). \nJohn Paul Jones of Led Zeppelin was born John Baldwin, which he used as a stage name.. He later legally changed it to John Paul Jones.\nSome performers take a series of different stage names. The British pop singer who was successful in the 1970s as Alvin Stardust previously went by the stage name of \"Shane Fenton\" in the 1960s. He had been born \"Bernard William Jewry\". Some performers will use different names in different settings. Charles Thompson, singer-songwriter for the alternative band the Pixies, was known in that band as \"Black Francis\". He was called \"Frank Black\" as a solo performer and again called \"Black Francis\" in a reunited Pixies.\nUnlike Hollywood stage names, many musical artists' stage names are obviously not personal names, but they may still end up universally used to refer to the performer, such as Lady Gaga. At times the line may be blurred between the name of an act and the stage name of the lead.\nMany performers refer to their stage name as their \"professional name\". For instance David Jones became David Bowie in order to avoid confusion with Davy Jones of the Monkees but retained Jones as his legal name. In some cases, performers subsequently adopt their stage name as their legal name. For instance, the former Robert Allen Zimmerman's legal name has been Robert Dylan (Bob Dylan) since he changed it in New York City Supreme Court in August 1962. Elton John was born Reginald Kenneth Dwight but changed his name by deed poll, making Elton Hercules John his real name. When he was knighted, he became Sir Elton Hercules John rather than Sir Reginald Kenneth Dwight. Similarly, Freddie Mercury was born Farrokh Bulsara, but legally changed his name concurrently with the formation of Queen. Elvis Costello (born Declan MacManus), who had adopted his professional name as a legal name, changed it back to his birth name in 1986. Another example is Marvin Lee Aday, known by his stage name Meat Loaf. In a similar way, actress and singer Miley Cyrus was born Destiny Hope Cyrus but found \"Miley\" more comfortable, making it her legal name.\nEntire musical groups have been known to adopt a common stage surname, the most notable arguably being the Ramones. Recent examples include The Donnas, Those Darlins, Los Campesinos! and Ween.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53413", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53413", "title": "Buggery", "text": ""}
{"id": "53414", "revid": "211905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53414", "title": "Cream (band)", "text": "1960s British rock supergroup\nCream were a British rock supergroup formed in London in 1966. The group consisted of bassist Jack Bruce, guitarist Eric Clapton and drummer Ginger Baker. Bruce was the primary songwriter and vocalist, although Clapton and Baker contributed to songs. Formed by members of previously successful bands, they are widely considered the first supergroup. Cream were highly regarded for the instrumental proficiency of each of their members.\nDuring their brief three-year career, the band released four albums: \"Fresh Cream\" (1966), \"Disraeli Gears\" (1967), \"Wheels of Fire\" (1968), and \"Goodbye\" (1969). Beginning with \"Disraeli Gears\", the band was joined in the studio by producer and multi-instrumentalist Felix Pappalardi. Their music spanned rock styles such as blues rock, psychedelia, and hard rock. Throughout their career, they sold more than 15 million records worldwide. The group's third album, \"Wheels of Fire\" (1968), is the first platinum-selling double album. They scored international hits with singles such as \"Sunshine of Your Love\" (1967) and \"White Room\" (1968).\nTensions between Bruce and Baker led to their decision in May 1968 to break up, although the band were persuaded to make a final album, \"Goodbye\", and to tour, culminating in two final farewell concerts at the Royal Albert Hall on 25 and 26 November 1968 which were filmed and shown in theatres, then in 1977 released as a home video, \"Farewell Concert\". The group briefly reunited twice following their breakup: in 1993 for their induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and again in 2005 for a series of concerts. Bruce died in 2014 followed by Baker in 2019, leaving Clapton as the last living member of the group.\nIn 1993, Cream were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. They were included in both \"Rolling Stone\" and VH1's lists of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\", at number 67 and 61 respectively. They were also ranked number 16 on VH1's \"100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock\".\nHistory.\nFormation (1966).\nBy July 1966, Eric Clapton's career with the Yardbirds and John Mayall &amp; the Bluesbreakers had earned him a reputation as one of the premier blues guitarists in Britain. Clapton, however, found the environment of Mayall's band confining, and sought to expand his playing in a new band. In 1966, Clapton met Ginger Baker, then the drummer of the Graham Bond Organisation, for which Jack Bruce had played bass guitar, harmonica and piano. Baker felt stifled in the Graham Bond Organisation and had grown tired of Graham Bond's drug addictions and bouts of mental instability. \"I had always liked Ginger\", explained Clapton. \"Ginger had come to see me play with the Bluesbreakers. After the gig he drove me back to London in his Rover. I was very impressed with his car and driving. He was telling me that he wanted to start a band, and I had been thinking about it too.\"\nEach was impressed with the other's playing abilities, prompting Baker to ask Clapton to join his new, then-unnamed group. Clapton immediately agreed, on the condition that Baker hire Bruce, who had joined Manfred Mann since leaving Graham Bond, as the group's bassist; according to Clapton, Baker was so surprised at the suggestion that he almost crashed the car. Clapton had met Bruce when the bassist/vocalist briefly played with the Bluesbreakers in November 1965; the two also had recorded together as part of an \"ad hoc\" group dubbed Powerhouse (which also included Steve Winwood and Paul Jones). Impressed with Bruce's vocals and technical prowess, Clapton wanted to work with him on an ongoing basis.\nIn contrast, while Bruce was in Bond's band, he and Baker had been notorious for their quarrelling. Their volatile relationship included on-stage fights and the sabotage of one another's instruments. After Baker fired Bruce from the band, Bruce continued to arrive for gigs; ultimately, Bruce was driven away from the band after Baker threatened him at knifepoint.\nBaker and Bruce tried to put aside their differences for the good of Baker's new trio, which he envisioned as collaborative, with each of the members contributing to music and lyrics. The band was named \"Cream\", as Clapton, Bruce, and Baker were already considered the \"cream of the crop\" among blues and jazz musicians in the exploding British music scene. Before deciding upon \"Cream\", the band considered calling themselves \"Sweet 'n' Sour Rock 'n' Roll\". Of the trio, Clapton had the biggest reputation in England; however, he was unknown in the United States, having left the Yardbirds before \"For Your Love\" hit the American Top Ten.\nThe band made its unofficial debut at the Twisted Wheel on 29 July 1966. Its official debut came two nights later at the Sixth Annual Windsor Jazz &amp; Blues Festival. Being new and with few original songs to its credit, they performed blues reworkings that thrilled the large crowd and earned it a warm reception. In October the band also got a chance to jam with Jimi Hendrix, who had recently arrived in London. Hendrix was a fan of Clapton's music and wanted a chance to play with him onstage.\nIt was during the early organisation that they decided Bruce would serve as the group's lead vocalist. While Clapton was shy about singing, he occasionally harmonised with Bruce, and in time, took lead vocals on several Cream tracks including \"Four Until Late\", \"Strange Brew\", \"World of Pain\", \"Outside Woman Blues\", \"Crossroads\", and \"Badge\".\n\"Fresh Cream\" (1966).\nThe band's debut album, \"Fresh Cream\", was recorded and released in 1966. The album reached number 6 in the UK charts and number 39 in the US. It was evenly split between self-penned originals and blues covers, including \"Four Until Late\", \"Rollin' and Tumblin'\", \"Spoonful\", \"I'm So Glad\" and \"Cat's Squirrel\". The rest of the songs were written by either Jack Bruce or Ginger Baker. (\"I Feel Free\", a UK hit single, was included on only the American edition of the LP.) The track \"Toad\" contained one of the earliest examples of a drum solo in rock music as Ginger Baker expanded upon his early composition \"Camels and Elephants\", written in 1965 with the Graham Bond Organisation.\n\"Disraeli Gears\" (1967).\nThe band first visited the US in March 1967 to play nine dates at the RKO 58th Street Theatre in New York City. There was little impact, as impresario Murray the K placed them at the bottom of a six-act bill that performed three times per date, eventually reducing the band to one song per concert. They returned to record \"Disraeli Gears\" in New York between 11 and 15 May 1967. This, the band's second album, was released in November 1967 and reached the top five in the charts on both sides of the Atlantic. Produced by Felix Pappalardi (who later co-founded the Cream-influenced hard rock band Mountain) and engineer Tom Dowd, it was recorded at Atlantic Studios in New York. \"Disraeli Gears\" is often considered to be the band's defining effort, successfully blending psychedelic British rock with American blues.\n\"Disraeli Gears\" also included \"Sunshine of Your Love\", which became the group's highest-charting song, peaking at number five on the U.S. \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nThe album was originally slated for release in the summer of 1967, but the record label opted to scrap the planned cover and repackage it with a new psychedelic cover, designed by artist Martin Sharp, and the resulting changes delayed its release for several months. The cover was remarkable for the time, with a psychedelic design patterned over a publicity photo of the trio.\nIn August 1967, the band played their first headlining dates in the US, first at The Fillmore in San Francisco and later at The Pinnacle in Los Angeles. The concerts were a great success and proved very influential on both the band itself and the flourishing hippie scene surrounding them. Upon discovering a growing listening audience, the band began to stretch out on stage, incorporating more time in their repertoire, some songs reaching jams of twenty minutes. Long, drawn-out jams in numbers like \"Spoonful\", \"N.S.U.\", \"I'm So Glad\", and \"Sweet Wine\" became live favourites, while songs like \"Sunshine of Your Love\", \"Crossroads\", and \"Tales of Brave Ulysses\" remained reasonably short.\n\"Wheels of Fire\" (1968).\nIn 1968 came the band's third release, \"Wheels of Fire\", which topped the American charts. The album was recorded in a spate of short sessions from July 1967 to June 1968. Still a relative novelty, the double album of two LP records was well-suited to extended solos. The \"Wheels of Fire\" studio recordings showcased the band moving away from the blues and more towards a semi-progressive rock style highlighted by odd time signatures and various orchestral instruments. However, the band did record Howlin' Wolf's \"Sitting on Top of the World\" and Albert King's \"Born Under a Bad Sign\". According to a BBC interview with Clapton, the record company, Atco Records, also handling Albert King, asked the band to cover \"Born Under a Bad Sign\", which became a popular track off the record. The opening song, \"White Room\", became a radio staple. Another song, \"Politician\", was written by the band while waiting to perform live at the BBC. The album's second disc included three live recordings from the Winterland Ballroom and one from the Fillmore. Clapton's second solo from \"Crossroads\" has made it to the top 20 in multiple \"greatest guitar solo\" lists.\nAfter the completion of \"Wheels of Fire\" in mid-1968, the band members had grown tired of their exhausting touring schedule and increasingly loud jamming, and wanted to go their separate ways. Baker stated in a 2006 interview with \"Music Mart\" magazine, \"It just got to the point where Eric said to me: 'I've had enough of this', and I said so have I. I couldn't stand it. The last year with Cream was just agony. It damaged my hearing permanently, and today I've still got a hearing problem because of the sheer volume throughout the last year of Cream. But it didn't start off like that. In 1966, it was great. It was really a wonderful experience musically, and it just went into the realms of stupidity.\" Bruce and Baker's combustible relationship proved even worse as a result of the strain put upon the band by non-stop touring, forcing Clapton to play the perpetual role of peacekeeper.\nClapton had also become interested in the music of Bob Dylan's former backing group, now known as the Band, and their debut album, \"Music from Big Pink\", which proved to be a welcome breath of fresh air to Clapton in comparison to the psychedelia and volume that had defined Cream. Furthermore, he had read a scathing Cream review in \"Rolling Stone\", a publication he had much admired, in which the reviewer, Jon Landau, called him a \"master of the blues clich\u00e9\". In the wake of that article, Clapton wanted to end Cream and pursue a different musical direction.\nAt the beginning of the band's farewell tour on 4 October 1968, in Oakland, California, nearly the entire set consisted of songs from \"Wheels of Fire\": \"White Room\", \"Politician\", \"Crossroads\", \"Spoonful\", and \"Deserted Cities of the Heart\", with \"Passing the Time\" taking the place of \"Toad\" for a drum solo. \"Passing the Time\" and \"Deserted Cities\" were quickly removed from the setlist and replaced by \"Sitting on Top of the World\" and \"Toad\".\n\"Goodbye\" and break-up (1968\u20131969).\nFrom its creation, Cream was faced with some fundamental problems that would later lead to its dissolution in November 1968. The antagonism between Bruce and Baker created tensions in the band. Clapton also felt that the members of the band did not listen to each other enough. Equipment during these years had also improved; new Marshall amplifier stacks produced more power, and Jack Bruce pushed the volume levels higher, creating tension for Baker, who would have trouble competing with roaring stacks. Clapton spoke of a concert during which he stopped playing and neither Baker nor Bruce noticed. Clapton has also commented that Cream's later gigs mainly consisted of its members showing off.\nCream decided that they would break up in May 1968 during a tour of the US. Later, in July, the band announced that they would break up after a farewell tour of the US and after playing two concerts in London. Jack Bruce was quoted as saying \"Travel can kill a group. It becomes boring, tiring and very depressing.\"\nCream were eventually persuaded to do one final album, appropriately titled \"Goodbye\". The album was recorded in late 1968 and released in early 1969, after the band had broken up. It comprised six songs: three live recordings dating from a concert at The Forum in Los Angeles, California, on 19 October, and three new studio recordings (including \"Badge\", which was written by Clapton and George Harrison, who also played rhythm guitar and was credited as \"L'Angelo Misterioso\"). \"I'm So Glad\" was included among the live tracks.\nCream's farewell tour consisted of 22 shows at 19 venues in the US from 4 October to 4 November 1968, and two final farewell concerts at the Royal Albert Hall on 25 and 26 November 1968. The final US gig was at the Rhode Island Auditorium on 4 November. The band arrived late, and due to local restrictions, were able to perform only two songs, \"Toad\" and a 20+ minute version of \"Spoonful\". The two Royal Albert Hall concerts were filmed for a BBC documentary and released on video (and later DVD) as \"Farewell Concert\". Both shows were sold out and attracted more attention than any other Cream concert, but their performance was regarded by many as below standard. Baker himself said of the concerts: \"It wasn't a good gig\u00a0... Cream was better than that\u00a0... We knew it was all over. We knew we were just finishing it off, getting it over with.\" Bruce had three Marshall stacks on stage for the farewell shows but one acted only as a spare, and he only used one or two, depending on the song. In an interview from \"Cream: Classic Artists\", he added that the band was getting worse by the minute.\nPost-Cream.\nBlind Faith, a band that included both Clapton and Baker, was formed after the demise of Cream, following an attempt by Clapton to recruit Steve Winwood into Cream in the hope that he would help act as a buffer between Bruce and Baker. Inspired by more song-based acts, Clapton went on to perform very different, less improvisational material with Delaney &amp; Bonnie, Derek and the Dominos, and in his own long and varied solo career.\nBruce began a varied and successful solo career with the 1969 release of \"Songs for a Tailor\", while Baker formed a jazz-fusion ensemble, Ginger Baker's Air Force, from the remnants of Blind Faith, with Winwood, Blind Faith bassist Rick Grech, Graham Bond on saxophone, and guitarist Denny Laine of the Moody Blues and (later) Wings.\nAll three members continued to explore new musical ideas and partnerships, play concerts and record music for over four decades after ending Cream.\nReunions.\nRock and Roll Hall of Fame.\nIn 1993, Cream were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and re-formed to perform at the induction ceremony. Initially, the trio were wary about performing, until encouraging words from Robbie Robertson inspired them to try. The set consisted of \"Sunshine of Your Love\", \"Crossroads\", and \"Born Under a Bad Sign\", a song they had previously played live just three times. Clapton mentioned in his acceptance speech that their rehearsal the day before the ceremony had marked the first time they had played together in 25 years. This performance spurred rumours of a reunion tour. Bruce and Baker said in later interviews that they were, indeed, interested in touring as Cream. A formal reunion did not take place immediately, as Clapton, Bruce and Baker continued to pursue solo projects, although the latter two worked together again in the mid-1990s as two-thirds of the power trio BBM with Irish blues rock guitarist Gary Moore.\n2005 concerts.\nAt Clapton's request, Cream reunited for a series of four shows, on 2, 3, 5, and 6 May 2005 at the Royal Albert Hall in London, the venue of their final concerts in 1968. Although the three musicians chose not to speak publicly about the shows, Clapton would later state that he had become more \"generous\" in regard to his past, and that the physical health of Bruce and Baker was a major factor: Bruce had recently undergone a transplant for liver cancer in 2003, and had almost lost his life, while Baker had severe arthritis.\nTickets for all four shows sold out in under an hour. The performances were recorded for a live CD and DVD. Among those in attendance were Bill Wyman, Steve Winwood, Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Roger Waters, Brian May, Jimmy Page, and Mick Taylor. The reunion marked the first time the band had played \"Badge\" and \"Pressed Rat and Warthog\" live.\nInspired by the success of the reunion, the band agreed to an additional set of three shows at the Madison Square Garden in New York City, from 24 to 26 October 2005. According to Clapton, these concerts did not live up to the Royal Albert Hall performances due to, among other reasons, lack of rehearsal and the resurgence of old grudges among band members.\nPost-2005.\nIn February 2006, Cream received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in recognition of their contribution to, and influence upon, modern music. That same month, a \"Classic Albums\" DVD was released detailing the story behind the creation and recording of \"Disraeli Gears\". On the day prior to the Grammy ceremony, Bruce made a public statement that more one-off performances of Cream had been planned: multiple dates in a few cities, similar to the Royal Albert Hall and Madison Square Garden shows.\nHowever, this story was denied by both Clapton and Baker, first by Clapton in \"The Times\" in April 2006. When asked about Cream, Clapton said: \"No.\u00a0Not for me. We did it and it was fun. But life is too short. I've got lots of other things I would rather do, including staying at home with my kids. The thing about that band was that it was all to do with its limits\u00a0... it was an experiment.\" In an interview in the UK magazine \"Music Mart\", about the release of a DVD about the Blind Faith concert in Hyde Park 1969, Baker commented about his unwillingness to continue the Cream reunion. These comments were far more specific and explosive than Clapton's, as they were centred around his relationship with Jack Bruce. Ginger said, \"When he's Dr. Jekyll, he's fine\u00a0... It's when he's Mr. Hyde that he's not. And I'm afraid he's still the same. I tell you this \u2013 there won't ever be any more Cream gigs, because he did Mr. Hyde in New York last year.\"\nWhen asked to elaborate, Baker replied:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Oh, he shouted at me on stage, he turned his bass up so loud that he deafened me on the first gig. What he does is that he apologises and apologises, but I'm afraid, to do it on a Cream reunion gig, that was the end. He killed the magic, and New York was like 1968\u00a0... It was just a get through the gig, get the money sort of deal. I was absolutely amazed. I mean, he demonstrated why he got the sack from Graham Bond and why Cream didn't last very long on stage in New York. I didn't want to do it in the first place simply because of how Jack was. I have worked with him several times since Cream, and I promised myself that I would never work with him again. When Eric first came up with the idea, I said no, and then he phoned me up and eventually convinced me to do it. I was on my best behaviour and I did everything I could to make things go as smooth as possible, and I was really pleasant to Jack.\nBruce told Detroit's WCSX radio station in May 2007 that there were plans for a Cream reunion later in the year. It was later revealed that the potential performance was to be November 2007 in London as a tribute to Ahmet Ertegun. The band decided against it and this was confirmed by Bruce in a letter to the editor of the Jack Bruce fanzine, \"The Cuicoland Express\", dated 26 September 2007:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe headlining act for the O2 Arena Ahmet Ertegun Tribute Concert (postponed to December 2007) turned out to be from another reunited English hard-rock act, Led Zeppelin. Baker and Bruce appeared on stage in London in December 2008, when Baker was awarded a lifetime achievement award by legendary cymbal manufacturer Zildjian. In an interview with BBC 6 Music in April 2010, Bruce confirmed that there would be no more Cream shows, stating simply, \"Cream is over.\" Bruce died on 25 October 2014 and Baker died on 6 October 2019, leaving Clapton as the last surviving member.\nStyle and legacy.\nThe members of Cream were described by Richie Unterberger of AllMusic as \"[yearning] to break free of the confines of the standard rock/R&amp;B/blues group\". He described the band's first album \"Fresh Cream\" as \"electrified and amped-up traditional blues\", and described the band's second album \"Disraeli Gears\" as \"invigorating, sometimes beguiling hard-driving psychedelic pop\" that used \"expected, crunching\" guitar riffs. According to Hugh of \"Classic Rock\", \"Cream pioneered a fusion of rock, blues and jazz that directly influenced an entire generation of musicians and therefore the course of rock music over the next decade. And the legacy continues to filter down.\" He also assessed, \"Before Cream [formed] in 1966, most British pop music stuck pretty rigidly to a verse/ chorus format, and any instrumental solo was generally confined to repeating the melody. Cream changed all that. [...] They took the two-note riff that comprised Willie Dixon\u2019s \"Spoonful\" and stretched it from two-and-a-half minutes to six-and-a-half, exaggerated it, and improvised all around it with a dazzling display of virtuoso playing.\" Baker and Bruce\u2019s styles were rooted in jazz, while Clapton brought a blues background to the fore. Fielder wrote, \"Clapton may not have had the musical knowledge and technique that Baker and Bruce possessed, but he had a God-given gift that enabled the group to justify their audacious name.\"\nJim Sullivan of NPR conferred the titles of \"rock\u2019s most legendary power trio\" and \"arguably [rock music's] first supergroup\" on Cream.\nDave Navarro of Jane's Addiction has cited Cream as an influence.\nPersonnel.\nBand members\nSession contributors\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53416", "revid": "91656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53416", "title": "Wallace Harrison", "text": "American architect (1895\u20131981)\nWallace Kirkman Harrison (September 28, 1895 \u2013 December 2, 1981) was an American architect. Harrison started his professional career with the firm of Corbett, Harrison &amp; MacMurray, participating in the construction of Rockefeller Center. He is best known for executing large public projects in New York City and upstate, many of them the fruit of his long friendship with governor Nelson Rockefeller.\nEarly life and education.\nHarrison was born in Worcester, Massachusetts, on September 28, 1895. He studied engineering at Worcester Polytechnic Institute and architecture at the Boston Architectural Club. In the 1920s, he attended \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts and, two years later, won the Rotch Taveling Scholarship in 1922.\nCareer.\nHarrison's work in the mid-20th century comprised large, modernist public projects and office buildings. He worked for McKim, Mead &amp; White and Bertram Grovesnor Goodhue from 1916 to 1923, and later formed a series of architectural partnerships. Harrison participated with the architectural teams involved in the construction of Rockefeller Center in New York City, completed in 1939. His brother-in-law was married to John D. Rockefeller Jr.'s daughter, Abigail and Harrison served as a designer and architectural adviser for Nelson Rockefeller, notably in the years when Rockefeller was governor of New York.\nIn 1941, Harrison joined with Max Abramowitz to form the firm of Harrison &amp; Abramowitz. In partnership with Abramovitz, Harrison designed scores of university and corporate buildings, including the Time &amp; Life (1959) and Socony-Mobil (1956), both designated New York City landmarks.\nAmong Harrison's most noted projects are the Metropolitan Opera House at the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts and the Empire State Plaza in Albany, New York. He also served as Director of Planning on the United Nations complex, which was built on slaughter house property contributed by the Rockefeller family (the Rockefellers owned the Tudor City Apartments across First Avenue). Harrision developed the design for the Pershing Memorial in Washington, D.C., which is now home to the National World War I Memorial. In addition to his architectural work, Harrison served as master planner and supervising architect for a number of important Long Island-based projects, including the World's Fairs of 1939 and 1964 in Flushing, Queens, and LaGuardia and Idlewild (now John F. Kennedy) airports.\nHarrison's major projects are marked by straightforward planning and sensible functionalism, although his residential side-projects show more experimental flair. In 1931, Harrison established an summer retreat in West Hills, New York, which was a very early example and workshop for the International Style in the United States, and a social and intellectual center of architecture, art, and politics. The home includes a circular living room that is rumored to have been the prototype for the Rainbow Room in Rockefeller Center. Two other circular rooms complete the center of Harrison's design. Frequent visitors and guests included Nelson Rockefeller, Robert Moses, Marc Chagall, Le Corbusier, Alexander Calder, and Fernand L\u00e9ger. Harrison's expansive country property also exhibited his relationships with contemporary architects. For example, shortly after purchasing the property in 1931, Harrison and his wife bought the Aluminaire House, an iconic, compact, ready-to-assemble steel-and-aluminum structure designed by Swiss architect Albert Frey and then editor of Architectural Record, A. Lawrence Kocher.\nHarrison collected works by Calder and L\u00e9ger and commissioned new ones for buildings that he designed, including his country house in West Hills, New York on Long Island, a pavilion at the 1939 New York World's Fair, parts of Rockefeller Center; and the United Nations headquarters. L\u00e9ger waited out part of World War II by painting a mural at the bottom of Harrison's swimming pool. L\u00e9ger also created a large mural for the home's circular living room and sculpted an abstract form to serve as a skylight. Calder's first show is said to have taken place at the home. In 1965, Harrison was appointed to a commission to choose modern art works for the Governor Nelson A. Rockefeller Empire State Plaza Art Collection in Albany, NY.\nBetween 1941 and 1943, Harrison designed and built the Clinton Hill Coops, a 12-building coop complex split between two campuses along Clinton Ave. in Brooklyn, to house the Brooklyn Navy Yards workers.\nHarrison's architectural drawings and archives are held by the Drawings and Archives Department of Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library at Columbia University.\nHarrison was a member of the United States Commission of Fine Arts from 1955 to 1959. In 1967, Harrison received the AIA Gold Medal. In 1938, he was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member, and became a full Academician in 1948.\nPersonal life.\nHarrison married Ellen Hunt Milton (1903\u20131995) in 1926. They had a daughter, Sarah, and lived in Manhattan and Seal Harbor, Maine.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53417", "revid": "1311942238", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53417", "title": "Raymond Hood", "text": "American architect (1881\u20131934)\nRaymond Mathewson Hood (March 29, 1881 \u2013 August 14, 1934) was an American architect who worked in the Neo-Gothic and Art Deco styles. He is best known for his designs of the Tribune Tower, American Radiator Building, and Rockefeller Center. Through a short yet highly successful career, Hood exerted an outsized influence on twentieth century architecture.\nEarly life and education.\nEarly life.\nRaymond Mathewson Hood was born in Pawtucket, Rhode Island on March 29, 1881, to John Parmenter Hood and Vella Mathewson. John Hood was the owner of J.N. Polsey &amp; Co., a crate and box manufacturing company. The family lived at 107 Cottage Street in a house designed by John Hood and local architect Albert H. Humes. In a 1931 profile of Hood in \"The New Yorker\", writer Allene Talmey described the Hood home as \"the ugliest place in town.\" In 1893, the Hood family visited the World\u2019s Columbian Exposition in Chicago, an experience that may have sparked Hood's interest in architecture.\nEducation.\nIn 1898, Hood graduated from Pawtucket High School. Later that year Hood enrolled at Brown University. At Brown he studied mathematics, rhetoric, French, and drawing. In 1899, seeking more opportunities to pursue an architectural education, Hood enrolled at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.\nAt MIT, Hood studied under Constant-D\u00e9sir\u00e9 Despradelle, a prominent proponent of the Beaux-Arts style. Hood excelled at creating meticulously rendered architectural drawings, and after graduating worked as a draftsman for Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson. During his time at Cram, Goodhue and Ferguson, Hood purportedly worked on the 1899 design of the Classical Revival Deborah Cook Sayles Public Library.In June 1904, Hood returned to Pawtucket before leaving for Europe with the intention of studying at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Hood failed his first attempt at the entrance exam in October 1904 though was accepted after his second attempt in 1905. His capstone \"dipl\u00f4me\" project at the \u00c9cole was a city hall for Pawtucket, his hometown. The project, which was never realized, fused classical features with modern technology.\nCareer.\nIn 1911, Hood returned to the US, taking a job at the office of Henry Hornbostel in Pittsburgh.\nIn 1916, Hood designed an ambitious plan for downtown Providence; the project's defining feature was a civic tower, whose pedimented base occupied the entire southern edge of Exchange Place. The plan, which was likewise never realized, was published in \"The Providence Journal\" under the headline \"A Striking Plan for Dignifying Civic Centre.\"\nChicago Tribune Tower.\nIn 1922, New York architect John Mead Howells, who had met him at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts, invited Hood to become his partner in the Chicago Tribune building competition in which Howells had been invited to compete. The neo-Gothic design submitted by Howells and Hood won the competition beating the designs of prominent competitors, including Eliel Saarinen, Walter Gropius, and Adolf Loos.\nThe design proved pivotal in Hood's career, catalyzing his emergence as a preeminent architect of the era.\nAmerican Radiator Building.\nAmong the commissions received by Hood in the immediate wake of his design for the Tribune Tower, was a design for a new New York office tower for the American Radiator Company. In his 1924 design for the building, produced in collaboration with architect Jacques Andr\u00e9 Fouilhoux, Hood moved towards a looser interpretation of Gothic architecture, cladding the structure in black brick. The design was additionally noted for its revolutionary use of lighting. According to art and architectural historian Dietrich Neumann, the design \"helped to introduce a new age of color and light in American architecture.\"\nApproach.\nHood did not consider himself an artist, but saw himself as \"manufacturing shelter\", writing:\nThere has been entirely too much talk about the collaboration of architect, painter and sculptor; nowadays, the collaborators are the architects, the engineer, and the plumber. ... Buildings are constructed for certain purposes, and the buildings of today are more practical, from the standpoint of the man who is in them than the older buildings. ... We are considering effort and convenience much more than appearance or effect.\nHood's design theory was aligned with that of the Bauhaus, in that he valued utility as beauty:\nBeauty is utility, developed in a manner to which the eye is accustomed by habit, in so far as this development does not detract from its quality of usefulness.\nDespite this paean to utility, Hood's designs featured non-utilitarian aspects such as roof gardens, polychromy, and Art Deco ornamentation. As much as Hood might insist that his designs were largely determined by the practicalities of zoning laws and the restraints of economics, each of his major buildings were different enough to suggest that Hood's design artistry was a significant factor in the final result.\nWhile a student at the \u00c9cole des Beaux-Arts, Hood met John Mead Howells, with whom he later partnered. Hood frequently employed architectural sculptor Rene Paul Chambellan both for architectural sculptures for his building and to make plasticine models of his projects. Hood is believed to have coined the term \"Architecture of the Night\" in a 1930 pamphlet published by General Electric.\nHood died at age 53 due to arthritis and was interred at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York.\nInfluence.\nHood's buildings were featured in works by Georgia O'Keeffe (\"Radiator Building\u2014Night, New York,\" 1927), Diego Rivera (\"Frozen Assets,\" 1931), and Berenice Abbott (\"McGraw-Hill Building\", 1936; \"Fortieth Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenue\", 1938), and Samuel Gottscho (\"Rockefeller Center and RCA Building from 515 Madison Ave\", 1933).\nExhibitions.\nIn 1984, the Whitney Museum hosted an exhibition of Hood's work entitled \"City of Towers.\" Curated by Carol Willis, the exhibit featured Hood's sketches and blueprints.\nIn 2020, The David Winton Bell Gallery at Brown University, Hood's \"alma mater\", held an online exhibition titled \"Raymond Hood and the American Skyscraper.\" The exhibition focused on a selection of Hood's built and unbuilt skyscrapers, and included about 70 of his architectural drawings, photographs, models, and books.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography"}
{"id": "53418", "revid": "36679905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53418", "title": "Easter Island", "text": "Island in the southeastern Pacific\nEaster Island (, ; , ) is an island and special territory of Chile in the southeastern Pacific Ocean, at the southeasternmost point of the Polynesian Triangle in Oceania. The island is renowned for its nearly 1,000 extant monumental statues, called \"moai\", which were created by the early Rapa Nui people. In 1995, UNESCO named Easter Island a World Heritage Site, with much of the island protected within Rapa Nui National Park. Easter Island is also the only territory in Polynesia where Spanish is an official language.\nExperts differ on when the island's Polynesian inhabitants first reached the island. While many researchers cited evidence that they arrived around the year 800, a 2007 study provided compelling evidence suggesting their arrival was closer to 1200. The inhabitants created a thriving and industrious culture, as evidenced by the island's numerous enormous stone \"moai\" and other artifacts. Land clearing for cultivation and the introduction of the Polynesian rat led to gradual deforestation. By the time of European arrival in 1722, the island's population was estimated to be 2,000 to 3,000. European diseases, Peruvian slave raiding expeditions in the 1860s, and emigration to other islands such as Tahiti further depleted the population, reducing it to a low of 111 native inhabitants in 1877.\nChile annexed Easter Island in 1888. In 1966, the Rapa Nui were granted Chilean citizenship. In 2007, the island gained the constitutional status of \"special territory\" (). Administratively, it belongs to the Valpara\u00edso Region, constituting a single commune (Isla de Pascua) of the Province of Isla de Pascua. The 2017 Chilean census registered 7,750 people on the island, of which 3,512 (45%) identified as Rapa Nui.\nEaster Island is one of the world's most remote inhabited islands. The nearest inhabited land (around 50 residents in 2013) is Pitcairn Island, away; the nearest town with a population over 500 is Rikitea, on the island of Mangareva, away; the nearest continental point lies in central Chile, away.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Easter Island\" was given by the island's first recorded European visitor, the Dutch explorer Jacob Roggeveen, who encountered it on Easter Sunday (April 5) in 1722, while searching for \"Davis Land\". Roggeveen named it (18th-century Dutch for \"Easter Island\"). The island's official Spanish name, , also means \"Easter Island\".\nThe current Polynesian name of the island, (\"Big Rapa\"), was coined after the slave raids of the early 1860s, and refers to the island's topographic resemblance to the island of Rapa in the Bass Islands of the Austral Islands group. Norwegian ethnographer Thor Heyerdahl argued that \"Rapa\" was Easter Island's original name and that the Bass Islands' Rapa (\"Rapa Iti\") was named by refugees from it.\nThe phrase \"Te pito o te henua\" has been said to be the island's original name since French ethnologist Alphonse Pinart gave it the romantic translation \"The Navel of the World\" in his , published in 1877. William Churchill (1912) inquired about the phrase and was told that there were three \"\", these being the three capes (land's ends) of the island. The phrase appears to have been used in the same sense as the designation \"Land's End\" at the tip of Cornwall. He was unable to elicit a Polynesian name for the island and concluded that there may not have been one.\nAccording to Barthel (1974), oral tradition has it that the island was first named \"Te pito o te kainga a Hau Maka\", meaning \"The little piece of land of Hau Maka\". However, there are two words pronounced \"pito\" in Rapa Nui, one meaning \"end\" and one \"navel\", and the phrase can thus also mean \"The Navel of the World\". Another name, \"Mata ki te rangi\", means \"Eyes looking to the sky\".\nIslanders are referred to in Spanish as \"pascuense\", but members of the indigenous community are commonly called \"Rapa Nui\".\nFelipe Gonz\u00e1lez de Ahedo named it \"Isla de San Carlos\" (\"Saint Charles's Island\", the patron saint of Charles III of Spain) or \"Isla de David\" (probably the phantom island of Davis Land; sometimes translated as \"Davis's Island\") in 1770.\nHistory.\nIntroduction.\nOral tradition states the island was first settled by a two-canoe expedition originating from Marae Renga (or Marae Toe Hau\u2014otherwise known as Cook Islands), and led by the chief Hotu Matu'a and his captain Tu'u ko Iho. The island was first scouted after Haumaka dreamed of such a far-off country; Hotu deemed it a worthwhile place to flee from a neighboring chief, one to whom he had already lost three battles. At their time of arrival, the island had one lone settler, Nga Tavake 'a Te Rona. After a brief stay at Anakena, the colonists settled in different parts of the island. Hotu's heir, Tu'u ma Heke, was born on the island. Tu'u ko Iho is viewed as the leader who brought the statues and caused them to walk.\nThe Easter Islanders are considered Southeast Polynesians. Similar sacred zones with statuary (\"marae\" and \"ahu\") in East Polynesia demonstrate homology with most of Eastern Polynesia. At contact, populations were about 3,000\u20134,000.\nBy the 15th century, two confederations, \"hanau\", of social groupings, \"mata\", existed, based on lineage. The western and northern portion of the island belonged to the Tu'u, which included the royal Miru, with the royal center at Anakena, though Tahai and Te Peu served as earlier capitals. The eastern part of the island belonged to the 'Otu 'Itu. Shortly after the Dutch visit, from 1724 until 1750, the 'Otu 'Itu fought the Tu'u for control of the island. This continued until the 1860s. Famine followed the burning of huts and the destruction of fields. Social control vanished as the ordered way of life gave way to lawlessness and predatory bands as the warrior class took over. Homelessness prevailed, with many living underground. After the Spanish visit, from 1770 onward, a period of statue toppling, \"huri mo'ai\", commenced. This was an attempt by competing groups to destroy the socio-spiritual power, or \"mana\", represented by statues, making sure to break them in the fall to ensure they were dead and without power. None were left standing by the time of the arrival of the French missionaries in the 1860s.\nBetween 1862 and 1888, about 94% of the population perished or emigrated. The island was victimized by blackbirding from 1862 to 1863, resulting in the abduction or killing of about 1,500, with 1,408 working as indentured servants in Peru. Only about a dozen eventually returned to Easter Island, but they brought smallpox, which decimated the remaining population of 1,500. Those who perished included the island's \"tumu ivi 'atua\", bearers of the island's culture, history, and genealogy besides the \"rongorongo\" experts.\nRapa Nui settlement.\nEstimated dates of initial settlement of Easter Island have ranged from 400 to 1300\u00a0CE, though the current best estimate for colonization is in the \u00a0CE. Easter Island colonization likely coincided with the arrival of the first settlers in Hawaii. Rectifications in radiocarbon dating have changed almost all of the previously posited early settlement dates in Polynesia. Ongoing archaeological studies provide this late date: \"Radiocarbon dates for the earliest stratigraphic layers at Anakena, Easter Island, and analysis of previous radiocarbon dates imply that the island was colonized late, about \u00a0CE. Significant ecological impacts and major cultural investments in monumental architecture and statuary thus began soon after initial settlement.\"\nAccording to oral tradition, the first settlement was at Anakena. Researchers have noted that the Caleta Anakena landing point provides the island's best shelter from prevailing swells as well as a sandy beach for canoe landings and launchings, so it is a likely early place of settlement. However, radiocarbon dating concludes that other sites preceded Anakena by many years, especially the Tahai by several centuries.\nThe island was populated by Polynesians who most likely navigated in canoes or catamarans from the Gambier Islands (Mangareva, away) or the Marquesas Islands, away. According to some theories, such as the Polynesian Diaspora Theory, there is a possibility that early Polynesian settlers arrived from South America due to their remarkable sea-navigation abilities. Theorists have supported this through the agricultural evidence of the sweet potato. The sweet potato was a favoured crop in Polynesian society for generations but it originated in South America, suggesting interaction between these two geographic areas. Recent research has suggested that sweet potatoes may have spread to Polynesia by long-distance dispersal long before the Polynesians arrived. However, other researchers pointed out methodological flaws in this study and point to lingusitic evidence of contact between Pacific and South American peoples. Specifically the strong similarities between the words for sweet potato from Polynesian languages Rapa Nui \"kumara\", Hawaiian \"\u02bbuala\" and M\u0101ori \"k\u016bmara\" with South American Quechua and Aymara \"cumar, k'umar\" or \"k'umara\". In support of contact between human populations, recent human genetic evidence shows contact and interbreeding between Pacific and Native American populations occurred 800 years ago, predating human settlement of Easter Island.\nWhen James Cook visited the island, one of his crew members, a Polynesian from Bora Bora, Hitihiti, was able to communicate with the Rapa Nui. It has been noted that the early jumping-off points for the early Polynesian colonization of Easter Island are more likely to have been from Mangareva, Pitcairn and Henderson, which lie about halfway between the Marquesas and Easter. It has been observed that there is great similarity with the Rapa Nui language and Early Mangarevan, similarities between a statue found in Pitcairn and some statues found in Easter Island, the resemblance of tool styles in Easter Island to those in Mangareva and Pitcairn, and correspondences of skulls found in Easter Island to two skulls found in Henderson, all suggesting Henderson and Pitcairn Islands to have been early stepping stones from Mangareva to Easter Island. In 1999, a voyage with reconstructed Polynesian boats was able to reach Easter Island from Mangareva after a seventeen-and-a-half-day voyage.\nAccording to oral traditions recorded by missionaries in the 1860s, the island originally had a strong class system: an \"ariki\", or high chief, wielded great power over nine other clans and their respective chiefs. The high chief was the eldest descendant through first-born lines of the island's legendary founder, Hotu Matu'a. The most visible element in the culture was the production of massive moai statues that some believe represented deified ancestors. According to \"National Geographic\", \"Most scholars suspect that the moai were created to honor ancestors, chiefs, or other important personages, However, no written and little oral history exists on the island, so it's impossible to be certain.\"\nIt was believed that the living had a symbiotic relationship with the dead in which the dead provided everything that the living needed (health, fertility of land and animals, fortune etc.) and the living, through offerings, provided the dead with a better place in the spirit world. Most settlements were located on the coast, and most moai were erected along the coastline, watching over their descendants in the settlements before them, with their backs toward the spirit world in the sea.\nEcocide hypothesis.\nIn his book \"\", Jared Diamond suggested that cannibalism took place on Easter Island after the construction of the moai contributed to environmental degradation when extreme deforestation (ecocide) destabilized an already precarious ecosystem. Archeological record shows that at the time of the initial settlement the island was home to many species of trees, including at least three species which grew up to or more: \"Paschalococos\" (possibly the largest palm trees in the world at the time), \"Alphitonia zizyphoides\", and \"Elaeocarpus rarotongensis.\" At least six species of land birds were known to live on the island. A major factor that contributed to the extinction of multiple plant species was the introduction of the Polynesian rat. Studies by paleobotanists have shown rats can dramatically affect the reproduction of vegetation in an ecosystem. In the case of Rapa Nui, recovered plant seed shells showed markings of being gnawed on by rats. This version of the history speculates a high former population to the island that had already declined before Europeans arrived. Barbara A. West wrote, \"Sometime before the arrival of Europeans on Easter Island, the Rapanui experienced a tremendous upheaval in their social system brought about by a change in their island's ecology... By the time of European arrival in 1722, the island's population had dropped to 2,000\u20133,000 from a high of approximately 15,000 just a century earlier.\"\nBy that time, 21 species of trees and all species of land birds became extinct through some combination of over-harvesting, over-hunting, rat predation, and climate change. The island was largely deforested, and it did not have any trees taller than . Loss of large trees meant that residents were no longer able to build seaworthy vessels, significantly diminishing their fishing abilities. According to this version of the history, the trees were used as rollers to move the statues to their place of erection from the quarry at Rano Raraku. Deforestation also caused erosion which caused a sharp decline in agricultural production. This was exacerbated by the loss of land birds and the collapse in seabird populations as a source of food. By the 18th century, islanders were largely sustained by farming, with domestic chickens as the primary source of protein.\nAs the island became overpopulated and resources diminished, warriors known as \"matatoa\" gained more power and the Ancestor Cult ended, making way for the Bird Man Cult. Beverly Haun wrote, \"The concept of mana (power) invested in hereditary leaders was recast into the person of the birdman, apparently beginning circa 1540, and coinciding with the final vestiges of the moai period.\" This cult maintained that, although the ancestors still provided for their descendants, the medium through which the living could contact the dead was no longer statues but human beings chosen through a competition. The god responsible for creating humans, Makemake, played an important role in this process. Katherine Routledge, who systematically collected the island's traditions in her 1914/15 expedition, showed that the competitions for Bird Man (Rapa Nui: \"tangata manu\") started around 1760, after the arrival of the first Europeans, and ended in 1878, with the construction of the first church by Roman Catholic missionaries who formally arrived in 1864. Petroglyphs representing Bird Men on Easter Island are the same as some in Hawaii, indicating that this concept was probably brought by the original settlers; only the competition itself was unique to Easter Island. According to Diamond and Heyerdahl's version of the island's history, the \"huri mo'ai\"\u00a0\u2013 \"statue-toppling\"\u00a0\u2013 continued into the 1830s as a part of fierce internal wars. By 1838, the only standing moai were on the slopes of Rano Raraku, in Hoa Hakananai'a in Orongo, and Ariki Paro in Ahu Te Pito Kura.\nCriticism of the ecocide hypothesis.\nDiamond and West's version of the history is highly controversial. A study headed by Douglas Owsley published in 1994 asserted that there is little archaeological evidence of pre-European societal collapse. Bone pathology and osteometric data from islanders of that period clearly suggest few fatalities can be attributed directly to violence. Research by Binghamton University anthropologists Robert DiNapoli and Carl Lipo in 2021 suggests that the island experienced steady population growth from its initial settlement until European contact in 1722. The island never had more than a few thousand people prior to European contact, and their numbers were increasing rather than dwindling.\nSeveral works that address or counter Diamond's claims in \"Collapse\" have been published. In \"Ecological Catastrophe and Collapse -The Myth of \"Ecocide\" on Rapa Nui (Easter Island)\", Hunt and Lipo set out a claim-by-claim rebuttal to Diamond's claims. This includes, among other things, that deforestation began immediately, but the population grew while the forest declined as the land was converted to more productive farmland; that the island's population grew continuously up to the arrival of Europeans, with the only clear decline starting in the period of 1750\u20131800; that studies from other islands show clearly that Polynesian settlement without Polynesian rats is only associated with minimal forest loss while the arrival of rats without human settlement is devastating to forest populations; only species favoured by the rats for consumption were lost, not for example the native \"Sophora toromiro\"; that the island's drier, less predictable climate made it inherently more vulnerable to deforestation than other Polynesian islands; and that the population declines on Rapa Nui can be well attributed to the very mechanism described by Diamond in another of his books, \"Guns, Germs and Steel\" \u2013 the devastating impact of introduced diseases, raids, slavery, and exploitation of indigenous populations.\nIn another work, Hunt and Lipo discuss more evidence against the ecocide hypothesis. In addition to focusing on the settlement chronology, they note that the island has an abnormally low amount of evidence of warfare compared to other Polynesian islands, only relatively small-scale intergroup conflict. There are no fortifications, and the attributed obsidian mata'a \"weapons\" show rather evidence of having been used in agriculture, and indeed, match up with agricultural tools long recognized among artifacts of other Polynesian peoples. Evidence of violence among skeletal remains of pre-European native skeletons is minimal, with only 2.5% of crania showing evidence of antemortem fractures, consistent with Oswley's conclusions: \"most skeletal injuries appear to have been nonlethal. Few fatalities were directly attributable to violence. The physical evidence suggests that the frequency of warfare and lethal events was exaggerated in folklore.\" Despite known folklore, Hunt and Lipo also conclude that clear evidence of cannibalism among skeletal remains is entirely lacking. They note that in the search for evidence supporting ecocide, the far more obvious answer has long been known, and cite Metraux as evidence that \"The historic slave-trading, epidemic disease, intensive sheep ranching, and tragic population collapse \u2013 indeed the genocide of the Rapanui People \u2013 is well documented, and has been recognized for a long time.\" They conclude that when it comes to the science, \"It does not matter whether Rapa Nui offers a parable for today's urgent environmental problems.\"\nIn a 2010 metastudy on the state of the evidence, the Mulrooney et al. concludes that \"To date, there is no conclusive evidence for the proposed precontact collapse of Rapa Nui society\". In particular, the authors note that the obsidian usage trends lead to entirely different, self-inconsistent interpretations, while use of the oral histories of widespread intertribal warfare is undercut not just by early foreign visitors referring to the people as peaceful and docile, but the fact that the very wars in question were referred to as \"the wars of the throwing down of the statues\", an event well-dated to not have begun until after western contact.\nAnother study published in 2024 finds no genetic evidence of the ecocide hypothesis.\nEuropean contact.\nThe first recorded European contact with the island was on April 5, 1722, Easter Sunday, by Dutch navigator Jacob Roggeveen. His visit resulted in the death of about a dozen islanders, including the \"tumu ivi 'atua\", and the wounding of many others.\nThe next foreign visitors (on 15 November 1770) were two Spanish ships, the Ship of the line \"San Lorenzo\" (70 guns) and the frigate \"Santa Rosal\u00eda\" (26 guns), under the command of Captain Don Felipe Gonz\u00e1lez de Ahedo. The Spanish were amazed by the \"standing idols\", all of which were erect at the time.\nFour years later, in 1774, British explorer James Cook visited Easter Island; he reported that some statues had been toppled. Through the interpretation of Hitihiti, Cook learned the statues commemorated their former high chiefs, including their names and ranks.\nIn 1776 the Chilean abbot Juan Ignacio Molina highlights the island for its \"monumental statues\" in the fifth chapter on \"Chilean Islands\" of his book \"Natural and Civil History of the Kingdom of Chile\", in which the San F\u00e9lix and San Ambrosio Islands are also mentioned mentioned. These islands are considered part of the territory inherited by Chile under the principle of \"uti possidetis iuris\".\nOn April 10, 1786, French Admiral Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse anchored at Hanga Roa at the start of a circumnavigation of the Pacific. He made a detailed map of the bay, including his anchorage points, as well as a more generalised map of the island, plus some illustrations.\n19th century.\nA series of devastating events killed or removed most of the population in the 1860s. In December 1862, Peruvian slave raiders struck. Violent abductions continued for several months, eventually capturing around 1,500 men and women, half of the island's population. Among those captured were the island's paramount chief, his heir, and those who knew how to read and write the rongorongo script, the only Polynesian script to have been found to date, although debate exists about whether this is proto-writing or true writing.\nWhen the slave raiders were forced to repatriate the people they had kidnapped, carriers of smallpox disembarked together with a few survivors on each of the islands. This created devastating epidemics from Easter Island to the Marquesas islands. Easter Island's population was reduced to the point where some of the dead were not even buried.\nThe first Christian missionary, Eug\u00e8ne Eyraud, arrived in January 1864 and spent most of that year on the island and reported for the first time the existence of the so-called rongo-rongo tablets; but mass conversion of the Rapa Nui only came after his return in 1866 with Father Hippolyte Roussel. Two other missionaries arrived with Captain Jean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bornier. Eyraud contracted tuberculosis during the 1867 island epidemic, which took a quarter of the island's remaining population of 1,200, with only 930 Rapanui remaining. The dead included the last \"ariki mau\", the last East Polynesia royal first-born son, the 13-year-old Manu Rangi. Eyraud died of tuberculosis in August 1868, by which time almost the entire Rapa Nui population had become Roman Catholic.\nTuberculosis, introduced by whalers in the mid-19th century, had already killed several islanders when Eug\u00e8ne Eyraud died from the disease in 1867. It ultimately resulted in the death of approximately a quarter of the island's population. The managers of the sheep ranch and the missionaries started buying the newly available lands of the deceased in the years that followed, which led to large confrontations between natives and settlers.\nJean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bornier bought up all of the island apart from the missionaries' area around Hanga Roa and moved a few hundred Rapa Nui to Tahiti to work for his backers. In 1871 the missionaries, having fallen out with Dutrou-Bornier, evacuated all but 171 Rapa Nui to the Gambier islands. Those who remained were mostly older men. Six years later, only 111 people lived on Easter Island, and only 36 of them had any offspring. From that point on, the island's population slowly recovered. But with over 97% of the population dead or gone in less than a decade, much of the island's cultural knowledge had been lost.\nAlexander Salmon, Jr., the son of an English Jewish merchant and a P\u014dmare Dynasty princess, eventually worked to repatriate workers from his inherited copra plantation. He eventually bought up all lands on the island with the exception of the mission, and was its sole employer. He worked to develop tourism on the island and was the principal informant for the British and German archaeological expeditions for the island. He sent several pieces of genuine Rongorongo to his niece's husband, the German consul in Valpara\u00edso, Chile. Salmon sold the Brander Easter Island holdings to the Chilean government on January 2, 1888, and signed as a witness to the cession of the island. He returned to Tahiti in December 1888. He effectively ruled the island from 1878 until his cession to Chile in 1888.\nIn 1887 Chile took concrete actions to incorporate the island into the national territory, at the request of the Chilean Navy Captain Policarpo Toro, who was concerned about the unprotected situation of the Rapa Nui for decades and began to influence the situation on his own initiative. Policarpo, through negotiations, bought land on the island at the request of the Bishop of Valparaiso, Salvador Donoso Rodriguez, owner of 600 hectares, together with the Salmon brothers, Dutrou-Bornier and John Brander, from Tahiti. The Chilean captain put money from his own pocket for this purpose, together with 6000 pounds sterling sent by the Chilean government. According to Rapa Nui tradition, the lands could not be sold, however, third parties believed they owned them and they were bought from them so that they would not interfere in the affairs of the island from that moment on.\nAt that time, the Rapa Nui population reached alarming numbers. In a census carried out by the Chilean corvette Abtao in 1892, there were only 101 Rapa Nui alive, of which only 12 were adult men. The Rapa Nui ethnic group, along with their culture, was at its closest point to extinction.\nThen, on September 9, 1888, thanks to the efforts of the Bishop of Tahiti, Monsignor Jos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Verdier, the Agreement of Wills (\"Acuerdo de Voluntades\") was signed, in which the local representative Atamu Tekena, head of the Council of Rapanui Chiefs ceded the sovereignty of the island to the State of Chile, represented by Policarpo Toro. The Rapa Nui elders ceded sovereignty, without renouncing their titles as chiefs, the ownership of their lands, the validity of their culture and traditions and on equal terms. The Rapa Nui sold nothing, they were integrated in equal conditions to Chile.\nThe annexation to Chile, together with the abolition of slavery in Peru, brought the advantage that foreign slavers did not take any more inhabitants from the island. However, in 1895, the \"Compa\u00f1\u00eda Explotadora de Isla de Pascua\" from Enrique Merlet obtained the concession of the entire island after the failure of the State's colonization plan following the Civil War of 1891 and the change of government in the country.\nThe company imposed prohibitions to live and work outside Hanga Roa and even forced labor of the islanders in the company, something that was avoided thanks to the \"safe-conducts\" given by the Navy that allowed the islanders to cross the entire island once the Navy took control of the island during the 20th Century.\nIn 1903 the island was bought by the English sheep-farming company Williamson Balfor from the Merlet company, and \u2013 no longer being able to farm for food \u2013 the natives were forced to work on the ranches in order to buy food.\n20th century.\nIn 1914 there was an uprising of the natives inspired by the elderly catechist Mar\u00eda Angata Veri Veri and led by Daniel Maria Teave with the aim of getting the State to take charge of the situation generated by the company. The Navy held the company responsible for the \"brutal and savage acts\" committed by Merlet and the company's administrators and an investigation was requested.\nIn 1916, the island was declared a subdelegation of the Department of Valpara\u00edso. In the same year, Archbishop Rafael Edwards Salas visited the island and became the main spokesman for the natives' complaints and demands. However, the Chilean State decided to renew the lease to the company, under the figure of the so-called \"Provisional Temperament\", distributing additional lands to the natives (5 ha per marriage as of 1926), allocating lands for the Chilean administration and establishing the permanent presence of the Navy, which in 1936 established a regulation according to which, with prior permission, the natives could leave Hanga Roa to fish or provide themselves with fuel.\nMonsignor Rafael Edwards sought to have the island declared a \"naval jurisdiction\" in order to intervene in it as military vicar and in this way support the Rapa Nui community, creating better living conditions.\nIn 1933, the Chilean State Defense Council required the registration of the island in the name of the State in order to protect it from private individuals who wanted to register it in their own name.\nUntil the 1960s the Rapanui were confined to Hanga Roa. The rest of the island was rented to the Williamson-Balfour Company as a sheep farm until 1953 when President Carlos Ib\u00e1\u00f1ez del Campo cancelled the company's contract for non-compliance and then assigned the entire administration of the island to the Chilean Navy. The island was then managed by the Chilean Navy until 1966, at which point the island was reopened in its entirety. The Rapanui were given Chilean citizenship that year with the Pascua Law enacted during the government of Eduardo Frei Montalva. Only Spanish was taught in the schools until that year. The Law also created the Isla de Pascua commune depending from the Valpara\u00edso Province and implemented the Civil Registry, created the positions of governor, mayor and councilman, as well as the 6th Police Station of Carabineros de Chile, the first fire company of Easter Island, schools and a hospital. The first mayor was sworn in 1966 and was Alfonso Rapu who sent a letter to President Frei two years prior influencing him to create the Pascua Law.\nIslanders were only able to travel off the island easily after the construction of the Mataveri International Airport in 1965, which was built by the Longhi construction company, carrying hundreds of workers, heavy machinery, tents and a field hospital on ships. However, its use did not go beyond airline operations with small groups of tourists. At the same time, a NASA tracking station operated on the island, which ceased operations in 1975.\nBetween 1965 and 1970, the United States Air Force (USAF) settled on Easter Island, radically changing the way of life of the Rapa Nui, as they became acquainted with the customs of the consumer societies of the developed world.\nIn April 1967 LAN Chile flights began to land and the island began to be oriented towards cultural tourism. Since then, the main concerns for the natives were to strengthen production and marketing cooperatives, which received state support, and to recover their communal lands.\nFollowing the 1973 Chilean coup d'\u00e9tat that brought Augusto Pinochet to power, Easter Island was placed under martial law. Tourism slowed down and private property was restored. During his time in power, Pinochet visited Easter Island on three occasions. The military built a number of new military facilities and a new city hall.\nOn January 24, 1975, television arrived on the island, with the inauguration of a station of Televisi\u00f3n Nacional de Chile, which broadcast programming on a delayed basis until 1996, when live satellite transmissions to the island began.\nIn 1976 the Isla de Pascua Province was created with Arnt Arentsen Pettersen appointed as the first governor between 1976 and 1979. Between 1984 and 1990 the administration of Governor Sergio Rapu Haoa stands out and since then all the governors have been Rapanui.\nIn 1979, Decree Law No. 2885 was enacted to grant individual land titles to regular holders.\nOn April 1, 1986, Law No. 18,502 is enacted, which establishes the special fuel subsidy in Easter Island, stating that it \"may not exceed in each product 3.5 monthly tax units per cubic meter, whose value may be paid directly or through the imputation of the respective amount to the payment of certain taxes\".\nAs a result of an agreement in 1985 between Chile and the United States, the runway at Mataveri International Airport was extended by , reaching , and was re-opened in 1987. Pinochet is reported to have refused to attend the opening ceremony in protest against pressures from the United States to address human rights cases.\n21st century.\nFishers of Rapa Nui have shown their concern of illegal fishing on the island. \"Since the year 2000 we started to lose tuna, which is the basis of the fishing on the island, so then we began to take the fish from the shore to feed our families, but in less than two years we depleted all of it\", Pakarati said. On 30 July 2007, a constitutional reform gave Easter Island and the Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands (also known as Robinson Crusoe Island) the status of \"special territories\" of Chile. Pending the enactment of a special charter, the island continues to be governed as a province of the V Region of Valpara\u00edso.\nSpecies of fish were collected in Easter Island for one month in different habitats including shallow lava pools and deep waters. Within these habitats, two holotypes and paratypes, \"Antennarius randalli\" and \"Antennarius moai\", were discovered. These are considered frog-fish because of their characteristics: \"12 dorsal rays, last two or three branched; bony part of first dorsal spine slightly shorter than second dorsal spine; body without bold zebra-like markings; caudal peduncle short, but distinct; last pelvic ray divided; pectoral rays 11 or 12\".\nIn 2018, the government decided to limit the stay period for tourists from 90 to 30 days because of social and environmental issues faced by the Island to preserve its historical importance.\nA tsunami warning was declared for Easter Island after the 2022 Hunga Tonga\u2013Hunga Ha'apai eruption and tsunami.\nEaster Island was closed to tourists from March 17, 2020, until August 4, 2022, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Then in early October 2022, just two months after the island was reopened to tourists, a forest fire burned nearly of the island, causing irreparable damage to some of the \"moai\". Arson is suspected.\nIndigenous rights movement.\nStarting in August 2010, members of the indigenous Hitorangi clan occupied the Hangaroa Eco Village and Spa. The occupiers allege that the hotel was bought from the Pinochet government, in violation of a Chilean agreement with the indigenous Rapa Nui, in the 1990s. The occupiers say their ancestors had been cheated into giving up the land. According to a BBC report, on 3 December 2010, at least 25 people were injured when Chilean police using pellet guns attempted to evict from these buildings a group of Rapa Nui who had claimed that the land the buildings stood on had been illegally taken from their ancestors. In 2020 the conflict was settled. The property rights were transferred to the Hitorangi clan while the owners retained the exploitation of the hotel for 15 years.\nIn January 2011, the UN Special Rapporteur on Indigenous People, James Anaya, expressed concern about the treatment of the indigenous Rapa Nui by the Chilean government, urging Chile to \"make every effort to conduct a dialogue in good faith with representatives of the Rapa Nui people to solve, as soon as possible the real underlying problems that explain the current situation\". The incident ended in February 2011, when up to 50 armed police broke into the hotel to remove the final five occupiers. They were arrested by the government, and no injuries were reported.\nGeography.\nEaster Island is one of the world's most isolated inhabited islands. Its closest inhabited neighbour is Pitcairn Island, to the west, with approximately 50 inhabitants. The nearest continental point lies in central Chile near Concepci\u00f3n, at . Easter Island's latitude is similar to that of Caldera, Chile, and it lies west of continental Chile at its nearest point (between Lota and Lebu in the Biob\u00edo Region). Isla Salas y G\u00f3mez, to the east, is closer but is uninhabited. The Tristan da Cunha archipelago in the southern Atlantic competes for the title of the most remote island, lying from Saint Helena island and from the South African coast.\nThe island is about long by at its widest point; its overall shape is triangular. It has an area of , and a maximum elevation of above mean sea level. There are three \"Rano\" (freshwater crater lakes), at Rano Kau, Rano Raraku and Rano Aroi, near the summit of Terevaka, but no permanent streams or rivers.\nGeology.\nEaster Island is a volcanic island, consisting mainly of three extinct coalesced volcanoes: Terevaka (altitude 507 metres) forms the bulk of the island, while two other volcanoes, Poike and Rano Kau, form the eastern and southern headlands and give the island its roughly triangular shape. Lesser cones and other volcanic features include the crater Rano Raraku, the cinder cone Puna Pau and many volcanic caves including lava tubes. Poike used to be a separate island until volcanic material from Terevaka united it to the larger whole. The island is dominated by hawaiite and basalt flows which are rich in iron and show affinity with igneous rocks found in the Gal\u00e1pagos Islands.\nEaster Island and surrounding islets, such as Motu Nui and Motu Iti, form the summit of a large volcanic mountain rising over from the sea bed. The mountain is part of the Salas y G\u00f3mez Ridge, a (mostly submarine) mountain range with dozens of seamounts, formed by the Easter hotspot. The range begins with Pukao and next Moai, two seamounts to the west of Easter Island, and extends east to the Nazca Ridge. The ridge was formed by the Nazca Plate moving over the Easter hotspot.\nLocated about east of the East Pacific Rise, Easter Island lies within the Nazca Plate, bordering the Easter Microplate. The Nazca-Pacific relative plate movement due to the seafloor spreading, amounts to about per year. This movement over the Easter hotspot has resulted in the Easter Seamount Chain, which merges into the Nazca Ridge further to the east. Easter Island and Isla Salas y G\u00f3mez are surface representations of that chain. The chain has progressively younger ages to the west. The current hotspot location is speculated to be west of Easter Island, amidst the Ahu, Umu and Tupa submarine volcanic fields and the Pukao and Moai seamounts.\nEaster Island lies atop the Rano Kau Ridge, and consists of three shield volcanoes with parallel geologic histories. Poike and Rano Kau exist on the east and south slopes of Terevaka, respectively. Rano Kau developed between 0.78 and 0.46 Ma from tholeiitic to alkalic basalts. This volcano possesses a clearly defined summit caldera. Benmoreitic lavas extruded about the rim from 0.35 to 0.34 Ma. Finally, between 0.24 and 0.11 Ma, a fissure developed along a NE\u2013SW trend, forming monogenetic vents and rhyolitic intrusions. These include the cryptodome islets of Motu Nui and Motu Iti, the islet of Motu Kao Kao, the sheet intrusion of Te Kari Kari, the perlitic obsidian Te Manavai dome and the Maunga Orito dome.\nPoike formed from tholeiitic to alkali basalts from 0.78 to 0.41 Ma. Its summit collapsed into a caldera which was subsequently filled by the Puakatiki lava cone pahoehoe flows at 0.36 Ma. Finally, the trachytic lava domes of Maunga Vai a Heva, Maunga Tea Tea, and Maunga Parehe formed along a NE-SW trending fissure.\nTerevaka formed around 0.77 Ma of tholeiitic to alkali basalts, followed by the collapse of its summit into a caldera. Then at about 0.3Ma, cinder cones formed along a NNE-SSW trend on the western rim, while porphyritic benmoreitic lava filled the caldera, and pahoehoe flowed towards the northern coast, forming lava tubes, and to the southeast. Lava domes and a vent complex formed in the Maunga Puka area, while breccias formed along the vents on the western portion of Rano Aroi crater. This volcano's southern and southeastern flanks are composed of younger flows consisting of basalt, alkali basalt, hawaiite, mugearite, and benmoreite from eruptive fissures starting at 0.24 Ma. The youngest lava flow, Roiho, is dated at 0.11 Ma. The Hanga O Teo embayment is interpreted to be a 200 m high landslide scarp.\nRano Raraku and Maunga Toa Toa are isolated tuff cones of about 0.21 Ma. The crater of Rano Raraku contains a freshwater lake. The stratified tuff is composed of sideromelane, slightly altered to palagonite, and somewhat lithified. The tuff contains lithic fragments of older lava flows. The northwest sector of Rano Raraku contains reddish volcanic ash. According to Bandy, \"...all of the great images of Easter Island are carved from\" the light and porous tuff from Rano Raraku. A carving was abandoned when a large, dense and hard lithic fragment was encountered. However, these lithics became the basis for stone hammers and chisels. The Puna Pau crater contains an extremely porous pumice, from which was carved the Pukao \"hats\". The Maunga Orito obsidian was used to make the \"mataa\" spearheads.\nIn the first half of the 20th century, steam reportedly came out of the Rano Kau crater wall. This was photographed by the island's manager, Mr. Edmunds.\nThe ancient Easter Island residents captured fresh groundwater where it seeped into the sea.&lt;ref name=\"sciencedaily/210921091735\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"10.3390/rs13132531\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"orb.binghamton.edu/1041\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"researchgate.net/334000200\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nClimate.\nUnder the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, the climate of Easter Island is classified as a tropical rainforest climate (\"Af\") that borders on a humid subtropical climate (\"Cfa\"). The lowest temperatures are recorded in July and August (minimum ) and the highest in February (maximum temperature ), the summer season in the southern hemisphere. Winters are relatively mild. The rainiest month is May, though the island experiences year-round rainfall. Easter Island's isolated location exposes it to winds which help to keep the temperature fairly cool. Precipitation averages per year. Occasionally, heavy rainfall and rainstorms strike the island. These occur mostly in the winter months (June\u2013August). Since it is close to the South Pacific High and outside the range of the Intertropical Convergence Zone, cyclones and hurricanes do not occur around Easter Island. There is significant temperature moderation due to its isolated position in the middle of the ocean.\nEcology.\nEaster Island, together with its closest neighbour, the tiny island of Isla Salas y G\u00f3mez farther east, is recognized by ecologists as a distinct ecoregion, the Rapa Nui tropical broadleaf forests. The original tropical moist broadleaf forests are now gone, but paleobotanical studies of fossil pollen, tree moulds left by lava flows, and root casts found in local soils indicate that the island was formerly forested, with a range of trees, shrubs, ferns, and grasses. A large extinct palm, \"Paschalococos disperta\", related to the Chilean wine palm (\"Jubaea chilensis\"), was one of the dominant trees as attested by fossil evidence. Like its Chilean counterpart it probably took close to 100 years to reach adult height. The Polynesian rat, which the original settlers brought with them, played a very important role in the disappearance of the Rapa Nui palm. Although some may believe that rats played a major role in the degradation of the forest, less than 10% of palm nuts show teeth marks from rats. The remains of palm stumps in different places indicate that humans caused the trees to fall because in large areas, the stumps were cut efficiently.\nThe loss of the palms to make the settlements led to their extinction almost 350 years ago. The toromiro tree \"(Sophora toromiro)\" was prehistorically present on Easter Island, but is now extinct in the wild. However, the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and the G\u00f6teborg Botanical Garden are jointly leading a scientific program to reintroduce the toromiro to Easter Island. With the palm and the toromiro virtually gone, there was considerably less rainfall as a result of less condensation. After the island was used to feed thousands of sheep for almost a century, by the mid-1900s the island was mostly covered in grassland with \"nga'atu\" or bulrush (\"Schoenoplectus californicus tatora\") in the crater lakes of Rano Raraku and Rano Kau. The presence of these reeds, which are called \"totora\" in the Andes, was used to support the argument of a South American origin of the statue builders, but pollen analysis of lake sediments shows these reeds have grown on the island for over 30,000 years. Before the arrival of humans, Easter Island had vast seabird colonies containing probably over 30 resident species, perhaps the world's richest. Such colonies are no longer found on the main island. Fossil evidence indicates six species of land birds (two rails, two parrots, one owl, and one heron), all of which have become extinct. Five introduced species of land bird are known to have breeding populations (see List of birds of Easter Island).\nLack of studies results in poor understanding of the oceanic fauna of Easter Island and waters in its vicinity; however, possibilities of undiscovered breeding grounds for humpback, southern blue and pygmy blue whales including Easter Island and Isla Salas y G\u00f3mez have been considered. Potential breeding areas for fin whales have been detected off northeast of the island as well.\nThe immunosuppressant drug sirolimus was first discovered in the bacterium \"Streptomyces hygroscopicus\" in a soil sample from Easter Island. The drug is also known as rapamycin, after Rapa Nui. It is now being studied for extending longevity in mice.\nTrees are sparse, rarely forming natural groves, and it has been argued whether native Easter Islanders deforested the island in the process of erecting their statues, and in providing sustenance for an overconsumption of natural resources from a overcrowded island. Experimental archaeology demonstrated that some statues certainly could have been placed on Y-shaped wooden frames called \"miro manga erua\" and then pulled to their final destinations on ceremonial sites. Other theories involve the use of \"ladders\" (parallel wooden rails) over which the statues could have been dragged. Rapa Nui traditions metaphorically refer to spiritual power \"(mana)\" as the means by which the moai were \"walked\" from the quarry. Recent experimental recreations have proven that it is fully possible that the moai were literally walked from their quarries to their final positions by use of ropes, casting doubt on the role that their existence plays in the environmental collapse of the island.\nGiven the island's southern latitude, the climatic effects of the Little Ice Age (about 1650 to 1850) may have exacerbated deforestation, although this remains speculative. Many researchers point to the climatic downtrend caused by the Little Ice Age as a contributing factor to resource stress and to the palm tree's disappearance. Experts, however, do not agree on when the island's palms became extinct.\nJared Diamond dismisses past climate change as a dominant cause of the island's deforestation in his book \"Collapse\" which assesses the collapse of the ancient Easter Islanders. Influenced by Heyerdahl's romantic interpretation of Easter's history, Diamond insists that the disappearance of the island's trees seems to coincide with a decline of its civilization around the 17th and 18th centuries, alongside declines of fish bones in middens (suggesting a decline in fishing) and then declines in bird bones, which he attributes to habitat loss. He notes that they stopped making statues at that time and started destroying the ahu. But the link is weakened because the Bird Man cult continued to thrive and survived the great impact caused by the arrival of explorers, whalers, sandalwood traders, and slave raiders.\nBenny Peiser noted evidence of self-sufficiency when Europeans first arrived. The island still had smaller trees, mainly toromiro, which became extinct in the wild in the 20th century probably because of slow growth and changes in the island's ecosystem. Cornelis Bouman, Jakob Roggeveen's captain, stated in his logbook, \"...\u00a0of yams, bananas and small coconut palms we saw little and no other trees or crops.\" According to Carl Friedrich Behrens, Roggeveen's officer, \"The natives presented palm branches as peace offerings.\" According to ethnographer Alfred M\u00e8traux, the most common type of house was called \"hare paenga\" (and is known today as \"boathouse\") because the roof resembled an overturned boat. The foundations of the houses were made of buried basalt slabs with holes for wooden beams to connect with each other throughout the width of the house. These were then covered with a layer of totora reed, followed by a layer of woven sugarcane leaves, and lastly a layer of woven grass.\nPeiser claims that these reports indicate that large trees existed at that time, which is perhaps contradicted by the Bouman quote above. Plantations were often located farther inland, next to foothills, inside open-ceiling lava tubes, and in other places protected from the strong salt winds and salt spray affecting areas closer to the coast. It is possible many of the Europeans did not venture inland. The statue quarry, only from the coast with an impressive cliff high, was not explored by Europeans until well into the 19th century.\nEaster Island has suffered from heavy soil erosion in recent centuries, aggravated by massive historic deforestation alongside modern sheep farming throughout most of the 20th century. Jakob Roggeveen reported that Easter Island was exceptionally fertile. \"Fowls are the only animals they keep. They cultivate bananas, sugar cane, and above all sweet potatoes.\" In 1786 Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de La P\u00e9rouse visited Easter Island and his gardener declared that \"three days' work a year\" would be enough to support the population. Rollin, a major in the P\u00e9rouse expedition, wrote, \"Instead of meeting with men exhausted by famine... I found, on the contrary, a considerable population, with more beauty and grace than I afterwards met in any other island; and a soil, which, with very little labor, furnished excellent provisions, and in an abundance more than sufficient for the consumption of the inhabitants.\" The islanders' innovation of lithic mulching \u2013 the practice of covering fields with gravel or rocks to trap moisture and improve soil fertility \u2013 is a well-known and effective practice in dry areas of the premodern world.\nAccording to Diamond, the oral traditions (the veracity of which has been questioned by Routledge, Lavachery, M\u00e8traux, Peiser, and others) of the current islanders seem obsessed with cannibalism, which he offers as evidence supporting a rapid collapse. For example, he states, to severely insult an enemy one would say, \"The flesh of your mother sticks between my teeth.\" This, Diamond asserts, means the food supply of the people ultimately ran out. Cannibalism, however, was widespread across Polynesian cultures. Human bones have not been found in earth ovens other than those behind the religious platforms, indicating that cannibalism in Easter Island was a ritualistic practice. Contemporary ethnographic research has proven there is scarcely any tangible evidence for widespread cannibalism anywhere and at any time on the island. The first scientific exploration of Easter Island (1914) recorded that the indigenous population strongly rejected allegations that they or their ancestors had been cannibals.\nCulture.\nMythology.\nThe most important myths are:\nStone work.\nThe Rapa Nui people had a Stone Age culture and made extensive use of local stone:\nMoai (statues).\nThe large stone statues, or \"moai\", for which Easter Island is famous, were carved in the period 1100\u20131680\u00a0CE (rectified radio-carbon dates). A total of 887 monolithic stone statues have been inventoried on the island and in museum collections. Although often identified as \"Easter Island heads\", the statues have torsos, most of them ending at the top of the thighs; a small number are complete figures that kneel on bent knees with their hands over their stomachs. Some upright moai have become buried up to their necks by shifting soils.\nAlmost all (95%) moai were carved from compressed, easily worked solidified volcanic ash or tuff, found at a single site on the side of the extinct volcano Rano Raraku. The native islanders who carved them used only stone hand chisels, mainly basalt \"toki\", which lie in place all over the quarry. The stone chisels were sharpened by chipping off a new edge when dulled. While sculpting was going on, the volcanic stone was splashed with water to soften it. While many teams worked on different statues at the same time, a single moai took a team of five or six men approximately a year to complete. Each statue represented the deceased head of a lineage.\nOnly a quarter of the statues were installed. Nearly half remained in the quarry at Rano Raraku, and the rest sat elsewhere, presumably on their way to intended locations. The largest moai raised on a platform is known as \"Paro\". It weighs and is long. Several other statues of similar weight were transported to ahu on the north and south coasts.\nPossible means by which the statues were moved include employment of a \"miro manga erua\", a Y-shaped sledge with cross pieces, pulled with ropes made from the tough bark of the hau tree and tied around the statue's neck. Anywhere from 180 to 250 men were required for pulling, depending on the size of the moai. Among other researchers on moving and erecting the moai was Vince Lee, who reenacted a moai moving scenario. Some 50 of the statues were re-erected in modern times. One of the first was on Ahu Ature Huke in Anakena beach in 1956. It was raised using traditional methods during a Heyerdahl expedition.\nAnother method that might have been used to transport the moai would be to attach ropes to the statue and rock it, tugging it forward as it rocked. This would fit the legend of the Mo'ai 'walking' to their final locations. This might have been managed by as few as 15 people, supported by the following evidence:\nThere is debate regarding the effects of the monument creation process on the environment. Some believe that the process of creating the moai caused widespread deforestation and ultimately a civil war over scarce resources.\nIn 2011, a large moai statue was excavated from the ground. During the same excavation program, some larger moai were found to have complex dorsal petroglyphs, revealed by deep excavation of the torso.\nIn 2020, a pickup truck crashed into and destroyed a moai statue due to brake failure. No one was injured in the incident.\nAhu (stone platforms).\n\"Ahu\" are stone platforms. Varying greatly in layout, many were reworked during or after the \"huri mo'ai\" or \"statue-toppling\" era; many became ossuaries, one was dynamited open, and Ahu Tongariki was swept inland by a tsunami. Of the 313 known ahu, 125 carried moai\u00a0\u2013 usually just one, probably because of the shortness of the moai period and transportation difficulties. Ahu Tongariki, from Rano Raraku, had the most and tallest moai, 15 in total. Other notable ahu with moai are Ahu Akivi, restored in 1960 by William Mulloy, Nau Nau at Anakena and Tahai. Some moai may have been made from wood and were lost.\nThe classic elements of ahu design are:\nOn top of many ahu would have been:\nAhu evolved from the traditional Polynesian \"marae\". In this context, \"ahu\" referred to a small structure sometimes covered with a thatched roof where sacred objects, including statues, were stored. The ahu were usually adjacent to the marae or main central court where ceremonies took place, though on Easter Island, ahu and moai evolved to much greater size. There the marae is the unpaved plaza before the ahu. The biggest ahu is and holds 15 statues, some of which are high. The filling of an ahu was sourced locally (apart from broken, old moai, fragments of which have been used in the fill). Individual stones are mostly far smaller than the moai, so less work was needed to transport the raw material, but artificially leveling the terrain for the plaza and filling the ahu was laborious.\nAhu are found mostly on the coast, where they are distributed densely and fairly evenly. The exceptions are the western slopes of Mount Terevaka and the Rano Kau and Poike headlands, where they are much sparser. These are the three areas with the least low-lying coastal land and, apart from Poike, the furthest areas from Rano Raraku. One ahu with several moai was recorded on the cliffs at Rano Kau in the 1880s but had fallen to the beach before the Routledge expedition. At least three recorded on Poike in the 1930s have also since disappeared.\nStone walls.\nOne of the highest-quality examples of Easter Island stone masonry is the rear wall of the ahu at Vinapu. Made without mortar by shaping hard basalt rocks of up to to match each other exactly, it has a superficial similarity to some Inca stone walls in South America.\nStone houses.\nAmong the various structures, the hare paenga, hare oka, tupa, hare moa, and the distinctive stone houses of Orongo village stand out for their unique designs and functions.\nThe hare paenga, commonly referred to as \"boat houses,\" were the predominant residential structures in ancient Rapa Nui. Their design featured an elliptical foundation constructed from meticulously dressed basalt slabs, known as paenga stones, which supported a thatched roof resembling an inverted boat hull. This aerodynamic shape was particularly suited to withstand the island's strong winds. These dwellings varied in size, with some measuring up to 45 meters in length, indicating their communal use by extended families or for significant gatherings.\nThe hare oka were round stone structures whose specific functions remain less documented. Closely related to these were the tupa, which bore a striking resemblance in design but served a specialized purpose. Tupa were typically situated near the coastline and were inhabited by astronomer-priests who observed celestial movements, underscoring the importance of astronomy in Rapa Nui culture.\nIntegral to Rapa Nui settlements were the hare moa, oblong stone enclosures designed to house chickens. Given the value of poultry as a food source and possibly for ceremonial purposes, these structures were strategically placed within villages to facilitate monitoring and protection of the birds.\nThe ceremonial village of Orongo presents a unique architectural adaptation. Here, the traditional hare paenga design was transformed; instead of thatched roofs, the houses were constructed entirely from flat basalt slabs sourced from the Rano Kao crater. These stone houses, built around 1400, reflect a response to the village's exposure to harsh coastal weather conditions and the availability of basalt as a building material. The entrances to these dwellings were notably low, requiring individuals to crawl for entry, a feature that may have offered protection against the elements and added structural stability.\nPetroglyphs.\nEaster Island has one of the richest collections of petroglyphs in all Polynesia. Around 1,000 sites with more than 4,000 petroglyphs are catalogued. Designs and images were carved out of rock for a variety of reasons: to create totems, to mark territory, or to memorialize a person or event. There are distinct variations around the island in the frequency of themes among petroglyphs, with a concentration of Birdmen at Orongo. Other subjects include sea turtles, Komari (vulvas) and Makemake, the chief god of the \"Tangata manu\" or Birdman cult.\nCaves.\nThe island and neighbouring Motu Nui are riddled with caves, many of which show signs of past human use for planting and as fortifications, including narrowed entrances and crawl spaces with ambush points. Many caves feature in the myths and legends of the Rapa Nui.\nStone aerophone.\nThe \"Pu o Hiro\" (\"Trumpet of Hiro)\" is a high ancient stone aerophone on the north coast of Easter Island. It was once used by the Rapa Nui as a musical instrument in fertility rituals. The stone is covered in petroglyphs called \"komari\" which represent fertility. By skillfully blowing wind in the top hole it makes a deep, trumpeting sound to invoke the god of rain Hiro in Polynesian mythology.\nRongorongo.\nEaster Island once had an apparent script called \"rongorongo\". Glyphs include pictographic and geometric shapes; the texts were incised in wood in reverse boustrophedon direction. It was first reported by French missionary Eug\u00e8ne Eyraud in 1864. At that time, several islanders said they could understand the writing, but according to tradition, only ruling families and priests were ever literate, and none survived the slave raids and subsequent epidemics. Despite numerous attempts, the surviving texts have not been deciphered, and without decipherment it is not certain that they are actually writing. Part of the problem is the small amount that has survived: only two dozen texts, none of which remain on the island. There are also only a couple of similarities with the petroglyphs on the island.\nWood carving.\nWood was scarce on Easter Island during the 18th and 19th centuries, but a number of highly detailed and distinctive carvings have found their way to the world's museums. Particular forms include:\n21st-century culture.\nThe Rapanui sponsor an annual festival, the \"Tapati\", held since 1975 around the beginning of February to celebrate Rapa Nui culture. In 2016, local band Topatangi played the Tapati festival. The islanders also maintain a national football team and three discos in the town of Hanga Roa. Other cultural activities include a musical tradition that combines South American and Polynesian influences and woodcarving.\nSports.\nThe Chilean leg of the Red Bull Cliff Diving World Series takes place on the Island of Rapa Nui.\nTapati festival.\nTapati Rapa Nui festival (\"week festival\" in the local language) is an annual two-week long festival celebrating Easter Island culture. The Tapati is centered around a competition between two families/ clans competing in various competitions to earn points. The winning team has their candidate crowned 'queen' of the island for the next year. The competitions are a way to maintain and celebrate traditional cultural activities such as cooking, jewelry-making, woodcarving, and canoeing.\nDemographics.\n2012 census.\nPopulation at the 2012 census was 5,761 (increased from 3,791 in 2002). In 2002, 60% were persons of indigenous Rapa Nui origin, 39% were mainland Chileans (or their Easter Island-born descendants) of European (mostly Spanish) or mestizo (mixed European and indigenous Chilean Amerindian) origin and Easter Island-born mestizos of European and Rapa Nui and/or native Chilean descent, and the remaining 1% were indigenous mainland Chilean Amerindians (or their Easter Island-born descendants). As of 2012[ [update]], the population density on Easter Island was .\nDemographic history.\nThe 1982 population was 1,936. The increase in population in the last census was partly caused by the arrival of people of European or mixed European and Native American descent from the Chilean mainland. However, most married a Rapa Nui spouse. Around 70% of the population were natives. Estimates of the pre-European population range from 7\u201317,000. Easter Island's all-time low of 111 inhabitants was reported in 1877. Out of these 111 Rapa Nui, only 36 had descendants, and all of today's Rapa Nui claim descent from those 36.\nLanguages.\nEaster Island's traditional language is Rapa Nui, an Eastern Polynesian language, sharing some similarities with Hawaiian and Tahitian. However, as in the rest of Chile, the official language used is Spanish. Easter Island is the only territory in Polynesia where Spanish is an official language.\nIt is supposed that the 2,700 indigenous Rapa Nui living in the island have a certain degree of knowledge of their traditional language; however, census data does not exist on the primary known and spoken languages among Easter Island's inhabitants, and there are recent claims that the number of fluent speakers is as low as 800. Indeed, Rapa Nui has been declining in its number of speakers as the island undergoes Hispanicization, because the island is under the jurisdiction of Chile and is now home to a number of Chilean continentals, most of whom speak only Spanish. For this reason, most Rapa Nui children now grow up speaking Spanish, and those who do learn Rapa Nui begin learning it later in life. Even with efforts to revitalize the language, Ethnologue has established that Rapa Nui is currently a threatened language.\nEaster Island's indigenous Rapa Nui toponymy has survived with few Spanish additions or replacements, a fact that has been attributed in part to the survival of the Rapa Nui language.\nAdministration and legal status.\nEaster Island shares with Juan Fern\u00e1ndez Islands the constitutional status of \"special territory\" of Chile, granted in 2007. As of 2011[ [update]] a special charter for the island was under discussion in the Chilean Congress.\nAdministratively, the island is a province (Isla de Pascua Province) of the Valpara\u00edso Region and contains a single commune (\"comuna\") (Isla de Pascua). Both the province and the commune are called \"Isla de Pascua\" and encompass the whole island and its surrounding islets and rocks, plus Isla Salas y G\u00f3mez, some to the east. The provincial governor is appointed by the President of the Republic. The municipal administration is located in Hanga Roa, led by a mayor and a six-member municipal council, all directly elected for a four-year mandate.\nIn August 2018, a law took effect prohibiting non-residents from staying on the island for more than 30 days.\nSince 1966 rape, sexual abuse and crimes against property in Easter Island had lower sentences than corresponding offences in mainland Chile. This law was repealed in 2021 by a Constitutional Court decree.\nTransportation.\nEaster Island is served by Mataveri International Airport, with jet service (currently Boeing 787s) from LATAM Chile and, seasonally, subsidiaries such as LATAM Per\u00fa.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53421", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53421", "title": "Philip Johnson", "text": "American architect (1906\u20132005)\nPhilip Cortelyou Johnson (July 8, 1906 \u2013 January 25, 2005) was an American architect who designed modern and postmodern architecture. Among his best-known designs are his modernist Glass House in New Canaan, Connecticut; the postmodern 550 Madison Avenue in New York City, designed for AT&amp;T; 190 South La Salle Street in Chicago; IDS Tower in downtown Minneapolis; the Sculpture Garden of New York City's Museum of Modern Art; and the Pre-Columbian Pavilion at Dumbarton Oaks. His January 2005 obituary in \"The New York Times\" described his works as being \"widely considered among the architectural masterpieces of the 20th century\".\nIn 1930, Johnson became the first director of the architecture department of the Museum of Modern Art in New York. There he arranged for visits by Walter Gropius and Le Corbusier and negotiated the first American commission for Mies van der Rohe, after he fled Nazi Germany. In 1932, he organized with Henry-Russell Hitchcock the first exhibition dedicated to modern architecture at the Museum of Modern Art, which gave name to the subsequent movement known as International Style. In 1934, Johnson resigned his position at the museum.\nDuring the 1930s, Johnson became an ardent admirer of Adolf Hitler, openly praised the Nazi Party, and espoused antisemitic views. He wrote for \"Social Justice\" and \"Examiner\", where he published an admiring review of Hitler's \"Mein Kampf\". In 1939, as a correspondent for \"Social Justice\", he witnessed Hitler's invasion of Poland, which he later described as \"a stirring spectacle\". In 1941, after the U.S. entered the war, Johnson abruptly renounced his earlier views, quit journalism, and organized an anti-Fascist league at Harvard Design School. He was investigated by the FBI, and was eventually cleared for military service. He evaded indictment and jail by cooperating with the prosecution, though, according to some critics, it may have been because of his social connections; no evidence of this was ever produced. Years later he would refer to these activities as \"the stupidest thing I ever did[which] I never can atone for\".\nIn 1978, he was awarded an American Institute of Architects Gold Medal. In 1979, he was the first recipient of the Pritzker Architecture Prize. Today his skyscrapers are prominent features in the skylines of New York, Houston, Chicago, Detroit, Minneapolis, Pittsburgh, Atlanta, Madrid, and other cities.\nEarly life and education.\nJohnson was born in Cleveland, Ohio, on July 8, 1906, the son of a lawyer, Homer Hosea Johnson (1862\u20131960), and the former Louisa Osborn Pope (1869\u20131957), a niece of Alfred Atmore Pope and a first cousin of Theodate Pope Riddle. He had an older sister, Jeannette, and a younger sister, Theodate. He was descended from the Jansen family of New Amsterdam. His ancestors include the Huguenot Jacques Cortelyou, who laid out the first town plan of New Amsterdam for Peter Stuyvesant. He grew up in New London, Ohio. He had a stutter and was diagnosed with cyclothymia. He attended the Hackley School in Tarrytown, New York, then studied as an undergraduate at Harvard University, where he focused on learning Greek, philology, history and philosophy, particularly the work of the Pre-Socratic philosophers. He graduated in 1930.\nCareer.\nAfter graduation, Johnson made a series of trips to Europe, including Germany, where his family had a summer house. He visited the landmarks of classical and Gothic architecture, and joined Henry-Russell Hitchcock, a prominent architectural historian, who was introducing Americans to the work of Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and other modernists. In 1928, he met German architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who was at the time designing the German Pavilion for the 1929 Barcelona International Exposition. The meeting formed the basis for a lifelong relationship of both collaboration and competition.\nJohnson had a substantial fortune, largely due to his father's successful investment in the Aluminum Company of America. With this fortune, in 1930 he financed the new architecture department of the Museum of Modern Art in New York, and in 1932 he was named its curator. As curator he arranged for American visits by Gropius and Le Corbusier, and negotiated the first American commission for Mies van der Rohe. In 1932, working with Hitchcock and Alfred H. Barr, Jr., he organized the first exhibition on Modern architecture at the Museum of Modern Art. The show and their simultaneously published book \"International Style: Modern Architecture Since 1922\", published in 1932, played a seminal role in introducing modern architecture to the American public.\nWhen the rise of the Nazis in Germany forced the modernists Marcel Breuer and Mies van der Rohe to leave Germany, Johnson helped arrange for them to work in the United States. He created a small organization called the Gray Shirts, styled after the Nazi Brownshirts.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe amount of power he yearned for was inversely proportional to the amount he actually attained. In politics, he proved to be a trifler, the dilettante he earlier feared himself to be, a model of futility who sought to find a messiah or to pursue messianic ends but whose most lasting following turned out to be the agents of the FBI, who themselves finally grew bored with him. In short, he was never much of a political threat to anyone, still less an effective doer of either political good or political evil.\nFranz Schulze, \"Philip Johnson: Life and Work\" (1994), p.144\nPolitics and journalism.\nIn December 1934, Johnson abruptly left the Museum of Modern Art and began pursuing a career in journalism and politics. He first became a supporter of Huey Long, the populist governor of Louisiana. He tried and failed to recruit Long to join the National Party, which he founded. Johnson unsuccessfully ran for representative of New London in the Connecticut state legislature. After Long was assassinated in 1935, Johnson became a correspondent for \"Social Justice\", the newspaper of the radical-populist and anti-Semitic Father Charles Coughlin. Johnson traveled to Germany and Poland as a correspondent, where he wrote admiringly about the Nazis.\nIn \"Social Justice\", Johnson expressed, as \"The New York Times\" later reported, \"more than passing admiration for Hitler\". In the summer of 1932 Johnson attended one of the Nuremberg Rallies in Germany and saw Hitler for the first time. Years later he would describe the event to his biographer, Franz Schulze: \"You simply could not fail to be caught up in the excitement of it, by the marching songs, by the crescendo and climax of the whole thing, as Hitler came on at last to harangue the crowd\". He told of being thrilled at the sight of \"all those blond boys in black leather\" marching past the F\u00fchrer. Sponsored by the German government, he traveled on a press tour which covered the invasion of Poland in 1939. Schulze dismissed these early political activities as inconsequential, concluding they merited \"little more substantial attention than they have gained\" and his politics \"were driven as much by an unconquerable esthetic impulse as by fascist philosophy or playboy adventurism\".\nArchitecture school and Army service.\nIn 1941, at the age of 35, Johnson abandoned politics and journalism and enrolled in the Harvard Graduate School of Design, where he studied with Marcel Breuer and Walter Gropius, who had recently fled from Nazi Germany. In 1941, Johnson designed and built his first building, a house at 9 Ash Street in Cambridge, Massachusetts. The house, strongly influenced by Mies van der Rohe, has a wall around the lot which merges with the structure. It was used by Johnson to host social events and was eventually submitted as his graduate thesis; he sold the house after the war, and it was purchased by Harvard in 2010 and restored by 2016.\nIn 1942, while still a student of the architecture school, Johnson tried to enlist with Naval Intelligence, and then for a federal job, but was rejected both times. In 1943, after his graduation from Harvard, he was drafted to the Army and was sent to Fort Ritchie, Maryland, to interrogate German prisoners of war. He was investigated by the FBI for his involvement with the German government, Coughlin and Lawrence Dennis, an American fascist economist, and was cleared for continued military service. After the trial of Dennis and his collaborators, Johnson was relieved of his interrogation duties and transferred to Fort Belvoir, Virginia, where he spent the rest of his military service doing routine duties.\nEarly Modernist period (1946\u20131960).\nIn 1946, after he completed his schooling and his military service, Johnson returned to the Museum of Modern Art as a curator and writer. At the same time, he began working to establish his architectural practice. He built a small house, influenced by the work of Mies, in Sagaponack, Long Island. In 1947, he published the first monograph in English on the architecture of Mies.\nIn 1947, he curated the first exhibition of modern architecture of the Museum of Modern Art including a model of the glass Farnsworth House of Mies.\nIn 1949, he began building a new residence, the Glass House in New Canaan, Connecticut, which was completed in 1949. It was clearly influenced by Farnsworth House, an influence which Johnson never denied, but looked quite different.\nThe Glass House is a 56-foot by 32-foot glass rectangle, sited at the edge of a crest on Johnson's estate overlooking a pond. The building's sides are glass and charcoal-painted steel; the floor, of brick, is not flush with the ground but sits 10\u00a0inches above. The interior is an open space divided by low walnut cabinets; a brick cylinder contains the bathroom and is the only object to reach floor to ceiling. \"The New York Times\" described it in 2005 as \"one of the 20th century's greatest residential structures. \"Like all of Johnson's early work, it was inspired by Mies, but its pure symmetry, dark colors and closeness to the earth marked it as a personal statement; calm and ordered rather than sleek and brittle.\"Philip wrote that the burnt wooden homes he had seen in Poland \"where nothing was left but the foundations and chimneys of brick,\" were a further source of inspiration.\nJohnson continued to add to the Glass House estate during each period of his career. He added a small pavilion with columns by the lake in 1963, an art gallery set into a hillside in 1965, a postmodern sculpture gallery with a glass roof in 1970; a castle-like library with a rounded tower in 1980; a concrete block tower dedicated to his friend Lincoln Kirstein, the founder of the New York City Ballet; and a chain-link \"ghost house\" dedicated to Frank Gehry.\nAfter completing the Glass House, he completed two more houses in New Canaan in a style similar to the Glass House; the Hodgson House (1951) and the Wiley House (1953). In New York City, He designed two major modernist additions to the Museum of Modern Art; a new annex, and, to complement it, the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Sculpture Garden (1953)\nIn 1954\u201356, he made the pro bono design for Congregation Kneses Tifereth Israel, a synagogue for a conservative Jewish congregation in Port Chester, New York. It had a simple interior and a ceiling of curving plaster panels.\nIn 1957, Johnson designed the Soreq Nuclear Research Center in Israel at the invitation of Shimon Peres.\nJohnson joined Mies van der Rohe as the architect of record (Mies did not have a New York architectural license) for the 39-story Seagram Building (1956). Johnson was pivotal in steering the commission towards Mies by working with Phyllis Lambert, the daughter of the CEO of Seagram. The commission resulted in the iconic bronze-and-glass tower on Park Avenue. The building was designed by Mies, and the interiors of the Four Seasons and Brasserie restaurants (later redesigned), as well as office furniture were designed by Johnson. In December 1955, the state of New York denied an architect's license to Mies. He moved back to Chicago and put Johnson fully in charge of construction. Mies returned in late 1956 and finished the building.\nLate Modernism (1960\u20131980).\nThroughout the 1960s, Johnson continued to create in the vocabulary of the modernist style, designing geometrical theatres, a monastery, art galleries and gardens. The Munson-Williams-Proctor Arts Institute (1960) is a good example of his work in the period; it is supported by eight external ferro-concrete piers, or two on each side. The exterior structural members are clad in bronze and \"black\" Canadian granite. The windowless cube is set above the office areas, which recessed in a dry moat, giving a \"floating\" effect. A model of the building was exhibited in the United States Pavilion at the Brussels' World's Fair of 1958 as an example of the new trends in American architecture. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2010.\nAnother major project of the period was the Atrium of the David H. Koch Theater (formerly the New York State Theatre, the home of the New York City Ballet, at Lincoln Center in New York.\nIn 1967, Johnson entered a new phase of his career, founding a partnership with architect John Burgee. He began to design office building complexes for large corporations. The most prominent of these was Pennzoil Place (1970\u201376) in Houston, Texas. The two towers of Pennzoil Place have sloping roofs covering the top seven floors and are trapezoidal in form, planned to create two large triangular areas on the site, which are occupied with glass-covered lobbies designed like greenhouses. This idea was widely copied in skyscrapers in other cities.\nThe Johnson building of the Boston Central Library (1972) adjoins the original Boston library built in the 19th century by the celebrated firm of McKim, Mead &amp; White. Johnson harmonized his building with the original landmark by using similar proportions and the same pink Milford granite.\nIn the late 1970s, Johnson combined architecture and landscape architecture to create two imaginative civic gardens. The Fort Worth Water Gardens, which opened in 1974, is an urban landscape where visitors experience water in distinct ways. The gardens cover 4.3-acres (1.7 hectares), and comprise three very different kinds of water features. First, a quiet meditation pool, surrounded with cypress trees and high walls, with a thin sheet of water cascading downward to the pool, making the sound of a rain shower. The second pool is an aerating pool with multiple illuminated spray fountains, beneath a grove of oak trees. The third fountain is the Active Pool, which challenges fit visitors to walk down to the pool at the bottom, with water cascading all around them.\nIn 1977, Johnson completed a much quieter garden in Dallas, Thanks-Giving Square. It features a non-denominational chapel in a spiral form, a meditation garden and cascading fountains, tucked between buildings in the center of the city.\nPostmodern period (1980\u20131990).\nIn 1980, Johnson and Burgee completed a cathedral in a dramatic new style: the Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove, California, is a soaring glass megachurch originally built for the Reverend Robert H. Schuller. The interior can seat 2,248 persons. It takes the form of a four-pointed star, with free-standing balconies in three points and the chancel in the fourth. The cathedral is covered with more than 10,000 rectangular pieces of glass. The Glass panels are not bolted, but glued to the structure, with a silicon based glue, to give it greater ability to resist Southern California earthquakes. Johnson and Burgee designed it to withstand an earthquake of magnitude 8.0. The tower was added in 1990.\nThe cathedral quickly became a Southern California landmark, but its costs helped drive the church into debt. When the church declared bankruptcy in 2012, it was purchased by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Orange and became the Roman Catholic cathedral for Orange County.\nWorking with John Burgee, Johnson did not confine himself to a single style and was comfortable mixing elements of modernism and postmodernism. For the Cleveland Play House, he built a Romanesque brick structure. His skyscrapers in the 1980s were clad in granite and marble and usually had some feature borrowed from historic architecture. In New York he designed the Museum of Television and Radio (now the Paley Center for Media) (1991).\nIn 1982, working in collaboration with John Burgee, he finished one of his most famous buildings, 550 Madison Avenue (first known as AT&amp;T Building, then the Sony building before taking its present name). Built between 1978 and 1982, it is a skyscraper with an eight-story high arched entry and a split pediment at the top which resembles an enormous piece of 18th-century Chippendale furniture. It was not the first work of postmodern architecture, as Robert Venturi and Frank Gehry had already built smaller scale postmodern buildings, and Michael Graves had completed the Portland Building (1980\u201382) in Portland, Oregon, two years earlier. But the building's Manhattan location, size, and originality made it the most famous and recognizable example of postmodern architecture. It was designated a city landmark by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission in 2018.\nBetween 1979 and 1984, Johnson and Burgee built PPG Place, the postmodern headquarters of the Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company. It is a complex of six buildings within three city blocks, covering five and a half acres. The centerpiece is the 40-story tower, One PPG Place, which has a crown of spires at the corners which suggest the neogothic tower of the Houses of Parliament in London. During the 1980s, Johnson and Burgee completed a series of other notable postmodern landmarks. The TC Energy Center (formerly Republic Bank Center, later, Bank of America Center), in Houston (1983), was the first postmodern skyscraper in the Houston skyline. Fifty-six stories high, it has two setbacks creating what appear to be three different buildings, one against the other. The three triangular gables were inspired by Flemish Renaissance architecture. The interior and exterior are covered with rough-textured red granite, which also covers the surrounding sidewalks.\nThe new building for the Hines College of Architecture (1985) of the University of Houston paid homage to forms drawn from earlier periods of architectural history, using modern materials, construction methods, and scale. The facade of the Hines building resembles, on a larger scale, the neoclassic facades of the French architect Claude Nicolas Ledoux.\n400 West Market (1993) in Louisville, Kentucky, is a 35-story office tower built of reinforced concrete rather than the typical steel. It is topped by a concrete cupola, a vestige of the building's original owner and builder, Capital Holding.\nIn 1986, Johnson and Burgee moved their offices into one of their new buildings, the elliptical Lipstick Building at 885 Third Avenue in New York, nicknamed because of its resemblance to the color and shape of a stick of lipstick. A feud was beginning between the two architects, with Burgee demanding greater recognition.\nAs their business flourished and number of clients grew, the feud between Burgee and Johnson continued to grow. In 1988, the firm's name was changed to John Burgee Architects with Johnson as the \"design consultant\". In 1991, Johnson responded by establishing his own firm. The feud ended badly for Burgee; he was saddled with all of the firm's debts, while Johnson no longer had any responsibility. Burgee was eventually forced to declare bankruptcy and to retire, while Johnson continued to get commissions.\nLater career and buildings (1991\u20132005).\nAfter four years as a solo practitioner, Johnson invited Alan Ritchie to join him as a partner. Ritchie had been a partner for many years in the Johnson-Burgee office and was the partner-in-charge of the AT&amp;T building and the 190 South LaSalle office building, a skyscraper designed as an homage to the demolished Masonic Temple of Chicago. In 1994, they formed the new practice of Philip Johnson-Alan Ritchie Architects. During the next 10 years, they worked closely together and explored new directions in architecture, designing buildings as sculptural objects.\nThe Gate of Europe in Madrid (1989-1996) was originally a collaboration with Burgee and one of his rare works in Europe. It features two office buildings leaning toward each other, the first example of this style, which spread to America. The towers are 26 stories each, and both lean by 15 degrees from vertical.\n191 Peachtree Tower in Atlanta was a project begun with Burgee. It is composed of two 50-story towers joined and crowned with two classical pavilions.\nThe Comerica Tower (1991-1993) was also begun with Burgee. Like their earlier Postmodern works, it featured elements borrowed from historical architecture, particularly the triangular gables, borrowed from Renaissance Flemish architecture. It is the second tallest building in the state of Michigan.\nThe Chapel of St. Basil at the University of St. Thomas in Houston, Texas (1992) is a notable late work. The design includes a domed chapel, a campanile, and a meditation garden, a labyrinth. Its structure is a combination of the basic forms: a cube, a sphere, and a plane. The cube contains the worship area, beneath a semi-sphere, which is presented as the symbolic opening to heaven. The vertical rectangular granite plane divides the church and opens the chapel to light. During daytime the interior is lit entirely with natural light.\nIn 1995, Johnson added a postmodern element to his own residence, the Glass House. This was a new entry pavilion in a sculptural form, which he called the \"Monsta\", or \"Monster\".\nOther late works include the Cathedral of Hope in Dallas, the Habitable Sculpture (a 26-story apartment tower in Lower Manhattan, the Children's Museum in Guadalajara, Mexico, and The Chrysler Center.\nThe Urban Glass House in Lower Manhattan was one of last designs with Alan Ritchie, and was not completed after Johnson's death. It is a condominium building in lower Manhattan whose form was inspired by Johnson's most famous early work, the Glass House in New Canaan, Connecticut.\nThe final building he designed with Richie was the Pennsylvania Academy of Music building in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, which was completed in 2008, three years after his death.\nHonors.\nIn 1978, Johnson was awarded an American Institute of Architects Gold Medal. In 1979, he became the first recipient of the Pritzker Architecture Prize the most prestigious international architectural award.\nIn 1991, Johnson received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.\nPersonal life.\nJohnson was gay. He came out publicly in 1993, and was regarded as \"the best-known openly gay architect in America\".\nIn 1934, Philip Johnson began his first serious relationship with Jimmie Daniels, a cabaret singer. The relationship lasted one year.\nJohnson died in his sleep at his Glass House retreat on January 25, 2005, at the age of ninety-eight. His partner of 45 years, David Whitney, died later that year at age 66.\nJohnson was among the public figures at the core of the effort to save Olana, the home of Frederic Edwin Church, before it was dedicated a National Historic Landmark in 1965 and subsequently became a New York State Historic Site.\nIn his will Johnson left his residential compound to the National Trust for Historic Preservation. It is now open to the public.\nArt collection and archives.\nAs an art collector Johnson had an eclectic eye. He supported avant-garde movements and young artists often before they became widely known. His collection of American art was strong in Abstract expressionism, Pop Art, Minimalism, Neo-Dada, Color Field, Lyrical Abstraction, and Neo-Expressionism and he often donated important works from his collection to institutions like MoMA, and other important private museums and University collections like the Norton Simon Museum, the Sheldon Museum of Art and the Iris &amp; B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts at Stanford University among many others.\nJohnson's publicly held archive, including architectural drawings, project records, and other papers up until 1964 are held by the Drawings and Archives Department of Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library at Columbia University, the Getty, and the Museum of Modern Art.\nControversy over political activities.\nReviewing Franz Schulze's biography of Johnson, Kazys Varnelis wrote that \"between 1932 and 1940, Johnson was an antisemite, fascist sympathizer, and active propagandist for the Nazi government.\" According to Varnelis, \"Johnson makes no apologetic gesture toward his past behavior unless he is confronted by direct questioning, nothing even as paltry as an open letter accounting for and regretting his past actions and condemning the motives that led him to them\". Johnson's activities included organizing political rallies for populist Huey Long; funding figures such as the right-wing agitator Joe McWilliams and his \"Christian Mobilizers\"; and writing for three periodicals, including Charles Coughlin's \"Social Justice\", whose \"almost every issue contained articles about the 'Jewish conspiracy' or about destructive economic forces led by figures with Jewish names\".\nBecause his family had a home in Germany and spent their summers there, Johnson traveled there frequently. As a \"Social Justice\" correspondent, he covered the huge Nazi rally at Nuremberg and the 1939 invasion of Poland with approval. The American correspondent William L. Shirer, traveling with him on the Nazi-sponsored press tour, labeled him in \"Berlin Diary\", as \"the American fascist\" and suspected him of spying for the Germans. On the same tour, three weeks after Poland fell to the Nazis, Johnson, with Shirer, \"was with German troops at the front as the guest of the Propaganda Ministry\". He wrote to a friend that \"The German green uniforms made the place look gay and happy... There were not many Jews to be seen. We saw Warsaw burn and Modlin being bombed. It was a stirring spectacle.\"\nIn his \"Social Justice\" report on his trip to Poland, Johnson declared that the German victory amounted to an unmitigated triumph for the Polish people and that nothing in the war's outcome need concern Americans. Johnson went on to say that German forces had not significantly harmed Polish civilians, and said that \"99 percent of the towns I visited since the war are not only intact but full of Polish peasants and Jewish shopkeepers.\" He said reports of Nazi mistreatment of Poles was \"misinformed\". Referring to political developments in France, Johnson wrote in \"Social Justice\" that \"Lack of leadership and direction in the state has let the one group get control who always gain power in a nation's time of weakness\u2014the Jews\". In 1940 Johnson quit journalism and distanced himself from politics.\nIn April 1942, on reports that Johnson might be working in Colonel Donovan's Office of the Coordinator of Information, the United States Assistant Attorney General James H. Rowe wrote to Director Hoover, saying, \"I can think of no more dangerous man to have working in an agency which possesses so many military secrets.\" Johnson was later investigated by the FBI, but no charges were brought against him, and he was cleared for military service.\nJohnson was inducted into the U.S. Army in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on March 12, 1943, but controversy continued. His name arose again in the so-called \"Great Sedition Trial\" of 1944 through his former contacts in the 1930s with its main target, the former diplomat and economist Lawrence Dennis, who in the 1930s supported fascist economics as an alternative to capitalism. Dennis was charged with sedition, or advocating the forcible overthrow of the U.S. government, under the Smith Act. Johnson was accused of \"close and steady contact\" with Dennis in the spring of 1938, and providing financial support towards publishing Dennis's 1940 book \"The Dynamics of War and Revolution\". Johnson had already testified in 1942 in the government case against another former associate, the German poet and journalist George Sylvester Viereck in 1942. The ongoing federal case against Dennis, an FBI investigation, and a congressional investigation investigated about 30 people, including Johnson, but in the end he was not charged. Johnson was formally asked to appear at trial as a witness, and\u2014by his own account\u2014was speaking to prosecutor O. John Rogge, but after Judge Edward C. Eicher died of a heart attack, a mistrial was declared and the case was dropped.\nIn 1993, when asked by \"Vanity Fair\" about his past political views, he said, \"I have no excuse (for) such unbelievable stupidity. ... I don't know how you expiate guilt.\"\nIn 1956, he donated a design for Congregation Kneses Tifereth Israel in Port Chester, New York. Architecture professor Anat Geva observed in a paper that \"all critics agree that his design of the Port Chester Synagogue can be considered as his attempt to ask for forgiveness.\"\nHe discussed his trips to Germany and his infatuation with fascism in a 1996 interview with Charlie Rose. He said, \"It was the stupidest thing I ever did, and I never forgive myself and I never can atone for it. There's nothing I can do... That's been torture to me ever since.\" He admitted to Rose that, while he had \"difficulty\" with Franklin D. Roosevelt because of his inability to achieve what he set out, he \"worshiped the man\" and \"voted for him four times.\" Replying to Rose asking if he liked \"strong figures\", he said \"Sure do. I like good architects that are strong, like Gehry.\"\nIn 2018, Nikil Saval wrote in \"The New Yorker\" that \"Johnson would later describe Hitler as 'a spellbinder'; in 1964, well after he had been forced to abjure his Nazi past, he insisted in letters that Hitler was 'better than Roosevelt.'\"\nIn 2020, in the wake of the murder of George Floyd and the wave of place name changes that followed, the Johnson Study Group\u2014a group of 40 architects, designers, and educators\u2014approached the Museum of Modern Art asking that honors given to Johnson be removed from public view, citing his \"commitment to white supremacy\", spread of Nazi publications, involvement with American fascist politics, and \"effective segregation\" of the architectural collection at the museum. \"When it comes to racist urban planning policies in the 20th century and a deeply Eurocentric antiblack archive of American architecture,\" V. Mitch McEwen said, \"MoMA under white supremacist Philip Johnson did largely create the problem. It innovated white supremacy in architecture ... where under his leadership not a single work by any Black architect or designer was included.\"\nIn a 2020 article in \"Elle Decor\" magazine, articles editor Charles Curkin asked Pritzker Prize laureate Balkrishna Doshi if the architecture world was due for a reckoning, citing the Museum of Modern Art's chief architecture and design curatorship still being named after Johnson. Doshi replied that \"Life itself is due for a reckoning, and architects must give respect to life.\"\nIn 2020, Johnson's name was dropped from the Harvard University Philip Johnson Thesis House, which was designed by Johnson. Sarah Whiting, dean of the Harvard Graduate School of Design, announced the change on December 5, 2020, citing Johnson's \"widely documented white supremacist views and activities.\"\nIn popular culture.\nJohnson is mentioned (along with fellow architect Richard Rogers) in the song \"Thru These Architect's Eyes\" on the album \"Outside\" (1995) by David Bowie.\nHe appears in Nathaniel Kahn's \"My Architect\", a 2003 documentary about Kahn's father, Louis Kahn.\nPhilip Johnson's Glass House, along with Mies van der Rohe's Farnsworth House, was the subject of Sarah Morris's 2010 film \"Points on a Line\". Morris filmed at both sites over the course of several months, among other locations including The Four Seasons Restaurant, the Seagram Building, Mies van der Rohe\u02bcs controversial 860\u2013880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments, and Chicago\u02bcs Newberry Library.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53422", "revid": "17859592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53422", "title": "Pritzker Architecture Prize", "text": "International architecture award\nThe Pritzker Architecture Prize is an international award presented annually \"to honor a living architect or architects whose built work demonstrates a combination of those qualities of talent, vision and commitment which has produced consistent and significant contributions to humanity and the built environment through the art of architecture.\" Founded in 1979 by Jay A. Pritzker and his wife Cindy, the award is funded by the Pritzker family and sponsored by the Hyatt Foundation. It is considered to be one of the world's premier architecture prizes, and is often referred to as the Nobel Prize of architecture.\nCriteria and proceedings.\nThe Pritzker Architecture Prize Jury says it is awarded \"irrespective of nationality, race, creed, or ideology\". The recipients receive US$100,000, a citation certificate, and, since 1987, a bronze medallion. The designs on the medal are inspired by the work of architect Louis Sullivan, while the Latin inspired inscription on the reverse of the medallion\u2014\"firmitas, utilitas, venustas\" (English: firmness, commodity and delight)\u2014is from Ancient Roman architect Vitruvius. Before 1987, a limited edition Henry Moore sculpture accompanied the monetary prize.\nThe executive director of the prize, Manuela Luc\u00e1-Dazio, solicits nominations from a range of people, including past Laureates, academics, critics and others \"with expertise and interest in the field of architecture\". Any licensed architect can also make a personal application for the prize before November 1 every year. (In 1988 Gordon Bunshaft nominated himself for the award and eventually won it.) The jury, consisting of five to nine \"experts\u00a0... recognized professionals in their own fields of architecture, business, education, publishing, and culture\", deliberates and early in the following year announce the winner. The prize chair is the 2016 Pritzker laureate Alejandro Aravena; earlier chairs were J. Carter Brown (1979\u20132002), the Lord Rothschild (2003\u20132004), the Lord Palumbo (2005\u20132015), Glenn Murcutt (2016\u20132018) and Stephen Breyer (2019\u20132020).\nLaureates.\nInaugural winner Philip Johnson was cited \"for 50 years of imagination and vitality embodied in a myriad of museums, theaters, libraries, houses, gardens and corporate structures\". The 2004 laureate Zaha Hadid was the first female prize winner. Ryue Nishizawa became the youngest winner in 2010 at age 44. Partners in architecture (in 2001, Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron, in 2010, Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa, in 2020, Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara, and in 2021, Anne Lacaton and Jean-Philippe Vassal) have shared the award. In 1988, Gordon Bunshaft and Oscar Niemeyer were both separately honored with the award. The 2017 winners, architects Rafael Aranda, Carme Pigem, and Ram\u00f3n Vilalta were the first group of three to share the prize.\n! scope=row| Riken Yamamoto\n! scope=row| Liu Jiakun\n A.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;a Roche was born in Ireland.\n B.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;b Pei was born in China.\n C.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;c Gehry was born in Canada.\n D.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;d Hadid was born in Iraq.\n E.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;e Rogers was born in Italy into an Anglo-Italian family.\n F.\u00a0 &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\u2020 Posthumous award.\n G.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;g Ceremony held online due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\n H.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;h K\u00e9r\u00e9 was born in Burkina Faso.\n I.\u00a0&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;i Yamamoto was born in China to Japanese parents while it was under Japanese occupation.\nCriticism.\nIn 2013, the student organization \"Women in Design\" at the Harvard Graduate School of Design started a petition arguing Denise Scott Brown should receive joint recognition with her partner, Robert Venturi, who won the award in 1991. The petition, according to \"The New York Times\", \"reignited long-simmering tensions in the architectural world over whether women have been consistently denied the standing they deserve in a field whose most prestigious award was not given to a woman until 2004, when Zaha Hadid won\". Scott Brown told CNN that \"as a woman, she had felt excluded by the elite of architecture throughout her career,\" and that \"the Pritzker Prize was based on the fallacy that great architecture was the work of a 'single lone male genius' at the expense of collaborative work.\" Responding to the petition, the 2013 prize jury said that it cannot revisit the decisions of past juries, either in the case of Scott Brown or that of Lu Wenyu, whose husband Wang Shu won in 2012. The 2020 Pritzker jury said in its citation awarding the prize to Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara \u2013 making them the fourth and fifth women to ever be awarded the prize \u2013 that they were, \"pioneers in a field that has traditionally been and still is a male-dominated profession [and] beacons to others as they forge their exemplary professional path.\"\nReferences.\nSpecific\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral"}
{"id": "53424", "revid": "19912518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53424", "title": "Hector Berlioz", "text": "French Romantic composer and conductor (1803\u20131869)\n \nLouis-Hector Berlioz (11 December 1803\u00a0\u2013 8 March 1869) was a French Romantic composer and conductor. His output includes orchestral works such as the \"Symphonie fantastique\" and \"Harold in Italy\", choral pieces including the Requiem and \"L'Enfance du Christ\", his three operas \"Benvenuto Cellini\", \"Les Troyens\" and \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\", and works of hybrid genres such as the \"dramatic symphony\" \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" and the \"dramatic legend\" \"La Damnation de Faust\".\nThe elder son of a provincial physician, Berlioz was expected to follow his father into medicine, and he attended a Parisian medical college before defying his family by taking up music as a profession. His independence of mind and refusal to follow traditional rules and formulas put him at odds with the conservative musical establishment of Paris. He briefly moderated his style sufficiently to win France's premier music prize \u2013 the Prix de Rome \u2013 in 1830, but he learned little from the academics of the Paris Conservatoire. Opinion was divided for many years between those who thought him an original genius and those who viewed his music as lacking in form and coherence.\nAt the age of twenty-four Berlioz fell in love with the Irish Shakespearean actress Harriet Smithson, and he pursued her obsessively until she finally accepted him seven years later. Their marriage was happy at first but eventually foundered. Harriet inspired his first major success, the \"Symphonie fantastique\", in which an idealised depiction of her occurs throughout.\nBerlioz completed three operas, the first of which, \"Benvenuto Cellini\", was an outright failure. The second, the epic \"Les Troyens\" (The Trojans), was so large in scale that it was never staged in its entirety during his lifetime. His last opera, \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\"\u00a0\u2013 based on Shakespeare's comedy \"Much Ado About Nothing\"\u00a0\u2013 was a success at its premiere but did not enter the regular operatic repertoire. Meeting only occasional success in France as a composer, Berlioz increasingly turned to conducting, in which he gained an international reputation. He was highly regarded in Germany, Britain and Russia both as a composer and as a conductor. To supplement his earnings he wrote musical journalism throughout much of his career; some of it has been preserved in book form, including his \"Treatise on Instrumentation\" (1844), which was influential in the 19th and 20th centuries. Berlioz died in Paris at the age of 65.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife and career.\n1803\u20131821: early years.\nBerlioz was born on 11 December 1803, the eldest child of Louis Berlioz (1776\u20131848), a physician, and his wife, Marie-Antoinette Jos\u00e9phine, \"n\u00e9e\" Marmion (1784\u20131838). His birthplace was the family home in the commune of La C\u00f4te-Saint-Andr\u00e9 in the d\u00e9partement of Is\u00e8re, in south-eastern France. His parents had five more children, three of whom died in infancy; their surviving daughters, Nanci and Ad\u00e8le, remained close to Berlioz throughout their lives.\nBerlioz's father, a respected local figure, was a progressively minded doctor credited as the first European to practise and write about acupuncture. He was an agnostic with a liberal outlook; his wife was a strict Roman Catholic of less flexible views. After briefly attending a local school when he was about ten, Berlioz was educated at home by his father. He recalled in his \"M\u00e9moires\" that he enjoyed geography, especially books about travel, to which his mind would sometimes wander when he was supposed to be studying Latin; the classics nonetheless made an impression on him, and he was moved to tears by Virgil's account of the tragedy of Dido and Aeneas. Later he studied philosophy, rhetoric, and \u2013 because his father planned a medical career for him \u2013 anatomy.\nMusic did not feature prominently in the young Berlioz's education. His father gave him basic instruction on the flageolet, and he later took flute and guitar lessons with local teachers. He never studied the piano, and throughout his life played haltingly at best. He later contended that this was an advantage because it \"saved me from the tyranny of keyboard habits, so dangerous to thought, and from the lure of conventional harmonies\".\nAt the age of twelve Berlioz fell in love for the first time. The object of his affections was an eighteen-year-old neighbour, Estelle Dub\u0153uf. He was teased for what was seen as a boyish infatuation, but something of his early passion for Estelle endured all his life. He poured some of his unrequited feelings into his early attempts at composition. Trying to master harmony, he read Rameau's \"Trait\u00e9 de l'harmonie\", which proved incomprehensible to a novice, but Charles-Simon Catel's simpler treatise on the subject made it clearer to him. He wrote several chamber works as a youth, subsequently destroying the manuscripts, but one theme that remained in his mind reappeared later as the A-flat second subject of the overture to \"Les Francs-juges\".\n1821\u20131824: Medical student.\nIn March 1821 Berlioz passed the baccalaur\u00e9at examination at the University of Grenoble \u2013 it is not certain whether at the first or second attempt \u2013 and in late September, aged seventeen, he moved to Paris. At his father's insistence he enrolled at the School of Medicine of the University of Paris. He had to fight hard to overcome his revulsion at dissecting bodies, but in deference to his father's wishes, he forced himself to continue his medical studies.\nThe horrors of the medical college were mitigated thanks to an ample allowance from his father, which enabled him to take full advantage of the cultural, and particularly musical, life of Paris. Music did not at that time enjoy the prestige of literature in French culture, but Paris nonetheless possessed two major opera houses and the country's most important music library. Berlioz took advantage of them all. Within days of arriving in Paris he went to the Op\u00e9ra, and although the piece on offer was by a minor composer, the staging and the magnificent orchestral playing enchanted him. He went to other works at the Op\u00e9ra and the Op\u00e9ra-Comique; at the former, three weeks after his arrival, he saw Gluck's \"Iphig\u00e9nie en Tauride\", which thrilled him. He was particularly inspired by Gluck's use of the orchestra to carry the drama along. A later performance of the same work at the Op\u00e9ra convinced him that his vocation was to be a composer.\nThe dominance of Italian opera in Paris, against which Berlioz later campaigned, was still in the future, and at the opera houses he heard and absorbed the works of \u00c9tienne M\u00e9hul and Fran\u00e7ois-Adrien Boieldieu, other operas written in the French style by foreign composers, particularly Gaspare Spontini, and above all five operas by Gluck. He began to visit the Paris Conservatoire library in between his medical studies, seeking out scores of Gluck's operas and making copies of parts of them. By the end of 1822 he felt that his attempts to learn composition needed to be augmented with formal tuition, and he approached Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Le Sueur, director of the Royal Chapel and professor at the Conservatoire, who accepted him as a private pupil.\nIn August 1823 Berlioz made the first of many contributions to the musical press: a letter to the journal \"Le Corsaire\" defending French opera against the incursions of its Italian rival. He contended that all Rossini's operas put together could not stand comparison with even a few bars of those of Gluck, Spontini or Le Sueur. By now he had composed several works including \"Estelle et N\u00e9morin\" and \"Le Passage de la mer Rouge\" (The Crossing of the Red Sea) \u2013 both since lost.\nIn 1824 Berlioz graduated from medical school, after which he abandoned medicine, to the strong disapproval of his parents. His father suggested law as an alternative profession and refused to countenance music as a career. He reduced and sometimes withheld his son's allowance, and Berlioz went through some years of financial hardship.\n1824\u20131830: Conservatoire student.\nIn 1824 Berlioz composed a \"Messe solennelle\". It was performed twice, after which he suppressed the score, which was thought lost until a copy was discovered in 1991. During 1825 and 1826 he wrote his first opera, \"Les Francs-juges\", which was not performed and survives only in fragments, the best known of which is the overture. In later works he reused parts of the score, such as the \"March of the Guards\", which he incorporated four years later in the \"Symphonie fantastique\" as the \"March to the Scaffold\".\nIn August 1826 Berlioz was admitted as a student to the Conservatoire, studying composition under Le Sueur and counterpoint and fugue with Anton Reicha. In the same year he made the first of four attempts to win France's premier music prize, the Prix de Rome, and was eliminated in the first round. The following year, to earn some money, he joined the chorus at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre des Nouveaut\u00e9s. He competed again for the Prix de Rome, submitting the first of his Prix cantatas, \"La Mort d'Orph\u00e9e\", in July. Later that year he attended productions of Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" and \"Romeo and Juliet\" at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'Od\u00e9on given by Charles Kemble's touring company. Although at the time Berlioz spoke hardly any English, he was overwhelmed by the plays \u2013 the start of a lifelong passion for Shakespeare. He also conceived a passion for Kemble's leading lady, Harriet Smithson \u2013 his biographer Hugh Macdonald calls it \"emotional derangement\" \u2013 and obsessively pursued her, without success, for several years. She refused even to meet him.\nThe first concert of Berlioz's music took place in May 1828, when his friend Nathan Bloc conducted the premieres of the overtures \"Les Francs-juges\" and \"Waverley\" and other works. The hall was far from full, and Berlioz lost money. Nevertheless, he was greatly encouraged by the vociferous approval of his performers, and the applause from musicians in the audience, including his Conservatoire professors, the directors of the Op\u00e9ra and Op\u00e9ra-Comique, and the composers Auber and H\u00e9rold.\nBerlioz's fascination with Shakespeare's plays prompted him to start learning English during 1828, so that he could read them in the original. At around the same time he encountered two further creative inspirations: Beethoven and Goethe. He heard Beethoven's third, fifth and seventh symphonies performed at the Conservatoire, and read Goethe's \"Faust\" in G\u00e9rard de Nerval's translation. Beethoven became both an ideal and an obstacle for Berlioz \u2013 an inspiring predecessor but a daunting one. Goethe's work was the basis of \"Huit sc\u00e8nes de Faust\" (Berlioz's Opus 1), which premiered the following year and was reworked and expanded much later as \"La Damnation de Faust\".\n1830\u20131832: Prix de Rome.\nBerlioz was largely apolitical, and neither supported nor opposed the July Revolution of 1830, but when it broke out he found himself in the middle of it. He recorded events in his \"M\u00e9moires\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I was finishing my cantata when the revolution broke out\u00a0... I dashed off the final pages of my orchestral score to the sound of stray bullets coming over the roofs and pattering on the wall outside my window. On the 29th I had finished, and was free to go out and roam about Paris till morning, pistol in hand.\nThe cantata was \"La Mort de Sardanapale\", with which he won the Prix de Rome. His entry the previous year, \"Cl\u00e9op\u00e2tre\", had attracted disapproval from the judges because to highly conservative musicians it \"betrayed dangerous tendencies\", and for his 1830 offering he carefully modified his natural style to meet official approval. During the same year he wrote the \"Symphonie fantastique\" and became engaged to be married.\nBy now recoiling from his obsession with Smithson, Berlioz fell in love with a nineteen-year-old pianist, Marie (\"Camille\") Moke. His feelings were reciprocated, and the couple planned to be married. In December Berlioz organised a concert at which the \"Symphonie fantastique\" was premiered. Protracted applause followed the performance, and the press reviews expressed both the shock and the pleasure the work had given. Berlioz's biographer David Cairns calls the concert a landmark not only in the composer's career but in the evolution of the modern orchestra. Franz Liszt was among those attending the concert; this was the beginning of a long friendship. Liszt later transcribed the entire \"Symphonie fantastique\" for piano to enable more people to hear it.\nShortly after the concert Berlioz set off for Italy: under the terms of the Prix de Rome, winners studied for two years at the Villa Medici, the French Academy in Rome. Within three weeks of his arrival he went absent without leave: he had learnt that Marie had broken off their engagement and was to marry an older and richer suitor, Camille Pleyel, the heir to the Pleyel piano manufacturing company. Berlioz made an elaborate plan to kill them both (and her mother, known to him as \"l'hippopotame\"), and acquired poisons, pistols and a disguise for the purpose. By the time he reached Nice on his journey to Paris he thought better of the scheme, abandoned the idea of revenge, and successfully sought permission to return to the Villa Medici. He stayed for a few weeks in Nice and wrote his \"King Lear\" overture. On the way back to Rome he began work on a piece for narrator, solo voices, chorus and orchestra, \"Le Retour \u00e0 la vie\" (The Return to Life, later renamed \"L\u00e9lio\"), a sequel to the \"Symphonie fantastique\".\nBerlioz took little pleasure in his time in Rome. His colleagues at the Villa Medici, under their benevolent principal Horace Vernet, made him welcome, and he enjoyed his meetings with Felix Mendelssohn, who was visiting the city, but he found Rome distasteful: \"the most stupid and prosaic city I know; it is no place for anyone with head or heart.\" Nonetheless, Italy had an important influence on his development. He visited many parts of it during his residency in Rome. Macdonald comments that after his time there, Berlioz had \"a new colour and glow in his music\u00a0... sensuous and vivacious\"\u00a0\u2013 derived not from Italian painting, in which he was uninterested, or Italian music, which he despised, but from \"the scenery and the sun, and from his acute sense of locale\". Macdonald identifies \"Harold in Italy\", \"Benvenuto Cellini\" and \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" as the most obvious expressions of his response to Italy, and adds that \"Les Troyens\" and \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\" \"reflect the warmth and stillness of the Mediterranean, as well as its vivacity and force\". Berlioz himself wrote that \"Harold in Italy\" drew on \"the poetic memories formed from my wanderings in Abruzzi\".\nVernet agreed to Berlioz's request to be allowed to leave the Villa Medici before the end of his two-year term. Heeding Vernet's advice that it would be prudent to delay his return to Paris, where the Conservatoire authorities might be less indulgent about his premature ending of his studies, he made a leisurely journey back, detouring via La C\u00f4te-Saint-Andr\u00e9 to see his family. He left Rome in May 1832 and arrived in Paris in November.\n1832\u20131840: Paris.\nOn 9 December 1832 Berlioz presented a concert of his works at the Conservatoire. The programme included the overture of \"Les Francs-juges\", the \"Symphonie fantastique\" \u2013 extensively revised since its premiere \u2013 and \"Le Retour \u00e0 la vie\", in which Bocage, a popular actor, declaimed the monologues. Through a third party, Berlioz had sent an invitation to Harriet Smithson, who accepted, and was dazzled by the celebrities in the audience. Among the musicians present were Liszt, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Chopin and Niccol\u00f2 Paganini; writers included Alexandre Dumas, Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, Heinrich Heine, Victor Hugo and George Sand. The concert was such a success that the programme was repeated within the month, but the more immediate consequence was that Berlioz and Smithson finally met.\nBy 1832 Smithson's career was in decline. She presented a ruinously unsuccessful season, first at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre-Italien and then at lesser venues, and by March 1833 she was deep in debt. Biographers differ about whether and to what extent Smithson's receptiveness to Berlioz's wooing was motivated by financial considerations; but she accepted him, and in the face of strong opposition from both their families they were married at the British Embassy in Paris on 3\u00a0October 1833. The couple lived first in Paris, and later in Montmartre (then still a village). On 14 August 1834 their only child, Louis-Cl\u00e9ment-Thomas, was born. The first few years of the marriage were happy, although it eventually foundered. Harriet continued to yearn for a career but, as her biographer Peter Raby comments, she never learned to speak French fluently, which seriously limited both her professional and her social life.\nPaganini, known chiefly as a violinist, had acquired a Stradivarius viola, which he wanted to play in public if he could find the right music. Greatly impressed by the \"Symphonie fantastique\", he asked Berlioz to write him a suitable piece. Berlioz told him that he could not write a brilliantly virtuoso work, and began composing what he called a symphony with viola obbligato, \"Harold in Italy\". As he foresaw, Paganini found the solo part too reticent \u2013 \"There's not enough for me to do here; I should be playing all the time\" \u2013 and the violist at the premiere in November 1834 was Chr\u00e9tien Urhan.\nUntil the end of 1835 Berlioz had a modest stipend as a laureate of the Prix de Rome. His earnings from composing were neither substantial nor regular, and he supplemented them by writing music criticism for the Parisian press. Macdonald comments that this was activity \"at which he excelled but which he abhorred\". He wrote for \"L'Europe litt\u00e9raire\" (1833), \"Le R\u00e9novateur\" (1833\u20131835), and from 1834 for the \"Gazette musicale\" and the \"Journal des d\u00e9bats\". He was the first, but not the last, prominent French composer to double as a reviewer: among his successors were Faur\u00e9, Messager, Dukas and Debussy. Although he complained \u2013 both privately and sometimes in his articles \u2013 that his time would be better spent writing music than in writing music criticism, he was able to indulge himself in attacking his b\u00eates noires and extolling his enthusiasms. The former included musical pedants, coloratura writing and singing, viola players who were merely incompetent violinists, inane libretti, and baroque counterpoint. He extravagantly praised Beethoven's symphonies, and Gluck's and Weber's operas, and scrupulously refrained from promoting his own compositions. His journalism consisted mainly of music criticism, some of which he collected and published, such as \"Evenings in the Orchestra\" (1854), but also more technical articles, such as those that formed the basis of his \"Treatise on Instrumentation\" (1844). Despite his complaints, Berlioz continued writing music criticism for most of his life, long after he had any financial need to do so.\nBerlioz secured a commission from the French government for his Requiem \u2013 the \"Grande messe des morts\" \u2013 first performed at Les Invalides in December 1837. A second government commission followed \u2013 the \"Grande symphonie fun\u00e8bre et triomphale\" in 1840. Neither work brought him much money or artistic fame at the time, but the Requiem held a special place in his affections: \"If I were threatened with the destruction of the whole of my works save one, I would crave mercy for the \"Messe des morts\"\".\nOne of Berlioz's main aims in the 1830s was \"battering down the doors of the Op\u00e9ra\". In Paris at this period, the musical success that mattered was in the opera house and not the concert hall. Robert Schumann commented, \"To the French, music by itself means nothing\". Berlioz worked on his opera \"Benvenuto Cellini\" from 1834 until 1837, continually distracted by his increasing activities as a critic and as a promoter of his own symphonic concerts. The Berlioz scholar D. Kern Holoman comments that Berlioz rightly regarded \"Benvenuto Cellini\" as a work of exceptional exuberance and verve, deserving a better reception than it received. Holoman adds that the piece was of \"surpassing technical difficulty\", and that the singers were not especially co-operative. A weak libretto and unsatisfactory staging exacerbated the poor reception. The opera had only four complete performances, three in September 1838 and one in January 1839. Berlioz said that the failure of the piece meant that the doors of the Op\u00e9ra were closed to him for the rest of his career \u2013 which they were, except for a commission to arrange a Weber score in 1841.\nShortly after the failure of the opera, Berlioz had a great success as composer-conductor of a concert at which \"Harold in Italy\" was given again. This time Paganini was present in the audience; he came on to the platform at the end and knelt in homage to Berlioz and kissed his hand. A few days later Berlioz was astonished to receive a cheque from him for 20,000 francs. Paganini's gift enabled Berlioz to pay off Harriet's and his own debts, give up music criticism for the time being, and concentrate on composition. He wrote the \"dramatic symphony\" \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" for voices, chorus and orchestra. It was premiered in November 1839 and was so well received that Berlioz and his huge instrumental and vocal forces gave two further performances in rapid succession. Among the audiences was the young Wagner, who was overwhelmed by its revelation of the possibilities of musical poetry, and who later drew on it when composing \"Tristan und Isolde\".\nAt the close of the decade Berlioz achieved official recognition in the form of appointment as deputy librarian of the Conservatoire and as an officer of the Legion of Honour. The former was an undemanding post, but not highly paid, and Berlioz remained in need of a reliable income to allow him the leisure for composition.\n1840s: Struggling composer.\nThe \"Symphonie fun\u00e8bre et triomphale\", marking the tenth anniversary of the 1830 Revolution, was performed in the open air under the direction of the composer in July 1840. The following year the Op\u00e9ra commissioned Berlioz to adapt Weber's \"Der Freisch\u00fctz\" to meet the house's rigid requirements: he wrote recitatives to replace the spoken dialogue and orchestrated Weber's \"Invitation to the Dance\" to provide the obligatory ballet music. In the same year he completed settings of six poems by his friend Th\u00e9ophile Gautier, which formed the song cycle \"Les Nuits d'\u00e9t\u00e9\" (with piano accompaniment, later orchestrated). He also worked on a projected opera, \"La Nonne sanglante\" (The Bloody Nun), to a libretto by Eug\u00e8ne Scribe, but made little progress. In November 1841 he began publishing a series of sixteen articles in the \"Revue et gazette musicale\" giving his views about orchestration; they were the basis of his \"Treatise on Instrumentation\", published in 1843.\nDuring the 1840s Berlioz spent much of his time making music outside France. He struggled to make money from his concerts in Paris, and learning of the large sums made by promoters from performances of his music in other countries, he resolved to try conducting abroad. He began in Brussels, giving two concerts in September 1842. An extensive German tour followed: in 1842 and 1843 he gave concerts in twelve German cities. His reception was enthusiastic. The German public was better disposed than the French to his innovative compositions, and his conducting was seen as highly impressive. During the tour he had enjoyable meetings with Mendelssohn and Schumann in Leipzig, Wagner in Dresden and Meyerbeer in Berlin.\nBy this time Berlioz's marriage was failing. Harriet resented his celebrity and her own eclipse, and as Raby puts it, \"possessiveness turned to suspicion and jealousy as Berlioz became involved with the singer Marie Recio\". Harriet's health deteriorated, and she took to drinking heavily. Her suspicion about Recio was well founded: the latter became Berlioz's mistress in 1841 and accompanied him on his German tour.\nBerlioz returned to Paris in mid-1843. During the following year he wrote two of his most popular short works, the overtures \"Le carnaval romain\" (reusing music from \"Benvenuto Cellini\") and \"Le corsaire\" (originally called \"La tour de Nice\"). Towards the end of the year he and Harriet separated. Berlioz maintained two households: Harriet remained in Montmartre and he moved in with Recio at her flat in central Paris. His son Louis was sent to a boarding school in Rouen.\nForeign tours featured prominently in Berlioz's life during the 1840s and 1850s. Not only were they highly rewarding both artistically and financially, but he did not have to grapple with the administrative problems of promoting concerts in Paris. Macdonald comments:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBerlioz's major work from the decade was \"La Damnation de Faust\". He presented it in Paris in December 1846, but it played to half-empty houses, despite excellent reviews, some from critics not usually well disposed to his music. The highly romantic subject was out of step with the times, and one sympathetic reviewer observed that there was an unbridgeable gap between the composer's conception of art and that of the Paris public. The failure of the piece left Berlioz heavily in debt; he restored his finances the following year with the first of two highly remunerative trips to Russia. His other foreign tours during the rest of the 1840s included Austria, Hungary, Bohemia and Germany. After those came the first of his five visits to England; it lasted for more than seven months (November 1847 to July 1848). His reception in London was enthusiastic, but the visit was not a financial success because of mismanagement by his impresario, the conductor Louis-Antoine Jullien.\nSoon after Berlioz's return to Paris in mid-September 1848, Harriet suffered a series of strokes, which left her almost paralysed. She needed constant nursing, which he paid for. When in Paris he visited her continually, sometimes twice a day.\n1850s: international success.\nAfter the failure of \"La Damnation de Faust\", Berlioz spent less time on composition during the next eight years. He wrote a Te Deum, completed in 1849 but not published until 1855, and some short pieces. His most substantial work between \"The Damnation\" and his epic \"Les Troyens\" (1856\u20131858) was a \"sacred trilogy\", \"L'Enfance du Christ\" (Christ's Childhood), which he began in 1850. In 1851 he was at the Great Exhibition in London as a member of an international committee judging musical instruments. He returned to London in 1852 and 1853, conducting his own works and others'. He enjoyed consistent success there, with the exception of a revival of \"Benvenuto Cellini\" at Covent Garden which was withdrawn after one performance. The opera was presented in Leipzig in 1852 in a revised version prepared by Liszt with Berlioz's approval and was moderately successful. In the early years of the decade Berlioz made numerous appearances in Germany as a conductor.\nIn 1854 Harriet died. Both Berlioz and their son Louis had been with her shortly before her death. During the year Berlioz completed the composition of \"L'Enfance du Christ\", worked on his book of memoirs, and married Marie Recio, which, he explained to his son, he felt it his duty to do after living with her for so many years. At the end of the year the first performance of \"L'Enfance du Christ\" was warmly received, to his surprise. He spent much of the next year in conducting and writing prose.\nDuring Berlioz's German tour in 1856, Liszt and his companion, Carolyne zu Sayn-Wittgenstein, encouraged Berlioz's tentative conception of an opera based on the \"Aeneid\". Having first completed the orchestration of his 1841 song cycle \"Les Nuits d'\u00e9t\u00e9\", he began work on \"Les Troyens\" \u2013 The Trojans \u2013 writing his own libretto based on Virgil's epic. He worked on it, in between his conducting commitments, for two years. In 1858 he was elected to the Institut de France, an honour he had long sought, though he played down the importance he attached to it. In the same year he completed \"Les Troyens\". He then spent five years trying to have it staged.\n1860\u20131869: final years.\nIn June 1862 Berlioz's wife died suddenly, aged 48. She was survived by her mother, to whom Berlioz was devoted, and who looked after him for the rest of his life.\n\"Les Troyens\" \u2013 a five-act, five-hour opera \u2013 was on too large a scale to be acceptable to the management of the Op\u00e9ra, and Berlioz's efforts to have it staged there failed. The only way he could find of seeing the work produced was to divide it into two parts: \"The Fall of Troy\" and \"The Trojans at Carthage\". The latter, consisting of the final three acts of the original, was presented at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre\u2010Lyrique, Paris, in November 1863, but even that truncated version was further truncated: during the run of 22 performances, number after number was cut. The experience demoralised Berlioz, who wrote no more music after this.\nBerlioz did not seek a revival of \"Les Troyens\" and none took place for nearly 30 years. He sold the publishing rights for a large sum, and his last years were financially comfortable; he was able to give up his work as a critic, but he lapsed into depression. As well as losing both his wives, he had lost both his sisters, and he became morbidly aware of death as many of his friends and other contemporaries died. He and his son had grown deeply attached to each other, but Louis was a captain in the merchant navy, and was more often than not away from home. Berlioz's physical health was not good, and he was often in pain from an intestinal complaint, possibly Crohn's disease.\nAfter the death of his second wife, Berlioz had two romantic interludes. During 1862 he met \u2013 probably in the Montmartre Cemetery \u2013 a young woman less than half his age, whose first name was Am\u00e9lie and whose second, possibly married, name is not recorded. Almost nothing is known of their relationship, which lasted for less than a year. After they ceased to meet, Am\u00e9lie died, aged only 26. Berlioz was unaware of it until he came across her grave six months later. Cairns hypothesises that the shock of her death prompted him to seek out his first love, Estelle, now a widow aged 67. He called on her in September 1864; she received him kindly, and he visited her in three successive summers; he wrote to her nearly every month for the rest of his life.\nIn 1867 Berlioz received the news that his son had died in Havana of yellow fever. Macdonald suggests that Berlioz may have sought distraction from his grief by going ahead with a planned series of concerts in St Petersburg and Moscow, but far from rejuvenating him, the trip sapped his remaining strength. The concerts were successful, and Berlioz received a warm response from the new generation of Russian composers and the general public, but he returned to Paris visibly unwell. He went to Nice to recuperate in the Mediterranean climate, but fell on rocks by the shore, possibly because of a stroke, and had to return to Paris, where he convalesced for several months. In August 1868, he felt able to travel briefly to Grenoble to judge a choral festival. After arriving back in Paris he gradually grew weaker and died at his house in the Rue de Calais on 8\u00a0March 1869, at the age of 65. He was buried in Montmartre Cemetery with his two wives, who were exhumed and re-buried next to him.\nWorks.\nIn his 1983 book \"The Musical Language of Berlioz\", Julian Rushton asks \"where Berlioz comes in the history of musical forms and what is his progeny\". Rushton's answers to these questions are \"nowhere\" and \"none\". He cites well-known studies of musical history in which Berlioz is mentioned only in passing or not at all, and suggests that this is partly because Berlioz had no models among his predecessors and was a model to none of his successors. \"In his works, as in his life, Berlioz was a lone wolf\". Forty years earlier, Sir Thomas Beecham, a lifelong proponent of Berlioz's music, commented similarly, writing that although, for example, Mozart was a greater composer, his music drew on the works of his predecessors, whereas Berlioz's works were all wholly original: \"the \"Symphonie fantastique\" or \"La Damnation de Faust\" broke upon the world like some unaccountable effort of spontaneous generation which had dispensed with the machinery of normal parentage\".\nRushton suggests that \"Berlioz's way is neither architectural nor developmental, but illustrative\". He judges this to be part of a continuing French musical aesthetic, favouring a \"decorative\" \u2013 rather than the German \"architectural\" \u2013 approach to composition. Abstraction and discursiveness are alien to this tradition, and in operas, and to a large extent in orchestral music, there is little continuous development; instead self-contained numbers or sections are preferred.\nBerlioz's compositional techniques have been strongly criticised and equally strongly defended. It is common ground for critics and defenders that his approach to harmony and musical structure conforms to no established rules; his detractors ascribe this to ignorance, and his proponents to independent-minded adventurousness. His approach to rhythm caused perplexity to conservatively-inclined contemporaries; he hated the \"phrase carr\u00e9e\" \u2013 the unvaried four- or eight-bar phrase \u2013 and introduced new varieties of rhythm to his music. He explained his practice in an 1837 article: accenting weak beats at the expense of the strong, alternating triple and duple groups of notes and using unexpected rhythmic themes independent of the main melody. Macdonald writes that Berlioz was a natural melodist, but that his rhythmic sense led him away from regular phrase lengths; he \"spoke naturally in a kind of flexible musical prose, with surprise and contour important elements\".\nBerlioz's approach to harmony and counterpoint was idiosyncratic, and has provoked adverse criticism. Pierre Boulez commented, \"There are awkward harmonies in Berlioz that make one scream\". In Rushton's analysis, most of Berlioz's melodies have \"clear tonal and harmonic implications\" but the composer sometimes chose not to harmonise accordingly. Rushton observes that Berlioz's preference for irregular rhythm subverts conventional harmony: \"Classic and romantic melody usually implies harmonic motion of some consistency and smoothness; Berlioz's aspiration to musical prose tends to resist such consistency.\" The pianist and musical analyst Charles Rosen has written that Berlioz often sets the climax of his melodies in relief with the most emphatic chord a triad in root position, and often a tonic chord where the melody leads the listener to expect a dominant. He gives as an example the second phrase of the main theme \u2013 the \"id\u00e9e fixe\" \u2013 of the \"Symphonie fantastique\", \"famous for its shock to classical sensibilities\", in which the melody implies a dominant at its climax resolved by a tonic, but in which Berlioz anticipates the resolution by putting a tonic under the climactic note.\nEven among those unsympathetic to his music, few deny that Berlioz was a master of orchestration. Richard Strauss wrote that Berlioz invented the modern orchestra. Some of those who recognise Berlioz's mastery of orchestration nonetheless dislike a few of his more extreme effects. The pedal point for trombones in the \"Hostias\" section of the Requiem is often cited; some musicians such as Gordon Jacob have found the effect unpleasant. Macdonald has questioned Berlioz's fondness for divided cellos and basses in dense, low chords, but he emphasises that such contentious points are rare compared with \"the felicities and masterstrokes\" abounding in the scores. Berlioz took instruments hitherto used for special purposes and introduced them into his regular orchestra: Macdonald mentions the harp, the cor anglais, the bass clarinet and the valve trumpet. Among the characteristic touches in Berlioz's orchestration singled out by Macdonald are the wind \"chattering on repeated notes\" for brilliance, or being used to add \"sombre colour\" to Romeo's arrival at the Capulets' vault, and the \"Ch\u0153ur d'ombres\" in \"L\u00e9lio\". Of Berlioz's brass he writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Brass can be solemn or brazen; the \"Marche au supplice\" in the \"Symphonie fantastique\" is a defiantly modern use of brass. Trombones introduce Mephistopheles with three flashing chords or support the gloomy doubts of Narbal in \"Les Troyens\". With a hiss of cymbals, pianissimo, they mark the entry of the Cardinal in \"Benvenuto Cellini\" and the blessing of little Astyanax by Priam in \"Les Troyens\".\nSymphonies.\nBerlioz wrote four large-scale works he called symphonies, but his conception of the genre differed greatly from the classical pattern of the German tradition. With rare exceptions, such as Beethoven's Ninth, a symphony was taken to be a large\u2010scale wholly orchestral work, usually in four movements, using sonata form in the first movement and sometimes in others. Some pictorial touches were included in symphonies by Beethoven, Mendelssohn and others, but the symphony was not customarily used to recount a narrative.\nAll four of Berlioz's symphonies differ from the contemporary norm. The first, the \"Symphonie fantastique\" (1830), is purely orchestral, and the opening movement is broadly in sonata form, but the work tells a story, graphically and specifically. The recurring \"id\u00e9e fixe\" theme is the composer's idealised (and in the last movement caricatured) portrait of Harriet Smithson. Schumann wrote of the work that despite its apparent formlessness, \"there is an inherent symmetrical order corresponding to the great dimensions of the work, and this besides the inner connexions of thought\", and in the 20th century Constant Lambert wrote, \"Formally speaking it is among the finest of 19th-century symphonies\". The work has always been among Berlioz's most popular.\n\"Harold in Italy\", despite its subtitle \"Symphony in four parts with viola principal\", is described by the musicologist Mark Evan Bonds as a work traditionally seen as lacking any direct historical antecedent, \"a hybrid of symphony and concerto that owes little or nothing to the earlier, lighter genre of the symphonie concertante\". In the 20th century critical opinion varied about the work, even among those well-disposed to Berlioz. Felix Weingartner, an early 20th-century champion of the composer, wrote in 1904 that it did not reach the level of the \"Symphonie fantastique\"; fifty years later Edward Sackville-West and Desmond Shawe-Taylor found it \"romantic and picturesque\u00a0... Berlioz at his best\". In the 21st century Bonds ranks it among the greatest works of its kind in the 19th century.\nThe \"Dramatic Symphony\" with chorus, \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\" (1839), is still further from the traditional symphonic model. The episodes of Shakespeare's drama are represented in orchestral music, interspersed with expository and narrative sections for voices. Among Berlioz's admirers the work divides opinion. Weingartner called it \"a style-less mixture of different forms; not quite oratorio, not quite opera, not quite symphony \u2013 fragments of all three, and nothing perfect\". Countering accusations of lack of unity in this and other Berlioz works, Emmanuel Chabrier replied in a single emphatic word. Cairns regards the work as symphonic, albeit \"a bold extension\" of the genre, but he notes that other Berliozians including Wilfrid Mellers view it as \"a curious, not entirely convincing compromise between symphonic and operatic techniques\". Rushton comments that \"pronounced unity\" is not among the virtues of the work, but he argues that to close one's mind on that account is to miss all that the music has to give.\nThe last of the four symphonies is the \"Symphonie funebre et triomphale\", for giant brass and woodwind band (1840), with string parts added later, together with optional chorus. The structure is more conventional than the instrumentation: the first movement is in sonata form, but there are only two other movements, and Berlioz did not adhere to the traditional relationship between the various keys of the piece. Wagner called the symphony \"popular in the most ideal sense\u00a0... every urchin in a blue blouse would thoroughly understand it\".\nOperas.\nNone of Berlioz's three completed operas were written to commission, and theatre managers were not enthusiastic about staging them. Cairns writes that unlike Meyerbeer, who was rich, influential, and deferred to by opera managements, Berlioz was \"an opera composer on sufferance, one who composed on borrowed time paid for with money that was not his but lent by a wealthy friend\".\nThe three operas contrast strongly with one another. The first, \"Benvenuto Cellini\" (1838), inspired by the memoirs of the Florentine sculptor, is an opera semiseria, seldom staged until the 21st century, when there have been signs of a revival in its fortunes, with its first production at the Metropolitan Opera (2003) and a co-production by the English National Opera and the Op\u00e9ra national de Paris (2014), but it remains the least often produced of the three operas. In 2008, the music critic Michael Quinn called it \"an opera overflowing in every way, with musical gold bursting from each curve and crevice\u00a0... a score of continually stupendous brilliance and invention\" but agreed with the general view of the libretto: \"incoherent\u00a0... episodic, too epic to be comedy, too ironic for tragedy\". Berlioz welcomed Liszt's help in revising the work, streamlining the confusing plot; for his other two operas he wrote his own libretti.\nThe epic \"Les Troyens\" (1858) is described by the musical scholar James Haar as \"incontestably Berlioz's masterpiece\", a view shared by many other writers. Berlioz based the text on Virgil's \"Aeneid\", depicting the fall of Troy and subsequent travels of the hero. Holoman describes the poetry of the libretto as old fashioned for its day, but effective and at times beautiful. The opera consists of a series of self-contained numbers, but they form a continuous narrative, with the orchestra playing a vital part in expounding and commenting on the action. Although the work plays for five hours (including intervals) it is no longer the normal practice to present it across two evenings. \"Les Troyens\", in Holoman's view, embodies the composer's artistic creed: the union of music and poetry holds \"incomparably greater power than either art alone\".\nThe last of Berlioz's operas is the Shakespearean comedy \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\" (1862), written, the composer said, as a relaxation after his efforts with \"Les Troyens\". He described it as \"a caprice written with the point of a needle\". His libretto, based on \"Much Ado About Nothing\", omits Shakespeare's darker sub-plots and replaces the clowns Dogberry and Verges with an invention of his own, the tiresome and pompous music master Somarone. The action focuses on the sparring between the two leading characters, but the score contains some gentler music, such as the nocturne-duet \"Nuit paisible et sereine\", the beauty of which, Cairns suggests, matches or surpasses the love music in \"Rom\u00e9o\" or \"Les Troyens\". Cairns writes that \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\" \"has wit and grace and lightness of touch. It accepts life as it is. The opera is a divertissement, not a grand statement\".\n\"La Damnation de Faust\", although not written for the theatre, is sometimes staged as an opera.\nChoral.\nBerlioz gained a reputation, only partly justified, for liking gigantic orchestral and choral forces. In France there was a tradition of open-air performance, dating from the Revolution, calling for larger ensembles than were needed in the concert hall. Among the generation of French composers ahead of him, Cherubini, M\u00e9hul, Gossec and Berlioz's teacher Le Sueur all wrote for huge forces on occasion, and in the Requiem and to a lesser degree the Te Deum Berlioz follows them, in his own manner. The Requiem calls for sixteen timpani, quadruple woodwind and twelve horns, but the moments when the full orchestral sound is unleashed are few \u2013 the Dies irae is one such \u2013 and most of the Requiem is notable for its restraint. The orchestra does not play at all in the \"Quaerens me\" section, and what Cairns calls \"the apocalyptic armoury\" is reserved for special moments of colour and emphasis: \"its purpose is not merely spectacular but architectural, to clarify the musical structure and open up multiple perspectives.\"\nWhat Macdonald calls Berlioz's monumental manner is more prominent in the \"Te Deum\", composed in 1849 and first heard in 1855, when it was given in connection with the Exposition Universelle. By that time the composer had added to its two choruses a part for massed children's voices, inspired by hearing a choir of 6,500 children singing in St Paul's Cathedral during his London trip in 1851. A cantata for double chorus and large orchestra in honour of Napoleon III, \"L'Imp\u00e9riale\", described by Berlioz as \"en style \u00e9norme\", was played several times at the 1855 exhibition, but has subsequently remained a rarity.\n\"La Damnation de Faust\", though conceived as a work for the concert hall, did not achieve success in France until it was staged as an opera long after the composer's death. Within a year of Raoul Gunsbourg's production of the piece at Monte Carlo in 1893 the work was presented as an opera in Italy, Germany, Britain, Russia and the US. The many elements of the work vary from the robust \"Hungarian March\" near the beginning to the delicate \"Dance of the Sylphs\", the frenetic \"Ride to the Abyss\", M\u00e9phistoph\u00e9l\u00e8s' suave and seductive \"Song of the Devil\", and Brander's \"Song of a Rat\", a requiem for a dead rodent.\n\"L'Enfance du Christ\" (1850\u20131854) follows the pattern of \"La Damnation de Faust\" in mixing dramatic action and philosophic reflection. Berlioz, after a brief youthful religious spell, was a lifelong agnostic, but he was not hostile to the Roman Catholic church, and Macdonald calls the \"serenely contemplative\" end of the work \"the nearest Berlioz ever came to a devoutly Christian mode of expression\".\nM\u00e9lodies.\nBerlioz wrote songs throughout his career, but not prolifically. His best-known work in the genre is the song cycle \"Les Nuits d'\u00e9t\u00e9\", a group of six songs, originally for voice and piano but now usually heard in its later orchestrated form. He suppressed some of his early songs, and his last publication, in 1865, was the \"33 M\u00e9lodies\", collecting into one volume all his songs that he chose to preserve. Some of them, such as \"H\u00e9l\u00e8ne\" and \"Sara la baigneuse\", exist in versions for four voices with accompaniment, and there are others for two or three voices. Berlioz later orchestrated some of the songs originally written with piano accompaniment, and some, such as \"Za\u00efde\" and \"Le Chasseur danois\" were written with alternative piano or orchestral parts. \"La Captive\", to words by Victor Hugo, exists in six different versions. In its final version (1849) it was described by the Berlioz scholar Tom S. Wotton as like \"a miniature symphonic poem\". The first version, written at the Villa Medici, had been in fairly regular rhythm, but for his revision Berlioz made the strophic outline less clear-cut, and added optional orchestral parts for the last stanza, which brings the song to a quiet close.\nThe songs remain on the whole among the least known of Berlioz's works, and John Warrack suggests that Schumann identified why this might be so: the shape of the melodies is, as usual with Berlioz, not straightforward, and to those used to the regular four-bar phrases of French (or German) song this is an obstacle to appreciation. Warrack also comments that the piano parts, though not lacking in harmonic interest, are discernibly written by a non-pianist. Despite that, Warrack considers up to a dozen songs from the \"33 M\u00e9lodies\" well worth exploring \u2013 \"Among them are some masterpieces.\"\nProse.\nBerlioz's literary output was considerable and mostly consists of music criticism. Some was collected and published in book form. His \"Treatise on Instrumentation\" (1844) began as a series of articles and remained a standard work on orchestration throughout the 19th century; when Richard Strauss was commissioned to revise it in 1905 he added new material but did not change Berlioz's original text. The revised form remained widely used well into the 20th century; a new English translation was published in 1948.\nOther selections from Berlioz's press columns were published in \"Les Soir\u00e9es de l'orchestre\" (Evenings with the Orchestra, 1852), \"Les Grotesques de la musique\" (1859) and \"\u00c0 travers chants\" (Through Songs, 1862). His \"M\u00e9moires\" were published posthumously in 1870. Macdonald comments that there are few facets of musical practice of the time untouched in Berlioz's \"feuilletons\". He professed to dislike writing his press pieces, and they undoubtedly took up time that he would have preferred to spend writing music. His excellence as a witty and perceptive critic may have worked to his disadvantage in another way: he became so well known to the French public in that capacity that his stature as a composer became correspondingly more difficult to establish.\nReputation and Berlioz scholarship.\nWriters.\nThe first biography of Berlioz, by Eug\u00e8ne de Mirecourt, was published during the composer's lifetime. Holoman lists six other French biographies of the composer published in the four decades after his death. Of those who wrote for and against Berlioz's music in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, among the most outspoken were musical amateurs such as the lawyer and diarist George Templeton Strong, who called the composer's music variously \"flatulent\", \"rubbish\", and \"the work of a tipsy chimpanzee\", and, in the pro-Berlioz camp, the poet and journalist Walter J. Turner, who wrote what Cairns calls \"exaggerated eulogies\". Like Strong, Turner was, in the words of the music critic Charles Reid, \"unhampered by any excess of technical knowledge\".\nSerious studies of Berlioz in the 20th century began with Adolphe Boschot's \"L'Histoire d'un romantique\" (three volumes, 1906\u20131913). His successors were Tom S. Wotton, author of a 1935 biography, and Julien Tiersot, who wrote numerous scholarly articles on Berlioz and began the collection and editing of the composer's letters, a process eventually completed in 2016, eighty years after Tiersot's death. In the early 1950s the best-known Berlioz scholar was Jacques Barzun, a prot\u00e9g\u00e9 of Wotton, and, like him, strongly hostile to many of Boschot's conclusions, which they saw as unfairly critical of the composer. Barzun's study was published in 1950. He was accused at the time by the musicologist Winton Dean of being excessively partisan, and refusing to admit failings and unevenness in Berlioz's music; more recently he has been credited by the musicologist Nicholas Temperley with playing a major part in improving the climate of musical opinion towards Berlioz.\nSince Barzun, the leading Berlioz scholars have included David Cairns, D. Kern Holoman, Hugh Macdonald and Julian Rushton. Cairns translated and edited Berlioz's \"M\u00e9moires\" in 1969, and published a two-volume, 1500-page study of the composer (1989 and 1999), described in \"Grove's Dictionary of Music and Musicians\" as \"one of the masterpieces of modern biography\". Holoman was responsible for the publication in 1987 of the first thematic catalogue of Berlioz's works; two years later he published a single-volume biography of the composer. Macdonald was appointed in 1967 as the inaugural general editor of the New Berlioz Edition published by B\u00e4renreiter; 26 volumes were issued between 1967 and 2006 under his editorship. He is also one of the editors of Berlioz's \"Correspondance g\u00e9n\u00e9rale\", and author of a 1978 study of Berlioz's orchestral music, and of the \"Grove\" article on the composer. Rushton has published two volumes of analyses of Berlioz's music (1983 and 2001). The critic Rosemary Wilson said of his work, \"He has done more than any other writer to explain the uniqueness of Berlioz's musical style without losing a sense of wonder in its originality of musical expression.\"\nChanging reputation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNo other composer [is] so controversial as Hector Berlioz. Feelings about the merits of his music are seldom lukewarm; it has always tended to excite either uncritical admiration or unfair disparagement.\n\"The Record Guide\", 1955.\nBecause few of Berlioz's works were often performed in the late-19th and early 20th centuries, widely accepted views of his music were based on hearsay rather than on the music itself. Orthodox opinion emphasised supposed technical defects in the music and ascribed to the composer characteristics that he did not possess. Debussy called him \"a monster\u00a0... not a musician at all. He creates the illusion of music by means borrowed from literature and painting\". In 1904, in the second edition of \"Grove\", Henry Hadow made this judgment:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The remarkable inequality of his composition may be explained, in any rate in part, as the work of a vivid imagination striving to explain itself in a tongue which he never perfectly understood.\nBy the 1950s the critical climate was changing, although in 1954 the fifth edition of \"Grove\" carried this verdict from L\u00e9on Vallas:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Berlioz, in truth, never did contrive to express what he aimed at in the impeccable manner he desired. His boundless artistic ambition was nourished by no more than a melodic gift of no great amplitude, clumsy harmonic procedures and a pen without pliancy.\nCairns dismisses the article as \"an astonishing anthology of all the nonsense that has ever been talked about [Berlioz]\", but adds that by the 1960s it seemed a quaint survival from a vanished age. By 1963 Cairns, viewing Berlioz's greatness as firmly established, felt able to advise anyone writing on the subject, \"Do not keep harping on the 'strangeness' of Berlioz's music; you will no longer carry the reader with you. And do not use phrases like 'genius without talent', 'a certain strain of amateurishness', 'curiously uneven': they have had their day.\"\nOne important reason for the steep rise in Berlioz's reputation and popularity is the introduction of the LP record after the Second World War. In 1950 Barzun made the point that although Berlioz was praised by his artistic peers, including Schumann, Wagner, C\u00e9sar Franck and Modest Mussorgsky, the public had heard little of his music until recordings became widely available. Barzun maintained that many myths had grown up about the supposed quirkiness or ineptitude of the music \u2013 myths that were dispelled once the works were finally made available for all to hear. Neville Cardus made a similar point in 1955. As more and more Berlioz works became widely available on record, professional musicians and critics, and the musical public, were for the first time able to judge for themselves.\nA milestone in the reappraisal of Berlioz's reputation came in 1957, when for the first time a professional opera company staged the original version of \"The Trojans\" in a single evening. It was at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden; the work was sung in English with some minor cuts, but its importance was internationally recognised, and led to the world premiere staging of the work uncut and in French, at Covent Garden in 1969, marking the centenary of the composer's death.\nIn recent decades Berlioz has been widely regarded as a great composer, prone to lapses like any other. In 1999 the composer and critic Bayan Northcott wrote that the work of Cairns, Rushton, Sir Colin Davis and others retained \"the embattled conviction of a cause\". Nevertheless, Northcott was writing about Davis's \"Berlioz Odyssey\" of seventeen concerts of Berlioz's music, featuring all the major works, a prospect unimaginable in earlier decades of the century. Northcott concluded, \"Berlioz still seems so immediate, so controversial, so ever-new\".\nRecordings.\nAll of Berlioz's major works and most of his minor ones have been commercially recorded. This is a comparatively recent development. In the mid-1950s the international record catalogues listed complete recordings of seven major works: the \"Symphonie fantastique\", \"Symphonie fun\u00e8bre et triomphale\", \"Harold in Italy\", \"Les Nuits d'\u00e9t\u00e9\", \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\", the Requiem and the Te Deum, and various overtures. Excerpts from \"Les Troyens\" were available but there were no complete recordings of the operas.\nRecordings conducted by Colin Davis are prominent in the Berlioz discography, some studio-made and others recorded live. The first was \"L'Enfance du Christ\" in 1960 and the last the Requiem in 2012. In between there were five recordings of \"Les Nuits d'\u00e9t\u00e9\", four each of \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\", the \"Symphonie fantastique\" and \"Rom\u00e9o et Juliette\", and three of \"Harold in Italy\", \"Les Troyens\", and \"La Damnation de Faust\".\nIn addition to Davis's versions, \"Les Troyens\" has received studio recordings under Charles Dutoit and John Nelson; Nelson and Daniel Barenboim have recorded versions of \"B\u00e9atrice et B\u00e9n\u00e9dict\", and Nelson and Roger Norrington have conducted \"Benvenuto Cellini\" for CD. Singers who have recorded \"Les Nuits d'\u00e9t\u00e9\" include Victoria de los \u00c1ngeles, Leontyne Price, Janet Baker, R\u00e9gine Crespin, Jessye Norman and Kiri Te Kanawa, and more recently, Karen Cargill and Susan Graham.\nBy far the most recorded of Berlioz's works is the \"Symphonie fantastique\". The discography of the British Hector Berlioz website lists 96 recordings, from the pioneering version by Gabriel Piern\u00e9 and the Concerts Colonne in 1928 to those conducted by Beecham, Pierre Monteux, Charles Munch, Herbert von Karajan and Otto Klemperer to more recent versions including those of Boulez, Marc Minkowski, Yannick N\u00e9zet-S\u00e9guin and Fran\u00e7ois-Xavier Roth.\nNotes, references and sources.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53425", "revid": "1689", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53425", "title": "Frank O. Gehry", "text": ""}
{"id": "53426", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53426", "title": "Pseudonymity", "text": ""}
{"id": "53427", "revid": "40754995", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53427", "title": "Kenz\u014d Tange", "text": "Japanese architect (1913\u20132005)\n was a Japanese architect. Born in Sakai and raised in China and southern Japan, Tange was inspired from an early age by the work of Le Corbusier and designed his first buildings under Imperial Japan. He first achieved recognition for his projects to reconstruct the destroyed cities of postwar Japan, particularly Hiroshima, where he designed the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park. His engagement with the Congres Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne in the 1950s made him one of the first Japanese architects to achieve international recognition. \nRenowned for synthesizing traditional Japanese styles with modernism, Tange's work was emblematic of the Japanese postwar boom. However, he built major projects on five continents. He was a forerunner, mentor, and patron of the metabolist movement. He was also known as an ambitious, original urban planner whose ideas inspired the reconstruction of cities including Skopje. Tange would continue designing buildings until his death in 2005.\nTange won awards for his contributions to architecture, including the Royal Gold Medal in 1965, the AIA Gold Medal in 1966, the Praemium Imperiale for Architecture in 1993, and the Pritzker Prize, the \"Nobel Prize of architecture\", in 1987.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn on 4 September 1913 in Sakai, Japan, Tange spent his early life in the Chinese cities of Hankou and Shanghai; he and his family returned to Japan after learning of the death of one of his uncles. In contrast to the green lawns and red bricks in their Shanghai abode, the Tange family took up residence in a thatched roof farmhouse in Imabari on the island of Shikoku.\nAfter finishing middle school, Tange moved to Hiroshima in 1930 to attend high school. It was here that he first encountered the works of Swiss modernist, Le Corbusier. His discovery of the drawings of the Palace of the Soviets in a foreign art journal convinced him to become an architect. Although he graduated from high school, Tange's poor results in mathematics and physics meant that he had to pass entrance exams to qualify for admission to the prestigious universities. He spent two years doing so and during that time, he read extensively about western philosophy. Tange also enrolled in the film division at Nihon University's art department to dodge Japan's drafting of young men to its military and seldom attended classes.\nIn 1935 Tange began the tertiary studies he desired at the University of Tokyo's architecture department. He studied under Hideto Kishida and Yoshikazu Uchida. Although Tange was fascinated by the photographs of the Katsura villa that sat on Kishida's desk, his work was inspired by Le Corbusier. His graduation project was a seventeen-hectare (42-acre) development set in Tokyo's Hibiya Park.\nEarly career.\nAfter graduating from the university, Tange started to work as an architect at the office of Kunio Maekawa. During his employment, he travelled to Manchuria, participating in an architectural design competition for a bank, and toured Japanese-occupied Rehe on his return. When the Second World War started, he left Maekawa to rejoin the University of Tokyo as a postgraduate student. He developed an interest in urban design, and referencing only the resources available in the university library, he embarked on a study of Greek and Roman marketplaces. \nHis career would begin in earnest by winning a string of national competitions. In 1941, he won the People's House Design Competition. In 1942, Tange entered a competition for the design of the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere Memorial Hall. He was awarded first prize for a design that would have been situated at the base of Mount Fuji; the hall he conceived was a fusion of Shinto shrine architecture and the plaza on Capitoline Hill in Rome. In 1943, he won the competition for Japan-Thai Cultural Hall. None of his winning designs were realised. However, Tange's earliest work represents active engagement with the nationalist paradigms of Japanese imperial architecture. In response to a 1942 questionnaire regarding his views on style and architectural policy for the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, he stated: \"We must ignore both Anglo-American culture and the pre-existing cultures of the Southeast Asian Races. [...] We should start out with an unshakable conviction in the tradition and the future of the Japanese races.\" \nTange's pre-1945 success was a clear liability in the immediate postwar years, and was rarely noted by critics until the 1980s. Although his postwar style departed from his nationalistic early work, scholars have nonetheless identified continuities in Tange's early and later work, specifically in his aims to formulate a specifically Japanese style of modern architecture.\nIn 1946, Tange became an assistant professor at the University of Tokyo. In 1962, he opened the Urban Design Laboratory, and was promoted to professor of the Department of Urban Engineering in 1963. His students included Sachio Otani, Kisho Kurokawa, Arata Isozaki, Hajime Yatsuka and Fumihiko Maki.\nSelected projects.\nPostwar Reconstruction and Hiroshima Peace Memorial.\nTange's interest in urban studies put him in a good position to handle post war reconstruction. In the summer of 1946 he was invited by the War Damage Rehabilitation Board to put forward a proposal for certain war damaged cities. He submitted plans for Hiroshima and Maebashi. His design for an airport in Kanon, Hiroshima was accepted and built, but a seaside park in Ujina was not.\nThe Hiroshima authorities took advice about the city's reconstruction from foreign consultants, and in 1947 Tam Deling, an American park planner, suggested they build a Peace Memorial and preserve buildings situated near ground zero, that point directly below the explosion of the atomic bomb. In 1949 the authorities enacted the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Reconstruction Act, which gave the city access to special grant aid, and in August 1949, an international competition was announced for the design of the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park.\nTange was awarded first prize for a design that proposed a museum whose axis runs through the park, intersecting Peace Boulevard and the atomic bomb dome. The building is raised on massive columns, which frame the view along the structure's axis.\nWork on the Peace Center commenced in 1950. In addition to the axial nature of the design, the layout is similar to Tange's early competition arrangement for the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere Memorial Hall.\nIn the initial design the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum was dominated by adjoining utility buildings, which were linked to it by high-level walkways. Tange refined this concept to place the museum prominently at the centre, separate from the utility buildings (only one of which was subsequently designed by him). In addition to architectural symbolism, he thought it important for the design to centre around the building that houses the information about the atomic explosion.\nThe museum is constructed from bare reinforced concrete. The primary museum floor is lifted six metres above the ground on huge piloti and is accessible via a free-standing staircase. The rhythmical facade comprises vertical elements that repeat outwards from the centre. Like the exterior, the interior is finished with rough concrete; the idea was to keep the surfaces plain so that nothing could distract the visitor from the contents of the exhibits.\nThe Peace Plaza is the backdrop for the museum. The plaza was designed to allow 50 thousand people to gather around the peace monument in the centre. Tange also designed the Cenotaph monument as an arch composed of two hyperbolic paraboloids, said to be based on traditional Japanese ceremonial tombs from the Kofun Period.\nIse Shrine.\nIn 1953, Tange and architectural journalist and critic Noboru Kawazoe were invited to attend the reconstruction of the Ise Grand Shrine. The shrine is rebuilt every 20 years, and in 1953, it marked the 59th iteration of this tradition, which began in 690 by the order of Emperor Temmu. Normally the reconstruction process was a very closed affair but this time the ceremony was opened to architects and journalists to document the event. The ceremony coincided with the end of the American Occupation and it seemed to symbolise a new start in Japanese architecture. In 1965 when Tange and Kawazoe published the book \"Ise: Prototype of Japanese Architecture\", he likened the building to a modernist structure: an honest expression of materials, a functional design and prefabricated elements.\nKagawa Prefectural Government Hall.\nThe Kagawa Prefectural Government Hall on the island of Shikoku was completed in 1958. Its expressive construction could be likened to the Daibutsu style seen at the T\u014ddai-ji in Nara. The columns on the elevation bore only vertical loads so Tange was able to design them to be thin, maximising the surfaces for glazing. Although the hall has been called one of his finest projects, it drew criticism at the time of its construction for relying too heavily on tradition.\nTange's own home.\nTange's own home, designed in 1951 and completed in 1953, uses a similar skeleton structure raised off the ground as the Hiroshima Peace Museum; however, it is fused with a more traditional Japanese design that uses timber and paper. The house is based on the traditional Japanese module of the tatami mat, with the largest rooms designed to have flexibility so that they can be separated into three smaller rooms by fusuma sliding doors. The facade is designed with a rhythmic pattern; it comprises two types of facade designs (\"a\" and \"b\") that are ordered laterally in an a-b-a-a-b-a arrangement. The house is topped with a two-tier roof. Kazuo Shinohara's 1954 house at Kugayama is remarkably similar in its design, although it is built with steel and has a simpler rhythm in its facade.\nTown Hall, Kurashiki.\nThe fortress-like town hall in Kurashiki was designed in 1958 and completed in 1960. When it was constructed it was situated on the edge of the old town centre connecting it with the newer areas of the town. Kurashiki is better known as a tourist spot for its old Machiya style houses.\nSet in an open square, the building sits on massive columns that taper inwards as they rise. The elevation consists of horizontal planks (some of which are omitted to create windows) which overlap at the corners in a \"log cabin\" effect. The entrance is covered with a heavy projecting concrete canopy which leads to a monumental entrance hall. The stair to this hall ascends in cantilevered straight flights to the left and right. The walls to this interior are bare shuttered concrete punctured by windows reminiscent of Le Corbusier's La Tourette. The Council Chamber is a separate building whose raked roof has seating on top of it to form an external performance space.\nTokyo Bay Plan.\nTokyo experienced a massive population boom in the postwar years, putting significant strain on existing urban infrastructure. The municipal government responded by establishing the National Capital Construction Committee in 1951, which focused on decentralization as a prime method to relieve population pressures. In 1958, the committee released the National Capital Region Development Plan (NCRDP), which called for the establishment of multiple satellite cities and subcentres and the development of a greenbelt around Central Tokyo, in emulation of Patrick Abercrombie's 1944 Greater London Plan.\nTange and the nascent Metabolists sought to produce a response to the NCRDP which recognized the fundamental ways in which they believed the automobile had changed urban development and life. Tange's plan, published in 1960 at the Tokyo venue of the World Design Congress, completely bypassed the existing infrastructure of Tokyo and called for a radical new development pattern centered on a massive megastructure spanning Tokyo Bay. Tange believed that modern \"pivotal\" megacities such as Tokyo had their economic basis in the tertiary sector, and that, accordingly, conventional modern urban planning based on the separation of different functional \"zones\" was no longer useful. Believing that the city's vitality was grounded in the very movement of its then-10 million inhabitants, the Tokyo Bay megastructure was designed as an \"arterial structure\" to enhance the mobility of the city.\nTaking inspiration from Le Corbusier's earlier \"Ville Radieuse\", the Tokyo Bay plan emphasized the separation of pedestrians and vehicles, and the creation of an integrated system of architecture and highways which would encourage linear development and constant mobility. The project, at least in its first planned stage, would stretch 18 km from downtown Tokyo across the bay to Chiba, and be ripe for expansion with the city's population.\nThe ambitious plan was never implemented, although it generated considerable interest. Peter Smithson, who, along with his wife Alice, regularly engaged with Tange, admitted the ingenuity of the plan, but denied its feasibility and disputed Tange's ideal of linear growth. Christopher Alexander, writing in 1965, viewed the plan as a \"beautiful\" example of a \"tree city\" which was wholly incapable of meeting the basic necessities of human organization (Alexander personally was a proponent of a \"semi-lattice\" model of urban growth).\nThe plan nonetheless introduced significant, new ideas into the contemporary urban-planning discourse, and initiated a \"megastructure movement\". It also served as a significant inspiration for his work in the next few years: the Yamanashi Communication Center in Kofu and his plan for Skopje both encapsulated his ideal of the \"city as process\".\nTokyo Olympic arenas.\nThe Yoyogi National Gymnasium is situated in an open area in Yoyogi Park on an adjacent axis to the Meiji Shrine. The gymnasium and swimming pool were designed by Tange for the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, which were the first Olympics held in Asia. Tange began his designs in 1961 and the plans were approved by the Ministry of Education in January 1963. The buildings were placed to optimize space available for parking and to permit the smoothest transition of incoming and outgoing people.\nInspired by the skyline of the Colosseum in Rome, the roofs have a skin suspended from two masts. The buildings were inspired by Le Corbusier's Philips Pavilion designed for Brussels' World Fair, and the Ingalls Rink, Yale University's hockey area, by Eero Saarinen (both structures were completed in 1958). The roof of the Philips Pavilion was created by complex hyperbolic paraboloid surfaces stretched between cables. In both cases Tange took Western ideas and adapted them to meet Japanese requirements.\nThe gymnasium has a capacity of approximately 16,000 and the smaller building can accommodate up to 5,300 depending on the events that are taking place. At the time it was built, the gymnasium had the world's largest suspended roof span. Two reinforced concrete pillars support a pre-stressed steel net onto which steel plates are attached. The bottom anchoring of this steel net is a heavy concrete support system which forms a distinct curve on the interior and exterior of the building. In the interior, this structural anchor is used to support the grandstand seats. The overall curvature of the roof helps protect the building from the damaging effects of strong winds.\nTange won a Pritzker Prize for the design; the citation described the gymnasium as \"among the most beautiful buildings of the 20th century\".\nPlan for Skopje.\nThe reconstruction plan of the capital city of Skopje, then part of the Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia following a major earthquake was won by Tange's architecture team in 1965. The project was significant because of its international influence, however for Tange it was model case for urban reconstruction to realise modern architecture principles. It is the first time that a Japanese architect was invited by an international body to participate in an urban development of this scale.\nSupreme Court Building of Pakistan.\nThe Supreme Court of Pakistan Building is the official and principal workplace of the Supreme Court of Pakistan, located in 44000 Constitution Avenue Islamabad, Pakistan. Construction on the building began in the 1960s, but it was only completed in 1993, it is flanked by the Prime Minister's Secretariat to the south and President's House and the Parliament Building to the north.\nDesigned by Tange, to a design brief prepared by the PEPAC, the complex was engineered and built by CDA Engineering and Siemens Engineering.\nYamanashi Press and Broadcasting Centre.\nTange was commissioned to build a communications centre in K\u014dfu in 1961. In 1966, the Yamanashi Press and Broadcasting Centre, a building which would serve as the headquarters for the Yamanashi Broadcasting System and house several of its divisions, including studios for radio and television and printing presses for a newspaper, was completed. The Press and Broadcasting Centre was one of the few opportunities Tange had to fully implement his Metabolist ideals of constant movement and expansion, albeit at a small scale.\nThe building grows out of sixteen towers, all five metres in diameter but varying in height, which carry vertical circulation and services including stairs and lifts. They are spanned by large, horizontal floor trays, which house the activities performed in the building. The plan of the building emphasized possibilities for continuous modification and growth by omitting some floor plates, which have since been filled in with gardens, and by the possibility for modifications around the sixteen towers which house essential circulation and services. Originally, the cafeteria and some public-facing services were situated on the ground floor, while the newspaper, TV Broadcasting, and radio divisions were situated on the third, sixth, and eighth floors, respectively. Offices in the building had glass walled floors and were surrounded by balconies. At least conceptually, the building was designed to expand with the company and even incorporate cars, although this has not come to fruition.\nThe Press and Broadcasting Centre is one of the few actually built expressions of Metabolist architecture, along with Kisho Kurokawa's now-demolished Nagakin Capsule Tower. The building continues to dominate its surroundings, however, critics have stated that the building has long diverged from its original ideals, and several redesign proposals have been submitted.\nOsaka Exposition 1970.\nIn 1965 the Bureau International des Expositions decided that Japan should host the 1970 Exposition. of land in the Senri Hills near Osaka were put aside for its use. Tange and Uzo Nishiyama were appointed as planners for the masterplan by the Theme Committee. Tange assembled a group of twelve architects to design the infrastructure and facilities for the Expo.\nAt the centre of the Expo was the Festival Plaza. Tange conceived that this plaza (with its oversailing space frame roof) would connect the display spaces and create a setting for a \"festival\". The plaza divided the site into a northern zone for pavilions and a southern zone for administration facilities. The zones were interconnected with moving pathways.\nSingapore.\nIn 1970, he became acquainted with Lee Kuan Yew while staying in Hong Kong to receive an honorary degree from the University of Hong Kong. Singapore had gained independence only five years earlier and was rapidly developing its small territory. They got on well, and Tange was soon invited to serve as an advisor to the urban planning arm of the Singaporean government. Initially, he gave advice on what should be preserved and what should be rebuilt, and he also planned the development of a reclaimed area, Marina South.\nIn the 1980s, Tange designed the main campus layout and building complex of the newly established Nanyang Technological University. He also defined the skyline of the Central Business District by designing iconic buildings such as One Raffles Place (the tallest building outside the United States upon its completion), the Pickering Operations Complex, and UOB Plaza in the 1980s and 1990s. He also designed Singapore Indoor Stadium.\nHawaii Hochi Building.\nStarted in 1972 and completed in 1975 for \"Hawaii Hochi\", a Japanese language newspaper founded in 1912. The brutalist building was one of only two buildings Tange designed for construction in the United States, the other being an expansion for the Minneapolis Institute of Art. The building features two structures connected by an open air courtyard with tropical plants, and a rooftop parking lot.\nSyrian Presidential Palace.\nIn 1975, while Hafez al-Assad was still in power, Tange began designing the Presidential Palace in Damascus, Syria. According to a 2013 article by The Guardian, Tange resigned before construction began, and his original design was \"reinterpreted\" by others. The resulting compound ultimately enclosed 31,500 square metres (340,000 square feet) of space.\nArchitectural circle.\nCongr\u00e8s International d'Architecture Moderne.\nTange's first placing in the design competition for the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park gained him recognition from Kunio Maekawa. The elder architect invited Tange to attend the Congr\u00e8s International d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM). Founded in 1928, this organization of planners and architects had initially promoted architecture in economic and social context, but at its fourth meeting in 1933 (under the direction of Le Corbusier) it debated the notion of the \"Functional City\". This led to a series of proposals on urban planning known as \"The Athens Charter\". By the 1951 CIAM meeting that was held in Hoddesdon, England, to which Tange was invited, the Athens Charter came under debate by younger members of the group (including Tange) who found the Charter too vague in relation to city expansion. The \"Athens Charter\" promoted the idea that a city gains character from its continual changes over many years; this notion was written before the advent of mass bombings and the Second World War and therefore held little meaning for Tange who had evidenced the destruction of Hiroshima. The discussions at Hoddesdon sowed discontent within CIAM that eventually contributed to its breakup after their Dubrovnik meeting in 1956; the younger members of CIAM formed a splinter group known as Team X, which Tange later joined. Tange presented various designs to Team X in their meetings. At a 1959 meeting in Otterlo, Holland, one of his presentations included an unrealised project by Kiyonori Kikutake; this project became the basis of the Metabolist Movement.\nWhen Tange travelled back to Japan from the 1951 CIAM meeting, he visited Le Corbusier's nearly complete Unit\u00e9 d'Habitation in Marseilles, France. He also looked at the sketches for the new capital of Punjab at Chandigarh, India.\nTokyo World Design Conference and urban planning.\nTange had left the Team X Otterlo conference early to take up a tenure at Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His experiences at the conference may have led him to set his fifth year students a project to design a 25-thousand-person residential community to be erected in Boston over the bay. The scheme comprised two giant A-frame structures that resembled Tange's competition entry for the World Health Organisation's headquarters on Lake Geneva. Both this scheme and the earlier ones by Kikutake formed the basis of Tange's speech to the Tokyo World Design Conference in 1960. In his speech he used words such as \"cell\" and \"metabolism\" in relation to urban design. The Metabolist movement grew out of discussions with other members of the conference. Amongst them were Kisho Kurokawa, Junzo Sakakura, Alison and Peter Smithson, Louis Kahn, Jean Prouv\u00e9, B. V. Doshi and Jacob Bakema. The conference ended with Tange's presentation of the Boston plan and his own scheme, \"The Tokyo Plan \u2013 1960\".Tange argued that the normal urban pattern of a radial centripetal transportation system was a relic of the Middle Ages and would not handle the strain placed upon it by the world's mega cities, which he qualified as those with populations greater than 10\u00a0million. Rather than building up a city from a civic centre, Tange's proposal was based on civic axis, developing the city in a linear fashion. Three levels of traffic, graded according to speed, would facilitate the movement of up to 2.5\u00a0million people along the axis, which would be divided into vertebrae-like cyclical transportation elements. The sheer size of the proposal meant that it would stretch out across the water of Tokyo Bay. Tange's proposals at this conference play a large part in establishing his reputation as \"The West's favourite Japanese architect\".\nIn 1965 Tange was asked by the United Nations to enter a limited competition for the redevelopment of Skopje, which was at that time a city of Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The town had been heavily destroyed by an earthquake in 1963. Tange won 60% of the prize; the other 40% was awarded to the Yugoslav team. Tange's design furthered ideas put forward in the earlier \"Tokyo Plan\", which in turn served as an inspiration for the Yamanashi Press and Broadcasting Center.\nUrbanists and Architects Team.\nTange's inspiration for his design office came from his friend Walter Gropius who he had first met at the CIAM meeting in 1951. While lecturing at the Bauhaus, Gropius had placed great importance on teaching architects, especially imparting on them the concept of working together as a team. The Urbanists and Architects Team was founded in 1961 and became Kenz\u014d Tange Associates. Tange promoted a very flat hierarchy in the practice: partners were equal in importance and were encouraged to participate in every project. Multiple options were developed simultaneously, and research on individual schemes was encouraged.\nLater career.\nDuring the 1970s and 1980s Tange expanded his portfolio to include buildings in over 20\u00a0countries around the world. In 1985, at the behest of Jacques Chirac, the mayor of Paris at that time, Tange proposed a master plan for a plaza at Place d'Italie that would interconnect the city along an east-west axis.\nFor the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building, which opened in 1991, Tange designed a large civic centre with a plaza dominated by two skyscrapers. These house the administration offices whilst a smaller seven-storey building contains assembly facilities. In his design of a high tech version of Kofu Communications Centre, Tange equipped all three buildings with state-of-the-art building management systems that monitored air quality, light levels and security. The external skin of the building makes dual references to both tradition and the modern condition. Tange incorporated vertical and horizontal lines reminiscent of both timber boarding and the lines on semiconductor boards.\nTange converted to Christianity, taking the name Joseph, the husband of Mary mother of Christ, some time before his death. He continued to practice until three years before his death in 2005. He disliked postmodernism in the 1980s and considered this style of architecture to be only \"transitional architectural expressions\". His funeral was held in one of his works, the Tokyo Cathedral.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Tadao Ando, one of Japan's greatest living architects, likes to tell the story of the stray dog, a stately akita, that wandered into his studio in Osaka some 20 years ago, and decided to stay. \"First, I thought I would call her Kenzo Tange; but then I realised I couldn't kick Kenzo Tange around. So I called her Le Corbusier instead.\"\u2014\u200a\nLegacy.\nThe modular expansion of Tange's Metabolist visions had some influence on Archigram with their plug-in mega structures. The Metabolist movement gave momentum to Kikutake's career. Although his Marine City proposals (submitted by Tange at CIAM) were not realised, his Miyakonojo City Hall (1966) was a more Metabolist example of Tange's own Nichinan Cultural Centre (1962). Although the Osaka Expo had marked a decline in the Metabolist movement, it resulted in a \"handing over\" of the reigns to a younger generation of architects such as Kazuo Shinohara and Arata Isozaki.\nIn an interview with Jeremy Melvin at the Royal Academy of Arts, Kengo Kuma explained that, at the age of ten, he was inspired to become an architect after seeing Tange's Olympic arenas, which were constructed in 1964.\nFor Reyner Banham, Tange was a prime exemplar of the use of Brutalist architecture. His use of B\u00e9ton brut concrete finishes in a raw and undecorated way combined with his civic projects such as the redevelopment of Tokyo Bay made him a great influence on British architects during the 1960s. \nTange's son Paul Noritaka Tange graduated from Harvard University in 1985 and went on to join Kenz\u014d Tange Associates. He became the president of Kenzo Tange Associates in 1997 before founding Tange Associates in 2002.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53428", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53428", "title": "Public key", "text": ""}
{"id": "53429", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53429", "title": "Tange Kenzo", "text": ""}
{"id": "53430", "revid": "980331", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53430", "title": "Nickname", "text": "Informal name of a person, place, or thing\nA nickname, in some circumstances also known as a sobriquet, or informally a \"moniker\", is an informal substitute for the proper name of a person, place, or thing. It is distinct from a pseudonym, pen name, stage name, or title, although the concepts can overlap. A nickname may be a descriptive and based on characteristics, or it be a variant form of a proper name. Nicknames may be used for convenience by shortening a name, or they may be used to express affection, playfulness, contempt, or to reflect a particular character trait.\nEtymology.\nThe compound word \"ekename\", meaning \"additional name\", was attested as early as 1303. This word was derived from the Old English word \"eac\", meaning \"also\", related to \"eacian\", meaning \"to increase\". By the 15th century, the misdivision of the syllables of the phrase \"an ekename\" led to its rephrasing as \"a nekename\". Though the spelling has changed, the meaning of the word has remained relatively stable ever since.\nPeople.\nThe term \"nickname\" is often used as an umbrella term to describe any deviation from a person's legal or official name; a nickname may be used exclusively, instead the person's original name, or it may be used in addition to it, with the person being referred to them interchangeably. Nicknames can be classified into several types, based on their origin or purpose. Nicknames may be based on names, physical characteristics, personality traits, geographical origins, or terms of endearment. Some types of nicknames, like diminutives, or shortened names, may be chosen by their bearers; for example, a woman named \"Elizabeth\" may choose to go by \"Liz\" because she finds it faster to write and say. Other types of nicknames tend to be bestowed on people by others. These might still be based on the bearer's legal name, or they might be unrelated. Some of these nicknames are affectionate in nature, like pet names or hypocorism, while others are derogatory and used as a form of name calling. Often, nicknames that are bestowed by other people are based on some type of distinctive characteristic, like \"Lefty\" for a left-handed person. \nLanguage conventions.\nEnglish nicknames are generally represented in quotes between the bearer's first and last names (e.g., \"Dwight David \"Ike\" Eisenhower\" and \"Daniel Lamont \"Bubba\" Franks\"). It is also common for the nickname to be identified after a comma following the full real name or later in the body of the text, such as in an obituary (e.g., \"Frankie Frisch, \"The Fordham Flash\"\"). Like English, German uses (German-style) quotation marks between the first and last names (e.g., \"Andreas Nikolaus \u201eNiki\u201c Lauda\"). Other languages may use other conventions; for example, Italian writes the nickname after the full name followed by \"detto\" \"called\" (e.g., \"Salvatore Schillaci detto Tot\u00f2\"), in Spanish the nickname is written in formal contexts at the end in quotes following \"alias\" (e.g. \"Alfonso Tostado, alias \u00abel Abulense\u00bb\"), in Portuguese the nickname is written after the full name followed by \"vulgo\" or between parenthesis (e.g. Edson Arantes do Nascimento, vulgo Pel\u00e9 / Edson Arantes do Nascimento (Pel\u00e9)) and Slovenian represents nicknames after a dash or hyphen (e.g., \"Franc Rozman \u2013 Stane\"). The latter may confuse because it resembles an English convention sometimes used for married and maiden names.\nSocietal uses.\nIn Viking societies, many people had \"heiti\", \"vi\u00f0rnefni\", or \"kenningarn\u00f6fn\" (Old Norse terms for nicknames) which were used in addition to, or instead of, the first name. In some circumstances, the giving of a nickname had a special status in Viking society in that it created a relationship between the name maker and the recipient of the nickname, to the extent that the creation of a nickname also often entailed a formal ceremony and an exchange of gifts known in Old Norse as \"nafnfestr\" ('fastening a name'). Nicknames are widely attested in Anglo-Saxon England, and similar social models have been applied to these names.\nIn Bengali society, for example, people will often have two names: a \"daknam\" (pet name) which is the name used by family and friends and a \"bhalonam\" which is their formal name.\nIn the United Kingdom, some surnames have nicknames traditionally attached. A man with the surname 'Clark' will be nicknamed 'Nobby'; the surname 'Miller' will have the nickname 'Dusty' (alluding to the flour dust of a miller at work); the surname 'Adams' has the nickname 'Nabby'. Several other nicknames are linked traditionally with surnames, including Chalky White, Bunny Warren, Tug Wilson, and Spud Baker. Other British nicknames allude to a person's origins. A Scotsman may be nicknamed 'Jock', an Irishman 'Paddy' (alluding to Saint Patrick, the patron saint of Ireland), or 'Mick' (alluding to the preponderance of Roman Catholicism in Ireland), and a Welshman may be nicknamed 'Taffy' (from Welsh \"Dafydd\", David). Some nicknames referred ironically to a person's physical characteristics, such as 'Lofty' for a short person, 'Curly' for a bald man, or 'Bluey' for a redhead.\nIn Chinese culture, nicknames are frequently used within a community among relatives, friends, and neighbors. A typical southern Chinese nickname often begins with a \"\u963f\" followed by another character, usually the last character of the person's given name. For example, Taiwanese politician Chen Shui-bian (\u9673\u6c34\u6241) is sometimes referred as \"\u963f\u6241\" (A-Bian). In many Chinese communities of Southeast Asia, nicknames may also connote one's occupation or status. For example, the landlord might be known simply as \"\" (), Hokkien for \"boss\") to his tenants or workers, while a bread seller would be called \"Mianbao Shu\" \u9762\u5305\u53d4 (literally, Uncle Bread).\nNicknames derived from proper names.\nA nickname can be a shortened or a modified variation on a person's real name. These are sometimes called diminutives. People may decide to use these nicknames on their own, or may accept them after being called them by others. These nicknames take different forms: \nA nickname may be formed by a portion of a name:\nNicknames based on characteristics.\nOther nicknames are not based on proper names, but rather describe some characteristic about a person. These may be complimentary terms, like \"Flash\" for a fast runner, or they might be derogatory, like \"Stinky\" for someone with body odor. They may also be based on things like geographical origin, like \"Tex\" for someone from Texas.\nNicknames based on relationship.\nA nickname may refer to the relationship with the person. This is a term of endearment.\nGeography.\nPlacenames.\nMany geographical places have titles, or alternative names, which have positive implications. Paris, for example, is the \"City of Light\", Rome is the \"Eternal City\", Venice is \"La Serenissima\", and New Jersey is the \"Garden State\". These alternative names are often used to boost the status of such places, contrary to the usual role of a nickname. Many places or communities, particularly in the US, adopt titles because they can help in establishing a civic identity, help outsiders recognize a community or attract people to a community, promote civic pride, and build community unity. Titles and slogans that successfully create a new community \"ideology or myth\" are also believed to have economic value. Their economic value is difficult to measure, but there are anecdotal reports of cities that have achieved substantial economic benefits by \"branding\" themselves by adopting new slogans.\nBy contrast, older city nicknames may be critical: London is still occasionally referred to as \"The Smoke\" in memory of its notorious \"pea-souper\" smogs (smoke-filled fogs) of the 19th and early 20th centuries, and Edinburgh was \"Auld Reekie\" for the same reason, as countless coal fires polluted its atmosphere.\nResidents.\nBesides or replacing the demonym, some places have collective nicknames for their inhabitants. Many examples of this practice are found in Wallonia and in Belgium in general, where such a nickname is referred to in French as \"blason populaire\".\nComputing.\nIn the context of information technology, \"nickname\" is a common synonym for the \"screen name\" or \"handle\" of a user. In computer networks it has become a common practice for every person to also have one or more nicknames for pseudonymity, to avoid ambiguity, or simply because the natural name or technical address would be too long to type or take too much space on the screen.\nIn the IRC (Internet Relay Chat) text-based messaging system first developed in the late 1980s, a nickname (or \"nick\") was required for every client that connected to an IRC server.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53432", "revid": "12331483", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53432", "title": "Diracs constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "53433", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53433", "title": "Dirac's constant", "text": ""}
{"id": "53435", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53435", "title": "Venus de Milo", "text": "Ancient Greek marble statue of the goddess Aphrodite\nThe Venus de Milo or Aphrodite of Melos is an ancient Greek marble sculpture that was created during the Hellenistic period. Its exact dating is uncertain, but the modern consensus places it in the 2nd century BC, perhaps between 160 and 110 BC. It was discovered in 1820 on the island of Milos, Greece, and has been displayed at the Louvre Museum since 1821. Since the statue's discovery, it has become one of the most famous works of ancient Greek sculpture in the world.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" is believed to depict Aphrodite, the Greek goddess of love, whose Roman counterpart was Venus. Made of Parian marble, the statue is larger than life size, standing over high. The statue is missing both arms. The original position of these missing arms is uncertain. The sculpture was originally identified as depicting Aphrodite holding the apple of discord as a marble hand holding an apple was found alongside it; recent scientific analysis supports the identification of this hand as part of the sculpture. On the basis of a now-lost inscription found near the sculpture, it has been attributed to Alexandros from Antioch on the Maeander, though the name on the inscription is uncertain and its connection to the Venus is disputed.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" rapidly became a cornerstone of the Louvre's antiquities collection in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars, and its fame spread through distribution in photographs and three-dimensional copies. The statue inspired over 70 poems, influenced 19th-century art and the Surrealist movement in the early 20th century, and has been featured in various modern artistic projects, including film and advertising. In contrast to the popular appreciation of the sculpture, scholars have been more critical. Though upon its discovery the Venus was considered a classical masterpiece, since it was re-dated to the Hellenistic period classicists have neglected the Venus in favour of studying sculptures mentioned in ancient written sources, even though they only survive as later copies which are technically inferior to the Venus.\nDescription.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" is an over tall Parian marble statue of a Greek goddess, most likely Aphrodite, depicted with a bare torso and drapery over the lower half of her body. The figure stands with her weight on her right leg, and the left leg raised; her head is turned to the left. The statue is missing both arms, the left foot, and the earlobes. There is a filled hole below her right breast that originally contained a metal tenon that would have supported the right arm. \nThe Venus' flesh is polished smooth, but chisel marks are still visible on other surfaces. The drapery is more elaborately carved on the right-hand side of the statue than the left, perhaps because on the left-hand side it was originally obscured from view. Likewise the Venus is less finely-finished from behind, suggesting that it was originally intended to be viewed only from the front. While the body of the Venus is depicted in a realistic style, the head is more idealised. The lips are slightly open, showing teeth, and the eyes and mouth are small. The sculpture has been minimally restored: only the tip of the nose, lower lip, big toe on the right foot, and some of the drapery.\nStylistically, the sculpture combines elements of classical and Hellenistic art. Features such as the small, regular eyes and mouth, and the strong brow and nose, are classical in style, while the shape of the torso and the deeply carved drapery are Hellenistic.\nKenneth Clark describes the figure as \"the last great work of antique Greece\", and \"of all the works of antiquity one of the most complex and the most artful. ...[the sculptor] has consciously attempted to give the effect of a 5th-century work\", while also using \"the inventions of his own time\"; \"the planes of her body are so large and calm that at first we do not realise the number of angles through which they pass. In architectural terms, she is a baroque composition with classic effect\". \nDiscovery.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" was discovered on 8 April 1820 by a Greek farmer on the island of Milos, then still part of the Ottoman Empire. Olivier Voutier, a French sailor interested in archaeology, witnessed the discovery and encouraged the farmer to continue digging. Voutier and the farmer uncovered two large pieces of the sculpture and a third, smaller piece. A fragment of an arm, a hand holding an apple, and two herms were also found alongside the statue. Two inscriptions were also apparently found with the Venus. One, transcribed by Dumont D'Urville, a French naval officer who arrived on Milos shortly after the discovery, commemorates a dedication by one Bakchios son of Satios, the assistant gymnasiarch. The other, recorded on a drawing made by Auguste Debay, preserves part of a sculptor's signature. Both inscriptions are now lost. Other sculptural fragments found around the same time include a third herm, two further arms, and a foot with sandal.\nDumont D'Urville wrote an account of the find. According to his testimony, the Venus statue was found in a quadrangular niche. If this findspot were the original context for the Venus, the niche and the gymnasiarch's inscription suggests that the \"Venus de Milo\" was installed in the gymnasium of Melos. An alternative theory proposed by Salomon Reinach is that the findspot was instead the remains of a lime kiln, and that the other fragments had no connection to the Venus; this theory is dismissed by Christofilis Maggidis as having \"no factual basis\".\nAfter stopping in Melos, D'Urville's ship sailed to Constantinople, where he reported the find to the Comte de Marcellus, assistant to Charles Fran\u00e7ois de Riffardeau, marquis de Rivi\u00e8re, the French ambassador. Rivi\u00e8re agreed that Marcellus should go to Melos to buy the statue. By the time Marcellus arrived at Melos, the farmer who discovered the statue had already received another offer to buy it, and it had been loaded onto a ship; the French intervened and Marcellus was able to buy the Venus. It was brought to France, where Louis XVIII had it installed in the Louvre. Contrary to the usual practice at the time, on the recommendation of Quatrem\u00e8re de Quincy, the Venus was not significantly restored but was exhibited in the state in which she was discovered. Quatrem\u00e8re, who believed that the Venus was originally part of a group with a sculpture of Mars, argued that as the entire Mars was missing it was impossible to restore the sculpture. \nDisplay.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" was initially installed in the Louvre in 1821; it was rapidly moved twice before finding a long-term home in the where it remained until 1848. From there it was moved to the , where it remained until being removed from the museum in 1870 for protection during the Paris Commune. When the was renovated in the 1880s, the Venus was given a new pedestal which allowed spectators to rotate the sculpture; at the same time the approach to the sculpture was filled with other ancient Venus statues. \nA proposal in 1919 to display the Venus alongside the Leonardo's \"Mona Lisa\" and Michelangelo's \"Dying Slave\" and \"Rebellious Slave\" was never carried out, but in 1936, the sculpture was once again moved to the to accommodate the volume of visitors to the Louvre; the other Venus statues were removed to focus visitors on the \"Venus de Milo\". At this time the route for visitors through the Louvre was modified to be more chronological, coming through galleries of archaic and classical sculpture before arriving in a gallery dedicated to the Hellenstic period; the Venus de Milo was placed between the classical and Hellenistic galleries. During the Second World War the sculpture was once again removed from the Louvre for safekeeping, and stored in the Ch\u00e2teau de Valen\u00e7ay. In 1964 it was exhibited in Tokyo and Kyoto; this is the only time the sculpture has left France since it was acquired by the Louvre. In 1972 an experiment was made with a new site for the sculpture, and it was temporarily moved to allow renovations in the 1980s and 1990s; by 1999 the volume of visitors to the Venus was causing problems and the Louvre authorities were considering returning the sculpture to its previous setting. In 2010 the sculpture was installed in its new setting, with the sculptural fragments discovered alongside it on display in the same room.\nInterpretation.\nIdentification.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" is probably a sculpture of the goddess Aphrodite, but its fragmentary state makes secure identification difficult. The earliest written accounts of the sculpture, by a French captain and the French vice-consul on Melos, both identify it as representing Aphrodite holding the apple of discord, apparently on the basis of the hand holding an apple found with the sculpture. An alternative identification proposed by Reinach is that she represents the sea-goddess Amphitrite, and was originally grouped with a sculpture of Poseidon from Melos, discovered in 1878. Other proposed identifications include a Muse, Nemesis, or Sappho.\nThe authorship and date of the \"Venus de Milo\" were both disputed from its discovery. Within a month of its acquisition by the Louvre, three French scholars had published papers on the statue, disagreeing on all aspects of its interpretation: Toussaint-Bernard \u00c9m\u00e9ric-David thought it dated to c.\u2009420 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009380 BC, between sculptors Phidias and Praxiteles; Quatrem\u00e8re de Quincy attributed it to the mid-fourth century and the circle of Praxiteles; and the Comte de Clarac thought it a later copy of a work by Praxiteles. The scholarly consensus in the 19th century was that the Venus dated to the fourth century BC. In 1893, Adolf Furtw\u00e4ngler was the first to argue that it was in fact late Hellenistic, dating to c.\u2009150 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u200950 BC, and this dating continues to be widely accepted.\nOne of the inscriptions discovered with the statue, which was drawn by Debay as fitting into the missing section of the statue's plinth, names the sculptor as [---]andros, son of [M]enides, of Antioch on the Maeander. The inscription must date to after 280 BC, when Antioch on the Maeander was founded; the lettering of the inscription suggests a date of 150\u201350 BC. Maggidis argues based on this inscription, as well as the style of the statue and the increasing prosperity of Melos in the period due to Roman involvement on the island which he suggests is a plausible context for the commissioning of the sculpture, that it probably dates to c.\u2009150 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009110 BC. Rachel Kousser agrees with Furtw\u00e4ngler's dates for the sculpture. Marianne Hamiaux suggests c.\u2009160 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009140 BC. \nThe association of the fragmentary artist's signature with the sculpture, and thus the identification of the sculptor as Alexandros of Antioch, is not universally accepted. Kousser and Jean-Luc Martinez both question this connection. Kousser notes that though the plaque is shown fitting into the broken base of the Venus in Debay's drawing, the drawing shows no evidence of the sculpture's missing left foot which would have rested on it, while in Voutier's sketch of the finds the plaque is shown as the base of one of the herms found alongside the Venus. As the inscription is lost, its connection to the Venus cannot be either proven or disproven.\nMagiddis suggested that the \"Venus de Milo\" was carved by the same sculptor who also made the Poseidon of Melos. Ism\u00e9ni Trianti has suggested that three further sculptures found in Melos can be attributed to the same artist: two statues of women, and a colossal statue of a god.\nReconstructions.\nWithout arms, it is unclear what the statue originally looked like. The original appearance of the Venus has been disputed since 1821, with de Clarac arguing that the Venus was a single figure holding an apple, whereas Quatremere held that she was part of a group, with her arms around another figure. Other proposed restorations have included the Venus holding wreaths, a dove, or spears.\nWilhelm Fr\u00f6hner suggested in 1876 that the \"Venus de Milo\"'s right hand held the drapery slipping down from her hips, while the left held an apple; this theory was expanded on by Furtw\u00e4ngler. Kousser considers this the \"most plausible\" reconstruction. Scientific analyses conducted during restoration of the Venus in 2010 supported the theory that the arm fragment and hand holding the apple found alongside the sculpture were originally part of the Venus; Martinez argues that the identification of the sculpture as Venus holding an apple is thus definitively proved.\nHamiaux suggests that the \"Venus de Milo\" is of the same sculptural type as the Capuan Venus and another sculpture of Aphrodite from Perge. She argues that all derive from the cult statue in the temple of Aphrodite on the Acrocorinth, which depicted Aphrodite admiring herself in a shield. Christine Mitchell Havelock, who believes the Capuan Venus was based on the \"Venus de Milo\", by contrast considers the Melian sculpture \"a fresh invention\" of the Hellenistic period.\nReception.\nNo ancient source can be securely identified as discussing the \"Venus de Milo\", and there are neither enough surviving ancient statues, nor enough evidence about how ancient Greeks judged artistic quality, to judge how the sculpture would have been received in the ancient world. \nBut, according to Kenneth Clark (in 1949), \"within a few years of her discovery in 1820, the Venus de Milo had taken the central, impregnable position formerly occupied by the Venus de' Medici, and even now that she has lost favour with connoisseurs and archaeologists she has held her place in popular imagery as a symbol, or trade mark, of Beauty\".\nToday the \"Venus de Milo\" is perhaps the most famous ancient Greek statue in the world, seen by more than seven million visitors every year. It established itself as a key part of the Louvre's antiquities collection soon after its discovery. At this time, the Louvre had recently lost several major works following the Napoleonic Wars, as objects acquired by Napoleon were returned to their countries of origin. The Venus was soon one of the most famous antiquities in Europe; in the 19th century it was distributed in plaster casts, photographs, and bronze copies. A plaster cast was sent to the Berlin Academy in 1822, only a year after the Louvre acquired the Venus, and a cast was displayed at The Crystal Palace.\nThe \"Venus de Milo\" has been the subject of both literature and the visual arts since its discovery. More than 70 poems about the Venus have been published. In the 19th century paintings of the Venus often depicted statuettes of the figure, for instance in Honor\u00e9 Daumier's \"The Connoisseur\". 19th-century artists also used the Venus as a model: Max Klinger based the Minerva in his \"Judgement of Paris\" on the Venus de Milo; Eugene Delacroix may have used it for \"Liberty Leading the People\".\nIn the early 20th century, the \"Venus de Milo\" caught the attention of the surrealist movement. Erwin Blumenfeld and Clarence Sinclair Bull both made photomontages based on the Venus. Max Ernst used the Venus in his \"instruction manuals\"; Ren\u00e9 Magritte painted a plaster copy of the Venus, making her body pink, her robe blue, and leaving the head white; and Salvador Dal\u00ec based several paintings and sculptures, including his painting \"The Hallucinogenic Toreador\", on her. In contemporary art, Niki de Saint-Phalle has used a reproduction of the Venus in a performance, Yves Klein produced a copy in International Klein Blue, and artists including Arman, Clive Barker, and Jim Dine have all made sculptures inspired by the Venus. \nThe iconic status of the \"Venus de Milo\" has meant that in the 20th century it has been used in film and advertising: a poster for the 1932 film \"Blonde Venus\" shows Marlene Dietrich as the \"Venus de Milo\", while in 2003 Eva Green, wearing only a white sheet and black arm-length gloves, recreated the sculpture in \"The Dreamers\". Actresses have frequently been compared to the Venus: an article in \"Photoplay\" in 1928 concluded the Joan Crawford was the Hollywood actress whose measurements most resembled the \"Venus de Milo\", Clara Bow and Jean Harlow were both photographed as the Venus for magazines. Advertisements for Kellogg's cornflakes, an early speakerphone made by General Telephone &amp; Electronics, Levi's jeans and Mercedes-Benz cars have all used the Venus.\nIn contrast with the popular and artistic appreciation of the Venus, since F\u00fcrtwangler re-dated the sculpture to the Hellenistic period some scholars have been more critical. In his \"History of Greek Art\", Martin Robertson argues that the sculpture's reputation is due more to propaganda than to its own artistic merit. Scholars have concentrated on studying copies of classical sculpture mentioned in ancient sources, such as the Aphrodite of Knidos, than the Venus de Milo, even when those copies are generally considered to be technically inferior to the Venus; Elizabeth Prettejohn argues that this is due to classicists' bias towards written sources over visual ones.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53436", "revid": "48059164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53436", "title": "Bayonet", "text": "Pointed weapon attached to the end of a firearm\nA bayonet (from Old French , now spelt ) is a knife, dagger, sword, or spike-shaped melee weapon designed to be mounted on the end of the barrel of a rifle, carbine, musket or similar long firearm, allowing the gun to be used as an improvised spear in close combat.\nThe term is derived from the town of Bayonne in southwestern France, where bayonets were supposedly first used by Basques in the 17th century. From the early 17th to the early 20th century, it was an infantry melee weapon used for both offensive and defensive tactics, usually when charging in mass formations (human wave attacks). In contemporary times, bayonets are considered a weapon of last resort, and are rarely used in combat, although they are still used for ceremonial purposes (e.g, military parades).\nHistory.\nThe term \"bayonette\" itself dates back to the 16th century, but it is not clear whether bayonets at the time were knives that could be fitted to the ends of firearms, or simply a type of knife. \nFor example, Cotgrave's 1611 \"Dictionarie\" describes the bayonet as \"a kind of small flat pocket dagger, furnished with knives; or a great knife to hang at the girdle\". \nLikewise, Pierre Borel wrote in 1655 that a kind of long-knife called a \"bayonette\" was made in Bayonne but does not give any further description. \nThere are some accounts that place the invention of the bayonet in either France or Germany as early as 1570.\nPlug bayonets.\nThe first recorded instance of a bayonet proper is found in the Chinese military treatise, Binglu published in 1606. It was in the form of the Son-and-mother gun, a breech-loading musket that was issued with a roughly long plug bayonet, giving it an overall length of with the bayonet attached. It was labelled as a \"gun-blade\" () with it being described as a \"short sword that can be inserted into the barrel and secured by twisting it slightly\" that it is to be used \"when the battle have depleted both gunpowder and bullets as well as fighting against bandits, when forces are closing into melee or encountering an ambush\" and if one \"cannot load the gun within the time it takes to cover two bu (3.2 meters) of ground they are to attach the bayonet and hold it like a spear\".\nEarly bayonets were of the \"plug\" type, where the bayonet was fitted directly into the barrel of the musket. This allowed light infantry to be converted to heavy infantry and hold off cavalry charges. \nThe bayonet had a round handle that slid directly into the musket barrel. This naturally prevented the gun from being fired. \nThe first known mention of the use of bayonets in European warfare was in the memoirs of Jacques de Chastenet, Vicomte de Puys\u00e9gur. He described the French using crude plug bayonets during the Thirty Years' War . \nHowever, it was not until 1671 that General Jean Martinet standardized and issued plug bayonets to the French regiment of fusiliers then raised. They were issued to part of an English dragoon regiment raised in 1672, and to the Royal Fusiliers when raised in 1685.\nSocket bayonets.\nThe major problem with plug bayonets was that when attached they made it impossible to fire the musket, requiring soldiers to wait until the last possible moment before a melee to fix the bayonet. \nThe defeat of forces loyal to William of Orange by Jacobite Highlanders at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689 was due (among other things) to the use of the plug bayonet. \nThe Highlanders closed to , fired a single volley, dropped their muskets, and using axes and swords quickly overwhelmed the loyalists before they had time to fix bayonets. Shortly thereafter, the defeated leader, Hugh Mackay, is believed to have introduced a socket bayonet of his own invention. \nSoon \"socket\" bayonets would incorporate both socket mounts and an offset blade that fit around the musket's barrel, which allowed the musket to be fired and reloaded while the bayonet was attached.\nAn unsuccessful trial with socket or zigzag bayonets was made after the Battle of Fleurus in 1690, in the presence of King Louis XIV, who refused to adopt them, as they had a tendency to fall off the musket. \nShortly after the Peace of Ryswick (1697), the English and Germans abolished the pike and introduced socket bayonets. \nThe British socket bayonet had a spike with a triangular cross-section rather than a flat blade, with a flat side towards the muzzle and two fluted sides outermost to a length of . It had no lock to keep it fast to the muzzle, and was well-documented for falling off in the heat of battle.\nBy the mid-18th century, socket bayonets had been adopted by most European armies. In 1703, the French infantry adopted a spring-loaded locking system that prevented the bayonet from accidentally separating from the musket. \nA triangular blade was introduced around 1715 and was stronger than the previous single or double-edged model.\nSword bayonets.\nThe 18th century introduced the concept of the sword bayonet, a long-bladed weapon with a single- or double-edged blade that could also be used as a shortsword. \nIts initial purpose was to ensure that riflemen could form an infantry square properly to fend off cavalry attacks when in ranks with musketmen, whose weapons were longer. A prime early example of a sword bayonet-fitted rifle is the Pattern 1800 Infantry Rifle, later known as the \"Baker Rifle\". \nSword bayonets were used by German Jagers in the 18th century. The hilt usually had quillons modified to accommodate the gun barrel and a hilt mechanism that enabled the bayonet to be attached to a bayonet lug.\nA sword bayonet could be used in combat as a sidearm, when detached from the musket or rifle. When the bayonet was attached to the musket or rifle, it effectively turned all long guns into a spear or glaive, which made it suitable for both thrusting and cutting attacks.\nWhile the British Army eventually discarded the sword bayonet, the socket bayonet survived the introduction of the rifled musket into British service in 1854. The new rifled musket copied the French locking ring system. \nThe new bayonet proved its worth at the Battle of Alma and the Battle of Inkerman during the Crimean War, where the Imperial Russian Army learned to fear it.\nIn the 1860s, European nations began to develop new bolt-action breechloading rifles (such as the Chassepot and Snider\u2013Enfield) and sword bayonets suitable for mass production and used by police, pioneer, and engineer troops. \nThe decision to redesign the bayonet into a short sword was viewed by some as an acknowledgement of the decline in importance of the fixed bayonet as a weapon in the face of new advances in firearms technology. British magazine Punch wrote that \"the committee, in recommending this new sword bayonet, appear to have had in view the fact that bayonets will henceforth be less frequently used than in former times as a weapon of offence and defence; they desired, therefore, to substitute an instrument of more general utility.\"\nMultipurpose bayonets.\nOne of these multipurpose designs was the 'sawback' bayonet, which incorporated saw teeth on the spine of the blade. \nThe sawback bayonet was intended for use as a general-purpose utility tool as well as a weapon; the teeth were meant to facilitate the cutting of wood for various defensive works such as barbed-wire posts, as well as for butchering livestock.\nIt was initially adopted by the German states in 1865; until the middle of WWI approximately 5% of every bayonet style was complemented with a sawback version, for example in Belgium in 1868, Great Britain in 1869 and Switzerland in 1878 (Switzerland introduced their last model in 1914). \nThe original sawback bayonets were typically of the heavy sword-type, they were issued to engineers, with to some extent the bayonet aspect being secondary to the \"tool\" aspect.\nLater German sawbacks were more of a rank indicator than a functional saw. Generally, an average of 6% of all bayonets were sawbacks for non-commissioned officers. There were some exceptions, such as the kurzes Seitengewehr 1898 model, all of which were of the sawback design and meant for what was considered more prestigious units, such as machine gunners, telegraph troop and colonial troops. \nThe sawback proved relatively ineffective as a cutting tool, and was soon outmoded by improvements in military logistics and transportation; most nations dropped the sawback feature by the early 20th century. \nThe German army discontinued use of the sawback bayonet in 1917 after protests that the serrated blade caused unnecessarily severe wounds when used as a fixed bayonet.\nThe \"trowel\" or \"spade\" bayonet was another multipurpose design, intended for use both as an offensive weapon as well as a digging tool for excavating entrenchments. \nIn 1870, the US Army issued trowel bayonets to infantry regiments based on a design by Lieutenant-Colonel Edmund Rice, a US Army officer and Civil War veteran, which were manufactured by the Springfield Armory. \nBesides its utility as both a fixed bayonet and a digging implement, the Rice trowel bayonet could be used to plaster log huts and stone chimneys for winter quarters; sharpened on one edge, it could cut tent poles and pins. Ten thousand were eventually issued, and the design saw service during the 1877 Nez Perce campaign. Rice was given leave in 1877 to demonstrate his trowel bayonet to several nations in Europe. \nOne infantry officer recommended it to the exclusion of all other designs, noting that \"the entrenching [\"sic\"] tools of an army rarely get up to the front until the exigency for their use has passed.\" The Rice trowel bayonet was declared obsolete by the US Army in December 1881.\nContemporary bayonets.\nToday, the bayonet is rarely used in one-to-one combat. \nDespite its limitations, many modern assault rifles (including bullpup designs) retain a bayonet lug and the bayonet is issued by many armies. The bayonet is used for controlling prisoners, or as a weapon of last resort.\nIn addition, some authorities have concluded that the bayonet serves as a useful training aid in building morale and increasing desired aggressiveness in troops.\nToday's bayonets often double as multi-purpose utility knives, bottle openers or other tools. Issuing one modern multi-purpose bayonet/knife is also more cost effective than issuing separate speciality bayonets, and field or combat knives.\nLinguistic impact.\nThe push-twist motion of fastening the older type of spike bayonet has given a name to:\nIn chess, an aggressive variation of the King's Indian Defence is known as the \"Bayonet Attack\".\nThe bayonet has become a symbol of military power. The term \"at the point of a bayonet\" refers to using military force or action to accomplish, maintain, or defend something (cf. Bayonet Constitution). Undertaking a task \"with fixed bayonets\" has this connotation of no room for compromise and is a phrase used particularly in politics.\nBadges and insignias.\nThe Australian Army 'Rising Sun' badge features a semicircle of bayonets. The Australian Army Infantry Combat Badge (ICB) takes the form of a vertically mounted Australian Army SLR (7.62mm self-loading rifle FN FAL) bayonet surrounded by an oval-shaped laurel wreath.\nThe US Army Combat Action Badge, awarded to personnel who have come under fire since 2001 and who are not eligible for the Combat Infantryman Badge (due to the fact that only Infantry personnel may be awarded the Combat Infantryman Badge), has a bayonet as its central motif. The shoulder sleeve insignia for the 10th Mountain Division in the US Army features crossed bayonets. The US Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team's shoulder patch features a bayonet wrapped in a wing, symbolizing their airborne status. The brigade regularly deploys in task forces under the name \"Bayonet\".\nThe insignia of the British Army's School of Infantry is an SA80 bayonet against a red shield. It is worn as a Tactical recognition flash (TRF) by instructors at the Infantry Training Centre Catterick, the Infantry Battle School at Brecon and the Support Weapons School in Warminster. Fixed bayonets also feature on the cap badge and tactical recognition flash of the Small Arms School Corps.\nThe vocation tab collar insignia for the Singapore Armed Forces Infantry Formation utilizes two crossed bayonets. The bayonet is often used as a symbol of the Infantry in Singapore.\nBayonet charge.\nThe development of the bayonet from the 17th century onwards led to the bayonet charge becoming the main infantry tactic throughout the 18th, 19th, and early 20th century. The British Army under Wolesley, the later Duke of Wellington, evolved its tactics to adopt the \"Volley and Bayonet Charge\" from the earlier \"Highland Charge\" tactic of Highland regiments under his command. These proto \"fire and maneuver\" tactics were first introduced to the British Army by the 42nd Highlanders (Black Watch) at Fontenoy in 1745 although, they had been used by their antecedents, (The Independent Highland Watch Companies) prior to that. As early as the 19th century, military scholars were already noting that most bayonet charges did not result in close combat. Instead, one side usually fled before actual bayonet fighting ensued. The act of fixing bayonets has been held to be primarily connected to morale, the making of a clear signal to friend and foe of a willingness to kill at close quarters.\nThe bayonet charge was above all a tool of shock. While charges were reasonably common in 18th and 19th century warfare, actual combat between formations with their bayonets was so rare as to be effectively nonexistent. Usually, a charge would only happen after a long exchange of gunfire, and one side would break and run before contact was actually made. Sir Charles Oman, nearing the end of his history of the Peninsular War (1807\u20131814) in which he had closely studied hundreds of battles and combats, only discovered a single example of, in his words, \"one of the rarest things in the Peninsular War, a real hand-to-hand fight with the white weapon.\" Infantry melees were much more common in close country \u2013 towns, villages, earthworks and other terrain which reduced visibility to such ranges that hand-to-hand fighting was unavoidable. These melees, however, were not bayonet charges per se, as they were not executed or defended against by regular bodies of orderly infantry; rather, they were a chaotic series of individual combats where musket butts and fists were used alongside bayonets, swords, and polearms.\nNapoleonic wars.\nThe bayonet charge was a common tactic used during the Napoleonic wars. Despite its effectiveness, a bayonet charge did not necessarily cause substantial casualties through the use of the weapon itself. Detailed battle casualty lists from the 18th century showed that in many battles, less than 2% of all wounds treated were caused by bayonets. Antoine-Henri Jomini, a celebrated military author who served in numerous armies during the Napoleonic period, stated that the majority of bayonet charges in the open resulted with one side fleeing before any contact was made. Combat with bayonets did occur, but mostly on a small scale when units of opposing sides encountered each other in a confined environment, such as during the storming of fortifications or during ambush skirmishes in broken terrain. In an age of fire by massed volley, when compared to random unseen bullets, the threat of the bayonet was much more tangible and immediate \u2013 guaranteed to lead to a personal gruesome conclusion if both sides persisted. All this encouraged men to flee before the lines met. Thus, the bayonet was an immensely useful weapon for capturing ground from the enemy, despite seldom actually being used to inflict wounds.\nAmerican Civil War.\nDuring the American Civil War (1861\u20131865) the bayonet was found to be responsible for less than 1% of battlefield casualties, a hallmark of modern warfare. The use of bayonet charges to force the enemy to retreat was very successful in numerous small unit engagements at short range in the American Civil War, as most troops would retreat when charged while reloading. Although such charges inflicted few casualties, they often decided short engagements, and tactical possession of important defensive ground features. Additionally, bayonet drill could be used to rally men temporarily unnerved by enemy fire.\nWhile the overall Battle of Gettysburg was won by the Union armies due to a combination of terrain and massed artillery fire, a decisive point on the second day of the battle hinged on a bayonet charge at Little Round Top when Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain's 20th Maine Volunteer Infantry Regiment, running short of musket ammunition, charged downhill, surprising and capturing many of the surviving soldiers of the 15th Alabama Infantry Regiment and other Confederate regiments. Other bayonet charges occurred at Gettysburg, such as that of the 1st Minnesota Infantry Regiment. This was ordered in desperation by General Hancock earlier on July 2 in order to delay a Confederate brigade's advance long enough to bring up reinforcements for the holed Union line on Cemetery Ridge. Still another bayonet charge was conducted late in the evening on July 2 by the 137th New York Infantry Regiment defending the extreme right flank of the Union line on Culp's Hill. The charge of several companies managed to temporarily stall the advance of the 10th Virginia Infantry Regiment long enough for the 14th Brooklyn to move in on the 137th's right and repel the attack.\nGoing over the top.\nThe popular image of World War I combat is of a wave of soldiers with bayonets fixed, \"going over the top\" and charging across no man's land into a hail of enemy fire. Although this was the standard method of fighting early in the war, it was rarely successful. British casualties on the first day of the Battle of the Somme were the worst in the history of the British army, with 57,470 British casualties, 19,240 of whom were killed.\nDuring World War I, no man's land was often hundreds of yards across. The area was usually devastated by the warfare and riddled with craters from artillery and mortar shells, and sometimes contaminated by chemical weapons. Heavily defended by machine guns, mortars, artillery, and riflemen on both sides, it was often covered with barbed wire and land mines, and littered with the rotting corpses of those who were not able to make it across the sea of projectiles, explosions, and flames. A bayonet charge through no man's land often resulted in the total annihilation of entire battalions.\nBanzai charges.\nThe advent of modern warfare in the 20th century made bayonet charges dubious affairs. During the Siege of Port Arthur (1904\u20131905), the Japanese used human wave attacks against Russian artillery and machine guns, suffering massive casualties.\nHowever, during the Second Sino-Japanese War, the Japanese were able to use bayonet charges effectively against poorly organized and lightly armed Chinese troops. \"Banzai charges\" became an accepted military tactic where Japanese forces were able to rout larger Chinese forces routinely.\nIn the early stages of the Pacific War (1941\u20131945), a sudden bayonet charge could overwhelm unprepared enemy soldiers. Such charges became known to Allied forces as \"Banzai charges\" from the Japanese battle cry. By the end of the war, against well organized and heavily armed Allied forces, a banzai charge inflicted little damage but at high cost. They were sometimes conducted as a last resort by small groups of surviving soldiers when the main battle was already lost.\nSome Japanese commanders, such as General Tadamichi Kuribayashi, recognized the futility and waste of such attacks and expressly forbade their men from carrying them out. Indeed, the Americans were surprised that the Japanese did not employ banzai charges at the Battle of Iwo Jima.\nHuman wave attack.\nThe term \"human wave attack\" was often misused to describe the Chinese short attack\u2014a combination of infiltration and the shock tactics employed by the People's Liberation Army during the Korean War (1950\u20131953). A typical Chinese short attack was carried out at night by sending a series of small five-man fireteams to attack the weakest point of an enemy's defenses. The Chinese assault team would crawl undetected within grenade range, then launch surprise attacks with fixed bayonets against the defenders in order to breach the defenses by relying on maximum shock and confusion.\nIf the initial shock failed to breach the defenses, additional fireteams would press on behind them and attack the same point until a breach was created. Once penetration was achieved, the bulk of the Chinese forces would move into the enemy rear and attack from behind. Due to primitive communication systems and tight political controls within the Chinese army, short attacks were often repeated until either the defenses were penetrated or the attackers were completely annihilated.\nThis persistent attack pattern left a strong impression on UN forces that fought in Korea, giving birth to the description of \"human wave\". The term \"human wave\" was later used by journalists and military officials to convey the image of the American soldiers being assaulted by overwhelming numbers of Chinese on a broad front, which is inaccurate when compared with the normal Chinese practice of sending successive series of small teams against a weak point in the line. It was in fact rare for the Chinese to actually use densely concentrated infantry formations to absorb enemy firepower.\nModern usage.\nOne use the Germans in World War II made of bayonets was to search for people in hiding. One person hiding in a house in the Netherlands wrote: \"The Germans made lots of noise as they came upstairs, and they stabbed their bayonets into the wall. Then what we'd always feared actually happened: A bayonet went through the thin wallpaper above the closet, exposing the three people who were hiding there. 'Raus!' cried the Germans. 'Out!'\".\nDuring the Korean War, the French Battalion and Turkish Brigade used bayonet charges against enemy combatants. In 1951, United States Army officer Lewis L. Millett led soldiers of the US Army's 27th Infantry Regiment in capturing a machine gun position with bayonets. Historian S. L. A. Marshall described the attack as \"the most complete bayonet charge by American troops since Cold Harbor\". The location subsequently became known as Bayonet Hill. This was the last bayonet charge by the US Army. Millett was awarded the Medal of Honor.\nOn 23 October 1962, during the Sino-Indian War, 20 Indian soldiers led by Joginder Singh fixed bayonets and charged a force of 200 Chinese soldiers. While the charge would prove futile for Singh and his men, it initially threw the Chinese off guard and forced a retreat despite outnumbering them 10 to 1.\nOn 8 May 1970, National Guardsmen attacked student demonstrators with bayonets at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque. The demonstrators were protesting the war in Vietnam and Cambodia, and the killing of four students at Kent State University. Eleven were injured, some seriously.\nIn 1982, the British Army mounted bayonet charges during the Falklands War, notably the 3rd Battalion, Parachute Regiment during the Battle of Mount Longdon and the 2nd Battalion, Scots Guards during the final assault of Mount Tumbledown.\nIn 1995, during the Siege of Sarajevo, UN peacekeepers of the French 3rd Marine Infantry Regiment charged Serbian forces at the Battle of Vrbanja bridge. Actions led by the regiment allowed the UN peacekeepers to retreat from a threatened position. Two fatalities and seventeen wounded resulted.\nDuring the Second Gulf War and the war in Afghanistan, British Army units mounted several bayonet charges. In 2004, at the Battle of Danny Boy in Iraq, the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders charged mortar positions of the Mahdi Army. The ensuing hand-to-hand fighting resulted in an estimate of over 40 insurgents killed and 35 bodies collected and nine prisoners. Sergeant Brian Wood, of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment, was awarded the Military Cross for his part in the battle.\nIn 2009, Lieutenant James Adamson of the Royal Regiment of Scotland was awarded the Military Cross for a bayonet charge while in Afghanistan. Adamson had run out of ammunition so he immediately charged a Taliban fighter with his bayonet.\nLance Corporal Sean Jones of The Princess of Wales's Regiment was awarded the Military Cross for his role in a 2011 bayonet charge.\nUsage.\n\"Reach\" controversy.\nPrior to World War I, bayonet doctrine was largely founded upon the concept of \"reach\"; that is, a soldier's theoretical ability, by use of an extremely long rifle and fixed bayonet, to stab an enemy soldier without having to approach within reach of his opponent's blade. A combined length of rifle and bayonet longer than that of the enemy infantryman's rifle and attached bayonet, like the infantryman's pike of bygone days, was thought to impart a tactical advantage on the battlefield.\nIn 1886, the French army introduced a quadrangular \u00e9p\u00e9e spike for the bayonet of the Lebel Model 1886 rifle, the \"\u00c9p\u00e9e-Ba\u00efonnette Mod\u00e8le 1886\", resulting in a rifle and bayonet with an overall length of . Germany responded by introducing a long sword bayonet for the Model 1898 Mauser rifle, which had a 29-inch barrel. The bayonet, the \"Seitengewehr 98\", had a 50\u00a0cm (19.7-inch) blade. With an overall length of , the German army's rifle/bayonet combination was second only to the French Lebel for overall 'reach'.\nAfter 1900, Switzerland, Britain, and the United States adopted rifles with barrel lengths shorter than that of a rifled musket, but longer than that of a carbine. These were intended for general use by infantry and cavalry. The \"reach\" of the new short rifles with attached bayonets was reduced. Britain introduced the SMLE (Short, Magazine, Lee\u2013Enfield), in 1904. The German M1898 Mauser rifle and attached sword bayonet was 20\u00a0cm (eight inches) longer than the SMLE and its P1903 bayonet, which used a twelve-inch (30\u00a0cm) blade. While the British P1903 and its similar predecessor, the P1888, was satisfactory in service, criticism soon arose regarding the shortened reach. One military writer of the day warned: \"The German soldier has eight inches the better of the argument over the British soldier when it comes to crossing bayonets, and the extra eight inches easily turns the battle in favour of the longer, if both men are of equal skill.\"\nIn 1905, the German Army adopted a shortened bayonet, the \"Seitengewehr 98/05\" for engineer and pioneer troops, and in 1908, a short rifle as well, the \"Karabiner Model 1898AZ\", which was produced in limited quantities for the cavalry, artillery, and other specialist troops. However, the long-barreled 98 Mauser rifle remained in service as the primary infantry small arm. Moreover, German military authorities continued to promote the idea of outreaching one's opponent on the battlefield by means of a longer rifle/bayonet combination, a concept prominently featured in its infantry bayonet training doctrines. These included the \"throw point\" or \"extended thrust-and-lunge\" attack. Using this tactic, the German soldier dropped into a half-crouch, with the rifle and fixed bayonet held close to the body. In this position the soldier next propelled his rifle forward, then dropped the supporting hand while taking a step forward with the right foot, simultaneously thrusting out the right arm to full length with the extended rifle held in the grip of the right hand alone. With a maximum 'kill zone' of some eleven feet, the \"throw point\" bayonet attack gave an impressive increase in 'reach', and was later adopted by other military forces, including the U.S. Army.\nIn response to criticism over the reduced reach of the SMLE rifle and bayonet, British ordnance authorities introduced the P1907 bayonet in 1908, which had an elongated blade of some seventeen inches to compensate for the reduced overall length of the SMLE rifle. The 1907 bayonet was essentially a copy of the Japanese Type 30 bayonet, Britain having purchased a number of Japanese type 30 rifles for the Royal Navy during the preceding years. U.S. authorities in turn adopted a long (16-in. blade) bayonet for the M1903 Springfield short rifle, the M1905 bayonet; later, a long sword bayonet was also provided for the M1917 Enfield rifle.\nReversal in opinion.\nThe experience of World War I reversed opinion on the value of long rifles and bayonets in typical infantry combat operations. Whether in the close confines of trench warfare, night time raiding and patrolling, or attacking across open ground, soldiers of both sides soon recognized the inherent limitations of a long and ungainly rifle and bayonet when used as a close-quarters battle weapon. Once Allied soldiers had been trained to expect the \"throw point\" or \"extended thrust-and-lunge attack\", the method lost most of its tactical value on the World War I battlefield. It required a strong arm and wrist, was very slow to recover if the initial thrust missed its mark, and was easily parried by a soldier who was trained to expect it, thus exposing the German soldier to a return thrust which he could not easily block or parry. Instead of longer bayonets, infantry forces on both sides began experimenting with other weapons as auxiliary close-quarter arms, including the trench knife, trench club, handgun, hand grenade, and entrenching tool.\nSoldiers soon began employing the bayonet as a knife as well as an attachment for the rifle, and bayonets were often shortened officially or unofficially to make them more versatile and easier to use as tools, or to maneuver in close quarters. During World War II, bayonets were further shortened into knife-sized weapons in order to give them additional utility as fighting or utility knives. The vast majority of modern bayonets introduced since World War II are of the knife bayonet type.\nCurrent deployments.\nSoviet Union.\nThe original AK-47 has an adequate but unremarkable bayonet. However, the AKM Type I bayonet (introduced in 1959) was an improvement of the original design. \nIt has a Bowie style (clip-point) blade with saw-teeth along the spine, and can be used as a multi-purpose survival knife and wire-cutter when combined with its steel scabbard. \nThe AK-74 bayonet 6Kh5 (introduced in 1983) represents a further refinement of the AKM bayonet. It introduced a radical blade cross-section, that has a flat milled on one side near the edge and a corresponding flat milled on the opposite side near the false edge. \nThe blade has a new spear point and an improved one-piece moulded plastic grip, making it a more effective fighting knife. \nIt also has saw-teeth on the false edge and the usual hole for use as a wire-cutter. \nThe wire cutting versions of the AK bayonets each have an electrically insulated handle and an electrically insulated part of the scabbard, so it can be used to cut an electrified wire.\nUnited States.\nThe American M16 rifle used the M7 bayonet which is based on earlier designs such as the M4, M5 and M6 models, all of which are direct descendants of the M3 Fighting Knife and have a spear-point blade with a half sharpened secondary edge. \nThe newer M9 has a clip-point blade with saw-teeth along the spine, and can be used as a multi-purpose knife and wire-cutter when combined with its scabbard. It can even be used by troops to cut their way free through the relatively thin metal skin of a crashed helicopter or airplane. \nThe current USMC OKC-3S bayonet bears a resemblance to the Marines' iconic Ka-Bar fighting knife with serrations near the handle.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nThe Type 56 assault rifle includes the copy of an integral folding spike bayonet, similar to the SKS rifle or for some models, that of the AKM Type II bayonet. The QBZ-95, has a multi-purpose knife bayonet similar to the US M9.\nBelgium.\nThe FN FAL has two types of bayonet. The first is a traditional spear point bayonet. The second is the Type C socket bayonet introduced in the 1960s. \nIt has a hollow handle that fits over the muzzle and slots that lined up with those on the FAL's 22\u00a0mm NATO-spec flash hider. Its spear-type blade is offset to the side of the handle to allow the bullet to pass beside the blade.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe current British L3A1 socket bayonet is based on the FN FAL Type C socket bayonet with a clip-point blade. \nIt has a hollow handle that fits over the SA80/L85 rifle's muzzle and slots that lined up with those on the flash eliminator. The blade is offset to the side of the handle to allow the bullet to pass beside the blade. \nIt can also be used as a multi-purpose knife and wire-cutter when combined with its scabbard. The scabbard also has a sharpening stone and folding saw blade. \nThe use of contemporary bayonets by the British army was noted during the Afghanistan war in 2004. Traditionally, bayonets are instead called swords in The Rifles.\nGermany.\nThe H&amp;K G3 rifle uses two types of bayonets, both of which is mounted above the G3's rifle barrel. \nThe first is the standard G3 bayonet which has a blade similar to the American M7 bayonet. \nThe second is an Eickhorn KCB-70 type multi-purpose knife bayonet, featuring a clip-point with saw-back, a wire-cutter scabbard and a distinctive squared handgrip. \nAfter the German reunification, there was little use of modified AKM type II knife bayonets from stocks of the former Nationale Volksarmee (National People's Army) of East Germany, for the H&amp;K G36 rifle. \nThe original muzzle-ring was cut away and a new, large diameter muzzle ring welded in place. The original leather belt hanger was replaced by a complex web and plastic belt hanger designed to fit the West German load bearing equipment.\nAustria.\nThe Steyr AUG uses two types of bayonet. The first and most common is an Eickhorn KCB-70 type multi-purpose bayonet with an M16 bayonet type interface. \nThe second are the Glock \"Feldmesser 78\" (Field Knife 78) and the \"Feldmesser 81\" (Survival Knife 81), which can also be used as a bayonet, by engaging a socket in the pommel (covered by a plastic cap) into a bayonet adapter that can be fitted to the AUG rifle.\nThese bayonets are noteworthy, as they were meant to be used primarily as field or survival knives and use as a bayonet was a secondary consideration. They can also be used as throwing knives and have a built-in bottle opener in the crossguard.\nFrance.\nThe French use a more traditional spear point bayonet with the current FAMAS bayonet which is nearly identical to that of the M1949/56 bayonet. \nThe new French H&amp;K 416F rifle uses the Eickhorn \"SG 2000 WC-F\", a multi-purpose combat knife/bayonet (similar to the KM2000) with a wire cutter. \nIt weighs , is long with a half serrated blade for cutting through ropes. The synthetic handle and sheath have electrical insulation that protects up to 10,000 volts. The sheath also has a diamond blade sharpener.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53438", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53438", "title": "Olympic", "text": "Olympic or Olympics may refer to\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "53439", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53439", "title": "Olympic games", "text": ""}
{"id": "53441", "revid": "39200713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53441", "title": "Rock Creek Park", "text": "Urban park in Washington, D.C., U.S.\nRock Creek Park is a large urban park that bisects the Northwest quadrant of Washington, D.C. Created by Act of Congress in 1890, the park comprises 1,754 acres (2.74\u00a0mi2, 7.10\u00a0km2), generally along Rock Creek, a tributary of the Potomac River.\nMore than two million people visit the park each year, many to use recreation facilities such as its golf course; hiking, biking, and equestrian trails; tennis center; nature center; playgrounds, and picnic facilities.\nThe park is administered by the National Park Service, whose Rock Creek Park administrative unit administers dozens of other federally owned properties in the District of Columbia, including Meridian Hill Park, the Old Stone House in Georgetown, and some of the Fort Circle Parks, a series of batteries and forts built to defend the nation's capital during the American Civil War.\nThe Rock Creek Historic District was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 23, 1991.\nHistory.\nRock Creek Park was established by an act of Congress signed into law by President Benjamin Harrison on September 27, 1890, following advocacy by Charles C. Glover and other civic leaders and in the wake of the creation of the National Zoo the preceding year. \nIt was only the third national park established by the U.S., following Yellowstone in 1872 and Mackinac National Park in 1875. Sequoia was created at the same time, and Yosemite shortly thereafter. In 1933, Rock Creek Park became part of the newly formed National Capital Parks unit of the National Park Service.\nThe Rock Creek Park Act authorized the purchase of no more than of land, extending north from Klingle Ford Bridge in the District of Columbia (approximately the northern limit of the National Zoo), to be \"perpetually dedicated and set apart as a public park or pleasure ground for the benefit and enjoyment of the people of the United States\". The Act also called for regulations to \"provide for the preservation from injury or spoliation of all timber, animals, or curiosities within said park, and their retention in their natural condition, as nearly as possible\". Rock Creek Park is the oldest natural urban park in the National Park System. Park construction began in 1897.\nIn 1913, Congress authorized creation of the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway and extended the park along a narrow corridor from the zoo to the mouth of Rock Creek at the Potomac River. The parkway remains a major traffic thoroughfare, especially along the portion south of the zoo. \nThe park's golf course, designed by William Flynn, was opened with nine holes in 1923 and expanded three years later to 18. Like the rest of the city's public courses, it was segregated until 1941, when U.S. Secretary of the Interior Harold Ickes ordered them all opened to African Americans.\nIn the 1980s, hundreds of stones removed from the United States Capitol during a renovation were stored in the park. The loose pile, two stories high, was a popular, if unmarked and unsanctioned, attraction, and their removal in 2022 drew local and even national attention.\nBy the late 1990s, a popular conception had arisen that the park was unsafe. This persisted despite crime data, provided by D.C. police and park officials, that showed that the park saw fewer crimes than surrounding neighborhoods. The misperception was fed by the 2002 discovery in the park of the skeletal remains of Chandra Levy, a federal intern whose disappearance had attracted national media attention.\nDescription.\nThe main section of the park comprises 1754 acres (2.74\u00a0mi2, 7.10\u00a0km2), along the Rock Creek Valley. Including the other green areas the park administers (Glover Archbold Park, Montrose Park, Dumbarton Oaks Park, Meridian Hill Park, Battery Kemble Park, Palisades Park, Whitehaven Park, etc.), it encompasses more than 2000 acres (3\u00a0mi2, 8\u00a0km2).\nThe parklands follow the course of Rock Creek across the D.C.-Maryland border to connect with Rock Creek Stream Valley Park and Rock Creek Regional Park in Montgomery County. The Maryland parks are operated by the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission.\nThe Rock Creek Historic District was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 23, 1991.\nRecreation facilities include a golf course; equestrian trails; sport venues, including a tennis stadium which hosts major professional events; a nature center and planetarium; the Carter Barron Amphitheatre, an outdoor concert venue; and picnic and playground facilities. Rock Creek Park also maintains cultural exhibits, including the Peirce Mill. Rock Creek is a popular venue for jogging, cycling, and inline skating, especially on the long, winding Beach Drive, portions of which are closed to vehicles on weekends.\nA number of the city's outstanding bridges, such as the Lauzun's Legion, Dumbarton, Taft and the Duke Ellington bridges, span the creek and ravine.\nAmong the park's few monuments is a pink granite bench on Beach Drive south of the Peirce Mill, dedicated on November 7, 1936, by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt in memory of former French ambassador Jean Jules Jusserand. In 2014, it was named \"best obscure memorial\" by \"Washington City Paper\".\nHorse Center.\nRock Creek Park Horse Center, founded in 1972, is located in the middle of the park near the Nature Center. The barn, run by Guest Services Inc, has 57 stalls, two outdoor rings, one indoor ring, and three bluestone turnout paddocks. The stable provides trail rides, pony rides, and lessons for the public, along with boarding for private horses. The stable primarily teaches English riding, with an emphasis on lower-level jumping and dressage.\nThe barn is also home to Rock Creek Riders, a therapeutic riding program for adults and children with special needs in the D.C. area. Past participants in the program include brain-injured veterans of the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan and people with autism, cerebral palsy, or attention deficit disorder. The program is volunteer-run and relies on donations and contributions for funding. Previously, Rock Creek Riders has worked with the United States Mounted Police, National Park Service, Wounded Warrior Project, and the Caisson Platoon Equine Assisted Programs to provide these therapeutic riding services.\nPeirce Mill.\nPeirce Mill is a water-powered grist mill in Rock Creek Park. There were at least eight mills along Rock Creek within what is now Washington, D.C., and many more farther upstream in Montgomery County, Maryland. Of those eight, only Peirce Mill is still standing.\nIt was built in the 1820s by Isaac Peirce, along with a house, barn, and other buildings. It was later owned by a son, Joshua Peirce, and a nephew Peirce Shoemaker. It became part of Rock Creek Park in 1892.\nThe mill was listed on the National Register in 1969 as Peirce Mill. It was repaired and re-opened October 15, 2011.\nThe Peirce Carriage Barn, adjacent to the mill, is the National Park Service point of contact. The barn was part of the Peirce estate built in 1810 and used as a tack room and carriage barn. The barn is now a mini-museum containing information on the milling process, the Peirce family estate and other mills along the Rock Creek Valley.\nRock Creek multi-use trails.\nA set of hiker/biker trails in the park serve both commuters and recreational users. The mainline trail extends for about from Broad Branch Road to the southern end of the park where the trail continues several miles to Arlington Memorial Bridge and Hains Point. The northern trails consist of a loop along Bingham Road, Oregon Avenue, Beach Road, and Military Road with spurs along Oregon to the Nature Center and Wise Road. In the park, the mainline trail starts at the parking lot just west of the creek and south of Broad Branch. From there, it is co-located with a section of the Western Ridge Trail south past Peirce Mill to a trail bridge over the creek, where the two separate. After a short distance on the east side of the creek, it crosses back to the west side on Bluff Bridge. Dating back to 1934, it is the oldest part of the trail in the park, and the same age as the Devil's Chair and Saddle Club Bridges farther south. The trail remains on the west side until just south of Klingle Bridge where it crosses back to the east and leaves the park to enter the Zoo property.\nThe Park Service began to experiment with trails in August 1963 when mile-long Ross Drive was closed to cars from 6 am to noon on Sundays, but planning for a separate trail system didn't begin until 1965, when the federal \"Trails for America\" report identified a trail along Rock Creek as one of many trails for the D.C. area. That same year, the \"Fort Park System, A Re-evaluation Study of Fort Drive, Washington, D.C.\" report suggested running the Circle Fort Trail through the park.\nPlanning for trails led to action. In January 1967, NPS announced weekend road closures in April over a 5-mile loop in the center of the park, made up of Beach, Ross, Ridge and Joyce and they announced a plan to build a trail from Military Road to the District boundary. That trail, the first hiker-biker trail in the park, was built in the summer of 1967. The crushed bluestone trail was constructed from the Nature Center, past Wise Road to a turnaround loop just southwest of Beach Drive and the D.C. boundary.\nOver the next few months, NPS announced plans to add additional unpaved trails along Military Road from Oregon to Beach, along Wise to Fenwick Branch, beside Fenwick Branch to the District boundary and through Pinehurst Parkway Park (most of which were never constructed). In 1968, they built a second trail along Beach from Joyce to Bingham. By 1969, the two existing northern trails were connected with a trail along Bingham from Oregon to Beach. Later that year, NPS built the final section of the loop along Military between Oregon and Beach. By 1972, NPS had paved all of these trails except the section north of Wise to the DC Boundary. The section along Military Road was originally intended to serve as part of the Fort Circle Trail, passing by Fort DeRussy, but work on the Fort Circle Trail ended in the 1970s with only three parts, the one in Rock Creek, a section of the C&amp;O Canal towpath and another from Fort Stanton to Fort Mahon, completed. Over time, the Rock Creek section ceased to be viewed as part of the Fort Circle Trail system. Between 1979 and 1981, the unpaved trail and turnaround loop north of Wise was abandoned.\nFarther south, a trail along the creek was extended into the park in 1972. A trail along the Potomac built prior to 1967 was extended along the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway in 1971 and then into the park in 1972. It was built on a bridle path that dated back to the early 20th century up to the Bluff Bridge, which was built in 1934. The section of bridle path used between P and Q streets was built in conjunction with the Pentagon, as that project needed dirt and the park service needed dirt removed. These first sections of trail were 4 to 8 feet wide with rough pavement, steep slopes, poor visibility and sharp curves. By 1977, the trail was extended to Broad Branch Road, crossing the creek at Bluff Bridge and twice on newly constructed \"breakaway\" bridges.\nNPS and cyclists have long sought a way to close the gap on the north end of the park. After a 1973 proposal to extend the trail, NPS launched a study and announced a plan to do so in 1983, but quickly retracted it. In 1980, NPS, inspired by road closures in New York's Central Park, prepared an assessment of alternatives for a Bicycle Trail Study of the park that analyzed nine alternatives for completing the trail system, including construction of a new bike trail and alteration of the existing road network. After a period of public comment, NPS proposed expanding the weekend closure; constructing an additional of trail, designating Beach Drive north of Bingham a bicycle route and studying the suitability of a trail in that section. After years of additional study, public hearings and trial closures, NPS announced in February 1983 a plan to expand weekend closures and close Beach between Joyce and Broad Branch to automobile traffic. At first only one lane of Beach would be closed during rush hour, but after Metro's Red Line opened in Montgomery County in 1985, the section would be permanently closed. Six months later, under pressure from The American Automobile Association and the governments of D.C. and Montgomery County, the park service decided not to close the section of Beach. Instead, they decided to go ahead with the weekend closures and build a bicycle trail along a horse trail between Joyce and Broad Branch by 1986. But that trail was never built.\nIn 1982, the Park Service built two new bridges for the trail. One was added across Rock Creek when the road bridge between Pennsylvania Avenue and K Street was rebuilt, enabling the trail to stop using a narrow section of the road bridge. As well, a high-water bridge was built just south of Peirce Mill, replacing the low-water breakaway bridge that had been washed away by Hurricane David in 1979.\nBy 1990, biking on foot trails or bridle paths was no longer allowed.\nIn 1991, a high-water bridge replaced the trail bridge beneath Porter Road, the other low-water breakaway bridge built in the 1970s.\nThe prospect of completing a bike route across the park re-emerged in the 1990s when the park was required to come up with a General Management Plan. In 1991, a loosely knit, cyclist-dominated group called \"Auto-Free D.C.\" renewed the push to ban automobile traffic on Beach Drive. They suggested limited road closures to discourage commuters, but allow access to most locations in the park by car. When NPS failed to take up their suggestion, the group led a series of \"rolling road block\" protests which aimed to peaceably draw attention to the cause by disrupting rush hour traffic. Nonetheless, the protests led to some confrontations and arrests, and at one point the Military Road Bridge was graffitied with anti-automobile slogans. In 1996, NPS initiated a federally mandated General Management Plan for the park. In June 1997, NPS laid out several management alternatives, one of which would improve and expand the paved multi-use trails and add a new trail along Wise, with the police substation converted to a visitor center and bicycle rental facility. Another alternative suggested that sections of Beach Drive be permanently closed and converted into a wide multi-use trail and that Wise Road, Sherrill Drive, Bingham Drive, Grant Road, and Blagden Avenue be converted to paved trails. Both of these alternatives were less popular than the status quo. An additional alternative created by the People's Alliance for Rock Creek (PARC), a group consisting of the Washington Area Bicyclists Association, the Sierra Club, Friends of the Earth and 18 other advocacy groups, suggested making Beach Drive auto-free north of Broad Branch as a means of completing the trail envisioned in 1965. In 2003, in an attempt to appease both groups, the Park Service proposed extending the weekend closures of Beach Drive to weekdays from 9:30\u00a0a.m. to 3:30\u00a0p.m. The proposal was one of several, but was the \"preferred alternative.\" The plan had popular support, but no political support. Mayor Anthony Williams who had supported closure as a candidate, opposed it as mayor, citing the need to evacuate in a post-9/11 world. In May 2004, NPS proposed instead to only close the section from Joyce to Broad Branch, but again found opposition among politicians. So, in November 2005, the Park Service finalized their management plan which included no further road closures, the prospect of lowering speed limits and adding speed bumps, and improvements to the trail south of Broad Branch. However, speed limits were never reduced and no traffic calming was ever implemented.\nThe management plan completion cleared the way for the Park Service and DDOT to rebuild Beach Drive and the trail. Despite planning that started in 2005, work on the project didn't begin until September 22, 2016. The project rebuilt both Beach Drive and the trail. The trail section between Shoreham Drive and Broad Branch was widened to , repaved and realigned; the Shoreham Drive crossing, reworked in 2006, was again improved; the traffic lanes in the Zoo Tunnel were narrowed to widen the trail through it by ; a new access to Harvard Street was built and of new trail was constructed between the Porter Street Bridge and Bluff Bridge. In conjunction with the project, the trail through the Klingle Road intersection was redesigned to connect to the new Klingle Valley Trail, which was built on the washed out section of Klingle Road and opened on June 24, 2017. The work on the trail south of Broad Branch was completed on January 8, 2018. Work on Beach Drive between Joyce and Bingham, which improved a short section of trail near the bridge over the creek was completed on September 27, 2019.\nIn 2018, DDOT announced plans to rehabilitate and expand the trail within both Rock Creek Park and outside of it. Within Rock Creek Park, they will rehabilitate a section between Klingle Road and Bluff Bridge and a section on the west side of the creek south of Broad Branch Road. They will also build a new trail along Piney Ridge Road from Beach Drive to Arkansas Avenue.\nThough the 2005 D.C. bicycle plan only identified a need for \"an improved bicycle connection\" between Broad Branch and the Maryland Line, the 2013 MoveDC Multi-modal transportation plan includes a future trail on this section.\nSections of park roads have been subject to weekly closures to motor vehicles since the 1960s, though the times and locations changed. After the 1963 closure experiment, another was attempted in 1967 on Beach between Joyce and Broad Branch on Sunday mornings, but the response was not positive and it was discontinued. In 1970, NPS tried again, closing of Beach, and part of Morrow, every Sunday from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., but was again discontinued due to a lack of use. But, in 1972, NPS tried for a fourth time, again closing Beach between Broad Branch and Joyce from 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Sundays and it became a permanent feature. On more than one occasion in the 1970s they experimented with Saturday closures in the summer, once to support a new bicycle concession near Carter Barron, which generated no negative response, but also little use. By 1980, they added the section from Tilden to Piney Branch Road and expanded the hours to 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and in August 1981, they expanded the closure to Saturdays and holidays as an experiment. In July 1982, the weekend automobile ban was extended to the section of Beach from Picnic Grove 10 to Wise, and between West Beach and the D.C. boundary. In August 1983 they made the closures, between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. every Saturday and Sunday, official policy as part of the scaled back 1983 Plan. In 1985, the hours were increased from 7 a.m. Saturday to 7 p.m. Sunday from early April to Veterans Day on upper Beach Drive and year-round between Joyce and Broad Branch roads. By 1998 the closures had expanded to include not just the three sections of Beach but also the entirety of Bingham and Sherril Drives within the park and last all year long.\nAdministration.\nAs originally authorized by Congress, the park was governed by the Rock Creek Park Commission, comprising the Chief of Engineers of the Army, the engineer commissioner of the District of Columbia, and three presidential appointees. In 1933, the park, along with other National Capital Parks, was transferred to the jurisdiction of the National Park Service. The park is patrolled by the United States Park Police.\n\"Rock Creek Park\" is also an administrative unit of the National Park Service responsible for administration of 99 properties in the District of Columbia north and west of the National Mall and Memorial Parks. The properties include various parks, parkways, buildings, circles, triangles, memorials, and statues and include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGeography.\nAlthough D.C.'s primary geographic metonyms for racial and class divisions are the city's quadrants (\"i.e.\", Northwest, Southwest, Northeast, and Southeast), Rock Creek Park also separates prominent neighborhoods such as Georgetown, Cathedral Heights and Spring Valley from the rest of the city; hence, the designations WOTP (West of the Park) and EOTP (East of the Park) also serve this role.\nLegislative history.\nCongressional authorizations:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "53445", "revid": "254824", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53445", "title": "Palo Alto, California", "text": "Palo Alto ( ; Spanish for 'tall stick') is a charter city in northwestern Santa Clara County, California, United States, in the San Francisco Bay Area, named after a coastal redwood tree known as El Palo Alto.\nThe city of Palo Alto was incorporated in 1894 by the American industrialist Leland Stanford and his wife, Jane Stanford, when they founded Stanford University in memory of their only child, Leland Stanford\u00a0Jr. Palo Alto later expanded and now borders East Palo Alto, Mountain View, Los Altos, Los Altos Hills, Stanford, Portola Valley, and Menlo Park. As of the 2020 United States census, the population was 68,572. Palo Alto has one of the highest costs of living in the United States, and its residents are among the most educated in the country. However, it has a youth suicide rate four times higher than the national average, often attributed to academic pressure.\nAs one of the principal cities of Silicon Valley, Palo Alto is home to the headquarters of multiple tech companies, including HP, Space Systems/Loral, VMware, and PARC. Palo Alto has also served as headquarters or the founding location of several other tech companies, including Apple, Google, Meta, Logitech, Tesla, Intuit, IDEO, Pinterest, and PayPal. Ford Motor Company and Lockheed Martin each additionally maintain major research and technology facilities within Palo Alto.\nHistory.\nBefore the arrival of Europeans, the Ohlone lived on the San Francisco peninsula; in particular, the Puichon Ohlone lived in the Palo Alto area. The area of modern Palo Alto was first recorded by the 1769 party of Gaspar de Portol\u00e1, a 64-man, 200-horse expedition setting out from San Diego to find Monterey Bay. The group trekked past the bay without recognizing it and continued north. When they reached modern-day Pacifica, they ascended Sweeney Ridge and saw the San Francisco Bay on November 2. Portol\u00e1 descended from Sweeney Ridge southeast down San Andreas Creek to Laguna Creek (now Crystal Springs Reservoir), thence to the San Francisquito Creek watershed, ultimately camping from November 6\u201311, 1769, by a tall redwood later to be known as El Palo Alto.\nIn 1777, Father Jun\u00edpero Serra established the Mission Santa Clara de Asis, whose northern boundary was San Francisquito Creek and whose lands included modern Palo Alto. The area was under the control of the viceroy of Mexico and ultimately under the control of Spain. On November 29, 1777, Pueblo de San Jose de Guadalupe (now the city of San Jose a few miles to the south of what was to be Palo Alto) was established by order of the viceroy despite the displeasure of the local mission. The Mexican War of Independence ending in 1821 led to Mexico becoming an independent country, though San Jose did not recognize rule by the new Mexico until May 10, 1825. Mexico proceeded to sell off or grant much of the mission land.\nDuring the Mexican\u2013American War, the United States seized Alta California in 1846; however, this was not legalized until the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed on July 4, 1848. Mexican citizens in the area could choose to become United States citizens and their land grants were to be recognized if they chose to do so (though many legal disputes arose over this).\nThe land grant, Rancho Rinconada del Arroyo de San Francisquito, of about on the lower reaches of San Francisquito Creek (i.e., parts of modern Menlo Park and northern Palo Alto) was given to Maria Antonia Mesa in 1841. She and her husband Rafael Soto (who had died in 1839) had settled in 1835 near present-day Newell and Middlefield roads and sold supplies. In 1839, their daughter Mar\u00eda Luisa Soto (1817\u20131883) married John Coppinger, who was to be, in 1841, the grantee of Rancho Ca\u00f1ada de Raymundo (in modern San Mateo county). Upon Coppinger's death in 1847, Maria inherited it and later married a visiting boat captain, John Greer. Greer owned a home on the site that is now Town &amp; Country Village on Embarcadero and El Camino Real. Greer Avenue and Court are named for him.\nTo the south of the Sotos, the brothers Secundino and Teodoro Robles in 1849 bought Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito from Jos\u00e9 Pe\u00f1a, the 1841 grantee. The grant covered the area south of Rancho Rinconada del Arroyo de San Francisquito to more or less present-day Mountain View. The grant was bounded on the south by Mariano Castro's Rancho Pastoria de las Borregas grant across San Antonio Road. This later became the Robles Rancho, which constitutes about 80% of Palo Alto and Stanford University today. In 1863, it was whittled down in the courts to . Stories say the grand hacienda was built on the former meager adobe of Jos\u00e9 Pe\u00f1a near Ferne off San Antonio Road, midway between Middlefield and Alma Street. Their hacienda hosted fiestas and bull fights. It was ruined in the 1906 earthquake and its lumber was used to build a large barn nearby, which was said to have lingered until the early 1950s. On April 10, 1853, , comprising the present-day Barron Park, Matadero Creek and Stanford Business Park, was sold for $2,000 to Elisha Oscar Crosby, who called his new property Mayfield Farm. The name of Mayfield was later attached to the community that started nearby. On September 23, 1856, the Crosby land was transferred to Sarah Wallis to satisfy a debt he owed her. In 1880, Secundino Robles, father to twenty-nine children, still lived just south of Palo Alto, near the location of the present-day San Antonio Shopping Center in Mountain View.\nMany of the Spanish names in the Palo Alto area represent the local heritage, descriptive terms, and former residents. Pena Court, Miranda Avenue, which was essentially Foothill Expressway, was the married name of Juana Briones and the name occurs in Courts and Avenues and other street names in Palo Alto and Mountain View in the quadrant where she owned vast areas between Stanford University, Grant Road in Mountain View and west of El Camino Real, as well as a public park. Yerba Buena was to her credit. Rinconada was the major Mexican land grant name.\nThe township of Mayfield was formed in 1855, around the site of a stagecoach stop and saloon known as \"Uncle Jim's Cabin\" near the intersection of El Camino Real and today's California Avenue in what is now southern Palo Alto. In October 1863 the San Francisco to San Jose railroad had been built as far as Mayfield and service started between San Francisco and Mayfield (the station is now California Avenue); train service all the way to San Jose started in January 1864. El Camino became Main Street; the northeast\u2013southwest cross streets were named for Civil War heroes, with California Avenue originally being Lincoln Street. The town had its own newspaper by 1869 (the \"Mayfield Enterprise\", in English and Spanish), incorporated in 1903, and had breweries and a cannery.\nIn 1875, French financier Jean Baptiste Paulin Caperon, better known as Peter Coutts, purchased land in Mayfield and four other parcels around three sides of today's College Terrace \u2013 more than a thousand acres (4.0\u00a0km2) extending from today's Page Mill Road to Serra Street and from El Camino Real to the foothills. Coutts named his property Ayrshire Farm. Leland Stanford started buying land in the area in 1876 for a horse farm, called the Palo Alto Stock Farm. Stanford bought Ayrshire Farm in 1882.\nCreation of the town.\nIn 1884, Leland and Jane Stanford lost their only child Leland Stanford Jr. when he died of typhoid fever at 15 years old and decided to create a university in his memory. In 1886, they proposed having the university's gateway be Mayfield. However, they had one condition: alcohol had to be banned from the town. Known for its 13 rowdy saloons, Mayfield rejected his request. This led them to drive the formation of a new temperance town with the help of their friend Timothy Hopkins of the Southern Pacific Railroad, who in 1887 bought of private land for the new townsite. This Hopkins Tract, bounded by El Camino Real, San Francisquito Creek, Boyce, Channing, Melville, and Hopkins Avenues, and Embarcadero Road, was proclaimed a local Heritage District during Palo Alto's centennial in 1994. The Stanfords set up their university, Stanford University, and a train stop (on University Avenue) by the new town. This new community was initially called University Park (the name \"Palo Alto\" at that time was attached to what is now College Terrace), but was incorporated on April 16, 1894, with the name Palo Alto. With the Stanfords' support, Palo Alto grew to the size of Mayfield. Mayfield eventually passed an ordinance banning saloons that took effect in January 1905.\nLater history.\nOn July 2, 1925, Palo Alto voters approved the annexation of Mayfield and the two communities were officially consolidated on July 6, 1925. As a result, Palo Alto has two Caltrain stops and two downtown areas: one along University Avenue and one along California Avenue (renamed after the annexation since Palo Alto already had a Lincoln Avenue).\nThe \"Mayfield News\" wrote its own obituary four days later:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is with a feeling of deep regret that we see on our streets today those who would sell, or give, our beautiful little city to an outside community. We have watched Mayfield grow from a small hamlet, when Palo Alto was nothing more than a hayfield, to her present size ... and it is with a feeling of sorrow that we contemplate the fact that there are those who would sell or give the city away.\nPalo Alto continued to annex more land, including the Stanford Shopping Center area in 1953. Stanford Research Park, Embarcadero Road northeast of Bayshore, and the West Bayshore/San Antonio Road area were also annexed during the 1950s. Large amounts of land west of Foothill Expressway were annexed between 1959 and 1968; this is mostly undeveloped and includes Foothills Park and Arastradero Preserve. The last major annexations were of Barron Park in 1975 and, in 1979, a large area of marshlands bordering the bay.\nMany of Stanford University's first faculty members settled in the Professorville neighborhood of Palo Alto. Professorville, now a registered national historic district, is bounded by Kingsley, Lincoln, and Addison Avenues and the cross streets of Ramona, Bryant, and Waverley. The district includes a large number of well-preserved residences dating from the 1890s, including 833 Kingsley, 345 Lincoln, and 450 Kingsley. 1044 Bryant was the home of Russell Varian, co-inventor of the Klystron tube. The Federal Telegraph laboratory site, situated at 218 Channing, is a California Historical Landmark recognizing Lee de Forest's 1911 invention of the vacuum tube and electronic oscillator at that location. While not open to the public, the garage that housed the launch of Hewlett Packard is located at 367 Addison Avenue. Hewlett Packard recently restored the house and garage. A second historic district on Ramona Street can be found downtown between University and Hamilton Avenues. Established in 1963, the Palo Alto Chinese School is the San Francisco Bay Area's oldest Chinese school. It is also home to the second oldest opera company in California, the West Bay Opera.\nOne early major business was when Thomas Foon Chew, owner of the Bayside Canning Company in Alviso founded by his father, expanded his business by starting a cannery in 1918 in what was then Mayfield that initially employed 350 workers but later expanded. In the 1920s the Bayside Canning Company became one of the largest in the world. In 1949 the Palo Alto cannery, now part of the Sutter Packing Company under the ownership of Safeway, closed; at the time it was the largest employer in Palo Alto with about a 1,000 workers. Various businesses used the building since including Fry's Electronics.\nPalo Alto is also home to a long-standing baseball tradition. The Palo Alto Oaks are a collegiate summer baseball club that has been in the Bay Area since 1950, eight years longer than the San Francisco Giants. The Oaks were originally managed by Tony Makjavich for 49 years. The Oaks were going to fold before the summer 2016 season but were taken on by Daniel Palladino and Whaylan Price, Bay Area baseball coaches who did not want to see the team die. The Oaks have a rich history within the Palo Alto community.\nGeography.\nPalo Alto is situated in the southeastern section of the San Francisco Peninsula.\nIt consists of two large parcels of land connected by a narrow corridor. The southern inland section, located south of Interstate 280, is hilly, rural, and lightly populated and is the site of Pearson\u2013Arastradero Preserve and Foothills Park both part of the Palo Alto park system and also large parts of the Los Trancos and Monte Bello Open Space Preserves part of the Midpeninsula Regional Open Space District. The city extends as far as Skyline Boulevard along the ridge of the Santa Cruz Mountains.\nThe northern more densely populated parcel is bordered by San Francisquito Creek (with Menlo Park and East Palo Alto in adjacent San Mateo County beyond) to the north, San Francisco Bay to the north-east, Mountain View, Los Altos, and Los Altos Hills to the east and south-east and Stanford University to the south-west and west. Several major transit routes cross this parcel from the north-west to the south-east. The biggest and closest to the bay is the Bayshore Freeway and going inland are Alma Street/Central Expressway, El Camino Real, and Foothill Expressway. Interstate 280 is parallel and crosses the narrow corridor of land that connects the two parcels that makeup Palo Alto. Somewhat perpendicular to these roads are Sand Hill Road from El Camino until it crosses San Francisquito Creek into Menlo Park, Embarcadero Road, Oregon Expressway/Page Mill Road, Arastradero Road/East Charleston Road, and San Antonio Road (the last forms part of the boundary with Mountain View).\nAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of , of which is land and , comprising 7.38%, is water.\nThe official elevation is above sea level, but the city boundaries reach well into the northern section of the Santa Cruz Mountains.\nWater.\nPalo Alto is crossed by several creeks that flow north in the direction of the San Francisco Bay, Adobe Creek near its eastern boundary, San Francisquito Creek on its western boundary, and Matadero Creek in between the other two. Arastradero Creek is a tributary to Matadero Creek, and Barron Creek is now diverted to Adobe Creek just south of Highway 101 by a diversion channel. The San Francisquito Creek mainstem is formed by the confluence of Corte Madera Creek and Bear Creek not far below Searsville Dam. Further downstream, Los Trancos Creek is a tributary to San Francisquito Creek below Interstate 280.\nEnvironmental features.\nPalo Alto has a number of significant natural habitats, including estuarine, riparian, and oak forest. Many of these habitats are visible in Foothills Park, which is owned by the city. The Charleston Slough contains a rich marsh and littoral zone, providing feeding areas for a variety of shorebirds and other estuarine wildlife.\nClimate.\nTypical of the South Peninsula region of the San Francisco Bay Area, Palo Alto has a Mediterranean climate with mild, moderately wet winters and warm, dry summers. Typically, in the warmer months, as the sun goes down, the fog bank flows over the foothills to the west and covers the night sky, thus creating a blanket that helps trap the summer warmth absorbed during the day. Even so, it is rare for the overnight low temperature to exceed .\nIn January, average daily temperatures range from a low of to a high of . In July, average temperatures range from . The record high temperature was on September 6, 2022, and the record low temperature was on January 11, 1949, and December 24, 1990. Temperatures reach or higher on an average of 12.0 days. Temperatures drop to or lower on an average of 14.0 days.\nDue to the Santa Cruz Mountains to the west, there is a \"rain shadow\" in Palo Alto, resulting in an average annual rainfall of only . Measurable rainfall occurs on an average of 55.8 days annually. The wettest year on record was 1983 with and the driest year was 2013 with . The most rainfall in one month was in February 1998 and the most rainfall in one day was on February 3, 1998. Measurable snowfall is very rare in the populated areas of Palo Alto, but fell on January 21, 1962. A dusting of snow occasionally occurs in the highest (unpopulated) section of Palo Alto near Skyline Ridge, where the elevation reaches up to .\nAccording to the K\u00f6ppen Climate Classification system, Palo Alto has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Csb).\nLocal government.\nPalo Alto was incorporated in 1894. In 1909 a municipal charter created a local government consisting of a fifteen-member city council, with responsibilities for various governmental functions delegated to appointed committees. In 1950, the city adopted a Council\u2013manager government. Several appointed committees continue to advise the city council on specialized issues, such as land-use planning, utilities, and libraries, but these committees no longer have direct authority over City staff. Currently, the city council has seven members.\nThe mayor and vice-mayor serve one year at a time, with terms ending in January. General municipal elections are held in November of even-numbered years. Council terms are four years long.\nAccording to one study in 2015, the city's effective property tax rate of 0.42% was the lowest of the California cities included in the study.\nPolitics.\nIn the California State Legislature, Palo Alto is in the senatorial district, represented by Democrat Josh Becker, and in the Assembly district, represented by Democrat Marc Berman.\nIn the United States House of Representatives, Palo Alto is in California's congressional district, represented by Democrat Sam Liccardo.\nAccording to the California Secretary of State, as of February 10, 2019, Palo Alto has 40,040 registered voters. Of those, 20,857 (52.1%) are registered Democrats, 4,689 (11.7%) are registered Republicans, and 13,520 (33.8%) have declined to state a political party.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\n2020.\nThe 2020 United States census reported that Palo Alto had a population of 68,572. The population density was . The racial makeup of Palo Alto was 49.9% White, 1.8% African American, 0.2% Native American, 35.5% Asian, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 3.0% from other races, and 9.5% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7.4% of the population.\nThe census reported that 98.8% of the population lived in households, 0.2% lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 1.0% were institutionalized.\nThere were 26,677 households, out of which 32.7% included children under the age of 18, 55.0% were married-couple households, 4.2% were cohabiting couple households, 24.5% had a female householder with no partner present, and 16.3% had a male householder with no partner present. 26.6% of households were one person, and 13.2% were one person aged 65 or older. The average household size was 2.54. There were 17,563 families (65.8% of all households).\nThe age distribution was 21.8% under the age of 18, 7.1% aged 18 to 24, 24.8% aged 25 to 44, 26.7% aged 45 to 64, and 19.6% who were 65years of age or older. The median age was 42.2years. For every 100 females, there were 96.7 males.\nThere were 28,904 housing units at an average density of , of which 26,677 (92.3%) were occupied. Of these, 52.7% were owner-occupied, and 47.3% were occupied by renters.\nIn 2023, the US Census Bureau estimated that the median household income was $220,408, and the per capita income was $121,565. About 3.2% of families and 5.4% of the population were below the poverty line.\n2010.\nThe 2010 United States census reported that Palo Alto had a population of 64,403. The population density was . The racial makeup of Palo Alto was 41,359 (64.2%) White, 17,461 (27.1%) Asian, 1,197 (1.9%) African American, 121 (0.2%) Native American, 142 (0.2%) Pacific Islander, 1,426 (2.2%) from other races, and 2,697 (4.2%) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3,974 persons (6.2%).\nThe Census reported that 63,820 people (99.1% of the population) lived in households, 205 (0.3%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 378 (0.6%) were institutionalized.\nThere were 26,493 households, out of which 8,624 (32.6%) had children under the age of 18 living in them, 13,975 (52.7%) were opposite-sex married couples living together, 1,843 (7.0%) had a female householder with no husband present, 659 (2.5%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were 979 (3.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 188 (0.7%) same-sex married couples or partnerships. 7,982 households (30.1%) were made up of individuals, and 3,285 (12.4%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.41. There were 16,477 families (62.2% of all households); the average family size was 3.04.\nThe population was spread out, with 15,079 people (23.4%) under the age of 18, 3,141 people (4.9%) aged 18 to 24, 17,159 people (26.6%) aged 25 to 44, 18,018 people (28.0%) aged 45 to 64, and 11,006 people (17.1%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 41.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 95.7 males. For every 100 females aged 18 and over, there were 93.0 males.\nThere were 28,216 housing units at an average density of , of which 14,766 (55.7%) were owner-occupied, and 11,727 (44.3%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.5%; the rental vacancy rate was 5.6%. 39,176 people (60.8% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 24,644 people (38.3%) lived in rental housing units.\nHousing.\nPalo Alto, north of Oregon Expressway, is filled with older homes, including Craftsman and California Colonials, some of which date back to the 1890s but most of which were built in the first four decades of the 20th century. South of Oregon Expressway, the homes, including many Joseph Eichler-designed or Eichler-style houses, were primarily built in the first 20 years after World War II.\nWhile the city contains homes that now cost anywhere from $800,000 to well over $40 million, much of Palo Alto's housing stock is in the style of California mid-century middle-class suburbia. The median home sale price for all of Palo Alto was $1.2 million in 2007 and $1.4 million in July 2009. Palo Alto ranked in as the 5th most expensive city in the United States as of 2007[ [update]], with an average home sales price of $1,677,000. In 2010, Palo Alto ranked as the 2nd most expensive city in the United States, with a four-bedroom, two-bathroom home listing for $1.48 million on average. Palo Alto is by some measures the most expensive college town in the United States.\nBy 2020, residents' opposition to new housing has resulted in Palo Alto only allowing construction of enough low-income housing to meet 13% of its state-mandated share, and 6% of its share for very-low-income housing.\nHistory of housing.\nIn the 1920s, racial covenants were used that banned \"persons of African, Japanese, Chinese, or Mongolian descent\" from purchasing or renting homes in many neighborhoods throughout Palo Alto. In the 1950s, some movements opposed these policies, including the Palo Alto Fair Play Association, as well as architect and developer Joseph Eichler, who built almost 3,000 homes in Palo Alto.\nBlockbusting strategies were also employed to instill fear in white neighborhoods and cause White flight out of areas on the outskirts of the city. Blockbusting refers to a practice realtors adopted in which they would advertise the incoming presence of a black family to a neighborhood, causing panic among the white residents who would consequently sell their houses at deflated prices very quickly. One famous blockbusting event is responsible for the prevailing demographic divides between Palo Alto and East Palo Alto.\nOne of the most destructive policies at the time was redlining. Redlining was a policy put in place by the Federal Housing Association starting in 1937. Through the program, the association could rank neighborhoods from Type A, which was desirable, to Type D (outlined in red) which was deemed hazardous. Residents in Type D neighborhoods were ineligible for loans to buy or fix houses. The program was implemented in a way so that neighborhoods with any kind of African American population were ranked type C or D. This was also the case in Palo Alto and the surrounding areas. Palo Alto's White neighborhoods were ranked mostly Type A and B, allowing for wealth accumulation and eventually resulting in the high housing prices we see today. On the other hand, the surrounding areas were all marked Type C and D, and African Americans found themselves being driven to the outskirts of Palo Alto, what is now mostly East Palo Alto, where there was no money from loans in the economy, leading to a state of decay.\nHowever, for the most part, Palo Alto's housing was built on policies that are still reflected in the current demographics.\nEconomy.\nPalo Alto serves as a central economic focal point of the Silicon Valley and is home to more than 7,000 businesses employing more than 98,000 people. In the mid-1950s Palo Alto had a railroad village feel and the streets were lined with bungalows and prim storefronts. At a time when only 7 percent of American adults had completed four years of college, more than a third of men living in the Palo Alto suburb had a college degree. In 1949 Wallace Sterling had been appointed as Stanford's president and Frederick Terman became provost. The fledgling Stanford University was reorganized, offering applied educational programs on physics, material science, and electrical engineering. Stanford's basic research capabilities were built up and the laboratory facilities for applied work were brought together in the Stanford Electronics Laboratories.\nMany prominent technology firms reside in the Stanford Research Park on Page Mill Road, while nearby Sand Hill Road in the adjacent city of Menlo Park is a notable hub of venture capitalists.\nA number of prominent Silicon Valley companies no longer reside primarily in Palo Alto. These include Google (now in Mountain View), Facebook (now in Menlo Park), and PayPal (now in San Jose).\nIn 2021, Tesla, Inc. moved its headquarters from Palo Alto to Austin, Texas.\nPalo Alto's retail and restaurant trade includes Stanford Shopping Center, an upscale open air shopping center established in 1955, downtown Palo Alto, centered on University Avenue, https:// off of El Camino, and the California Avenue shopping district in its second downtown. \nPalo Alto is the location of the first street-level Apple Store, the first Apple mini store, the first West Coast Whole Foods Market store, and the first Victoria's Secret.\nTop employers.\nAccording to the city's 2023 Annual Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nUtilities.\nPalo Alto has a city-run and owned utility, City of Palo Alto Utilities (CPAU), which provides water, electric, gas service, and waste water disposal within city limits, with the minor exception of a rural portion of the city in the hills west of Interstate 280, past the Country Club, which does not receive gas from the city. Almost all other communities in northern California depend on Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&amp;E) for gas and electricity.\nWater and Gas Services (WGS) operates gas and water distribution networks within the city limits. The city operates both gas meters and the distribution pipelines. Water comes from city-operated watershed and wells and the City and County of San Francisco Hetch Hetchy system. The city is located in Santa Clara Valley Water District, North Zone. Hetch Hetchy pipeline #3 and #4 pass through the city.\nThe city operates its own electric power distribution network and telemetry cable network. Interconnection points tie the city into PG&amp;E's electric transmission system, which brings power from several sources to the city. Palo Alto is a member of a joint powers authority (the Northern California Power Agency), which cooperatively generates electricity for government power providers such as the City of Santa Clara, the City of Redding, and the Port of Oakland. Roughly the same group of entities operate the Transmission Agency of Northern California (TANC). TANC transports power over its own lines from as far as British Columbia through an interconnection with the federal Bonneville Power Administration. A local oddity is a series of joint poles; those primary conductor cross arms are marked PGE and CPA (City of Palo Alto) to identify each utility's side of the shared cross arms.\nPalo Alto has an ongoing community debate about the city providing fiber optic connectivity to all residences. A series of pilot programs have been proposed. One proposal called for the city to install dark fiber, which would be made live by a contractor.\nServices traditionally attributed to a cable television provider were sold to a regulated commercial concern. Previously the cable system was operated by a cooperative called Palo Alto Cable Coop.\nThe former Regional Bell Operating Company in Palo Alto was Pacific Telephone, now called AT&amp;T Inc., and previously called SBC and Pacific Bell. One of the earliest central office facilities switching Palo Alto calls is the historic Davenport central office (CO) at 529 Bryant Street. The building was sold and is now the home of the Palo Alto Internet Exchange. The former CO building is marked by a bronze plaque and is located on the north side of Bryant Street between University Avenue and Hamilton Avenue. It was called Davenport after the exchange name at the introduction of dial telephone service in Palo Alto. For example, modern numbers starting with 325- were Davenport 5 in the 1950s and '60s. The Step-by-Step office was scrapped and replaced by stored-program-controlled equipment at a different location about 1980. Stanford calls ran on a Step-by-Step Western Electric 701 PBX until the university purchased its own switch about 1980. It had the older, traditional Bell System 600\u00a0Hz+120\u00a0Hz dial tone. The old 497-number PBX, MDF, and battery string were housed in a steel building at 333 Bonair Siding. From the 1950s to 1980s, the bulk of Palo Alto calls were switched on Number 5 Crossbar systems. By the mid-1980s, these electromechanical systems had been junked. Under the Bell System's regulated monopoly, local coin telephone calls were ten cents until the early 1980s.\nDuring the drought of the early 1990s, Palo Alto employed water waste patrol officers to enforce water saving regulations. The team, called \"Gush Busters\", patrolled city streets looking for broken water pipes and poorly managed irrigation systems. Regulations were set to stop restaurants from habitually serving water, runoff from irrigation, and irrigation during the day. The main goal of the team was to educate the public in ways to save water. Citations consisted of Friendly Reminder postcards and more formal notices. To help promote the conservation message, the team only used bicycles and mopeds.\nFire and police departments.\nThe city was among the first in Santa Clara County to offer advanced life support (ALS) paramedic-level (EMT-P) ambulance service. In an arrangement predating countywide paramedic service, Palo Alto Fire operates two paramedic ambulances which are theoretically shared with county EMS assets. The Palo Alto Fire Department is currently the only fire department in Santa Clara County that routinely transports patients. Rural Metro holds the Santa Clara County 911 contract and provides transportation in other cities. Enhanced 9-1-1 arrived in about 1980 and included the then-new ability to report emergencies from coin telephones without using a coin. Palo Alto Fire also has a contract with Stanford University to cover most of the campus. In all, the Fire Department has six regular stations plus one opened only during the summer fire season in the foothills.\nThe police station was originally housed in a stone building at 450 Bryant Street. Still engraved with the words \"Police Court\", the building is now a non-profit senior citizen center, Avenidas. The police are now headquartered in the City Hall high rise. The department has just under 100 sworn officers ranking supplemented by approximately ten reserve officers and professional staff who support the police department and the animal services organization.\nEducation.\nPublic schools.\nThe Palo Alto Unified School District provides public education for most of Palo Alto. According to the National Center for Education Statistics, Palo Alto has a student-teacher ratio of 14.9, much lower than some surrounding communities. Juana Briones Elementary has a student/teacher ratio of 14.4. The school board meets at 7 p.m. on the 2nd and 4th Tuesdays of the month; the meetings are open to the public and city, cast live on Channel 28. Channel 28 is operated by the Mid-peninsula Community Media Center in Palo Alto, which is affiliated with the Alliance for Community Media. ACM represents over 2,000 PEG channels in the US. Government-access television (GATV) Cable TV. Palo Alto students attend one of two high schools, Gunn High School or Palo Alto High School. There are also three middle schools, JLS, Greene, and Fletcher.\nThe Los Altos School District and Mountain View\u2013Los Altos Union High School District provide public education for the Monroe neighborhood portion of Palo Alto off El Camino Real south of Adobe Creek.\nHigher education.\nPalo Alto is home to Palo Alto University, a school focused on psychology.\nThe main academic campus of Stanford University, a private research university, is adjacent to Palo Alto. The university also includes lands in the Palo Alto city limits.\nLibraries.\nThe Palo Alto City Library has five branches, with a total of 265,000 items in their collections. The Mitchell Park Library was rebuilt between 2010 and December 2014 to become the largest in Palo Alto. The former Main Library was then renamed the Rinconada branch. Palo Alto Children's Library is located close to the former Main Library. There are smaller branches in the Downtown and College Terrace neighborhoods.\nMedia.\nThe \"Palo Alto Daily Post\" publishes six days a week. \"Palo Alto Daily News\", a unit of the San Jose Mercury News, publishes five days a week.\" Palo Alto Weekly\" is published on Fridays. \"Palo Alto Times\", a daily newspaper, served Palo Alto and neighboring cities beginning in 1894. In 1979, it became the \"Peninsula Times Tribune\". The newspaper ceased publication in 1993.\nKDOW, 1220 AM, began broadcasting in 1949 as KIBE. It later became KDFC, simulcasting classical KDFC-FM. As KDOW it broadcasts a business news format. The transmitter is in East Palo Alto near the western approach to the Dumbarton Bridge. Power is 5,000 watts daytime and 145 watts nighttime. KZSU at 90.1 FM is owned by Stanford University. KFJC at 89.7 FM is licensed to nearby Los Altos and is licensed to the Foothill-De Anza Community College District.\nKTLN-TV, virtual channel 68, transmits from Mt. Allison across San Francisco bay, east of Palo Alto.\nThe Midpeninsula Community Media Center provides public, educational, and government access (PEG) cable television channels 26, 28, 29, 30 and 75.\nTransportation.\nRoads.\nPalo Alto is served by two major freeways, Highway 101 and Interstate 280 and is traversed by the Peninsula's main north\u2013south boulevard, El Camino Real (SR 82). Santa Clara County maintains 2 expressways in Palo Alto; Route G3 is the city's main east\u2013west route and is the only road in the city that connects the two freeways directly. Route G6 travels through the city as Alma Street, serving as an alternate route to SR 82. The city is also served indirectly by State Route 84 which traverses the Dumbarton Bridge to the north, and State Route 85 via Mountain View to the south.\nThere are no parking meters in Palo Alto, and all municipal parking lots and multi-level parking structures are free but limited to two or three hours per weekday 8am\u20135pm. Downtown Palo Alto has recently added many new lots to fill the overflow of vehicles. Beginning in 2014, Palo Alto has begun implementing permit parking in some areas of the town.\nAir.\nPalo Alto is served by Palo Alto Airport (KPAO), one of the busiest single-runway general aviation airports in the country. It is used by many daily commuters who fly (usually in private single-engine aircraft) from their homes in the Central Valley to work in the Palo Alto area.\nThe nearest commercial airport is San Jose International Airport (SJC) (also known as Norman Mineta Airport), about southeast. Nearby is San Francisco International Airport (SFO), about north.\nRail.\nPassenger train service is provided exclusively by Caltrain, with service between San Francisco and San Jose, extending to Gilroy. Caltrain has two regular stations in Palo Alto, the main one at the Palo Alto Station in downtown Palo Alto (local, limited, and express). The main Palo Alto station is the second busiest (behind 4th and King in San Francisco) on the entire Caltrain line. The other station is located at California Avenue, (local and limited). A third, the Stanford station, located beside Alma Street at Embarcadero Road, is used for occasional sports events (generally football) at Stanford Stadium. Freight trains through Palo Alto are operated by Union Pacific (formerly Southern Pacific).\nThere are 4 grade crossings within city limits, at the intersections of Alma St, Churchill Ave, Meadow Dr, and Charleston Rd. The city has made plans upgrade the southern crossings and even proposed closing the Churchill Ave crossing completely to road traffic, but the project has been a hot-button issue for local residents and politicians for over a decade. The current proposed solution is elevating the tracks above grade, while lowering the roadway below grade. A subway tunnel underneath the right of way and converting the old track bed into a park was also proposed, but eventually dropped after it was deemed to be too costly and concerns over environmental impacts. Despite increased train service and Caltrain already installing Electric Service equipment on the mainline, Palo Alto has no green-lighted plans to address the crossings, except for immediate changes at Churchill Ave to address safety concerns at that intersection.\nBus.\nThe Palo Alto Transit Center adjacent to the Palo Alto Train Station is the major bus hub for northern Santa Clara county. The Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) provides primary bus service through Palo Alto with service to the South Bay and Silicon Valley. San Mateo County Transit District (SamTrans) provides service to San Mateo County to the north but some lines include the Palo Alto Transit Center. The Stanford University Free Shuttle (Marguerite) provides a supplementary bus service between Stanford University and the Palo Alto Transit Center, and the Palo Alto Free Shuttle (Crosstown and Embarcadero), which circulates frequently, and provides service to major points in Palo Alto, including the main library, downtown, the Municipal Golf Course, the Palo Alto Transit Center, and both high schools. The Dumbarton Express is a weekday-only limited stop bus service that connects Union City BART in the East Bay to Palo Alto via the Dumbarton Bridge serving Stanford University, Stanford Research Park, Palo Alto Transit Center, and Veterans Hospital.\nCycling.\nCycling is a popular mode of transportation in Palo Alto. 9.5% of residents bicycle to work, the highest percentage of any city in the Bay Area, and third highest in the United States, after Davis, California and Boulder, Colorado. Since 2003, Palo Alto has received a Bicycle Friendly Community status of \"Gold\" from the League of American Bicyclists.\nThe city's flat terrain and many quiet tree-shaded residential streets offer comfort and safety to cyclists, and the temperate climate makes year-round cycling convenient. Palo Alto pioneered the bicycle boulevard concept in the early 1980s, enhancing residential Bryant Street to prioritize it for cyclists by removing stop signs, providing special traffic signals, and installing traffic diverters, and a bicycle/pedestrian bridge over Matadero Creek. However, busy arterial streets which often offer the fastest and most direct route to many destinations, are dangerous for cyclists due to high volumes of fast-moving traffic and the lack of bicycle lanes. El Camino Real, Alma Street, and Embarcadero and Middlefield roads, all identified as \"high priorities\" for adding bicycle lanes to improve safety by the 2003 Palo Alto Bicycle Transportation Plan, still contain no provisions for cyclists.\nThe Palo Alto Police Department decided to stop using tasers to detain bicyclists after a 2012 incident in which a 16-year-old boy, who had bicycled through a stop sign, was injured after police officers pursued him, fired a taser at him and suddenly braked their patrol car in front of him, causing the boy to crash.\nWalking.\nConditions for walking are excellent in Palo Alto except for crossing high-volume arterial streets such as El Camino Real and Oregon Expressway. Sidewalks are available on nearly every city street, with the notable exception of the Barron Park neighborhood, which was the last to be incorporated into the city. Palo Alto's Street grid is well-connected with few dead-end streets, especially in the city's older northern neighborhoods. An extensive urban forest, which is protected by the city's municipal code, provides shade and visual diversity, and slows motor vehicle traffic. 4.8% of residents walk to work.\nSister cities.\nPalo Alto has eight sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities International:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe city also has a relationship via Sibling Cities USA with Bloomington, Indiana since 2022. In addition Narok in Kenya is a friendship city, a less formal shorter term relationship which started in 2025.\nIn 1989, Palo Alto received a gift of a large, whimsical wooden sculpture called \"Foreign Friends\" (\"Fj\u00e4rran V\u00e4nner\")\u2014of a man, woman, dog and bird sitting on a park bench\u2014from Link\u00f6ping. The sculpture was praised by some, called \"grotesque\" by others, and became a lightning rod for vandals. It was covered with a large, addressed postcard marked \"Return to Sender.\" A former Stanford University professor was arrested for attempting to light it on fire. It was also doused with paint. When the original heads were decapitated on Halloween, 1993, the statue became a shrine\u2014flowers bouquets and cards were placed upon it. Following an anonymous donation, the heads were restored. Within weeks, the restored heads were decapitated again, this time disappearing. The heads were eventually replaced with new ones, which generated even more distaste, as many deemed the new heads even less attractive.\nA few months later, the man's arm was chopped off, the woman's lap was vandalized, the bird was stolen, and the replacements heads were decapitated and stolen. The sculpture was removed from its location on Embarcadero Road and Waverley Avenue in 1995, dismantled, and placed in storage until it was destroyed in 2000. Ironically, the statue was designed not as a lasting work of art, but as something to be climbed on with a lifespan of 10 to 25 years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;!-- required, or"}
